PDO-s3DCNNs: Partial Differential Operator Based Steerable 3D CNNs

Zhengyang Shen 1 2 Tao Hong 1 Qi She 2 Jinwen Ma 1 Zhouchen Lin 3 4 5

Abstract
Steerable models can provide very general and
flexible equivariance by formulating equivariance
requirements in the language of representation
theory and feature fields, which has been recognized to be effective for many vision tasks. However, deriving steerable models for 3D rotations
is much more difficult than that in the 2D case,
due to more complicated mathematics of 3D rotations. In this work, we employ partial differential
operators (PDOs) to model 3D filters, and derive general steerable 3D CNNs, which are called
PDO-s3DCNNs. We prove that the equivariant
filters are subject to linear constraints, which can
be solved efficiently under various conditions. As
far as we know, PDO-s3DCNNs are the most general steerable CNNs for 3D rotations, in the sense
that they cover all common subgroups of SO(3)
and their representations, while existing methods
can only be applied to specific groups and representations. Extensive experiments show that our
models can preserve equivariance well in the discrete domain, and outperform previous works on
SHREC’17 retrieval and ISBI 2012 segmentation
tasks with a low network complexity.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have dominated the computer vision field on various tasks.
Compared with fully-connected (FC) neural networks, one
main advantage of CNNs is that they are inherently translation equivariant: shifting an input and then feeding it
through a CNN is the same as feeding the original input and
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Bytedance AI Lab, Haidian District, Beijing, China
3
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China 4 Institute
for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Jinwen Ma
<jwma@math.pku.edu.cn>, Zhouchen Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

then shifting the resulted feature maps. However, conventional CNNs are not naturally equivariant to other transformations, such as rotations.
Consequently, many works focus on incorporating more
equivariance into CNNs. Firstly adopted in 2D images, Cohen & Welling (2016) proposed group equivariant CNNs
(G-CNNs) by rotating filters, which is equivariant over the
cyclic group C4 or the dihedral group D4 . Then some
methods (Hoogeboom et al., 2018; Weiler et al., 2018b) are
successively proposed to exploit the larger groups. However,
the equivariance achieved by these methods is very inflexible, because the feature maps inherently can only transform
in one single pattern (which can be characterized by regular
representation in the language of representation theory) as
inputs rotate. But in many vision tasks, it would be better if
the transformation behavior of feature maps could be flexibly defined as needed. For example, if the vectors in feature
maps are used to predict the object orientations, they should
also rotate as the inputs rotate.
In order to utilize more flexible and general equivariance,
Cohen & Welling (2017) proposed a theoretical framework
called steerable CNNs to describe equivariant models in
the language of representation theory and feature fields. To
be specific, the feature spaces are defined as the spaces of
feature fields, characterized by a group representation which
determines (“steers”) their transformation behavior under
the transformations of the input. After the feature fields or
representations are specified, equivariant filters are obtained
by directly solving the equivariance constraints. Steerable
CNNs include G-CNNs as special cases when employing
regular features. Weiler & Cesa (2019) further extended
the theoretical framework of steerable CNNs from C4 to
the Euclidean group E(2) and its subgroups, proposing
E2CNNs. E2CNNs are the most general steerable CNNs
for 2D rotations so far, as they can deal with all common
subgroups of SO(2) and their representations. However,
E2CNN cannot be extended to the 3D case trivially, since
the mathematics of rotation equivariance in 3D is much
more complicated than in 2D because 3D rotations do not
commute (Thomas et al., 2018).
Actually, equivariance is more important for the 3D case because 3D rotations are inevitable – even though a 3D object
is up-right, rotations may still occur around the vertical axis,

