Bayesian Nonparametric Learning for Point Processes with Spatial
Homogeneity: A Spatial Analysis of NBA Shot Locations

Fan Yin 1 Jieying Jiao 2 Jun Yan 2 Guanyu Hu 3

Abstract
Basketball shot location data provide valuable summary information regarding players to
coaches, sports analysts, fans, statisticians, as
well as players themselves. Represented by spatial points, such data are naturally analyzed with
spatial point process models. We present a novel
nonparametric Bayesian method for learning the
underlying intensity surface built upon a combination of Dirichlet process and Markov random field. Our method has the advantage of
effectively encouraging local spatial homogeneity when estimating a globally heterogeneous intensity surface. Posterior inferences are performed with an efficient Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) algorithm. Simulation studies
show that the inferences are accurate and the
method is superior compared to a wide range of
competing methods. Application to the shot location data of 20 representative NBA players in
the 2017-2018 regular season offers interesting
insights about the shooting patterns of these players. A comparison against the competing method
shows that the proposed method can effectively
incorporate spatial contiguity into the estimation
of intensity surfaces.

1. Introduction
Quantitative analytics have been a key driving force for advancing modern professional sports, and there is no exception for professional basketball (Kubatko et al., 2007). In
professional basketball, analyses of shooting patterns offer important insights about players’ attacking styles and
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
California, Irvine, CA, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA 3 Department of Statistics,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA. Correspondence
to: Guanyu Hu <guanyu.hu@missouri.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

shed light on the evolution of defensive tactics, which has
aroused substantial research interests from the statistical
community (e.g., Reich et al., 2006; Miller et al., 2014;
Franks et al., 2015; Cervone et al., 2016; Jiao et al., 2021a;
Hu et al., 2020b). As shot location data are naturally represented by spatial points, developments of novel methods
for analyzing spatial point patterns are of fundamental importance.
The literature on spatial point pattern data is voluminous
(see, e.g., Illian et al., 2008; Diggle, 2013; Guan, 2006;
Guan & Shen, 2010; Baddeley, 2017; Jiao et al., 2021b).
The most frequently adopted class of models in empirical
research is nonhomogeneous Poisson processes (NHPP),
or more generally, Cox processes, including log-Gaussian
Cox process (Møller et al., 1998). Such parametric models impose restrictions on the functional forms of underlying process intensity, which can suffer from underfitting
of data when there is a misfit between the complexity of
the model and the data available. In contrast, nonparametric approaches such as two-way kernel density estimation
provide more flexibility compared to parametric modeling
as the underfitting can be mitigated by using models with
unbounded complexity.
Several important features of the shot location data need to
be captured in any realistic nonparametric method. First,
near regions are highly likely to have similar intensities.
This makes that certain spatial contiguous constraints on
the intensity surface desirable. Existing method such as
mixture of finite mixtures (MFM) of nonhomogeneous
Poisson processes (Taddy & Kottas, 2012; Geng et al.,
2021) is lacking in this aspect. There are also rich literature (Blei & Frazier, 2011; Müller et al., 2011; Ghosh et al.,
2011; Page et al., 2016; Dahl et al., 2017) discussing spatial constraint prior for regression models however lacking
the discussion on intensity estimation of spatial point pattern data. Second, spatial contiguous constraints should not
dominate the intensity surface globally (Hu et al., 2020a;
Zhao et al., 2020). For some players, there are more than
one hot zones in their one-season shooting. Some players will prefer more corner three and top three rather than
45 degrees. Although, the corner is not spatial contiguous with top area, the same intensity value can still belong

