Bayesian Optimization for Distributionally Robust
Chance-constrained Problem
Yu Inatsu 1 Shion Takeno 1 Masayuki Karasuyama 1 Ichiro Takeuchi 1 2

Abstract
In black-box function optimization, we need to
consider not only controllable design variables
but also uncontrollable stochastic environment
variables. In such cases, it is necessary to solve
the optimization problem by taking into account
the uncertainty of the environmental variables.
Chance-constrained (CC) problem, the problem
of maximizing the expected value under a certain
level of constraint satisfaction probability, is one
of the practically important problems in the presence of environmental variables. In this study,
we consider distributionally robust CC (DRCC)
problem and propose a novel DRCC Bayesian
optimization method for the case where the distribution of the environmental variables cannot be
precisely specified. We show that the proposed
method can find an arbitrary accurate solution
with high probability in a finite number of trials, and confirm the usefulness of the proposed
method through numerical experiments.

1. Introduction
In this study, we consider a black-box function optimization
problem with two types of variables called design variables
which are fully controllable and environmental variables
which change randomly depending on the uncertainty of
the environment. Under the presence of these two types
of variables, the goal is to identify the design variables
that optimize the black-box function by taking into account
the uncertainty of environmental variables. In the past few
years, Bayesian Optimization (BO) framework that takes
the uncertain environmental variables into considerations
have been studied in various setups (see §1.1). In this paper,
1

Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Yu Inatsu
<inatsu.yu@nitech.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

we study one of such problems called distributionally robust
chance-constrained (DRCC) problem. The DRCC problem
is an instance of constrained optimization problems in an
uncertain environment, which is important in a variety of
practical problems in science and engineering.
The goal of a CC problem is to identify the design variables
that maximize the expectation of the objective function under the constraint that the probability of the constraint function exceeding a given threshold is greater than a certain
level. Let f (x, w) and g(x, w) be the unknown objective
and constraint functions, respectively, both of which depend
on the design variables x ∈ X and the environmental variables w ∈ Ω. For a given threshold h ∈ R and a level
α ∈ (0, 1), the CC problem is formulated as
Z
argmax
f (x, w)p† (w)dw
(1a)
x∈X
Ω
Z
subject to
1l[g(x, w) > h]p† (w)dw > α,
(1b)
Ω

where 1l[·] is the indicator function and p† (w) is the probability density function of the environmental variables w.
When p† (w) is known, there is a method to solve the CC
problem (see §1.1).
In this study, we consider the case where p† (w) is unknown
as is commonly encountered in practice. Here, we formulate
the uncertainty of p† (w) using a measure called distributionally robustness. Let A be the user-specified candidate
distribution family of w. Then, the DRCC problem is defined as
argmax F (x) subject to G(x) > α,

(2)

x∈X

where F (x) and G(x) are defined as
Z
F (x) = inf
f (x, w)p(w)dw,
p(w)∈A Ω
Z
G(x) = inf
1l[g(x, w) > h]p(w)dw.
p(w)∈A

(3a)
(3b)

Ω

Many real-world engineering problems can be formulated
as DRCC problems, including controlling the position of
a robot, controlling the switching of wind turbines, and

