Deploying Convolutional Networks on Untrusted Platforms
Using 2D Holographic Reduced Representations

Mohammad Mahmudul Alam 1 Edward Raff 1 2 3 Tim Oates 1 James Holt 2

Abstract
Due to the computational cost of running inference for a neural network, the need to deploy the
inferential steps on a third party’s compute environment or hardware is common. If the third party
is not fully trusted, it is desirable to obfuscate the
nature of the inputs and outputs, so that the third
party can not easily determine what specific task
is being performed. Provably secure protocols
for leveraging an untrusted party exist but are too
computational demanding to run in practice. We
instead explore a different strategy of fast, heuristic security that we call Connectionist Symbolic
Pseudo Secrets. By leveraging Holographic Reduced Representations (HRR), we create a neural
network with a pseudo-encryption style defense
that empirically shows robustness to attack, even
under threat models that unrealistically favor the
adversary.

1. Introduction
As convolutional neural networks (CNN) have become more
popular, so to have the concerns around their deployment.
Many tricks like low-precision floats, pruning of weights,
and classic software engineering and performance tuning
have been employed to reduce these computation costs. Still,
it is often necessary to deploy a model on third-party compute hardware or cloud environments for a variety of reasons (e.g., lower latency to customers, lack of computing
resources, and elasticity of computing demand). In these
situations, there are cases where the owner of the model
does not fully trust the third party and desires to obfuscate information about the model running on this untrusted

platform.
The current solutions to this situation naturally come from
the encryption community, and the tools of Secure Multiparty Computation (SMC) (Kerschbaum, 2006; Du & Atallah, 2001) and Homomorphic Encryption (HE) (GiladBachrach et al., 2016) provide methods for running programs on untrusted hardware that guarantee the privacy of
the results. These are valuable tools, but computationally
demanding and limiting. They often require restrictions on
even basic CNN functionality like avoiding softmax activation and sigmoid/tanh non-linearity, limits on the size of the
computation itself, and can dwarf the compute time saved
by offloading to the third party. Especially when providers
charge by compute-hours, this makes SMC and HE tools
impractical when computing and latency constraints are a
factor, or when neural networks are very large.
Current approaches to untrusted inference are all slower
than simply running the computation locally, making them
impractical. For this reason, our work scarifies provable
security for empirical security, by developing an approach
to insert “secrets” into a network’s input that can be later
extracted, yet obfuscate the input/output to the untrusted
party in an encryption-like manner. We emphatically stress
this is not strong encryption, but empirically we observe
a realistic adversary’s attacks are at random-guessing performance, and an unrealistically powerful adversary fairs
little better. We term our approach C ONNECTIONIST S YM BOLIC P SEUDO S ECRETS (CSPS)1 , and compared to the
fastest alternative (Mishra et al., 2020). CSPS is 5000×
faster and transfers 18, 000× less data, making it practically
deployable.

1
Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD,
USA 2 Laboratory for Physical Sciences, College Park, MD,
USA 3 Booz Allen Hamilton, McLean, VA, USA. Correspondence to: Edward Raff <Raff Edward@bah.com>, Tim Oates
<oates@cs.umbc.edu>.

To summarize, we leverage inspirations from encryption
and neuro-symbolic methods to symbolically represent a
one-time pad strategy from the encryption literature within a
neural network. The rest of our paper is organized as follows.
First, we will review work related to our own in section 2.
Our approach uses a Vector Symbolic Architecture (VSA)
known as the Holographic Reduced Representations (HRR)
from more classical symbolic AI work that may not be

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1
Our code can be found at https://github.com/
NeuromorphicComputationResearchProgram/
Connectionist-Symbolic-Pseudo-Secrets

