Head2Toe: Utilizing Intermediate Representations
for Better Transfer Learning

Utku Evci 1 Vincent Dumoulin 1 Hugo Larochelle 1 Michael C. Mozer 1

Abstract
Transfer-learning methods aim to improve performance in a data-scarce target domain using a
model pretrained on a data-rich source domain.
A cost-efficient strategy, linear probing, involves
freezing the source model and training a new classification head for the target domain. This strategy is outperformed by a more costly but stateof-the-art method—fine-tuning all parameters of
the source model to the target domain—possibly
because fine-tuning allows the model to leverage useful information from intermediate layers
which is otherwise discarded by the previously
trained later layers. We explore the hypothesis
that these intermediate layers might be directly
exploited. We propose a method, Head-to-Toe
probing (H EAD 2T OE), that selects features from
all layers of the source model to train a classification head for the target domain. In evaluations on
the Visual Task Adaptation Benchmark (VTAB),
Head2Toe matches performance obtained with
fine-tuning on average while reducing training
and storage cost a hundred fold or more, but critically, for out-of-distribution transfer, Head2Toe
outperforms fine-tuning1 .

1. Introduction
Transfer learning is a widely used method for obtaining
strong performance in a variety of tasks where training
data is scarce (e.g., Zhu et al., 2020; Alyafeai et al., 2020;
Zhuang et al., 2020). A well-known recipe for transfer
learning involves the supervised or unsupervised pretraining
of a model on a source task with a large training dataset
(also referred to as upstream training). After pretraining,
1
Google Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to: Utku Evci
<evcu@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
We open source our code at https://github.com/
google-research/head2toe

Linear

(a)

Head2Toe

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Whereas L INEAR utilizes only the last layer for transfer learning, (b) H EAD 2T OE selects the most useful features from
the entire network and trains a linear head on top.

the model’s output head is discarded, and the rest of the
network is used to obtain a feature embedding, i.e., the
output of what was formerly the penultimate layer of the
network. When transferring to a target task, a new output
head is trained on top of the feature extractor (downstream
training). This approach makes intuitive sense: if a linear
combination of embedding features performs well on the
source task and the source and target domains are similar,
we would expect a different linear combination of features
to generalize to the target domain.
This approach of training a new output head, which we refer
to as L INEAR, often yields significant improvements in performance on the target task over training the network from
scratch (Kornblith et al., 2019). An alternative to L INEAR
is fine-tuning (F INE T UNING), which uses target-domain
data to adapt all weights in the feature extractor together
with the new output head. This procedure requires running
forward and backward passes through the entire network at
each training step and therefore its per-step cost is significantly higher than L INEAR. Furthermore, since the entire
network is fine-tuned, the entire set of new weights needs
to be stored for every target task, making F INE T UNING
impractical when working on edge devices or with a large
number of target tasks. However, F INE T UNING is often
preferred over L INEAR since it consistently leads to better

