HousE: Knowledge Graph Embedding with Householder Parameterization

Rui Li 1 * Jianan Zhao 2 Chaozhuo Li 3 Di He 4 Yiqi Wang 5 Yuming Liu 6
Hao Sun 6 Senzhang Wang 7 Weiwei Deng 6 Yanming Shen 1 Xing Xie 3 Qi Zhang 6

Abstract
The effectiveness of knowledge graph embedding
(KGE) largely depends on the ability to model
intrinsic relation patterns and mapping properties.
However, existing approaches can only capture
some of them with insufficient modeling capacity.
In this work, we propose a more powerful KGE
framework named HousE, which involves a novel
parameterization based on two kinds of Householder transformations: (1) Householder rotations
to achieve superior capacity of modeling relation
patterns; (2) Householder projections to handle
sophisticated relation mapping properties. Theoretically, HousE is capable of modeling crucial
relation patterns and mapping properties simultaneously. Besides, HousE is a generalization of existing rotation-based models while extending the
rotations to high-dimensional spaces. Empirically,
HousE achieves new state-of-the-art performance
on five benchmark datasets. Our code is available
at https://github.com/anrep/HousE.

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) store massive human knowledge
as a collection of factual triples, where each triple (h, r, t)
represents a relation r between head entity h and tail entity t.
With a wealth of human knowledge, KGs have demonstrated
their effectiveness in a myriad of downstream applications
(Xiong et al., 2017). However, real-world KGs such as
Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008) and Yago (Suchanek et al.,
2007)) usually suffer from incompleteness. Knowledge
*
Work done during internship at MSRA. 1 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China 2 University of Notre Dame, Indiana, USA
3
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China 4 Peking University,
Beijing, China 5 Michigan State University, Michigan, USA
6
Microsoft, Beijing, China 7 Central South University, Changsha,
China. Correspondence to: Yanming Shen <shen@dlut.edu.cn>,
Chaozhuo Li <cli@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(a) Symmetry

(b) Antisymmetry

(c) Inversion

(d) Composition

(e) 1-to-N

(f) N-to-1

Figure 1. Illustrations of four relation patterns (a-d) (Sun et al.,
2019) and two challenging RMPs (e-f) (Bordes et al., 2013).

Graph Embedding (KGE), which learns low-dimensional
representations for entities and relations, excels as an effective tool for predicting missing links.
A crucial challenge of KGE lies in how to model relation
patterns (e.g., symmetry, antisymmetry, inversion and composition) and relation mapping properties (RMPs, i.e., 1-to1, 1-to-N, N-to-1 and N-to-N) (Bordes et al., 2013; Sun et al.,
2019) as shown in Figure 1. Most works design specific
vector spaces and operations to capture such patterns and
RMPs. For example, TransE (Bordes et al., 2013) represents
relations as translations, which fails in modeling symmetry
and RMPs. Recently, RotatE (Sun et al., 2019) represents
relations as rotations in the complex plane to model the
four relation patterns, but it is incapable of handling RMPs
due to the distance-preserving property of rotations. Rotate3D (Gao et al., 2020) and QuatE (Zhang et al., 2019)
introduce quaternions to extend rotations to 3-dimensional
and 4-dimensional spaces, and achieve better performance
with larger model capacity.
However, as far as we know, none of the existing methods
is capable of modeling all the relation patterns and RMPs as
shown in Table 1, leading to the sub-optimal performance.
Furthermore, some advanced approaches, such as (Sun et al.,
2019; Gao et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019), are specifically
designed on 2,3,4 dimensional spaces, which may be inadequate to capture the sophisticated structures of KGs (Zhang
et al., 2019). Therefore, this brings us a question: is there

