Inductive Matrix Completion: No Bad Local Minima and a Fast Algorithm

Pini Zilber 1 Boaz Nadler 1

Abstract
The inductive matrix completion (IMC) problem
is to recover a low rank matrix from few observed
entries while incorporating prior knowledge about
its row and column subspaces. In this work, we
make three contributions to the IMC problem:
(i) we prove that under suitable conditions, the
IMC optimization landscape has no bad local
minima; (ii) we derive a simple scheme with theoretical guarantees to estimate the rank of the
unknown matrix; and (iii) we propose GNIMC, a
simple Gauss-Newton based method to solve the
IMC problem, analyze its runtime and derive for
it strong recovery guarantees. The guarantees for
GNIMC are sharper in several aspects than those
available for other methods, including a quadratic
convergence rate, fewer required observed entries
and stability to errors or deviations from low-rank.
Empirically, given entries observed uniformly at
random, GNIMC recovers the underlying matrix
substantially faster than several competing methods.

1. Introduction
In low rank matrix completion, a well-known problem that
appears in various applications, the task is to recover a
rank-r matrix X ∗ ∈ Rn1 ×n2 given few of its entries, where
r ≪ min{n1 , n2 }. In the problem of inductive matrix
completion (IMC), beyond being low rank, X ∗ is assumed
to have additional structure as follows: its columns belong
to the range of a known matrix A ∈ Rn1 ×d1 and its rows
belong to the range of a known matrix B ∈ Rn2 ×d2 , where
r ≤ d1 ≤ n1 and r ≤ d2 ≤ n2 . Hence, X ∗ may be
written as X ∗ = AM ∗ B ⊤ , and the task reduces to finding
the smaller matrix M ∗ ∈ Rd1 ×d2 . In practice, the low rank
and/or the additional structure assumptions may hold only
1
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Pini Zilber <pini.zilber@weizmann.ac.il>, Boaz Nadler
<boaz.nadler@weizmann.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

approximately, and in addition, the observed entries may be
corrupted by noise.
The side information matrices A, B may be viewed as feature representations. For example, in movies recommender
systems, the task is to complete a matrix X ∗ of the ratings
given by n1 users to n2 movies. The columns of A, B may
correspond to viewers’ demographic details (age, gender)
and movies’ properties (length, genre), respectively (Abernethy et al., 2009; Menon et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2012; Yao
& Li, 2019). The underlying assumption in IMC is that uncovering the relations between the viewers and the movies in
the feature space, as encoded in M ∗ , suffices to deduce the
ratings X ∗ = AM ∗ B ⊤ . Other examples of IMC include
multi-label learning (Xu et al., 2013; Si et al., 2016; Zhang
et al., 2018), disease prediction from gene/miRNA/lncRNA
data (Natarajan & Dhillon, 2014; Chen et al., 2018; Lu
et al., 2018) and link prediction in networks (Menon &
Elkan, 2011; Chiang et al., 2018).
If the side information matrices allow for a significant
dimensionality reduction, namely d ≪ n where d =
max{d1 , d2 } and n = max{n1 , n2 }, recovering X ∗ is easier from both theoretical and computational perspectives.
From the information limit aspect, the minimal number of
observed entries required to complete a matrix of rank r
with side information scales as O(dr), compared to O(nr)
without side information. Similarly, the number of variables scales as d rather than as n, enabling more efficient
computation and less memory. Finally, features also allow
completion of rows and columns of X ∗ that do not have
even a single observed entry. Unlike standard matrix completion which requires at least r observed entries in each row
and column of X ∗ , in IMC the feature vector is sufficient
to inductively predict the full corresponding row/column;
hence the name ’Inductive Matrix Completion’.
Several IMC methods were devised in the past years. Perhaps the most popular ones are nuclear norm minimization
(Xu et al., 2013; Lu et al., 2018) and alternating minimization (Jain & Dhillon, 2013; Natarajan & Dhillon, 2014;
Zhong et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2018). A more recent
method is multi-phase Procrustes flow (Zhang et al., 2018).
While nuclear norm minimization enjoys strong recovery
guarantees, it is computationally slow. Other methods are
faster, but the number of observed entries for their recovery

