First-Order Regret in Reinforcement Learning with Linear Function
Approximation: A Robust Estimation Approach

Andrew Wagenmaker 1 Yifang Chen 1 Max Simchowitz 2 Simon S. Du 1 Kevin Jamieson 1

Abstract
Obtaining first-order regret bounds—regret
bounds scaling not as the worst-case but with
some measure of the performance of the optimal policy on a given instance—is a core question in sequential decision-making. While such
bounds exist in many settings, they have proven
elusive in reinforcement learning with large state
spaces. In this work we address this gap, and
show thatpit is possible to obtain regret scale d3 H 3 · V ? · K + d3.5 H 3 log K) in
ing as O(
1
reinforcement learning with large state spaces,
namely the linear MDP setting. Here V1? is the
value of the optimal policy and K is the number
of episodes. We demonstrate that existing techniques based on least squares estimation are insufficient to obtain this result, and instead develop a
novel robust self-normalized concentration bound
based on the robust Catoni mean estimator, which
may be of independent interest.

1. Introduction
A central question in reinforcement learning (RL) is understanding precisely how long an agent must interact with its
environment before learning to behave near-optimally. One
popular way to measure this duration of interaction is by
studying the regret RK , or cumulative suboptimality, of online reinforcement algorithms that explore an unknown environment across K episodes of
pinteraction. Typical regret
guarantees scale as RK ≤ O( poly(d, H) · K), where d
measures the “size” of the environment and H the horizon
length of each episode.
In many cases,
√ however, regret bounds scaling at least as
large as Ω( K) may be deeply unsatisfactory. Consider, for
1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle 2 CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to: Andrew Wagenmaker <ajwagen@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

example, an environment where the agent receives rewards
only at very hard-to-reach states; that is, states which can
only be visited with some small probability p  1. In this
case, the maximal cumulative reward, optimal cumulative
expected-reward, or value V1? will also be quite small. In
other words, the cost of making a “mistake” at any given
episode results in a loss of at most√V1? reward, and the
cumulative loss associated with, say K, mistakes, should
also scale with this maximal penalty.
Motivated by this observation, there has been much recent
interest in achieving so-called small-value, small-loss, or
“first-order” regret
p bounds, which scale in proportion to
? · poly(d, H) · K) (it is well know
V1? : RK ≤ O( V1p
that the the scaling V1? K is unimprovable in general,
even in simple settings). Bounds of this form have received
considerable attention in the online learning, bandits, and
contextual bandits communities, and were responsible for
initiating the study of a broad array of instance-dependent
regret bounds in tabular (i.e. finite-state, finite-action) RL
settings as well.
First-Order Regret Beyond Tabular RL. Though firstorder regret has been achieved in both non-dynamic environments (e.g. contextual bandits) and in dynamic environments with finite state spaces (tabular RL) (Zanette &
Brunskill, 2019; Foster & Krishnamurthy, 2021), extension
to reinforcement learning in large state and action spaces
has proven elusive. The main difficulty is that, even though
the cumulative expected value of any policy is bounded as
V1? , the value-to-go associated with starting at some state
sh at step h, denoted Vh? (sh ), may be considerably larger.
Again, the paradigmatic example is when the reward is equal
to 1 on a handful of very hard-to-reach states. This means
that the variance of any learned predictor of the value function Vh? (sh ) may also be highly nonuniform in the state sh .
In the RL setting, this becomes more challenging because
the distribution across states evolves as the agent refines
its policies. And while in tabular settings, one can address
the non-uniformity by reasoning about each of the finitelymany states separately, there is no straightforward way to
generalize the argument to larger state spaces.
Contributions and Techniques. In this paper, we provide first-order regret bounds for reinforcement learning

