Understanding Doubly Stochastic Clustering

Tianjiao Ding 1 Derek Lim 2 René Vidal 1 Benjamin D. Haeffele 1

Original Affinity

Abstract
The problem of projecting a matrix onto the space
of doubly stochastic matrices finds several applications in machine learning. For example, in spectral clustering, it has been shown that forming the
normalized Laplacian matrix from a data affinity
matrix has close connections to projecting it onto
the set of doubly stochastic matrices. However,
the analysis of why this projection improves clustering has been limited. In this paper we present
theoretical conditions on the given affinity matrix
under which its doubly stochastic projection is
an ideal affinity matrix (i.e., it has no false connections between clusters, and is well-connected
within each cluster). In particular, we show that a
necessary and sufficient condition for a projected
affinity matrix to be ideal reduces to a set of conditions on the input affinity that decompose along
each cluster. Further, in the subspace clustering
problem, where each cluster is defined by a linear subspace, we provide geometric conditions on
the underlying subspaces which guarantee correct
clustering via a continuous version of the problem. This allows us to explain theoretically the
remarkable performance of a recently proposed
doubly stochastic subspace clustering method.

1. Introduction
Spectral clustering is a core technique in machine learning,
allowing one to cluster data with relatively general geometric arrangements based on pairwise measures of similarity
(or affinity) between data points. The steps of spectral clustering are well-known: 1) Define an affinity matrix whose
(i, j)th entry measures the similarity between points i and j;
2) Normalize the affinity matrix and compute a Laplacian;
3) Use eigenvectors of the Laplacian to define an embedding of the data; and 4) Cluster the embedding. However,
1

Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, USA 2 Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Doubly Stochastic

High

Low
Figure 1. Left: An affinity from a weighted stochastic block model
of 3 clusters, where the probability of a inter- and intra-cluster
connection are both 0.5, and the weights of inter- and intra-cluster
connections are from N (1, .12 ) and N (1.25, .12 ) respectively.
Right: A projection of the affinity onto the set of doubly stochastic
matrices under the ℓ2 metric, which has few false connections and
recovers the 3 clusters.

despite the relative simplicity in defining these steps, there
are several implementation details that can have a considerable impact on the overall clustering performance. For
example, the definition of the affinity matrix appears to be
the most important choice one needs to consider for good
performance. However, a key detail that often receives relatively little attention but can have a significant impact on
performance is how to normalize the affinity matrix. Indeed,
the two most popular spectral clustering methods, Ratio
Cut (Hagen & Kahng, 1992) and Normalized Cut (NCut)
(Shi & Malik, 2000), use two different normalizations of
the affinity, which emerge as continuous relaxations of two
different clustering objectives. An alternative point of view
is provided by Zass & Shashua (2006), who argue that these
methods for normalizing the affinity matrix are closely related to projecting the affinity onto the space of doubly
stochastic matrices, with the difference between methods
being what distance3 is minimized in the projection.
With this context, recall that an ideal affinity matrix satisfies
two properties: 1) Connectivity, i.e., the non-zero entries
(connections) between points within a cluster form a fullyconnected graph and 2) No false connections, i.e., there are
no connections for points between two different clusters.
Prior work has studied conditions on the data under which
3

For simplicity, we abuse the word distance to include other
more general ‘distance-like’ measures which to do not necessarily
satisfy all axioms of a distance (e.g., divergences).

