POET: Training Neural Networks on Tiny Devices
with Integrated Rematerialization and Paging

Shishir G. Patil 1 Paras Jain 1 Prabal Dutta 1 Ion Stoica 1 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1

Abstract
Fine-tuning models on edge devices like mobile
phones would enable privacy-preserving personalization over sensitive data. However, edge training has historically been limited to relatively small
models with simple architectures because training
is both memory and energy intensive. We present
POET, an algorithm to enable training large neural networks on memory-scarce battery-operated
edge devices. POET jointly optimizes the integrated search search spaces of rematerialization
and paging, two algorithms to reduce the memory consumption of backpropagation. Given a
memory budget and a run-time constraint, we formulate a mixed-integer linear program (MILP) for
energy-optimal training. Our approach enables
training significantly larger models on embedded
devices while reducing energy consumption while
not modifying mathematical correctness of backpropagation. We demonstrate that it is possible
to fine-tune both ResNet-18 and BERT within
the memory constraints of a Cortex-M class embedded device while outperforming current edge
training methods in energy efficiency. POET
is an open-source project available at https:
//github.com/ShishirPatil/poet

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are widely deployed for inference on
edge devices like smartphones and embedded platforms. In
contrast, training is still predominantly done on large cloud
servers with high-throughput accelerators such as GPUs.
The centralized cloud training model requires transmitting
sensitive data from edge devices to the cloud such as photos
1
University of California Berkeley. Correspondence to: Shishir
G. Patil <shishirpatil@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and keystrokes, thereby sacrificing user privacy and incurring additional data movement costs.
To enable users to personalize their models without relinquishing privacy, on-device training methods such as federated learning (Li et al., 2020) perform local training updates
without the need to consolidate data to the cloud. These
methods have been widely deployed to personalize keyboard suggestions in Google Gboard (Hard et al., 2018)
and to improve Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) on
iPhones (Paulik et al., 2021).
At the same time, current on-device training methods cannot support training modern architectures and large models.
For example, Google Gboard fine-tunes a simple logistic
regression model. Training larger models on edge devices is
infeasible primarily due to the limited device memory which
cannot store activations for backpropagation. A single training iteration for ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) requires 200×
more memory than inference.
Prior work has proposed strategies including paging to auxiliary memory (Peng et al., 2020) and rematerialization (Chen
et al., 2016; Jain et al., 2020; Kirisame et al., 2021) to reduce the memory footprint of training in the cloud. However,
these methods result in a significant increase in total energy
consumption. The data transfers associated with paging
methods often require more energy than recomputing the
data. Alternatively, rematerialization increases energy consumption at a rate of O(n2 ) as the memory budget shrinks.
In this work, we show that paging and rematerialization are
highly complementary. By carefully rematerializing cheap
operations while paging results of expensive operations to
auxiliary memory such as a flash or an SD card, we can
scale effective memory capacity with minimal energy overhead. By combining these two methods, we demonstrate
it is possible to train models like BERT on mobile-class
edge devices. By framing edge training as an optimization
problem, we discover optimal schedules with provably minimal energy consumption at a given memory budget. While
the focus of this paper is edge deployemnts, the energy
objective is increasingly becoming relevant even for cloud
deployments (Patterson et al., 2022).

