Byzantine Machine Learning Made Easy
By Resilient Averaging of Momentums

Sadegh Farhadkhani∗ 1 Rachid Guerraoui∗ 1 Nirupam Gupta∗ 1 Rafael Pinot∗ 1 John Stephan∗ 1

Abstract
Byzantine resilience emerged as a prominent topic
within the distributed machine learning community. Essentially, the goal is to enhance distributed
optimization algorithms, such as distributed SGD,
in a way that guarantees convergence despite the
presence of some misbehaving (a.k.a., Byzantine)
workers. Although a myriad of techniques addressing the problem have been proposed, the
field arguably rests on fragile foundations. These
techniques are hard to prove correct and rely on
assumptions that are (a) quite unrealistic, i.e., often violated in practice, and (b) heterogeneous,
i.e., making it difficult to compare approaches.
We present RESAM (RESilient Averaging of Momentums), a unified framework that makes it simple to establish optimal Byzantine resilience, relying only on standard machine learning assumptions. Our framework is mainly composed of
two operators: resilient averaging at the server
and distributed momentum at the workers. We
prove a general theorem stating the convergence
of distributed SGD under RESAM. Interestingly,
demonstrating and comparing the convergence of
many existing techniques become direct corollaries of our theorem, without resorting to stringent
assumptions. We also present an empirical evaluation of the practical relevance of RESAM.

1. Introduction
The vast amount of data collected every day, combined with
the increasing complexity of machine learning models, has
led to the emergence of distributed learning schemes (Abadi
1

Distributed Computing Laboratory (DCL), School of
Computer and Communication Sciences, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. Correspondence
to: Nirupam Gupta <nirupam.gupta@epfl.ch>, Rafael Pinot
<rafael.pinot@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2015; Kairouz et al., 2021). In the now classical
parameter server distributed architecture, the learning procedure consists of multiple data owners (or workers) collaborating to build a global model with the help of a central entity
(the parameter server), typically using the celebrated distributed stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm (Tsitsiklis et al., 1986; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 2015). The server
essentially maintains an estimate of the model parameter
which is updated iteratively using the average of the stochastic gradients computed by the workers.
Nevertheless, this algorithm is vulnerable to "misbehaving"
workers that could (either intentionally or inadvertently) sabotage the learning by sending arbitrarily bad gradients to the
server (Feng et al., 2015; Su & Vaidya, 2016). These workers are commonly referred to as Byzantine (Lamport et al.,
1982). To address this critical issue, a large body of research
has been devoted to adapting distributed SGD to make it
converge despite the presence of (a fraction of) Byzantine
workers, e.g., (Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017;
El Mhamdi et al., 2018; Yin et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2018;
Alistarh et al., 2018; Diakonikolas et al., 2019b; Allen-Zhu
et al., 2020; Prasad et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al., 2021).
The general idea consists in replacing the averaging step
of the algorithm with a robust aggregation rule, basically
seeking to filter out the bad gradients.
Demonstrating the correctness of the resulting algorithms
reveals however very challenging, and previous works rely
on unusual assumptions. For instance, a large body of work
assumes stochastic gradients that follow a specific distribution, e.g., sub-Gaussian/exponential (Chen et al., 2017; Feng
et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2018; Prasad et al., 2020). Some
approaches rely on stronger assumptions that are not even
satisfied by a Gaussian distribution, such as almost surely
absolutely boundedness (Alistarh et al., 2018; Diakonikolas
et al., 2019b; Allen-Zhu et al., 2020), or vanishing variance (Blanchard et al., 2017; Xie et al., 2018; El Mhamdi
et al., 2018; 2021a). Indeed, these assumptions are often violated in practice, resulting in the failure of these approaches
when some workers behave maliciously (Baruch et al., 2019;
Xie et al., 2019a). Ultimately, the considerable difference in
these assumptions from one approach to another makes it
quite difficult to compare the underlying techniques. Byz

