Robust Kernel Density Estimation with Median-of-Means principle

Pierre Humbert * 1

Batiste Le Bars * 2

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a robust nonparametric density estimator combining the popular Kernel Density Estimation method and the Medianof-Means principle (MoM-KDE). This estimator is shown to achieve robustness for a large
class of anomalous data, potentially adversarial. While previous works only prove consistency results under very specific contamination
models, this work provides finite-sample highprobability error-bounds without any prior knowledge on the outliers. To highlight the robustness
of our method, we introduce an influence function
adapted to the considered O ∪ I framework. Finally, we show that MoM-KDE achieves competitive results when compared with other robust kernel estimators, while having significantly lower
computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Over the past years, the task of learning in the presence
of outliers has become an increasingly important objective
in both statistics and machine learning. Indeed, in many
situations, training data can be contaminated by undesired
samples, which may badly affect the resulting learning task,
especially in adversarial settings. Therefore, building robust
estimators and algorithms that are resilient to outliers is
becoming crucial in many learning procedures. In particular, the inference of a probability density function from a
contaminated random sample is of major concern.
Density estimation methods are mostly divided into paramet-

Ludovic Minvielle * 3

ric and nonparametric techniques. Among the nonparametric family, the Kernel Density Estimator (KDE) is arguably
the most known and used for both univariate and multivariate densities (Parzen, 1962; Silverman, 1986; Scott, 2015),
but it is also known to be sensitive to datasets contaminated
by outliers (Kim and Scott, 2011; 2012; Vandermeulen and
Scott, 2014). The construction of a robust KDE is therefore
an important area of research that can have useful applications, such as anomaly detection and resilience to adversarial
data corruption. Yet, only few works have proposed such a
robust estimator.
Kim and Scott (2012) proposed to combine KDE with ideas
from M-estimation to construct the so-called Robust Kernel Density Estimator (RKDE). However, no consistency
results were provided and robustness was rather shown experimentally. Later, RKDE was proven to converge to the
true density, however at the condition that the dataset remains uncorrupted (Vandermeulen and Scott, 2013). More
recently, Vandermeulen and Scott (2014) proposed another
robust estimator, called Scaled and Projected KDE (SPKDE). Authors proved the L1 -consistency of SPKDE under
a variant of the Huber’s ε-contamination model (Huber,
1992) where two strong assumptions are made. First, the
contamination parameter ε is assumed to be known, and
second, the outliers must be uniform over the support of the
true density. Unfortunately, as they did not provide rates
of convergence, it still remains unclear at which speed SPKDE converges to the true density. Finally, both RKDE
and SPKDE require iterative algorithms to compute their
estimators, thus increasing the overall complexity of their
construction. For theoretical findings, the recent work of
Liu and Gao (2019) managed to obtain minimax optimal
rates for kernel density estimates, but in the quite restrictive
Huber’s model (see Sec. 2.1).

*

Authors in alphabetical order
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Inria, Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France.
2
Université Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille.
3
Université Paris-Saclay, ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Centre
Borelli, F-91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Correspondence
to: Batiste Le Bars <batiste.le-bars@inria.fr>, Pierre Humbert
<pierre.humbert@universite-paris-saclay.fr>.
1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In statistical analysis, another idea to construct robust estimators is to use the Median-of-Means principle (MoM).
Introduced by Nemirovsky and Yudin (1983), Jerrum et al.
(1986), and Alon et al. (1999), the MoM was first designed
to estimate the mean of a real random variable. It relies on
the simple idea that rather than taking the average of all the
observations, the sample is split in several non-overlapping
blocks over which the mean is computed. The MoM estimator is then defined as the median of these means. Being
easy to compute, the MoM properties have been studied by

