Proximal Denoiser for Convergent Plug-and-Play Optimization with
Nonconvex Regularization

Samuel Hurault 1 Arthur Leclaire 1 Nicolas Papadakis 1

Abstract
Plug-and-Play (PnP) methods solve ill-posed inverse problems through iterative proximal algorithms by replacing a proximal operator by a
denoising operation. When applied with deep
neural network denoisers, these methods have
shown state-of-the-art visual performance for image restoration problems. However, their theoretical convergence analysis is still incomplete.
Most of the existing convergence results consider
nonexpansive denoisers, which is non-realistic, or
limit their analysis to strongly convex data-fidelity
terms in the inverse problem to solve. Recently, it
was proposed to train the denoiser as a gradient
descent step on a functional parameterized by a
deep neural network. Using such a denoiser guarantees the convergence of the PnP version of the
Half-Quadratic-Splitting (PnP-HQS) iterative algorithm. In this paper, we show that this gradient
denoiser can actually correspond to the proximal
operator of another scalar function. Given this
new result, we exploit the convergence theory of
proximal algorithms in the nonconvex setting to
obtain convergence results for PnP-PGD (Proximal Gradient Descent) and PnP-ADMM (Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers). When
built on top of a smooth gradient denoiser, we
show that PnP-PGD and PnP-ADMM are convergent and target stationary points of an explicit
functional. These convergence results are confirmed with numerical experiments on deblurring,
super-resolution and inpainting. 1

1

Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, IMB, UMR 5251,F33400 Talence, France. Correspondence to: Samuel Hurault
<samuel.hurault@math.u-bordeaux.fr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
samuro95/Prox-PnP.

1. Introduction
Many image restoration (IR) tasks can be addressed by
solving an optimization problem
x∗ ∈ arg min λf (x) + g(x)

(1)

x

where f is a data-fidelity term, g a regularization term
and λ > 0 a parameter that controls the strength of the
regularization. In particular, we will consider the case
2
f (x) = 2σ1 2 ||Ax − y|| that corresponds to the linear obser∗
vation model y = Ax + ξ where y is the degraded image,
x∗ is the clean image that we want to recover, A is a linear
operator and ξ a white Gaussian noise of standard deviation σ. In several applications (like deblurring or inpainting),
the operator A is non-invertible, thus leading to an ill-posed
inverse problem. Including a term g allows to cope with the
ill-posed nature of this problem by assuming a-priori that
x must be regular in some sense. A long-standing problem
consists in designing functions g(x) that reflect a relevant
regularity prior on x while allowing for efficient numerical
schemes to solve (1).
For early image models, based e.g. on Fourier spectrum (Ruderman, 1994), total variation (Rudin et al., 1992),
wavelet sparsity (Mallat, 2009) or patch-based Gaussian
mixtures (Zoran & Weiss, 2011), the problem (1) can
be solved either explicitly (with linear filtering) or with
provably convergent algorithms (like iterative thresholding (Daubechies et al., 2004)). More recently, tremendous
progress has been made in IR by adopting deep image models that are learned from a database of clean images (Lunz
et al., 2018; Prost et al., 2021; González et al., 2021). It is
still an open question to understand how deep models can
be encoded in a regularization term g(x) that has sufficient
properties to apply well-known optimization techniques.
One fruitful way to tackle this problem is to rely on firstorder proximal splitting algorithms (Combettes & Pesquet,
2011). These algorithms operate individually on f and g
via the proximity operator defined for a stepsize τ > 0 as
Proxτ f (x) = arg min
z

1
||x − z||2 + f (z),
2τ

(2)

Among these algorithms, the Proximal Gradient Descent (PGD) (also called Forward-Backward Splitting) al-

