Approximate Frank-Wolfe Algorithms over Graph-structured Support Sets

Baojian Zhou 1 Yifan Sun 2

Abstract

sparsity pattern of x, which can be defined by interesting
graph structures such as a path, tree, or cluster over an underlying graph. Models M describe many interesting scenarios
where graph structures serve as a powerful prior. Important applications of these include generalized s-sparsity
(Argyriou et al., 2012; Lim & Wright, 2017), structuredsparsity (Bach et al., 2012a;b), clustered-sparsity (McDonald et al., 2016b), weighted graph models (WGM) (Hegde
et al., 2015b), graph LASSO (Sharpnack et al., 2012; Hallac
et al., 2015), marginal polytope (Krishnan et al., 2015), and
many others (Baraniuk et al., 2010).

In this paper, we consider approximate FrankWolfe (FW) algorithms to solve convex optimization problems over graph-structured support sets where the linear minimization oracle
(LMO) cannot be efficiently obtained in general.
We first demonstrate that two popular approximation assumptions (additive and multiplicative
gap errors) are not applicable in that no cheap
gap-approximate LMO oracle exists. Thus, approximate dual maximization oracles (DMO) are
proposed, which approximate the inner product
rather than the gap. We prove that the standard
FW method using a√δ-approximate DMO converges as O((1 − δ) s/δ) in the worst case, and
as O(L/(δ 2 t)) over a δ-relaxation of the constraint set. Furthermore, when the solution is
on the boundary, a variant of FW converges as
O(1/t2 ) under the quadratic growth assumption.
Our empirical results suggest that even these improved bounds are pessimistic, showing fast convergence in recovering real-world images with
graph-structured sparsity.

To solve the GSCO problem, a natural idea is to use projected gradient descent (PGD) where, a projection oracle
finds a point in D at per-iteration. PGD-based methods for
sparse and structure optimization have been well explored
(Bahmani et al., 2013; Jain et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2014;
Nguyen et al., 2017; Hegde et al., 2015a;b; 2016). To obtain approximate convergence guarantees, existing works of
this type assume projection oracles can be solved exactly or
with very high approximations guarantees. However, projections satisfying these requirements are usually hard to
find for problem (1). Furthermore, multiple projections may
be needed at per-iteration (Hegde et al., 2015b).

1. Introduction
This paper deals with the following graph-structured convex
optimization (GSCO) problem
min f (x), subject to x ∈ D(C, M),

x∈Rd

(1)

where D(C, M) ≜ conv {x : ∥x∥2 ≤ C, supp (x) ∈ M}
is a convex hull of the graph-structured support set described
by M, which contains a collection of allowed structures of
the problem, and f is a convex differentiable function. The
support of x, i.e., supp(x) ≜ {i : xi ̸= 0} encodes the
1

School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Baojian Zhou
<bjzhou@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Instead, the Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithm (Frank et al., 1956)
(a.k.a conditional gradient method) has been receiving increasing attention in recent years. Unlike PGD-based methods, FW-type methods, at each iteration, find a point using
the linear minimization oracle (LMO), which for many constraints may enjoy a much cheaper per-iteration cost than
the projection oracle (Combettes & Pokutta, 2021), and often obtain high-quality sparser solutions in early iterations.
Hence, they are attractive for solving structured problems
(Krishnan et al., 2015; Briol et al., 2015; Ping et al., 2016;
Berthet & Perchet, 2017; Allen-Zhu et al., 2017; Abernethy
& Wang, 2017). Yet, these attractive methods are less explored for graph-structured optimization problems.
To resolve problem (1) using FW-type methods, the main
difficulty is that solving the LMO efficiently, even with D
convex, is in general NP-hard for many structured models M.
A typical motivational example is a popular weighted graph
model (WGM), where M contains all sets of g connected
components of a specified weighted graph (Hegde et al.,
2015b). Here, both the projection oracle and LMO are NP-

