Variational Nearest Neighbor Gaussian Process

Luhuan Wu 1 Geoff Pleiss 2 John Cunningham 1 2

Abstract
Variational approximations to Gaussian processes
(GPs) typically use a small set of inducing points
to form a low-rank approximation to the covariance matrix. In this work, we instead exploit a sparse approximation of the precision matrix. We propose variational nearest neighbor
Gaussian process (VNNGP), which introduces
a prior that only retains correlations within K
nearest-neighboring observations, thereby inducing sparse precision structure. Using the variational framework, VNNGP’s objective can be
factorized over both observations and inducing
points, enabling stochastic optimization with a
time complexity of O(K 3 ). Hence, we can arbitrarily scale the inducing point size, even to the
point of putting inducing points at every observed
location. We compare VNNGP to other scalable
GPs through various experiments, and demonstrate that VNNGP (1) can dramatically outperform low-rank methods, and (2) is less prone to
overfitting than other nearest neighbor methods.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) provide rich priors over functions (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). While the GP posterior can be computed in closed form for regression models,
variational posterior approximations (Titsias, 2009; Hensman et al., 2013; van der Wilk et al., 2020) have become
increasingly popular as they offer numerous advantages.
First, variational methods can utilize stochastic minibatching (Hensman et al., 2013), enabling inference for largescale datasets. Second, variational methods are compatible with non-conjugate likelihoods (Hensman et al., 2015)
and simplify inference for interdomain observation models
(Lázaro-Gredilla & Figueiras-Vidal, 2009; Álvarez et al.,
2010; van der Wilk et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021). Finally,
1

Department of Statistics, Columbia University 2 Zuckerman
Institute, Columbia University. Correspondence to: Luhuan Wu
<lw2827@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

black box variational methods (Ranganath et al., 2014) make
it possible to use GP as components of larger models, such
as Deep Gaussian Processes (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013).
To apply variational methods to large-scale GP, it is often
necessary to make additional approximations (Titsias, 2009;
Hensman et al., 2017). This is because making GP inference
with N observations incurs a O(N 3 ) computation. A popular variational approach that aids this issue is the Stochastic
Variational Gaussian Process method (SVGP) (Hensman
et al., 2013), which essentially forms a low-rank approximation to the prior covariance. These approximations offer
well understood predictive properties (Bauer et al., 2016),
probable performance guarantees (Burt et al., 2019), and
competitive performance on numerous datasets. However,
there are also many instances when low-rank approximations are ill suited. For example, spatiotemporal datasets
often have intrinsically low lengthscale, meaning that the
data can vary rapidly with small changes in space and time.
In these settings, low-rank approximations cannot capture
fast variations, often resulting in low fidelity or “blurry” predictions (e.g. Datta et al., 2016a; Pleiss et al., 2020; Wu
et al., 2021).
In this paper, we are interested in making variational GP
methods more amenable to spatiotemporal data and other
domains with intrinsically low lengthscale, while retaining (and even improving) scalability. To do so, we replace
SVGP’s low-rank approximation of the prior covariance
matrix with a sparse approximation of the prior precision
matrix. Whereas a low-rank approximation assumes that
observations are explained through a small number of global
latent variables, a sparse precision approximation instead
assumes that observations are conditionally independent
given their nearest neighboring observations. Mathematically, the joint GP prior is approximated by the product
of one-dimensional conditionals, each of which only depends on a small subset of preceding observations based
on some predetermined ordering. This assumption is quite
reasonable in the context of spatiotemporal modeling. For
example, it is reasonable to assume that the weather in Los
Angeles and Maine are conditionally independent, given
neighboring cities in California.
Sparse precision approximations are common in spatiotemporal modeling throughout the geostatisics literature (e.g.

