Supervised Learning with General Risk Functionals

Liu Leqi 1 Audrey Huang 2 Zachary C. Lipton 1 Kamyar Azizzadenesheli 3

Abstract
Standard uniform convergence results bound the
generalization gap of the expected loss over a hypothesis class. The emergence of risk-sensitive
learning requires generalization guarantees for
functionals of the loss distribution beyond the
expectation. While prior works specialize in uniform convergence of particular functionals, our
work provides uniform convergence for a general class of Hölder risk functionals for which the
closeness in the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) entails closeness in risk. We establish the first uniform convergence results for estimating the CDF of the loss distribution, which
yield uniform convergence guarantees that hold
simultaneously both over a class of Hölder risk
functionals and over a hypothesis class. Thus licensed to perform empirical risk minimization,
we develop practical gradient-based methods for
minimizing distortion risks (widely studied subset
of Hölder risks that subsumes the spectral risks,
including the mean, conditional value at risk, cumulative prospect theory risks, and others) and
provide convergence guarantees. In experiments,
we demonstrate the efficacy of our learning procedure, both in settings where uniform convergence
results hold and in high-dimensional settings with
deep networks.

1. Introduction
To date, the vast majority of supervised, unsupervised, and
reinforcement learning research has focused on objectives
expressible as expectations (over some dataset or distribution) of an underlying loss (or reward) function. This focus
is understandable. The expected loss is mathematically convenient and a reasonable default, and a special case of nearly
every proposed family of risks. To be sure, this focus has
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign 3 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University.
Correspondence to: Liu Leqi <leqil@cs.cmu.edu>, Audrey Huang
<audreyh5@illinois.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

paid off: we now possess a rich body of theory and methods for evaluating, optimizing, and providing theoretical
guarantees on the expected loss.
However, real-world concerns such as risk aversion, equitable allocations of benefits and harms, or alignment with
human preferences, often demand that we address other
functionals of the loss distribution. For example, in finance,
the expectation of returns must be weighed against their
variance to determine an ideal portfolio allocation, as codified, e.g., in the mean-variance objective (Björk et al., 2014).
Focusing on supervised learning, consider the common scenario in which a population contains a minority (constituting fraction α of the population) but where group membership was not recorded in the available data. If the pattern
relating the features to the label were different for different demographics, a naively trained model might adversely
harm members of a minority group. Absent further information, one sensible strategy could be to optimize the worst
case performance over all subsets (of size up to α). This
would translate to the familiar Conditional Value at Risk
(CVaR) objective (Rockafellar et al., 2000). In addition,
even in settings where a model is evaluated in terms of the
expected loss at test time, the training objective may be chosen as other functionals due to reasons including distribution
shifts (Duchi & Namkoong, 2018), noisy labels (Lee et al.,
2020), imbalanced datset (Li et al., 2020), etc.
Risk-sensitive learning research addresses the problem of
learning models under many families of (risk) functionals, including (among others) distortion risks (Wirch &
Hardy, 2001), coherent risks (Artzner et al., 1999), spectral
risks (Acerbi, 2002), and cumulative prospect theory risks
(Prashanth et al., 2016). Subsuming these risks under a common framework addressing bounded losses/rewards, Huang
et al. (2021) recently introduced Lipschitz risk functionals,
for which differences in the risk are bounded by (sup norm)
differences in the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF)
of losses. Thus, because a single CDF estimate can be used
to estimate all Lipschitz risks, sup norm concentration of the
CDF estimate entails corresponding (simultaneous) concentration of all Lipschitz risks calculated on that CDF estimate.
However, this concentration result applies only to a single
hypothesis. In contrast, most uniform convergence results
in learning theory have concentrated largely on the expected
loss (Vapnik, 1999; 2013; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002).

