Stochastic Continuous Submodular Maximization: Boosting via Non-oblivious
Function
Qixin Zhang 1 2 Zengde Deng 2 Zaiyi Chen 2 Haoyuan Hu 2 Yu Yang 1

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit Stochastic Continuous
Submodular Maximization in both offline and online settings, which can benefit wide applications
in machine learning and operations research areas. We present a boosting framework covering
gradient ascent and online gradient ascent. The
fundamental ingredient of our methods is a novel
non-oblivious function F derived from a factorrevealing optimization problem, whose any stationary point provides a (1 − e−γ )-approximation
to the global maximum of the γ-weakly DRsubmodular objective function f ∈ CL1,1 (X ). Under the offline scenario, we propose a boosting
gradient ascent method achieving (1 − e−γ − ϵ2 )approximation after O(1/ϵ2 ) iterations, which
γ2
improves the ( 1+γ
2 ) approximation ratio of the
classical gradient ascent algorithm. In the online
setting, for the first time we consider the adversarial delays for stochastic gradient feedback, under
which we propose a boosting online gradient algorithm with the same non-oblivious function F .
Meanwhile, we verify that this boosting
online
√
algorithm achieves a regret of O( D) against a
(1 − e−γ )-approximation to the best feasible solution in hindsight, where D is the sum of delays
of gradient feedback. To the best of √
our knowledge, this is the first result to obtain O( T ) regret
against a (1 − e−γ )-approximation with O(1) gradient inquiry at each time step, when no delay
exists, i.e., D = T . Finally, numerical experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our boosting methods.

1

School of Data Science City University of Hong Kong,
Kowloon Hong Kong, China 2 Cainiao Network, Hang Zhou,
China. Correspondence to: Yu Yang <yuyang@cityu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Due to the relatively low computational complexity, firstorder optimization methods are widely used in machine
learning, operations research, and statistics communities.
Especially for convex objectives, there is an enormous literature (Bertsekas, 2015; Nesterov, 2013) deriving the convergence rate of first-order methods. Recent studies have shown
that first-order optimization methods could also achieve the
global minimum for some special non-convex problems (Netrapalli et al., 2014; Arora et al., 2016; Ge et al., 2016; Du
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020), although it is in general NPhard to find the global minima of a non-convex objective
function (Murty & Kabadi, 1987). Motivated by this, some
recent work focused on the structures and conditions under which non-convex optimization is tractable (Bian et al.,
2017; Hazan et al., 2016a). In this paper, we investigate
the stochastic γ-weakly continuous submodular maximization problem where an unbiased gradient oracle is available
under both offline and online scenarios.
Continuous DR-Submodular Maximization has drawn much
attention recently due to that it admits efficient approximate maximization routines. For instance, under the offline
deterministic setting, Bian et al. (2020; 2017) proposed
the vanilla Frank-Wolfe method and its variant achieving
1/2 and (1 − 1/e) approximations, respectively. When the
stochastic estimates of the gradient is available, Mokhtari
et al. (2018) and Hassani et al. (2020) proposed some improved variants of the Frank-Wolfe algorithm, equipped
with variance reduction techniques. In (Hassani et al., 2020),
assuming the Lipschitz continuity of stochastic Hessian, a
[(1 − 1/e)OP T − ε] solution is achieved using O(1/ε2 )
stochastic gradient. Such a result provides the tightest approximation as well as the optimal stochastic first-order
oracle complexity.
However, when generalizing Frank-Wolfe methods to the
online setting, some other tricks should be involved, which
makes the algorithm design more complicated. For example,
Chen et al. (2018b) and Zhang et al. (2019) took the idea of
meta actions (Streeter & Golovin, 2008) and blocking procedure to propose online Frank-Wolfe algorithms. Moreover,
in these aforementioned studies, the environment/adversary
reveals the reward and stochastic first-order information im-

