Equivariance versus Augmentation for Spherical Images

Jan E. Gerken 1 2 3 Oscar Carlsson 1 Hampus Linander 4 Fredrik Ohlsson 5 Christoffer Petersson 6 1
Daniel Persson 1

Abstract
We analyze the role of rotational equivariance in
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) applied
to spherical images. We compare the performance of the group equivariant networks known
as S2CNNs and standard non-equivariant CNNs
trained with an increasing amount of data augmentation. The chosen architectures can be considered baseline references for the respective design
paradigms. Our models are trained and evaluated
on single or multiple items from the MNIST or
FashionMNIST dataset projected onto the sphere.
For the task of image classification, which is inherently rotationally invariant, we find that by
considerably increasing the amount of data augmentation and the size of the networks, it is possible for the standard CNNs to reach at least the
same performance as the equivariant network.
In contrast, for the inherently equivariant task
of semantic segmentation, the non-equivariant
networks are consistently outperformed by the
equivariant networks with significantly fewer parameters. We also analyze and compare the inference latency and training times of the different networks, enabling detailed tradeoff considerations between equivariant architectures and
data augmentation for practical problems. The
equivariant spherical networks used in the experiments are available at https://github.
com/JanEGerken/sem_seg_s2cnn.

1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers University
of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden 2 Machine Learning Group
at Berlin Institute of Technology, Berlin, Germany 3 Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data (BIFOLD), Berlin,
Germany 4 Department of Physics, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden 5 Department of Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden 6 Zenseact,
Gothenburg, Sweden. Correspondence to: Daniel Persson
<daniel.persson@chalmers.se>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Sample from the spherical MNIST dataset used
for semantic segmentation. Left: input data. Right: segmentation mask.

1. Introduction
In virtually all computer vision tasks, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) consistently outperform fully connected
architectures. This performance gain can be attributed to
the weight sharing and translational equivariance of the
CNN layers: The network does not have to learn to identify
translated versions of an image, since the inductive bias of
equivariance already implies this identification. In contrast,
fully connected layers require many more training samples
to learn an effective form of equivariance. One way of
ameliorating this problem is to supply the network with
translated copies of the original training images, a form of
data augmentation. However, training with this kind of data
augmentation requires much longer training times and the
performance of CNNs may not be reached in this way.
A crucial point is that in the equivariant setting, we are
viewing the input image not only as a vector, but as a signal
defined on a two-dimensional grid. The translational symmetry then has a geometric origin: it is a symmetry of the
grid. From this perspective it is natural to envision generalizations of CNNs where not only translational symmetries
are implemented but also more general transformations,
such as rotations. Examples of networks that realize this
property are group equivariant CNNs which are equivariant
with respect to rotations on the plane (Cohen & Welling,
2016), or spherical CNNs which are equivariant with respect
to rotations of the sphere (Cohen et al., 2018). Similarly
to the case of translations discussed above, these symmetry
properties of the data can be learned approximately by a
non-equivariant model using data augmentation.

