Neural-Symbolic Models for Logical Queries on Knowledge Graphs

Zhaocheng Zhu 1 2 Mikhail Galkin 1 3 Zuobai Zhang 1 2 Jian Tang 1 4 5

Abstract
Answering complex first-order logic (FOL)
queries on knowledge graphs is a fundamental
task for multi-hop reasoning. Traditional symbolic methods traverse a complete knowledge
graph to extract the answers, which provides
good interpretation for each step. Recent neural
methods learn geometric embeddings for complex
queries. These methods can generalize to incomplete knowledge graphs, but their reasoning process is hard to interpret. In this paper, we propose
Graph Neural Network Query Executor (GNNQE), a neural-symbolic model that enjoys the advantages of both worlds. GNN-QE decomposes a
complex FOL query into relation projections and
logical operations over fuzzy sets, which provides
interpretability for intermediate variables. To reason about the missing links, GNN-QE adapts a
graph neural network from knowledge graph completion to execute the relation projections, and
models the logical operations with product fuzzy
logic. Experiments on 3 datasets show that GNNQE significantly improves over previous state-ofthe-art models in answering FOL queries. Meanwhile, GNN-QE can predict the number of answers without explicit supervision, and provide
visualizations for intermediate variables.1

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) encapsulate knowledge about the
world in a collection of relational edges between entities,
and are widely adopted by many domains (Miller, 1998;
Vrandečić & Krötzsch, 2014; Himmelstein et al., 2017;
Szklarczyk et al., 2019). Reasoning on knowledge graphs
1
Mila - Québec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal 3 McGill
University 4 HEC Montréal 5 CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence
to: Zhaocheng Zhu <zhaocheng.zhu@umontreal.ca>, Jian Tang
<jian.tang@hec.ca>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
DeepGraphLearning/GNN-QE

has attracted much attention in artificial intelligence, since
it can be used to infer new knowledge or answer queries
based on existing knowledge. One particular reasoning task
we are interested in is answering complex First-Order Logic
(FOL) queries on knowledge graphs, which involves logic
operations like existential quantifier (∃), conjunction (∧),
disjunction (∨) and negation (¬). For example, the question
“Which universities do the Turing Award winners of deep
learning work in?” can be represented as a FOL query, as
showed in Fig. 1.
Traditionally, the problem of reasoning is handled by
symbolic approaches, such as logic programming (Lloyd,
2012), fuzzy logic (Klir & Yuan, 1995) or probabilistic
reasoning (Pearl, 2014). In the same vein, several algorithms (Dalvi & Suciu, 2007; Schmidt et al., 2010; Zou
et al., 2011) have been developed for searching the answers
to complex queries on graph databases. These methods
traverse a graph and extract all possible assignments for
intermediate variables, which provides good interpretation
for each step. Besides, symbolic methods are guaranteed to
produce the correct answer if all facts are given (Stuart &
Peter, 2016). However, many real-world knowledge graphs
are known to be incomplete (Nickel et al., 2015), which
limits the usage of symbolic methods on knowledge graphs.
Recently, neural methods, such as embedding methods (Bordes et al., 2013; Trouillon et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2018)
and graph neural networks (GNNs) (Schlichtkrull et al.,
2018; Vashishth et al., 2019; Teru et al., 2020; Zhu et al.,
2021), have achieved significant progress in knowledge
graph completion. Based on the success of these neural
methods, many works have been proposed to solve FOL
queries on incomplete graphs by learning an embedding for
each FOL query (Hamilton et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2019; Ren
& Leskovec, 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021b).
Typically, these methods translate the logic operations into
neural logic operators in the embedding space. Nevertheless, it is hard to interpret what set of entities an intermediate embedding encodes, leaving the reasoning process
unknown to users. The only interpretable method is CQDBeam (Arakelyan et al., 2021), which applies beam search to
a pretrained embedding model in the entity space. However,
the complexity of exhaustive search prevents CQD-Beam
from being trained directly on complex queries.

