Convergence of Uncertainty Sampling for Active Learning

Anant Raj 1 2 Francis Bach 1

Abstract
Uncertainty sampling in active learning is heavily used in practice to reduce the annotation cost.
However, there has been no wide consensus on
the function to be used for uncertainty estimation in binary classification tasks and convergence
guarantees of the corresponding active learning algorithms are not well understood. The situation is
even more challenging for multi-category classification. In this work, we propose an efficient uncertainty estimator for binary classification which
we also extend to multiples classes, and provide a
non-asymptotic rate of convergence for our uncertainty sampling based active learning algorithm in
both cases under no-noise conditions (i.e., linearly
separable data). We also extend our analysis to
the noisy case and provide theoretical guarantees
for our algorithm under the influence of noise in
the tasks of binary and multi-class classifications.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, machine learning algorithms have
achieved a lot of success on various tasks in computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recognition.
This success has been led by various factors which include
improvement in computing architectures and improved machine learning algorithms. Moreover, the rapid growth in
the number of large labeled public datasets is also one of
the most important factors which contributed to the rise of
machine learning. However, in many practical scenarios, labeled data are hard to obtain, as it requires a lot of time and
human efforts to label a dataset. Hence, it is a time consuming as well as economically expensive procedure. For this
reason, there have been many efforts to build machine learning algorithms which require a significantly lower number
1

Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, Paris, France 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Coordinated Science Laboratory University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Anant Raj
<anant.raj@inria.fr>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of labeled samples to train. One major direction of research
in this area is to devise efficient active learning algorithms.
Active learning algorithms propose efficient labeling
schemes to reduce the number of labels required in order
to train a classifier, resulting in minimal annotation cost
while still maintaining high performance. Active learning
methods can be categorized in two major categories : (i)
stream-based active learning where samples from the data
generating distribution are sequentially presented to the active learner, and (ii) pool-based active learning where there
exists a very small number of labeled samples and the rest
of the samples have no label. We note that any streaming based active learning algorithm can be converted to a
pool-based active learning algorithm and vice versa (Sabato
& Hess, 2016). For both of these categories, there exists
an acquisition function which characterizes which informative samples should be labelled. The most popular way
of determining if a sample is informative or not is by estimating uncertainty. Other than uncertainty sampling based
approaches, the other major approaches for performing active learning are query-by-committee (Seung et al., 1992),
expected model change (Settles et al., 2007), expected error reduction (Roy & McCallum, 2001), expected variance
reduction (Wang et al., 2015), among others.
The main focus of this paper is uncertainty sampling based
active learning algorithms. Despite of it being one of the
most used active learning algorithms in practice, little is
known about its theoretical properties. Specifically, there
has been no common consensus on the uncertainty estimation approach used to perform active learning which also
provably converges. Also, most of the active learning algorithms studied previously in theory as well as in practice
are for binary classification and are not trivial to extend to
multi-category classification problems at least theoretically.
In this paper, we investigate these questions from the lens
of optimization through stochastic gradient descent, and
propose a sampling function for which the uncertainty sampling based active learning algorithm provably converges.
We make the following contributions in this work :
(i) We propose a family of theoretically motivated functions to estimate uncertainty for margin based predictions for binary and multi-category classification. Our
approach can also be used with any non-linear feature

