Log-Euclidean Signatures for Intrinsic Distances Between Unaligned Datasets

Tal Shnitzer 1 Mikhail Yurochkin 2 3 Kristjan Greenewald 2 3 Justin Solomon 1

Abstract
The need for efficiently comparing and representing datasets with unknown alignment spans various fields, from model analysis and comparison in
machine learning to trend discovery in collections
of medical datasets. We use manifold learning to
compare the intrinsic geometric structures of different datasets by comparing their diffusion operators, symmetric positive-definite (SPD) matrices
that relate to approximations of the continuous
Laplace-Beltrami operator from discrete samples.
Existing methods typically assume known data
alignment and compare such operators in a pointwise manner. Instead, we exploit the Riemannian
geometry of SPD matrices to compare these operators and define a new theoretically-motivated distance based on a lower bound of the log-Euclidean
metric. Our framework facilitates comparison
of data manifolds expressed in datasets with different sizes, numbers of features, and measurement modalities. Our log-Euclidean signature
(LES) distance recovers meaningful structural differences, outperforming competing methods in
various application domains.

1. Introduction
With the increased availability of data-driven methods, the
ability to compare data collections has become crucial.
In many cases, such comparisons are impossible without
computationally-expensive alignment and manipulation, especially when the datasets are of different dimensions or are
embedded in different domains. This problem is prominent
in learning, where the need for comparing datasets arises,
e.g., in the evaluation and comparison of neural network
(NN) architectures (Kornblith et al., 2019), data manifolds
of generative models (Heusel et al., 2017), and tasks in
transfer and meta learning (Achille et al., 2019).
1
MIT CSAIL 2 IBM Research 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. Correspondence to: Tal Shnitzer <talsd@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A common approach to dataset comparison assumes that
complex high-dimensional data lie on some manifold of
lower dimension, i.e., the manifold hypothesis (Fefferman
et al., 2016). Manifold learning techniques exploit this assumption to provide geometrically-motivated intrinsic data
representations, commonly by constructing discrete approximations of the underlying manifold’s Laplace-Beltrami
operator or heat kernel (Belkin & Niyogi, 2003; Coifman &
Lafon, 2006). Comparing such representations usually requires point-to-point correspondences, yielding an NP-hard
quadratic assignment problem (Cela, 2013).
One approach to avoiding the need for data alignment is via
spectral properties of the operators. Tsitsulin et al. (2020)
compare unaligned datasets by computing distances between approximations of the heat kernel traces at different
temperature scales, lower bounding an optimal transportbased metric computing a pointwise distance between heat
kernels (Mémoli, 2011). This pointwise comparison, providing the theoretical motivation for their distance as in many
related methods, overlooks the symmetric positive-definite
(SPD) structure of the heat kernel approximation used in
practice. Prior studies show that using appropriate metrics on the space of SPD matrices, forming a differentiable
Riemannian manifold, significantly outperforms pointwise
Euclidean comparisons (Pennec et al., 2006; Arsigny et al.,
2006; Barachant et al., 2013).
In this work, we take into account the SPD structure of
heat kernel approximations and use the log-Euclidean (LE)
metric (Arsigny et al., 2006) to compare them. We propose
the log-Euclidean signature (LES) distance for unaligned
datasets based on a lower bound of this metric. Our distance
function can be formulated in terms of efficient descriptors, which capture the underlying intrinsic geometry of the
data manifold, facilitating the comparison of heterogeneous
datasets. We demonstrate properties of the LES distance
on various data types, including 3-4D point clouds of geometric shapes, single cell RNA-sequencing data, and NN
embeddings, where we show that the LES distance provides
useful insights on architectures and embedding structures.

2. Related Work
Many frameworks for comparing datasets have been proposed. We outline the most related approaches proposing

