Beyond Images:
Label Noise Transition Matrix Estimation for Tasks with Lower-Quality Features

Zhaowei Zhu 1 Jialu Wang 1 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
The label noise transition matrix, denoting the
transition probabilities from clean labels to noisy
labels, is crucial for designing statistically robust
solutions. Existing estimators for noise transition matrices, e.g., using either anchor points or
clusterability, focus on computer vision tasks that
are relatively easier to obtain high-quality representations. We observe that tasks with lowerquality features fail to meet the anchor-point or
clusterability condition, due to the coexistence
of both uninformative and informative representations. To handle this issue, we propose a
generic and practical information-theoretic approach to down-weight the less informative parts
of the lower-quality features. This improvement
is crucial to identifying and estimating the label noise transition matrix. The salient technical
challenge is to compute the relevant informationtheoretical metrics using only noisy labels instead of clean ones. We prove that the celebrated f -mutual information measure can often
preserve the order when calculated using noisy
labels. We then build our transition matrix estimator using this distilled version of features.
The necessity and effectiveness of the proposed
method are also demonstrated by evaluating the
estimation error on a varied set of tabular data
and text classification tasks with lower-quality features. Code is available at github.com/UCSCREAL/BeyondImages.

1. Introduction
When a feature is not properly annotated, the returned noisy
label may differ from the ground-truth one (Wei et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yang Liu
<yangliu@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2022d). One popular and useful statistical information
about noisy labels is the label noise transition matrix (Liu,
2022), which characterizes the transition probability from
the ground-truth label to a particular noisy label. The noise
transition matrix has been demonstrated to be crucial in various tasks, e.g., learning noise-tolerant classifiers (Natarajan
et al., 2013), recovering unbiased estimates of fairness constraints (Lamy et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021b), identifying
mislabeled data (Northcutt et al., 2021b), and aggregating
multiple labels in crowdsourcing (Liu & Liu, 2015). These
applications often postulate the true knowledge of the noise
transition matrix, which is generally unattainable in realworld data. Problems may arise when the noise transition
matrix, acquired through an estimation process, incurs misspecification. It has been shown that the blind application
of such a noise transition matrix may in fact lead to higher
errors (Liu & Wang, 2021). In consequence, it is important
to estimate the label noise transition matrix accurately.
Most existing approaches to estimating the label noise transition matrix presuppose high-quality features. For example,
a series of research relies on finding the anchor points (Scott,
2015; Menon et al., 2015; Patrini et al., 2017; Liu & Tao,
2015; Xia et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021a;
Yang et al., 2021), defined as the instances that belong to
a true label class almost surely. Without high-quality features, instances belonging to different true label classes may
not be well-separated in any hidden space such that anchor
points rarely exist. Likewise, estimating the noise transition matrix with confident learning (Northcutt et al., 2021a)
also requires high-quality features to estimate the confident
points accurately.
Recent training-free estimator requires 2-Nearest-Neighbor
(2-NN) clusterability (Zhu et al., 2021c) to estimate the
noise transition matrix, where one feature and its 2-NN
should have the same true label. This method inevitably
depends on the quality of features since the likelihood that
a data instance satisfies the clusterability condition will
naturally decrease with lower-quality features.
Despite the above approaches achieving huge success on
image benchmark datasets, such as CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009), it remains questionable how these noise estimation approaches perform when it is hard to obtain high-

