Learning of Cluster-based Feature Importance for Electronic Health Record
Time-series
Henrique Aguiar 1 Mauro Santos 1 Peter Watkinson 2 Tingting Zhu 1

Abstract
The recent availability of Electronic Health
Records (EHR) has allowed for the development
of algorithms predicting inpatient risk of deterioration and trajectory evolution. However, prediction
of disease progression with EHR is challenging
since these data are sparse, heterogeneous, multidimensional, and multi-modal time-series. As
such, clustering is regularly used to identify similar groups within the patient cohort to improve
prediction. Current models have shown some
success in obtaining cluster representations of patient trajectories. However, they i) fail to obtain
clinical interpretability for each cluster, and ii)
struggle to learn meaningful cluster numbers in
the context of imbalanced distribution of disease
outcomes. We propose a supervised deep learning
model to cluster EHR data based on the identification of clinically understandable phenotypes with
regard to both outcome prediction and patient trajectory. We introduce novel loss functions to address the problems of class imbalance and cluster
collapse, and furthermore propose a feature-time
attention mechanism to identify cluster-based phenotype importance across time and feature dimensions. We tested our model in two datasets corresponding to distinct medical settings. Our model
yielded added interpretability to cluster formation
and outperformed benchmarks by at least 4% in
relevant metrics.

1. Introduction
A variety of medical settings are characterised by the existence of multiple distinct patient subgroups, largely distinguished by differences in pathology, response to treatment
and medical interventions, etc. Identifying and characteris1
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford,
United Kingdom 2 Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Henrique Aguiar <henrique.aguiar@eng.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ing such subgroups is key to better understand underlying
disease(s) and improve the delivery of medical care. For instance, the management of highly impactful chronic diseases
such as Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
and Cardiovascular Disease (CVD), (Adeloye et al., 2015),
has improved with the identification of subgroups with different exacerbation profiles, (Turner et al., 2015; Vogelmeier
et al., 2018).
Electronic Health Records (EHR) time-series data are typically used to determine clinically relevant subgroups, and
have been applied, e.g., to detect the risk of deterioration.
However, modelling disease progression and risk prediction is challenging due to the extreme data heterogeneity
nature of EHRs. Firstly, EHR data contains a mixture of
demographic or static variables (such as age and sex), and
multi-dimensional time-series (e.g Heart Rate, HR, and laboratory measurements, such as blood tests). Secondly, EHR
time-series are multi-modal as different features are collected from different devices, representing distinct clinical
properties of relevance. Similarly, time-series features are
sampled at different times and have low and distinct sampling rates, as well as different missing value properties.
Furthermore, each feature is associated with different noise
and evolution patterns.
Recent advances in deep learning (DL) approaches have
shown promising results in EHR modelling due to their
capacity to handle complex data (Rajkomar et al., 2018).
Nonetheless, DL approaches typically lack relevant interpretability frameworks which are key to scaling and deploying such tools in hospital settings. Several models have
since been proposed to tackle this issue (Mayhew et al.,
2018), however, most of them focus on a subset of EHR
features (usually vital signs only), consider one-dimensional
input data and fail to provide a clinically-focused phenotypic
analysis of learnt patient subgroups (via clustering).
This work builds on previous research by introducing a
cluster-based feature-time attention mechanism to improve
the prediction of patient outcomes through EHR data. Our
method also leverages phenotypic information to aid in
clinical interpretability, not only making use of demographic
and vital-sign information, but also of relevant laboratory
measurements (all present in the EHR) to provide a more
complete patient physiological status. Our contributions

