A Reduction from Linear Contextual Bandits Lower Bounds to Estimations
Lower Bounds
Jiahao He 1 Jiheng Zhang 1 Rachel Q. Zhang 1

Abstract
Linear contextual bandits and their variants are
usually solved using algorithms guided by parameter estimation. Cauchy-Schwartz inequality
established that estimation errors dominate algorithm regrets, and thus, accurate estimators suffice to guarantee algorithms with low regrets. In
this paper, we complete the reverse direction by
establishing the necessity. In particular, we provide a generic transformation from algorithms for
linear contextual bandits to estimators for linear
models, and show that algorithm regrets dominate
estimation errors of their induced estimators, i.e.,
low-regret algorithms must imply accurate estimators. Moreover, our analysis reduces the regret
lower bound to an estimation error, bridging the
lower bound analysis in linear contextual bandit
problems and linear regression.

1. Introduction
Contextual bandit is an extension of the multi-armed bandit problems that incorporates individual information, i.e.,
context. In most effective algorithms for linear contextual
bandits and their variants developed in the literature, e.g.,
(Auer, 2002; Li et al., 2010; Goldenshluger & Zeevi, 2013;
Kim & Paik, 2019; Han et al., 2021), actions are guided by
one or a set of estimators (e.g., OLS or LASSO) for the parameters in the linear reward function. Cauchy-Schwartz inequality establishes that estimation errors dominate regrets.
Thus, estimators with small errors suffice to guarantee algorithms with low regrets. However, one naturally suspects
their necessity: as the action space is much smaller than
the parameter space, is learning the entire reward function
indeed necessary for learning the optimal action?
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial Engineering
and Decision Analytics, The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.
Correspondence to: Jiahao He <jhebe@connect.ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this paper, we provide an affirmative answer to this question. That is, developing low-regret algorithms is essentially
a procedure of finding accurate estimations. Along with
Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, we complete the equivalence
between stochastic contextual bandit algorithms and the estimation of the reward function. We construct an algorithmbased estimator for any given algorithm of a stochastic
linear contextual bandit problem (or its variants), opposite
to developing estimator-based algorithms in the literature.
We show that the regret of the given algorithm dominates the
estimation error of the constructed estimator. Our construction and analysis remain valid under additional constraints
(e.g., privacy, batch) or structures (e.g., sparsity).
As a byproduct, our work provides a principled approach
to establishing a regret lower bound (characterizing the difficulty) of linear contextual bandit problems by reducing
the regret to an estimation error. In the literature, lower
bounds for linear contextual bandit problems are usually
established via specific constructions of hard problem instances. With our reduction, we can effortlessly obtain a
regret lower bound by applying existing minimax bounds
and constructions in estimation theory, which has been well
studied in the literature, e.g., (Duchi & Wainwright, 2013;
Duchi, 2016; Duchi et al., 2018; Wang & Xu, 2019; Acharya
et al., 2021). Under this principle, we revisit some established lower bounds in the literature and derive some new
lower bounds for various stochastic linear contextual bandit
problems.
1.1. Related Work
In the literature, contexts can be generated either from an
i.i.d. distribution (stochastic contexts) or any arbitrary procedure (adversarial contexts). Since a lower (upper) bound
under stochastic (adversarial) contexts is also a lower (upper) bound under adversarial (stochastic) contexts, here we
review literature with both types of contexts. Let T be the
total number of periods, K be the total number of arms, and
d be dimension of context vector.
The reward functions can be identical for all arms (single
parameter setting), or arm-dependent (multiple parameter
setting). Kannan et al. (2018) emphasized that a problem
under the multiple parameter setting with dimension d is

