E QUI B IND: Geometric Deep Learning for Drug Binding Structure Prediction

Hannes Stärk * 1 Octavian-Eugen Ganea * 1 Lagnajit Pattanaik 1 Regina Barzilay 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
Predicting how a drug-like molecule binds to a
specific protein target is a core problem in drug
discovery. An extremely fast computational binding method would enable key applications such as
fast virtual screening or drug engineering. Existing methods are computationally expensive
as they rely on heavy candidate sampling coupled with scoring, ranking, and fine-tuning steps.
We challenge this paradigm with E QUI B IND, an
SE(3)-equivariant geometric deep learning model
performing direct-shot prediction of both i) the receptor binding location (blind docking) and ii) the
ligand’s bound pose and orientation. EquiBind
achieves significant speed-ups and better quality
compared to traditional and recent baselines. Further, we show extra improvements when coupling
it with existing fine-tuning techniques at the cost
of increased running time. Finally, we propose a
novel and fast fine-tuning model that adjusts torsion angles of a ligand’s rotatable bonds based on
closed-form global minima of the von Mises angular distance to a given input atomic point cloud,
avoiding previous expensive differential evolution
strategies for energy minimization.

1. Introduction
Drug discovery is an expensive process, e.g., a single drug
costs around 1 billion dollars and takes 10 years of development and testing before potentially being FDA approved. Moreover, this process can fail at any point, e.g.,
due to unforeseen side effects or experimental disproof of
the promised therapeutic efficacy. Worse, there are 1060
possible drug-like molecules (Reymond & Awale, 2012),
going far beyond current experimental capabilities.
*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Hannes Stärk
<hstark@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Accurate computational methods, e.g., deep learning (DL)
based, can drastically reduce the molecular search space,
but need to be extremely fast to scan the vast biological and
chemical spaces for both desired and unexpected effects. For
instance, a novel drug that inactivates an important cancer
protein might negatively inhibit other essential proteins in
the human body, potentially resulting in life-threatening
side effects. Given that the human proteome contains up to
100 000 protein types, the current hope is to scan for these
interactions in a computational manner before bringing a
few promising candidates to in vitro and in vivo testing.
A core problem in drug discovery is understanding how
drug-like molecules (ligands) interact and form complexes
with target proteins (receptors) – drug binding – which is
a prerequisite for virtual screening. This is a difficult problem with different facets and constraints: binding kinetics,
conformational changes (internal molecular flexibility), and
chemical and geometrical atomic interaction types are part
of the domain knowledge describing ligand-protein binding
mechanisms (Du et al., 2016). For instance, classical models for molecular complex formation are ”lock-and-key”,
”induced fit”, and ”conformational selection”, while hydrophobic, hydrogen-bonding, and π-stacking are the most
frequent atomic binding interactions, but other types often
occur during binding (de Freitas & Schapira, 2017).
Current in silico approaches for (3D) structural drug binding
achieve high quality at a significant computational cost: in
our experiments the GNINA method (McNutt et al., 2021)
takes on average 146 seconds for a single ligand-receptor
pair, while the popular commercial software Glide (Halgren
et al., 2004) is up to 9 times slower. This is caused by the
common strategy employed by all previous binding methods: first, a large set of candidate complexes (e.g., millions)
is generated via thorough sampling of possible binding locations and poses (Hassan et al., 2017); then, scoring and ranking steps are used to retrieve the most promising instances;
finally, an energy-based fine-tuning method is employed to
best fit the ligand in the respective pocket locations.
Here, we introduce E QUI B IND, a novel geometric & graph
deep learning model for structural drug binding – Figure 1.
Inspired by Ganea et al. (2021a), we exploit graph matching networks (GMN) (Li et al., 2019) and E(3)-equivariant
graph neural networks (E(3)-GNN) (Satorras et al., 2021)

