Sharp-MAML: Sharpness-Aware Model-Agnostic Meta Learning

Momin Abbas * 1 Quan Xiao * 1 Lisha Chen * 1 Pin-Yu Chen 2 Tianyi Chen 1

Abstract
Model-agnostic meta learning (MAML) is currently one of the dominating approaches for fewshot meta-learning. Albeit its effectiveness, the
optimization of MAML can be challenging due to
the innate bilevel problem structure. Specifically,
the loss landscape of MAML is much more complex with possibly more saddle points and local
minimizers than its empirical risk minimization
counterpart. To address this challenge, we leverage the recently invented sharpness-aware minimization and develop a sharpness-aware MAML
approach that we term Sharp-MAML. We empirically demonstrate that Sharp-MAML and its
computation-efficient variant can outperform the
plain-vanilla MAML baseline (e.g., +3% accuracy on Mini-Imagenet). We complement the empirical study with the convergence rate analysis
and the generalization bound of Sharp-MAML. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first empirical and theoretical study on sharpness-aware minimization in the context of bilevel learning. The
code is available at https://github.com/
mominabbass/Sharp-MAML.

1. Introduction
Humans tend to easily learn new concepts using only a
handful of samples. In contrast, modern deep neural networks require thousands of samples to train a model that
generalizes well to unseen data (Krizhevsky et al., 2012).
Meta learning is a remedy to such a problem whereby new
concepts can be learned using a limited number of samples (Schmidhuber, 1987; Vilalta & Drissi, 2002). Meta
learning offers fast adaptation to unseen tasks (Thrun &
Pratt, 2012; Novak & Gowin, 1984) and has been widely
studied to produce state of the art results in a variety of fewshot learning settings including language and vision tasks
*

Equal contribution 1 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy,
NY 2 IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Tianyi Chen <chentianyi19@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Munkhdalai & Yu, 2017; Nichol & Schulman, 2018; Snell
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2016; Li & Malik, 2017; Vinyals
et al., 2016; Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Brock et al., 2018;
Zintgraf et al., 2019a; Wang et al., 2019; Achille et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2018a; Hsu et al., 2018; Obamuyide & Vlachos,
2019). In particular, model-agnostic meta learning (MAML)
is one of the most popular optimization-based meta learning
frameworks for few-shot learning (Finn et al., 2017; Vuorio
et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2020; Obamuyide & Vlachos, 2019).
MAML aims to learn an initialization such that after applying only a few number of gradient descent updates on the
initialization, the adapted task-specific model can achieve
desired performance on the validation dataset. MAML has
been successfully implemented in various data-limited applications including medical image analysis (Maicas et al.,
2018), language modelling (Huang et al., 2018), and object
detection (Wang et al., 2020).
Despite its recent success on some applications, MAML
faces a variety of optimization challenges. For example,
MAML incurs high computation cost due to second-order
derivatives, requires searching for multiple hyperparameters,
and is sensitive to neural network architectures (Antoniou
et al., 2019). Even if various optimization techniques can
potentially overcome these training challenges (e.g., making
training error small), whether the meta-model learned with
limited training samples can lead to small generalization
error or testing error in unseen tasks with unseen data, is not
guaranteed (Rothfuss et al., 2021).
These training and generalization challenges of MAML are
partially due to the nested (e.g., bilevel) structure of the
problem, where the upper-level optimization problem learns
shared model initialization and the lower-level problem optimizes task-specific models (Finn et al., 2017; Rajeswaran
et al., 2019a). This is in sharp contrast to the more widely
known single-level learning framework - empirical risk minimization (ERM). As a result, the training and generalization
challenges in ERM will not only remain in MAML but may
be also exacerbated by the bilevel structure of MAML. For
example, as we will show later, the nonconvex loss landscape of MAML contains possibly more saddle points and
local minimizers than its ERM counterpart, many of which
do not have good generalization performance. Recent works
have proposed various useful techniques to improve the generalization performance (Grant et al., 2018a; Park & Oliva,

