Diversiﬁed Adversarial Attacks based on Conjugate Gradient Method

Keiichiro Yamamura 1 Haruiki Sato 1 Nariaki Tateiwa 1 2 Nozomi Hata 3 Toru Mitsutake 1 Issa Oe 1
Hiroki Ishikura 1 Katsuki Fujisawa 3

Abstract
Deep learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples, and adversarial attacks used to
generate such examples have attracted considerable research interest. Although existing methods based on the steepest descent have achieved
high attack success rates, ill-conditioned problems occasionally reduce their performance. To
address this limitation, we utilize the conjugate
gradient (CG) method, which is effective for this
type of problem, and propose a novel attack algorithm inspired by the CG method, named the
Auto Conjugate Gradient (ACG) attack. The results of large-scale evaluation experiments conducted on the latest robust models show that, for
most models, ACG was able to ﬁnd more adversarial examples with fewer iterations than the existing SOTA algorithm Auto-PGD (APGD). We
investigated the difference in search performance
between ACG and APGD in terms of diversiﬁcation and intensiﬁcation, and deﬁne a measure
called Diversity Index (DI) to quantify the degree
of diversity. From the analysis of the diversity
using this index, we show that the more diverse
search of the proposed method remarkably improves its attack success rate.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are effective for various machine
learning tasks, and are increasingly being applied to
safety-critical tasks such as automated driving. However,
deep learning models may misclassify adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015) formed
1

Graduate School of Mathematics, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. 2 Present afﬁliation is NTT Software Innovation
Center, NTT Corporation. 3 Institute of Mathematics for Industry,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.. Correspondence to: Keiichiro Yamamura <keiichiro.yamamura@kyudai.jp>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. An example of our intended search for a multimodal
function. The search ﬁnds the global optima owing to an appropriate balance between diversiﬁcation and intensiﬁcation. The initial
search point is indicated by the white star, and the search ends at
the white square. The circles represent the search points, and the
black circles indicate that the search has been diversiﬁed.

by applying perturbations to their inputs which are too
small for the human eye to perceive. Hence, improving
the robustness of deep learning models against adversarial examples is crucial for safety-critical tasks. Adversarial
training (Goodfellow et al., 2015) is an effective method
used to create robust models. In adversarial training, adversarial examples are generated and added to the training
data. This requires many adversarial examples to be generated quickly for efﬁcient training.
An adversarial attack is a method used to generate adversarial examples. A white-box adversarial attack assumes
that the algorithm can obtain the outputs and gradients of
the deep learning models.
The fast gradient sign method (FGSM) (Goodfellow et al.,
2015), iterative-FGSM (I-FGSM) (Kurakin et al., 2017),
and projected gradient descent (PGD) attack (Madry et al.,
2018) use the sign of the steepest gradients at the update.
In addition, some attack strategies have successfully improved on the performance of these methods by introducing past search information. Momentum I-FGSM (Dong

