CITRIS: Causal Identifiability from Temporal Intervened Sequences
Phillip Lippe 1 2 Sara Magliacane 2 3 Sindy Löwe 2 4 Yuki M. Asano 1 2 Taco Cohen 5 Efstratios Gavves 1 2

Abstract
Understanding the latent causal factors of a dynamical system from visual observations is considered a crucial step towards agents reasoning in
complex environments. In this paper, we propose
CITRIS, a variational autoencoder framework that
learns causal representations from temporal sequences of images in which underlying causal
factors have possibly been intervened upon. In
contrast to the recent literature, CITRIS exploits
temporality and observing intervention targets to
identify scalar and multidimensional causal factors, such as 3D rotation angles. Furthermore, by
introducing a normalizing flow, CITRIS can be
easily extended to leverage and disentangle representations obtained by already pretrained autoencoders. Extending previous results on scalar
causal factors, we prove identifiability in a more
general setting, in which only some components
of a causal factor are affected by interventions.
In experiments on 3D rendered image sequences,
CITRIS outperforms previous methods on recovering the underlying causal variables. Moreover,
using pretrained autoencoders, CITRIS can even
generalize to unseen instantiations of causal factors, opening future research areas in sim-to-real
generalization for causal representation learning.

1. Introduction
Causal representation learning (Khemakhem et al., 2020a;
Lachapelle et al., 2022; Locatello et al., 2020a; Schölkopf
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021) focuses on learning repre1
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands 2 Institute of Informatics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
4
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands 5 Qualcomm AI Research, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.. Correspondence to: Phillip Lippe
<p.lippe@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

CITRIS
NF

t
NF
3D-loc.

...

color

Figure 1. From a sequence of images with interventions (orange),
CITRIS learns a normalizing flow, which maps a pretrained autoencoder’s entangled latent representation to a causal representation. In this, multiple latent dimensions (blue blocks) can represent a single causal factor, where causal relations exist over time.

sentations of causal factors from high-dimensional observations, such as images. Commonly, in learning causal representations, causal factors are assumed to be scalars. As
settings become more complex and high-dimensional, however, so do the causal dynamics, where estimating every
scalar causal variable becomes impractical. Consider for
instance a set of objects interacting in a three-dimensional
space. For each object, we can describe its position by three
variables x, y, z and its rotation in multiple angles. However, it is often more natural and sufficient to consider those
factors as two multidimensional variables, i.e. position and
rotation, especially when the definition of the default axes
is ambiguous. Such multidimensional causal factors are
reminiscent of macrovariables explored before in causality
(Chalupka et al., 2015; 2016a;b; Hoel et al., 2013; Höltgen,
2021), however, not in causal representation learning yet.
Hence, different from previous causal representation learning approaches, we consider causal factors as potentially
multidimensional vectors in this paper. This requires a representation model to learn a latent space of disentangled factors of variation, where latent variables of the same causal
factor are grouped together. To identify these multidimensional causal variables, we use sequences of observations
where interventions with known targets may have been performed at any time step. This setup resembles a reinforcement learning environment or an interactive real-world setting, with an agent performing actions over time representing interventions on multidimensional causal factors. However, instead of learning a policy to optimize a reward function, we aim at using this setting to identify the causal factors. We assume we can observe the intervention targets in

