Pocket2Mol: Efficient Molecular Sampling Based on 3D Protein Pockets

Xingang Peng 1 Shitong Luo 2 Jiaqi Guan 3 Qi Xie 4 Jian Peng 2 3 5 Jianzhu Ma 2 6 7

Abstract
Deep generative models have achieved tremendous success in designing novel drug molecules in
recent years. A new thread of works have shown
the great potential in advancing the specificity and
success rate of in silico drug design by considering the structure of protein pockets. This setting
posts fundamental computational challenges in
sampling new chemical compounds that could
satisfy multiple geometrical constraints imposed
by pockets. Previous sampling algorithms either
sample in the graph space or only consider the
3D coordinates of atoms while ignoring other detailed chemical structures such as bond types and
functional groups. To address the challenge, we
develop Pocket2Mol, an E(3)-equivariant generative network composed of two modules: 1) a new
graph neural network capturing both spatial and
bonding relationships between atoms of the binding pockets and 2) a new efficient algorithm which
samples new drug candidates conditioned on the
pocket representations from a tractable distribution without relying on MCMC. Experimental
results demonstrate that molecules sampled from
Pocket2Mol achieve significantly better binding
affinity and other drug properties such as druglikeness and synthetic accessibility.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in drug design
(Polykovskiy et al., 2020). One of the representative works
is that two out of six compounds designed by Insilico
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 HeliXon Limited, Beijing, China 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA 4 Westlake University, Hangzhou, China 5 AIR, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China 6 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University,
Beijing, China 7 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jianzhu Ma <majianzhu@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Medicine have been found to be active in cellular assays
against kinase DDR1 (Zhavoronkov et al., 2019). The main
intuition of these generative models is to efficiently represent all the collected chemical structures in a compact
low dimensional space and sample new drug candidates by
perturbing the hidden values. The outputs of these models
vary from 1D chemical descriptors (e.g. SMILES strings
(Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018)), 2D graphs (e.g. trees
(Jin et al., 2018; De Cao & Kipf, 2018) and hyper-graphs
(Kajino, 2019)) to 3D structures (Gebauer et al., 2018; 2019;
Simm et al., 2020).
However, at the molecular level, a small molecule inhibits or
activates particular biological functions only by binding to a
specific protein pocket. It can be expected that drug design
ignoring the target protein pockets could significantly reduce the success rate of downstream cell experiments. Only
recently, an increasing amounts of works start to study the
pocket-based drug design. To be more specific, given the
3D binding pocket of the target protein, these models are
aware of the geometric information of the 3D pocket and
generate molecules to bind to the pockets accordingly. Early
approaches modify the pocket-free models by integrating
evaluation functions like docking scores between sampled
molecules and pockets to guide the candidate searching
(Li et al., 2021). Another types of models transform the
3D pocket structures to molecular SMILES strings or 2D
molecular graph (Skalic et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2021) without modeling the interactions between the small molecular
structures and 3D pockets explicitly. Conditional generative
models are developed to model the 3D atomic density distributions within the 3D pocket structures (Masuda et al., 2020;
Luo et al., 2021). The challenging point of this problem
then moves to the efficiency of the structural sampling algorithm from the learned distributions. In addition, previous
models over-emphasize the importance of the 3D locations
of atoms while ignoring the generation of chemical bonds,
which results in unrealistic atomic connections in practice.
In this work, we improve the pocket-based drug design from
the following directions: 1) developing a new deep geometric neural network to accurately model the 3D structures
of pockets; 2) designing a new sampling strategy to enable
more efficient conditional 3D coordinates sampling; 3) assigning the ability of sampling chemical bonds between
a pair of atoms to our model. In particular, we develop

