Kill a Bird with Two Stones: Closing the Convergence Gaps in Non-Strongly
Convex Optimization by Directly Accelerated SVRG with Double
Compensation and Snapshots

Yuanyuan Liu 1 Fanhua Shang 2 Weixin An 1 Hongying Liu 1 3 Zhouchen Lin 4 5 3

Abstract
Recently, some accelerated stochastic variance reduction algorithms such as Katyusha and ASVRGADMM achieve faster convergence than nonaccelerated methods such as SVRG and SVRGADMM. However, there are still some gaps between the oracle complexities and their lower
bounds. To fill in these gaps, this paper proposes a novel Directly Accelerated stochastic Variance reductIon algorithm with two Snapshots
(DAVIS) for non-strongly convex (non-SC) unconstrained problems. Our theoretical results
show that DAVIS achieves the optimal conver2
gence rate O(1/(nS
)) and optimal gradient comp
plexity O(n+ nL/), which is identical to its
lower bound. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first directly accelerated algorithm that attains the lower bound and improves the convergence rate from O(1/S 2 ) to O(1/(nS 2 )). Moreover, we extend DAVIS and theoretical results to
non-SC problems with an equality constraint, and
prove that the proposed DAVIS-ADMM algorithm with double snapshots for each variable also
attains the optimal convergence rate O(1/(nS))

and optimal oracle complexity O n + L/ for
such problems, and it is at least by a factor n/S
faster than existing accelerated stochastic algorithms, where n  S in general.

1

Key Lab. of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding
of Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian
University, China 2 School of Computer Science and Technology,
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
300350, China 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory 4 Key Lab. of Machine
Perception (MoE), School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 5 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University.
Correspondence to: Fanhua Shang, Hongying Liu and Yuanyuan
Liu <fhshang@foxmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Consider the following finite-sum composite convex minimization problem
o
n
1 Xn
fi (x) + h(x) ,
F (x) ,
i=1
n
x∈Rd
min

(1)

where each fi (·) is convex, and h(·)Pis convex but possibly
n
non-smooth. We define f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x). This problem arises frequently in machine learning, signal processing,
statistics, and operations research (Bubeck, 2015), such as
regularized empirical risk minimization. In many real-world
applications, the number of component functions (i.e., n) is
usually very large so that even first-order methods become
computationally burdensome due to high per-iteration complexity O(nd). Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins
& Monro, 1951) uses the gradient of only one (or a small
batch of) randomly chosen fi to estimate full gradient in
each iteration, and enjoys a significantly lower cost O(d).
In recent years, stochastic (or incremental) variance reduction methods have received extensive attention due to their
low per-iteration cost and ability to handle large-scale problems. In particular, research on variance reduction methods
(e.g., SAG (Roux et al., 2012), SDCA (Shalev-Shwartz &
Zhang, 2013), SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013), SAGA
(Defazio et al., 2014), and their proximal variants, e.g.,
Prox-SVRG (Xiao & Zhang, 2014)), and stochastic variance
reduced algorithms of the alternating direction method of
multipliers (ADMM) (e.g., SAG-ADMM (Zhong & Kwok,
2014), SDCA-ADMM (Suzuki, 2014) and SVRG-ADMM
(Zheng & Kwok, 2016)) have made exciting progress, e.g.,
linear convergence for strongly convex (SC) problems.
For solving the SC problem (1), the oracle complexity (i.e.,
the number of Incremental First-order Oracle calls and Proximal Oracle calls needed to find an -suboptimal solution) of
the stochastic variance reduction methods mentioned above
is O((n+κ) log(1/)), while the complexity of accelerated
deterministic methods including AGD √
(Nesterov, 1983) and
APG (Beck & Teboulle, 2009) is O(n κ log(1/)), where
κ is the condition number. Obviously, the complexities
show that the variance reduction methods always converge

