Convergence of Policy Gradient for Entropy Regularized MDPs
with Neural Network Approximation in the Mean-Field Regime

Bekzhan Kerimkulov * 1 James-Michael Leahy * 2 David Šiška * 1 3 Łukasz Szpruch * 1 4

Abstract
We study the global convergence of policy gradient for infinite-horizon, continuous state and
action space, and entropy-regularized Markov decision processes (MDPs). We consider a softmax policy with (one-hidden layer) neural network approximation in a mean-field regime. Additional entropic regularization in the associated
mean-field probability measure is added, and the
corresponding gradient flow is studied in the 2Wasserstein metric. We show that the objective
function is increasing along the gradient flow. Further, we prove that if the regularization in terms of
the mean-field measure is sufficient, the gradient
flow converges exponentially fast to the unique
stationary solution, which is the unique maximizer of the regularized MDP objective. Lastly,
we study the sensitivity of the value function
along the gradient flow with respect to regularization parameters and the initial condition. Our
results rely on the careful analysis of the nonlinear Fokker–Planck–Kolmogorov equation and
extend the pioneering work of (Mei et al., 2020)
and (Agarwal et al., 2020), which quantify the
global convergence rate of policy gradient for
entropy-regularized MDPs in the tabular setting.

1. Introduction
1.1. Overview
In the last decades, reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
with neural network approximation have demonstrated incredible performance. Notable successes have been reported
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematics, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 2 Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom 3 Vega
Protocol, Gibraltar, Gibraltar 4 The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: James-Michael Leahy
<j.leahy@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

in (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019).
Various versions of the policy gradient algorithms have been
demonstrated to be particularly effective. However, a mathematical theory that provides guarantees for the convergence
of these algorithms has been elusive. In particular, we are
not aware of any work that has established convergence of a
policy gradient algorithm in the continuous state and action
setting with neural network approximation. The motivation
behind this work is to shed more light on this challenging
open question in the setting of entropy regularized MDPs
(Markov decision processes) where the policy is of softmax type and parameterized by a one-hidden layer neural
network in the mean-field regime.
Entropy regularized MDPs have been widely studied due
to their excellent empirical performance and desirable theoretical properties (Haarnoja et al., 2017; Geist et al., 2019).
Convergence of policy gradient with softmax policies was
first studied for the entropy regularized problem in (Agarwal
et al., 2020). The convergence has been further quantified
in (Mei et al., 2020), where the authors showed that softmax
policy gradient converges at an exponential rate. Encouraged by the recent convergence results of (Mei et al., 2020)
in the tabular setting, we consider the continuous state and
action space setting with policies approximated mean-field
neural networks. The mean-field setting was also considered
in (Agazzi & Lu, 2020). The authors show that if the meanfield policy gradient flow converges, then, under appropriate
assumptions, the limiting policy is optimal.
We consider an infinite horizon Markov decision model
M = (S, A, P, r, γ), where S is the state space, A the
action space with a fixed finite reference measure µ, P the
transition probability kernel, r is a bounded reward function,
and γ is the discount factor. For a given stochastic policy
π : S → P(A) and initial distribution ρ ∈ P(S), we
consider the entropy-regularized value function
"∞
#
X 
dπ
π
π
n
Vτ (ρ) = Eρ
γ
r(sn , an ) − τ ln
(an |sn )
,
dµ
n=0
where τ ≥ 0 determines the intensity of the entropy regularization. Denoting V π (s) = V π (δs ), we have
Z
τ
Vτπ (s) = V0π (s)−
dπ (ds0 |s)KL(π(·|s0 )|µ) , (1)
1−γ S

