Nearly Minimax Optimal Reinforcement Learning with
Linear Function Approximation

Pihe Hu 1 Yu Chen 2 Longbo Huang 1

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning with linear function approximation where the transition probability and reward functions are linear with respect to
a feature mapping ϕps, aq. Specifically, we consider the episodic inhomogeneous linear Markov
Decision Process (MDP), and propose a novel
computation-efficient algorithm,
LSVI-UCB` ,
?
r
which achieves an OpHd T q regret bound where
H is the episode length, d is the feature dimension, and T is the number of steps. LSVI-UCB`
builds on weighted ridge regression and upper
confidence value iteration with a Bernstein-type
exploration bonus. Our statistical results are obtained with novel analytical tools, including a
new Bernstein self-normalized bound with conservatism on elliptical potentials, and refined analysis
of the correction term. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first minimax optimal algorithm
for linear MDPs
up to logarithmic factors, which
?
closes the Hd gap
? between the best known upr H 3 d3 T q in (Jin et al., 2020)
per bound of Op
?
and lower bound of ΩpHd T q for linear MDPs.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated phenomenal empirical success in many areas, including games,
robotic control, etc., where improving sample complexity
is always an important topic. When the state space and
action space are finite, the Markov decision process (MDP)
has been proven to achieve nearly minimax optimal samplecomplexity with the generative model in (Azar et al., 2013).
For harder RL settings, nearly minimax optimal samplecomplexities are obtained in (Azar et al., 2017) for finite
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 Department of Mathematical Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Longbo
Huang <longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

horizon episodic MDPs, and (He et al., 2021; Tossou et al.,
2019) for infinite horizon MDPs1 . However, MDPs are
known to suffer from the curse-of-dimensionality due to
large and possibly infinite state and action space.
Function approximation is an essential approach for handling large MDPs, which assumes that the problem structure
has a compact representation concerning state or state-action
pairs and enables the development of nearly minimax optimal theoretical guarantees for RL problems. Linear function approximation is one of the most fundamental function
approximations. It has a significant impact since many problems can be linearly-parameterized structurally or combined
with embedding, where linear MDPs and linear mixture
MDPs are two of the most popular models. Representative
works for these two settings are presented in Table 1, from
which we find that the best regret upper
? bound for linear
r H 3 d3 T q by LSVIOp
MDPs and linear mixture MDPs are?
r H 2 d2 T ` H 3 dT q by
UCB in (Jin et al., 2020) and Op
`
UCRL-VTR in (Zhou et al., 2021), respectively. However,
the best-known
lower bound for these two settings are both
?
ΩpHd T q according to (Zhou et al., 2021), which means
the following fundamental question remains open:
Does there exist a computation-efficient and minimax optimal algorithm for RL with linear function approximation?
We answer this question affirmatively for linear MDPs by
designing the LSVI-UCB` algorithm, which reaches minimax optimal regret up to logarithmic factors. LSVI-UCB`
overcomes barriers to nearly minimax optimality in existing
works (Jin et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020b; Zanette et al.,
2020b; Wang et al., 2020a) for linear MDPs and their variations, including overly aggressive exploration and extra cost
for building a uniform convergence argument by covering
net. It constructs a Bernstein-type
? bonus to perform efficient
exploration, which ?
enables a H factor reduction in regret.
Besides, the extra d dependency from building the uniform convergence argument can be removed by our novel
p
technique of bounding the correction term pP´Pqp
Vp ´V ˚ q.
Notably, minimax optimal algorithms (Azar et al., 2017;
Zanette & Brunskill, 2019) for tabular MDPs also utilize the
1

An algorithm is nearly minimax optimal if its sample complexity matches the minimax lower bound up to logarithmic factors.

