Region-Based Semantic Factorization in GANs

Jiapeng Zhu 1 Yujun Shen 2 Yinghao Xu 3 Deli Zhao 4 Qifeng Chen 1

Abstract
Despite the rapid advancement of semantic discovery in the latent space of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), existing approaches
either are limited to finding global attributes
or rely on a number of segmentation masks
to identify local attributes. In this work, we
present a highly efficient algorithm to factorize
the latent semantics learned by GANs concerning
an arbitrary image region. Concretely, we
revisit the task of local manipulation with pretrained GANs and formulate region-based semantic discovery as a dual optimization problem.
Through an appropriately defined generalized
Rayleigh quotient, we manage to solve such
a problem without any annotations or training.
Experimental results on various state-of-the-art
GAN models demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach, as well as its superiority over prior
arts regarding precise control, region robustness,
speed of implementation, and simplicity of use.
Our source code can be found at here.

1. Introduction
Recent studies have shown that versatile semantics emerge
in the latent space of pre-trained Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Goetschalckx et al., 2019; Shen et al.,
2020a; Jahanian et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021b). Identifying
these variation factors, which are typically devised as
some directions in the latent spaces (Shen et al., 2020a),
facilitates a wide range of downstream tasks (Xu et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2021b; Tan et al., 2020), especially
image editing (Jahanian et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021b;
Menon et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020; Ling
et al., 2021). In particular, moving latent codes along a
1

Department of CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hong Kong, China. 2 ByteDance, Beijing, China
3
Department of IE, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. 4 Ant Research, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence
to: Qifeng Chen <cqf@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

certain direction can cause corresponding semantic changes
in the synthesized images. Accordingly, it is of great use to
discover these steerable directions diversely and precisely.
To interpret the latent space learned by GANs, many
attempts have been made, including both supervised
ones (Shen et al., 2020b; Jahanian et al., 2020; Yang et al.,
2021b) and unsupervised ones (Shen & Zhou, 2021; Voynov
& Babenko, 2020; Härkönen et al., 2020). Most prior arts,
however, target at finding global attributes (Shen et al.,
2020b; Yang et al., 2021b; Voynov & Babenko, 2020;
Härkönen et al., 2020) such that altering the latent code with
these attributes will manipulate the output image as a whole.
Researchers have given recent attention to detecting local
semantics due to their more practical usage, but they usually
require a number of images labeled with segmentation
masks for the discovery process (Suzuki et al., 2018; Collins
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021; Ling et al., 2021). A very recent
work manages to relate a local image region to a GAN latent
subspace independent of annotations (Zhu et al., 2021),
yet it turns to depend on some sensitive hyper-parameters,
resulting in insufficient robustness to the selected region.
In this work, we propose a surprisingly simple algorithm,
termed as ReSeFa, for region-based semantic factorization
in GANs. Unlike existing methods that only treat image
editing as an application and take no account of the manipulation model for semantic exploration, we re-examine
the task of local editing using pre-trained GANs as the
prior. Specifically, given a region of interest, a robust
manipulation method should take effect on the contents
within this area only and preserve the remaining contents as
much as possible. In other words, after altering the latent
code, we expect the pixels located in the target region to
change while the outside pixels remain the same. Such an
analysis helps define an optimization problem based on the
derivative of pixel values with respect to the latent code
(i.e., Jacobian). Solving this problem can help identify
the variation factors corresponding to a particular image
region. We further notice that the optimization objective can
be formulated as a generalized Rayleigh quotient (Horn &
Johnson, 2012) such that the aforementioned problem can
be solved efficiently.
To summarize, our proposed algorithm has the following
advantages over prior work. First, our algorithm does not

