LyaNet: A Lyapunov Framework for Training Neural ODEs

Ivan Dario Jimenez Rodriguez 1 Aaron D. Ames 1 Yisong Yue 1 2

Abstract
We propose a method for training ordinary differential equations by using a control-theoretic
Lyapunov condition for stability. Our approach,
called LyaNet, is based on a novel Lyapunov loss
formulation that encourages the inference dynamics to converge quickly to a correct prediction that
minimizes the original supervised loss. Theoretically, we show that minimizing Lyapunov loss
guarantees exponential convergence to a correct
solution and enables a novel robustness guarantee. We also provide practical algorithms, including one that avoids the cost of backpropagating
through a solver or using the adjoint method. Relative to standard Neural ODE training, we empirically find that LyaNet can offer improved prediction performance, faster convergence of inference
dynamics, and improved adversarial robustness.
Our code is available at https://github.
com/ivandariojr/LyapunovLearning.

1. Introduction
The use of dynamical systems as a learnable function class
has gained increasing attention, first sparked by the discovery of an alternative interpretation of ResNets as Ordinary
Differential Equations (Haber & Ruthotto, 2017; E, 2017;
Ruthotto & Haber, 2018; Lu et al., 2020), and further popularized with Neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2019). This fundamental insight holds the potential for a plethora of benefits
including parameter efficiency, the ability to propagate probability distributions (Chen et al., 2019; Rozen et al., 2021;
Song et al., 2020), accurate time-series modeling (Chen
et al., 2021a), among others.
1

Department of Computational and Mathematical Sciences,
California Institute of Technology 2 Argo AI. Correspondence to:
Ivan Dario Jimenez Rodriguez <ivan.jimenez@caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Comparing learned dynamics on a toy prediction task.
The quiver lines show the dynamics (Equation (2)) of a 2-D state
space, the dotted black lines show state trajectories from 100
initial conditions (Equations (1) and (2)), and the background
coloring shows the class label from the output layer (Equation
(3)), with red being the correct label. Left: a Neural ODE does
not learn stable dynamics, where some dynamics point towards
the incorrect prediction (blue region), and are especially sensitive
around the initial conditions. Right: an identical model trained
with LyaNet has much more stable dynamics that always smoothly
point towards the correct prediction (red region).

Neural ODE Model Class. Inference or the “forward pass”
uses a continuous-time ODE, parameterized by θ:
η(0) = φθ (x),
(input layer)
dη
= fθ (η, x, t), (continuum of hidden layers)
dt
ŷ(t) = ψθ (η(t)). (output layer)

(1)
(2)
(3)

Given input x, one makes a prediction (i.e., inference) by
solving the ODE specified by Equations (1) & (2), and
computing the output via Equation (3). Without loss of
generality, we assume (2) evolves in the time interval [0, 1],
i.e., ŷ(t) is typically computed at t = 1, although one could
in principle compute ŷ(t) at any t ∈ [0, 1]. We also assume
that x ∈ Rn , η ∈ H ⊂ Rk , θ ∈ Θ ⊆ Rl , and y ∈ Rm . The
state space H is assumed to be bounded and path connected.
Motivation. The standard learning approach is to differentiate through the ODE solution with techniques such as the adjoint method (Chen et al., 2019; Kidger et al., 2021), which
typically does not impose desirable structure, such as stability, within the learned dynamics.3 A such, the inference
3
Some prior work has explored learning dynamical systems
that are stable but not explicitly to a correct prediction (Ruthotto
& Haber, 2018; Manek & Kolter, 2020; Bai et al., 2019; 2021),
which can lead to a tension between stability and accuracy.

