Unaligned Supervision for Automatic Music Transcription in-the-Wild

Ben Maman 1 Amit H. Bermano 1

Abstract
Multi-instrument Automatic Music Transcription
(AMT), or the decoding of a musical recording into semantic musical content, is one of the
holy grails of Music Information Retrieval. Current AMT approaches are restricted to piano and
(some) guitar recordings, due to difficult data collection. In order to overcome data collection barriers, previous AMT approaches attempt to employ musical scores in the form of a digitized
version of the same song or piece. The scores are
typically aligned using audio features and strenuous human intervention to generate training labels. We introduce NoteEM , a method for simultaneously training a transcriber and aligning the
scores to their corresponding performances, in a
fully-automated process. Using this unaligned
supervision scheme, complemented by pseudolabels and pitch shift augmentation, our method
enables training on in-the-wild recordings with
unprecedented accuracy and instrumental variety.
Using only synthetic data and unaligned supervision, we report SOTA note-level accuracy of the
MAPS dataset, and large favorable margins on
cross-dataset evaluations. We also demonstrate
robustness and ease of use; we report comparable
results when training on a small, easily obtainable,
self-collected dataset, and we propose alternative
labeling to the MusicNet dataset, which we show
to be more accurate. Our project page is available
at https://benadar293.github.io.

1. Introduction
Automatic Music Transcription (AMT) is the task of decoding musical notes from an audio signal, and is one of the
most central tasks in Music Information Retrieval (MIR). It
benefits musicology and music education, musical search,
1

School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel. Correspondence to: Ben Maman <benmaman@mail.tau.ac.il>, Amit
H. Bermano <amberman@tauex.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and could even aid in realistic music synthesis. AMT is
challenging due to several reasons, due to effects such as
notes sharing partial frequencies, polyphony (simultaneous
notes played together, analogous to occlusions in computer
vision), echo effects, and multi-instrument performances,
escalating complexity.
Unsurprisingly, similarly to fields such as Computer Vision
and Natural Language Processing, deep neural networks
have contributed to AMT as well. However, as DNNs require massive amounts of training data, progress is limited.
The main bottleneck is that manual annotation is severely infeasible, even if done by experts, as it requires highly precise
timing. For this reason, for most instruments no datasets
of highly accurate annotation have been collected. Collection efforts have concentrated mainly on two instruments.
Guitar (Xi et al., 2018; Wiggins & Kim, 2019) annotations
are done semi-automatically with human verification, in a
difficult to scale process. For the piano, unique equipment
(the Disklavier) logs key activity during performance, making annotation trivial and data collection simpler. Indeed,
the guitar dataset we use for evaluation (Xi et al., 2018)
(which is practically the only available one) consists of only
∼3 hours of recordings, compared to ∼140 hours of piano material (Hawthorne et al., 2019). It is therefore not
surprising that most AMT literature concentrates on the latter, where supervision and evaluation are clean and readily
available (Hawthorne et al., 2018; 2019; 2021).
As it turns out, even within the case of the piano, supervised
detectors struggle to generalize to variances in the instrument or environment, let alone from synthetic to real data.
For this reason, for example, the accuracy of SOTA methods degrades in cross-dataset evaluation (e.g., training on
the piano recordings of the MAESTRO dataset (Hawthorne
et al., 2019), and testing on those of MAPS (Emiya et al.,
2010), or other cross dataset evaluations (Gardner et al.,
2021)). To mitigate these data intensive requirements, a popular approach seeks to annotate existing recordings through
alignment of real performances to their corresponding musical score. In other words, an easily obtainable digitized
performance (or MIDI) of a musical piece is aligned to a
real recorded performance. After the MIDI is warped to
best match the recording, it is used as annotation. This is
how, for example, the popular MusicNet dataset was constructed (with the support of human verification) (Thickstun

