Plug & Play Attacks: Towards Robust and Flexible Model Inversion Attacks

Lukas Struppek 1 Dominik Hintersdorf 1 Antonio De Almeida Correia 1 Antonia Adler 2 Kristian Kersting 1 3 4

Abstract
Model inversion attacks (MIAs) aim to create synthetic images that reflect the class-wise characteristics from a target classifier’s private training
data by exploiting the model’s learned knowledge. Previous research has developed generative
MIAs that use generative adversarial networks
(GANs) as image priors tailored to a specific target model. This makes the attacks time- and
resource-consuming, inflexible, and susceptible
to distributional shifts between datasets. To overcome these drawbacks, we present Plug & Play
Attacks, which relax the dependency between the
target model and image prior, and enable the use
of a single GAN to attack a wide range of targets,
requiring only minor adjustments to the attack.
Moreover, we show that powerful MIAs are possible even with publicly available pre-trained GANs
and under strong distributional shifts, for which
previous approaches fail to produce meaningful
results. Our extensive evaluation confirms the improved robustness and flexibility of Plug & Play
Attacks and their ability to create high-quality
images revealing sensitive class characteristics.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks keep pushing various benchmarks, the privacy and security of these models still receive
little attention, aside from adversarial attacks. Many users
may mistakenly assume that knowledge learned from training data is safely encoded in a model’s weights, so no privacy risks arise from the model. This assumption is wrong
and might lead to serious privacy threats. For example, mobile devices support device unlocking and payment approval
by facial recognition. If only the face recognition model
1

Department of Computer Science, Technical University of
Darmstadt, Germany. 2 Universität der Bundeswehr München, Munich, Germany. 3 Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, Germany. 4 Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI), Germany. Correspondence to: Lukas Struppek <lukas.struppek@cs.tu-darmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

without information on the user’s identity is then somehow
leaked or stolen, an adversary might aim to extract the visual characteristics of the user. If the attack is successful,
the targeted individual could be identified, leading to a massive compromise of privacy and security.
This paper focuses on these so-called model inversion attacks (MIAs), which intend to create synthetic images that
reflect the characteristics of a specific class from a model’s
private training data. For face recognition, the target model
is trained to classify the identities of a set of people. An adversary without any knowledge about the identities but with
access to the trained model then tries to create synthetic facial images that share characteristic features with the training identities, such as gender and hair color, and ideally
even allows inferring a person’s identity. More intuitively,
the adversary can be interpreted as a phantom sketch artist
who reconstructs faces from a model’s extracted knowledge.
In applications such as facial recognition, successful attacks
could compromise individual privacy.
For attacking deep neural networks, most MIAs use generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
as image priors to generate realistic images. Previous MIAs,
which we describe in Sec. 2, avoided distributional shifts
and relied on GANs trained on the same data distribution
as the target model (Zhang et al., 2020b; Chen et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2021), used additional input information such
as blurred pictures of a person (Zhang et al., 2020b), and
tailored the attack and its image prior to specific target models (Chen et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021), restricting the
reuse and flexibility of the attacks. Also, all approaches focused on low-resolution images, which limits the quality of
the extracted features, and have yet to show their applicability for higher resolutions. We provide a more formal introduction to MIAs and a theoretical consideration of ideal
MIAs and possible degradation factors in Sec. 3.
The present work aims to overcome these drawbacks. We
introduce Plug & Play Attacks, which aim at faster, more
robust and flexible MIAs that allow us to create highresolution images while loosening the dependencies between the image prior and the target models. More precisely, we introduce several novelties to (generative) MIAs
in Sec. 4. First, we tackle the problem of vanishing gradients during the optimization – a problem ignored by pre-

