Convergence of Invariant Graph Networks

Chen Cai 1 Yusu Wang 1

Abstract
Although theoretical properties such as expressive power and over-smoothing of graph neural
networks (GNN) have been extensively studied recently, its convergence property is a relatively new
direction. In this paper, we investigate the convergence of one powerful GNN, Invariant Graph Network (IGN) over graphs sampled from graphons.
We first prove the stability of linear layers for
general k-IGN (of order k) based on a novel interpretation of linear equivariant layers. Building
upon this result, we prove the convergence of kIGN under the model of Ruiz et al. (2020), where
we access the edge weight but the convergence
error is measured for graphon inputs. Under the
more natural (and more challenging) setting of
Keriven et al. (2020) where one can only access
0-1 adjacency matrix sampled according to edge
probability, we first show a negative result that
the convergence of any IGN is not possible. We
then obtain the convergence of a subset of IGNs,
denoted as IGN-small, after the edge probability
estimation. We show that IGN-small still contains
function class rich enough that can approximate
spectral GNNs arbitrarily well. Lastly, we perform experiments on various graphon models to
verify our statements.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently become a
key framework for the learning and analysis of graph type
of data, leading to progress on link prediction, knowledge
graph embedding, and property prediction to name a few
(Wu et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020). Although theoretical
properties such as expressive power (Maron et al., 2019b;
Keriven & Peyré, 2019; Maron et al., 2019a; Garg et al.,
2020; Azizian & Lelarge, 2020; Geerts, 2020; Bevilacqua
1
University of California San Diego, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Chen Cai <c1cai@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2021) and over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018; Oono
& Suzuki, 2019; Cai & Wang, 2020; Zhou et al., 2021)
of GNNs have received much attention, their convergence
property is less understood. In this paper, we systematically
investigate the convergence of one of the most powerful families of GNNs, the Invariant Graph Network (IGN) (Maron
et al., 2018). Different from message passing neural network (MPNN) (Gilmer et al., 2017), it treats graphs and
associated node/edge features as monolithic tensors and processes them in a permutation equivariant manner. 2-IGN can
approximate the message passing neural network (MPNN)
arbitrarily well on the compact domain. When allowing the
use of high-order tensor as the intermediate representation,
k-IGN is shown at least as powerful as k-WL test. As the
tensor order k goes to O(n4 ), it achieves the universality
and can distinguish all graphs of size n (Maron et al., 2019b;
Keriven & Peyré, 2019; Azizian & Lelarge, 2020).
The high level question we are interested in is the convergence and stability of GNNs. In particular, given a sequence
of graphs sampled from some generative models, does a
GNN performed on them also converge to a limiting object?
This problem has been considered recently, however, so far,
the studies (Ruiz et al., 2020; Keriven et al., 2020) focus
on the convergence of spectral GNNs, which encompasses
several models (Bruna et al., 2013; Defferrard et al., 2016)
including GCNs with order-1 filters (Kipf & Welling, 2016).
However, it is known that the expressive power of GCN
is limited. Given that 2(k)-IGN is strictly more powerful
than GCN (Xu et al., 2018) in terms of separating graphs1
and its ability to achieve universality, it is of great interest
to study the convergence of such powerful GNN. In fact,
it is posted as an open question in Keriven et al. (2021) to
study convergence for models more powerful than spectral
GNNs and higher order GNNs. This is the question we aim
to study in this paper.
Contributions. We present the first convergence study of
the powerful k-IGNs (strictly more powerful than the Spectral GNN which previous work studied). We first analyze
the building block of IGNs: linear equivariant layers, and
develop a stability result for such layers. The case of 2-IGN
is proved via case analysis while the general case of k-IGN
1

In terms of separating graphs, k-IGN > 2-IGN = GIN >
GCN for k > 2.

