Learning to Infer Structures of Network Games

Emanuele Rossi 1 2 Federico Monti 1 Yan Leng 3 Michael M. Bronstein 1 4 Xiaowen Dong 4

Abstract
Strategic interactions between a group of individuals or organisations can be modelled as games
played on networks, where a player’s payoff depends not only on their actions but also on those
of their neighbours. Inferring the network structure from observed game outcomes (equilibrium
actions) is an important problem with numerous
potential applications in economics and social
sciences. Existing methods mostly require the
knowledge of the utility function associated with
the game, which is often unrealistic to obtain in
real-world scenarios. We adopt a transformer-like
architecture which correctly accounts for the symmetries of the problem and learns a mapping from
the equilibrium actions to the network structure of
the game without explicit knowledge of the utility
function. We test our method on three different
types of network games using both synthetic and
real-world data, and demonstrate its effectiveness
in network structure inference and superior performance over existing methods.

1. Introduction
Individuals or organisations cooperate with or compete
against each other in a wide range of practical situations.
Strategic interactions between individuals are often modeled as games played on networks (Jackson & Zenou, 2014),
where an individual’s utility depends not only on their actions (and characteristics) but also on those of their neighbours. In a network game (and games in general), the utility
function is of fundamental importance, as rational agents
maximise their utilities when making real-life decisions.
The current literature on network games has primarily focused on the scenarios where the utility function is predefined, and the structure of the network (represented by a
*
Equal contribution 1 Twitter, London, UK 2 Imperial College
London, London, UK 3 The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX, USA 4 University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to:
Emanuele Rossi <emanuele.rossi1909@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

graph) is known beforehand. However, in practical settings,
while it is common to observe the actions of the players,
the underlying interaction network often remains hidden
or uncertain due to privacy reasons or the dynamic nature
of interactions. Furthermore, the utility function is often
unobservable. This makes it challenging to exploit network
information and utility function for behavioural predictions
and network-based interventions (Valente, 2012), e.g., marketing campaigns or information diffusion.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of inferring the structure of the interaction network from observed equilibrium
actions of a network game. A few recent studies have tackled similar problems (Irfan & Ortiz, 2011; Honorio & Ortiz,
2015; Ghoshal & Honorio, 2017a;b; Garg & Jaakkola, 2016;
2017; Barik & Honorio, 2019; 2020; Leng et al., 2020);
however, several major limitations remain. First, all these
methods require the explicit knowledge of the utility function to infer the underlying network structure, which may be
impractical to assume and may also change over time. The
work of Honorio & Ortiz (2015) considers a more general
hypothesis space of games for linear influence game, but
they only focus on binary actions and linear payoffs. Second,
the methodology in each of these studies has been designed
for the specific game under consideration, thereby limiting
its scope in handling a wide range of strategic interactions
in real-world scenarios.
To address these limitations, we first summarise three common network games studied in the recent literature in a
generic form, which is based on both individual and network
factors that impact one’s utility and the corresponding equilibrium actions. Despite the different nature of the games,
it permits the relation between the equilibrium actions and
network structure to be written in a unified manner. This
motivates us to propose a data-driven model where we learn
the functional mapping between the equilibrium actions
and network structure without explicit knowledge about
the utility function of the game. Our model is based on
an encoder-decoder approach where the encoder is a transformer architecture and the decoder can be chosen flexibly,
and is trained using pairs of actions and network structures.
Once trained, the model can be deployed to infer the network structure from only observed actions. Synthetic and
real-world experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
method against several state-of-the-art approaches.

