Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis

Michael Janner * 1 Yilun Du * 2 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 2 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning methods
often use learning only for the purpose of
estimating an approximate dynamics model,
offloading the rest of the decision-making
work to classical trajectory optimizers. While
conceptually simple, this combination has a
number of empirical shortcomings, suggesting
that learned models may not be well-suited to
standard trajectory optimization. In this paper,
we consider what it would look like to fold as
much of the trajectory optimization pipeline as
possible into the modeling problem, such that
sampling from the model and planning with it
become nearly identical. The core of our technical
approach lies in a diffusion probabilistic model
that plans by iteratively denoising trajectories.
We show how classifier-guided sampling and
image inpainting can be reinterpreted as coherent
planning strategies, explore the unusual and
useful properties of diffusion-based planning
methods, and demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework in control settings that emphasize longhorizon decision-making and test-time flexibility.

1

Introduction

Planning with a learned model is a conceptually simple
framework for reinforcement learning and data-driven
decision-making. Its appeal comes from employing learning
techniques only where they are the most mature and
effective: for the approximation of unknown environment
dynamics in what amounts to a supervised learning problem.
Afterwards, the learned model may be plugged into classical
trajectory optimization routines (Tassa et al., 2012; Posa
et al., 2014; Kelly, 2017), which are similarly wellunderstood in their original context.
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley 2 MIT.
Correspondence to: janner@berkeley.edu, yilundu@mit.edu.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

denoising

pθ (τ i−1 | τ i )

diffusion

q(τ i | τ i−1 )

Figure 1. Diffuser is a diffusion probabilistic model that plans by
iteratively refining trajectories.

However, this combination rarely works as described.
Because powerful trajectory optimizers exploit learned
models, plans generated by this procedure often look more
like adversarial examples than optimal trajectories (Talvitie,
2014; Ke et al., 2018). As a result, contemporary modelbased reinforcement learning algorithms often inherit more
from model-free methods, such as value functions and policy
gradients (Wang et al., 2019), than from the trajectory
optimization toolbox. Those methods that do rely on
online planning tend to use simple gradient-free trajectory
optimization routines like random shooting (Nagabandi
et al., 2018) or the cross-entropy method (Botev et al., 2013;
Chua et al., 2018) to avoid the aforementioned issues.
In this work, we propose an alternative approach to datadriven trajectory optimization. The core idea is to train a
model that is directly amenable to trajectory optimization,
in the sense that sampling from the model and planning
with it become nearly identical. This goal requires a shift
in how the model is designed. Because learned dynamics
models are normally meant to be proxies for environment
dynamics, improvements are often achieved by structuring
the model according to the underlying causal process (Bapst
et al., 2019). Instead, we consider how to design a model
in line with the planning problem in which it will be used.
For example, because the model will ultimately be used
for planning, action distributions are just as important as
state dynamics and long-horizon accuracy is more important
than single-step error. On the other hand, the model should
remain agnostic to reward function so that it may be used
Code and visualizations of the learned denoising process are
available at diffusion-planning.github.io.

