Understanding Dataset Difficulty with V-Usable Information

Kawin Ethayarajh 1 Yejin Choi 2 3 Swabha Swayamdipta 2

Abstract
Estimating the difficulty of a dataset typically involves comparing state-of-the-art models to humans; the bigger the performance gap, the harder
the dataset is said to be. However, this comparison provides little understanding of how difficult
each instance in a given distribution is, or what
attributes make the dataset difficult for a given
model. To address these questions, we frame
dataset difficulty—w.r.t. a model V—as the lack
of V-usable information (Xu et al., 2019), where
a lower value indicates a more difficult dataset for
V. We further introduce pointwise V-information
(PVI) for measuring the difficulty of individual
instances w.r.t. a given distribution. While standard evaluation metrics typically only compare
different models for the same dataset, V-usable information and PVI also permit the converse: for a
given model V, we can compare different datasets,
as well as different instances/slices of the same
dataset. Furthermore, our framework allows for
the interpretability of different input attributes via
transformations of the input, which we use to discover annotation artefacts in widely-used NLP
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Datasets are designed to act as proxies for real-world tasks,
yet most bear limited semblance to the tasks they purport
to reflect (Torralba & Efros, 2011; Recht et al., 2019). Understanding dataset difficulty is therefore imperative to understanding progress in AI. In practice, however, estimating
dataset difficulty is often limited to an informal comparison
of state-of-the-art model performance to that of humans; the
bigger the performance gap, the harder the dataset is said to
be (Ethayarajh & Jurafsky, 2020; Ma et al., 2021). However,
Work done during an internship at AI2. 1 Stanford University
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence 3 Paul G. Allen School of
Computer Science, University of Washington. Correspondence to:
Kawin Ethayarajh <kawin@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The Stanford NLI dataset contains more BERT-usable
information than the MultiNLI and CoLA datasets, making it easier
for BERT-base. Above, the distribution of instance difficulty (PVI)
in the held-out sets for each; dotted lines denote the average PVI.

such performance metrics offer little understanding of the
differential difficulty of individual instances, or of which
attributes in the input a given model finds useful.
To understand why a dataset is difficult, we extend recent
work in information theory (Xu et al., 2019). To illustrate,
consider a model family V that can learn to map a sentence
X with its sentiment Y . Even if X were to be encrypted,
the information X contains about Y would not be removed;
in other words, the Shannon mutual information would be
unchanged (Shannon, 1948). However, encryption makes
predicting the sentiment a lot more difficult for V. But
why? Intuitively, the task is easier when X is unencrypted
because the information it contains is usable by V; when
X is encrypted, the information still exists but becomes
unusable. This quantity—V-usable information—reflects
the ease with which V can predict Y given X. Xu et al.
(2019) show that it can be measured using the predictive
V-information framework, which generalizes Shannon information to consider computational constraints.
Our work extends the above framework by framing dataset
difficulty as the lack of V-usable information.1 The higher
1
We use the terms “V-usable information” and “V-information”
from Xu et al. (2019), interchangeably.

