Exploiting Redundancy: Separable Group
Convolutional Networks on Lie Groups

David M. Knigge 1 David W. Romero 2 Erik J. Bekkers 1

Abstract
Group convolutional neural networks (G-CNNs)
have been shown to increase parameter efficiency
and model accuracy by incorporating geometric
inductive biases. In this work, we investigate the
properties of representations learned by regular
G-CNNs, and show considerable parameter redundancy in group convolution kernels. This finding
motivates further weight-tying by sharing convolution kernels over subgroups. To this end, we
introduce convolution kernels that are separable
over the subgroup and channel dimensions. In
order to obtain equivariance to arbitrary affine Lie
groups we provide a continuous parameterisation
of separable convolution kernels. We evaluate our
approach across several vision datasets, and show
that our weight sharing leads to improved performance and computational efficiency. In many
settings, separable G-CNNs outperform their nonseparable counterpart, while only using a fraction
of their training time. In addition, thanks to the
increase in computational efficiency, we are able
to implement G-CNNs equivariant to the Sim(2)
group; the group of dilations, rotations and translations of the plane. Sim(2)-equivariance further
improves performance on all tasks considered,
and achieves state-of-the-art performance on rotated MNIST.

1. Introduction
Minsky & Papert (1988) suggest that the power of the perceptron comes from its ability to learn to discard irrelevant
information. In other words; information that does not bear
significance to the current task does not influence representations built by the network. According to Minsky &
1

University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 2 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: David M.
Knigge <d.m.knigge@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Papert (1988), this leads to a definition of perceptrons in
terms of the symmetry groups their learned representations
are invariant to. Progress in geometric deep learning has
shown the power of pro-actively equipping models with
such geometric structure as inductive bias, reducing model
complexity and improving generalisation and performance
(Bronstein et al., 2017). An early example of such geometric
inductive bias at work can be seen in the convolutional layer
in a CNN (LeCun et al., 1998). CNNs have been instrumental in conquering computer vision tasks, and much of their
success has been attributed to their use of the convolution
operator, which commutes with the action of the translation
group. This property, known as equivariance to translation, comes about as a result of the application of the same
convolution kernel throughout an input signal, enabling the
CNN to learn to detect the same features at any location
in the input signal, directly exploiting translational symmetries that naturally occur in many tasks.
Although invariance to object-identity preserving transformations has long been recognised as a desirable model characteristic in machine learning literature (Kondor, 2008; Cohen, 2013; Sifre & Mallat, 2014), only recently Cohen &
Welling (2016a) introduced the Group Equivariant CNN
(G-CNN) as a natural extension of the CNN (LeCun et al.,
1998), generalising its equivariance properties to group actions beyond translation. The layers of a G-CNN are explicitly designed to be equivariant to such transformations,
hence the model is no longer burdened with learning invariance to transformations that leave object identity intact.
It has since been shown that equivariant deep learning approaches may serve as a solution in fields that as of yet
remain inaccessible to machine learning due to scarce availability of labelled data, or when compact model design
due to limited computational power is required (Winkels &
Cohen, 2018; Linmans et al., 2018; Bekkers, 2020).
Complexity and redundancy issues impeding regular
group convolutions A growing body of work shows applications of G-CNNs consistently and decisively outperforming
classical CNNs (Worrall et al., 2017; Weiler et al., 2018a;
Bekkers et al., 2018; Esteves et al., 2018; Bekkers, 2020;
Worrall & Welling, 2019; Sosnovik et al., 2021b). However,
a practical challenge impeding application to larger groups

