Revisiting Online Submodular Minimization:
Gap-Dependent Regret Bounds, Best of Both Worlds
and Adversarial Robustness
Shinji Ito 1

Abstract
In this paper, we consider online decision problems with submodular loss functions. For such
problems, existing studies have only dealt with
worst-case analysis. This study goes beyond
worst-case analysis to show instance-dependent
regret bounds. More precisely, for each of the fullinformation and bandit-feedback settings, we propose an algorithm that achieves a gap-dependent
O(log T )-regret bound in the stochastic environment and is comparable to the best existing algorithm in the adversarial environment. The proposed algorithms also work well in the stochastic
environment with adversarial corruptions, which
is an intermediate setting between the stochastic
and adversarial environments.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the online submodular minimization
problem, a sequential decision-making problem with submodular cost functions. In this problem, a player sequentially chooses a subset Xt ⊆ [n] of a finite set [n] =
{1, 2, . . . , n} and then gets feedback of the cost function ft :
2[n] → R. We suppose that cost functions are submodular,
i.e., we assume that ft (X)+ft (Y ) ≥ ft (X∪Y )+ft (X∩Y )
holds for any X, Y ⊆ [n]. The goal of the player is to miniPT
mize the cumulative cost t=1 ft (Xt ) and the performance
is evaluated by means of the regret RT defined as
" T
#
T
X
X
∗
RT = max
E
ft (Xt ) −
ft (X ) . (1)
∗

to all the information in the cost function ft , i.e., can observe
ft (X) for any X, after determining Xt . In the latter banditfeedback setting, the player can observe only ft (Xt ), but
the values of ft (X) for X 6= Xt are not observable.
In many applications of online submodular optimization,
it is important to consider a variety of environment models. Submodular functions are closely related to the law of
diminishing returns in economics (Bach, 2013; Fujishige,
2005), and therefore, several applications of submodular
minimization can be found in the context of marketing. As
an application of online submodular minimization, Hazan &
Kale (2012) illustrated the problem of maximizing profits by
choosing a set of goods to produce. Matsuoka et al. (2021)
also pointed out that multi-product price optimization can
be formulated in terms of online submodular minimization.
In the latter application, for example, the profit can be expressed by a function depending on the set of discounted
products, which is supermodular (negation of submodular)
under the assumption that the demand of each product is
an additive function in prices and products have a relationship of substitute goods (Ito & Fujimaki, 2016). Here, the
cost function ft corresponds to the market response models,
which are supposed to be time-varying in nature. These
examples motivate us to consider a variety of dynamic environment models that characterize the behavior of ft .

1
NEC Corporation, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Shinji
Ito <i-shinji@nec.com>.

Previous studies Existing studies on online submodular
minimization focus on adversarial models, in which no
stochastic models for ft are assumed, but {ft }Tt=1 is an
arbitrary sequence of submodular functions. For this model,
Hazan & Kale (2012) have proposed
√ a computationally efficient algorithm that achieves O( nT )-regret for the fullinformation setting. This regret upper bound is worst-case
optimal up to √
a constant. In fact, any algorithm suffers regret
of at least Ω( nT ) for some (worst-case) input sequences
of ft . For the bandit-feedback setting, they have presented
an algorithm with O(nT 2/3 )-regret as well. It is not known
if this is tight at present.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A drawback of the worst-case optimal algorithms for the
adversarial model is that they tend to be too conservative.
In the adversarial model, because no assumptions are made

X ⊆[n]

t=1

t=1

For the feedback information, we consider two different
problem settings: the full-information setting and the banditfeedback setting. In the former setting, the player gets access

