Regret Bounds for Stochastic Shortest Path Problems
with Linear Function Approximation

Daniel Vial 1 2 Advait Parulekar 1 Sanjay Shakkottai 1 R. Srikant 2

Abstract
We propose an algorithm that uses linear function
approximation (LFA) for stochastic shortest path
(SSP). Under minimal assumptions, it obtains sublinear regret, is computationally efficient, and uses
stationary policies. To our knowledge, this is the
first such algorithm in the LFA literature (for SSP
or other formulations). Our algorithm is a special
case of a more general one, which achieves regret square root in the number of episodes given
access to a computation oracle.

1. Introduction
To cope with the massive state spaces of modern reinforcement learning (RL) applications, a plethora of recent papers have studied function approximation. A particularly
tractable case is linear function approximation (LFA). Here
one assumes the transition kernel and cost vector are linear
in known d-dimensional feature vectors, where typically
d ≪ S and A (the number of states and actions). In the
online setting, an agent interacts with the Markov decision
process (MDP) over T time steps (for infinite horizon average and discounted cost problems) or K episodes (for finite
horizon and stochastic shortest path problems). At a high
level, one seeks algorithms with two properties:
• Statistically efficient: regret independent of S and A, sublinear (ideally, square root) in T or K, and polynomial in
d and any other parameters.
• Computationally efficient: time and space complexity
independent of S and polynomial in d, A, T or K, and
any other parameters.
For the finite horizon problem, several algorithms have been
shown to achieve both properties. A key question we ad1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA 2 Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign,
IL, USA. Correspondence to: Daniel Vial <dvial@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

dress is whether such algorithms exist in stationary policy
settings, by which we mean those settings where stationary policies are guaranteed to be optimal (i.e., stochastic
shortest path (SSP) and average/discounted cost problems).
To our knowledge, this problem is essentially open: stateof-the-art algorithms are either computationally inefficient,
or they sidestep the issue by using non-stationary policies
that often require access to unknown MDP parameters. See
Section 1.1 for details.
In addition to this theoretical point of interest, there is practical motivation for understanding stationary policies. First,
they are simpler to deploy and (compared to large, but finite, horizons) less costly to store. Second, they do not
require a notion of “time zero,” which may be ill-defined in
practice. Third, RL applications like games with a random
number of moves are best modeled in the stationary policy
setting, in particular as SSP problems, where the agent tries
to minimize cost before reaching a goal state.
Contributions: Motivated by these theoretical and practical
concerns, we provide an algorithm for episodic SSP with
LFA that is statistically and computationally efficient while
using stationary policies. Beyond SSP, it is the first LFA
algorithm with these three desirable properties in any setting.
In more detail, our contributions are as follows:
• Optimistic approximate fixed points (OAFPs): In Section
3, we show that under the LFA assumption, the optimal
policy in an SSP can be computed from the fixed point
of a d-dimensional Bellman operator, denoted by G (see
Proposition 1). This is a simple observation, but it leads
to an important definition of OAFPs (see Definition 1).
Roughly, these are d-dimensional vectors that have small
Bellman error with respect to a data-driven operator Ĝt
that we interpret as an optimistic approximation of G.
• Regret bound with oracle: In Section 4, we assume access
to an oracle that computes OAFPs from trajectories and
propose Algorithm 1, which uses the oracle to update its
policy. When the LFA assumption holds, the minimal
cost for non-goal states cmin is positive, and a proper
policy exists (see Assumptions 1-2), Theorem 1 shows
Algorithm 1 achieves sublinear regret,
√ with the exponent
determined by the oracle’s quality ( K in the best case
– see Corollary 1). This reduces the problem of regret

