Local Augmentation for Graph Neural Networks

Songtao Liu 1 † Rex Ying 2 Hanze Dong 3 Lanqing Li 4 Tingyang Xu 4 Yu Rong 4 Peilin Zhao 4
Junzhou Huang 4 Dinghao Wu 1

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable performance on graph-based tasks. The
key idea for GNNs is to obtain informative representation through aggregating information from
local neighborhoods. However, it remains an open
question whether the neighborhood information
is adequately aggregated for learning representations of nodes with few neighbors. To address
this, we propose a simple and efficient data augmentation strategy, local augmentation, to learn
the distribution of the node representations of the
neighbors conditioned on the central node’s representation and enhance GNN’s expressive power
with generated features. Local augmentation is
a general framework that can be applied to any
GNN model in a plug-and-play manner. It samples feature vectors associated with each node
from the learned conditional distribution as additional input for the backbone model at each training iteration. Extensive experiments and analyses show that local augmentation consistently
yields performance improvement when applied
to various GNN architectures across a diverse set
of benchmarks. For example, experiments show
that plugging in local augmentation to GCN and
GAT improves by an average of 3.4% and 1.6%
in terms of test accuracy on Cora, Citeseer, and
Pubmed. Besides, our experimental results on
large graphs (OGB) show that our model consistently improves performance over backbones.
Code is available at https://github.com/
SongtaoLiu0823/LAGNN.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and their variants (Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018)
have achieved state-of-the-art performance on a variety of
graph-based tasks, including recommendation system (Ying
et al., 2018), drug discovery (Dai et al., 2019) and traffic prediction (Guo et al., 2019). The core of GNNs is to employ
a message-passing mechanism that passes and aggregates
information from the local neighborhood to generate informative representations.
Recent development of deep GNNs, such as JKnet (Xu
et al., 2018), GCNII (Chen et al., 2020b), and RevGNNDeep (Li et al., 2021) adds the output of shallow layers to
the deep layers with a residual-style design, to preserve the
locality information of node representations (Chen et al.,
2020b). Moreover, recent studies (Zeng et al., 2021; Zhang
& Li, 2021; Wijesinghe & Wang, 2022) utilize structural
information of the local neighborhood to design efficient
message-passing aggregation schemes to enhance the expressive power of GNNs. These works demonstrate that
local information plays a significant role in training GNN
models and designing powerful GNNs.

Part of the work was done during Songtao’s internship at
Tencent AI Lab 1 The Pennsylvania State University 2 Stanford
University 3 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Tencent AI Lab. Correspondence to: Songtao Liu
<skl5761@psu.edu>, Rex Ying <rexying@stanford.edu>, Lanqing Li <lanqingli1993@gmail.com>, Dinghao Wu <dinghao@psu.edu>.

Despite advances of GNNs in learning node representations
from the local neighborhood, it remains an open problem
whether the local neighborhood information is sufficient to
obtain effective node representations, especially for nodes
with limited number of neighbors. We argue that the limited
number of neighbors in the local neighborhood restricts the
expressive power of GNNs and hinders their performance,
especially in sample-starving cases where some nodes have
very few neighbors. Stacking graph layers to enlarge the
receptive field can incorporate multi-hop neighboring information but leads to over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018) without
residual connection to the input, and is not a direct solution to address this issue. Existing works on GNN model
architecture cannot tackle the problem that the very limited
neighbors are unfavorable to learning node representations.
Therefore, here we focus on enriching the local information
for low-degree nodes to obtain effective representations.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

One promising solution is to generate more samples in the
local neighborhood via data augmentation. Data augmentation has been well-studied in computer vision (Shorten &

†

