Short-Term Plasticity Neurons Learning to Learn and Forget

Hector Garcia Rodriguez 1 2 Qinghai Guo 3 Timoleon Moraitis 1

Abstract
Short-term plasticity (STP) is a mechanism that
stores decaying memories in synapses of the cerebral cortex. In computing practice, STP has been
used, but mostly in the niche of spiking neurons, even though theory predicts that it is the
optimal solution to certain dynamic tasks. Here
we present a new type of recurrent neural unit,
the STP Neuron (STPN), which indeed turns out
strikingly powerful. Its key mechanism is that
synapses have a state, propagated through time
by a self-recurrent connection-within-the-synapse.
This formulation enables training the plasticity
with backpropagation through time, resulting in
a form of learning to learn and forget in the short
term. The STPN outperforms all tested alternatives, i.e. RNNs, LSTMs, other models with fast
weights, and differentiable plasticity. We confirm
this in both supervised and reinforcement learning
(RL), and in tasks such as Associative Retrieval,
Maze Exploration, Atari video games, and MuJoCo robotics. Moreover, we calculate that, in
neuromorphic or biological circuits, the STPN
minimizes energy consumption across models,
as it depresses individual synapses dynamically.
Based on these, biological STP may have been a
strong evolutionary attractor that maximizes both
efficiency and computational power. The STPN
now brings these neuromorphic advantages also
to a broad spectrum of machine learning practice.
Code is available at https://github.com/
NeuromorphicComputing/stpn.

1. Introduction
1.1. Biological vs artificial neural networks
Biological neural networks are the source of inspiration for
some of the most successful machine learning (ML) models,
namely the artificial neural networks (ANNs) that underpin
Deep Learning. Despite the success of ANNs, artificial intelligence (AI) models still pale in comparison to animals
and humans in several respects. Widely acknowledged limitations include (a) the vast number of training episodes
required before mastering a task, (b) difficulties in dynamically changing tasks, (c) the ad hoc task-specificity of ANN
architectures, and (d) the high energy demands of running
the algorithms on computers. Similarly, despite their biological inspiration at an abstract level, ANNs lack many
of the computational operations that the known neuronal
biophysics implies. It is conceivable that this latter disparity
in implementation also underlies the former mismatch in
performance. In particular, much of the complexity within
biological neurons (a) is dedicated to synaptic plasticity for
learning, (b) is governed by dynamically changing chemical concentrations, (c) is maintained across brain areas and
species, and (d) accomplishes extreme energy efficiency. It
is hard to ignore that these four biological properties that
are largely missing from ANNs have a one-to-one correspondence to the four aforementioned limitations of ANNs.
Based on this, our high-level ambition here is to explore
whether these biological properties and the associated advantages can be brought to Deep Learning by a new rendition of
a particular neuromorphic mechanism, i.e. short-term plasticity (STP) of synapses. Our approach is closely related
to concepts from multiple subfields (Fig. 1.A), which we
review in this section.
1.2. Neuromorphic Computing

1

Huawei Technologies – Zurich Research Center, Switzerland 2 University College London, United Kingdom 3 Advanced
Computing & Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Timoleon Moraitis <timoleon.moraitis@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Our goal here is aligned with the field of neuromorphic computing, which has been porting biophysical mechanisms
from experimental neuroscience into models and emulating
them in electronic circuits to improve neural computation
(Indiveri & Horiuchi, 2011; Indiveri, 2021; Sarwat et al.,
2022a;b). However, the focus has been mostly on the specific property of spiking neuronal activations, in so-called
spiking neural networks (SNNs) (Maass, 1997; Ponulak &
Kasinski, 2011). In addition, the field’s aim has been over-

