Causal Conceptions of Fairness and their Consequences

Hamed Nilforoshan * 1 Johann Gaebler * 1 Ravi Shroff 2 Sharad Goel 3

Abstract

Recent work highlights the role of causality in
designing equitable decision-making algorithms.
It is not immediately clear, however, how existing
causal conceptions of fairness relate to one another, or what the consequences are of using these
definitions as design principles. Here, we first assemble and categorize popular causal definitions
of algorithmic fairness into two broad families:
(1) those that constrain the effects of decisions
on counterfactual disparities; and (2) those that
constrain the effects of legally protected characteristics, like race and gender, on decisions. We
then show, analytically and empirically, that both
families of definitions almost always—in a measure theoretic sense—result in strongly Pareto
dominated decision policies, meaning there is an
alternative, unconstrained policy favored by every
stakeholder with preferences drawn from a large,
natural class. For example, in the case of college admissions decisions, policies constrained to
satisfy causal fairness definitions would be disfavored by every stakeholder with neutral or positive
preferences for both academic preparedness and
diversity. Indeed, under a prominent definition
of causal fairness, we prove the resulting policies
require admitting all students with the same probability, regardless of academic qualifications or
group membership. Our results highlight formal
limitations and potential adverse consequences of
common mathematical notions of causal fairness.

*

1

Equal contribution
Stanford University, Stanford, CA
New York University, New York, NY 3 Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to:
Hamed
Nilforoshan <hamedn@cs.stanford.edu>, Johann Gaebler
<jgaeb@stanford.edu>, Ravi Shroff <ravi.shroff@nyu.edu>,
Sharad Goel <sgoel@hks.harvard.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Imagine designing an algorithm to guide decisions for college admissions. To help ensure algorithms such as this are
broadly equitable, a plethora of formal fairness criteria have
been proposed in the machine learning community (Berk
et al., 2021; Chouldechova, 2017; Chouldechova & Roth,
2020; Cleary, 1968; Corbett-Davies et al., 2017; Darlington,
1971; Dwork et al., 2012; Hardt et al., 2016; Kleinberg et al.,
2017; Woodworth et al., 2017; Zafar et al., 2017a;b). For example, under the principle that fair algorithms should have
comparable performance across demographic groups (Hardt
et al., 2016), one might check that among applicants who
were ultimately academically “successful” (e.g., who eventually earned a college degree, either at the institution in
question or elsewhere), the algorithm would recommend
admission for an equal proportion of candidates across race
groups. Alternatively, following the principle that decisions
should be agnostic to legally protected attributes like race
and gender (cf. Corbett-Davies & Goel, 2018; Dwork et al.,
2012), one might mandate that these features not be provided to the algorithm.
Recent scholarship has argued for extending equitable algorithm design by adopting a causal perspective, leading to
myriad additional formal criteria for fairness (Carey & Wu,
2022; Chiappa, 2019; Coston et al., 2020; Galhotra et al.,
2022; Imai & Jiang, 2020; Imai et al., 2020; Kilbertus et al.,
2017; Kusner et al., 2017; Loftus et al., 2018; Mhasawade
& Chunara, 2021; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Wang et al., 2019;
Wu et al., 2019; Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018; Zhang et al.,
2017). Less attention, however, has been given to understanding the potential downstream consequences of using
these causal definitions of fairness as algorithmic design
principles, leaving an important gap to fill if these criteria
are to responsibly inform policy choices.
Here we synthesize and critically examine the statistical
properties and concomitant consequences of popular causal
approaches to fairness. We begin, in Section 2, by proposing
a two-part taxonomy for causal conceptions of fairness that
mirrors the illustrative, non-causal fairness principles described above. Our first category of definitions encompasses
those that consider the effect of decisions on counterfactual disparities. For example, recognizing the causal effect
of college admission on later success, one might demand

