Accelerating Shapley Explanation via Contributive Cooperator Selection

Guanchu Wang * 1 Yu-Neng Chuang * 1 Mengnan Du 2 Fan Yang 1
Quan Zhou 3 Pushkar Tripathi 3 Xuanting Cai 3 Xia Hu 1

Abstract
Even though Shapley value provides an effective
explanation for a DNN model prediction, the computation relies on the enumeration of all possible
input feature coalitions, which leads to the exponentially growing complexity. To address this
problem, we propose a novel method SHEAR to
significantly accelerate the Shapley explanation
for DNN models, where only a few coalitions of
input features are involved in the computation.
The selection of the feature coalitions follows
our proposed Shapley chain rule to minimize the
absolute error from the ground-truth Shapley values, such that the computation can be both efficient and accurate. To demonstrate the effectiveness, we comprehensively evaluate SHEAR
across multiple metrics including the absolute error from the ground-truth Shapley value, the faithfulness of the explanations, and running speed.
The experimental results indicate SHEAR consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baseline methods across different evaluation metrics, which
demonstrates its potentials in real-world applications where the computational resource is limited. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/guanchuwang/SHEAR.

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable achievement of deep neural networks (DNNs) in a variety of fields, the black-box nature of
DNNs still limits its deployment in domains where model
explanations are required for acquiring trustful results, such
as healthcare (Esteva et al., 2019), finance (Caruana et al.,
2020) and recommender systems (Yang et al., 2018). Ex*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Rice
University 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University 3 Meta Platforms, Inc.. Correspondence to: Guanchu Wang <guanchu.wang@rice.edu>, Xia Hu
<xia.hu@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

plaining the behavior of DNNs is a significant problem
due to both the practical requirements of the stakeholders as well as the regulations in different domains, e.g.,
GDPR (Goodman et al., 2017; Floridi, 2019). To overcome
the black-box nature of DNNs, existing work has developed
various techniques for model interpretation such as gradientbased methods (Sundararajan et al., 2017), casual interpretation (Luo et al., 2020), counterfactual explanation (Yang
et al., 2021) and Shapley value explanation (Lundberg &
Lee, 2017). Among these, the Shapley value (Shapley, 2016)
has emerged as a popular explanation approach due to its
strong theoretical properties (Lipovetsky et al., 2001).
The Shapley value provides a natural and effective explanation for DNNs from the perspective of cooperative game
theory (Kuhn & Tucker, 1953; Winter, 2002; Roth, 1988).
The explanation can be adaptive to individual features, an
instance, or the representation of global feature contribution (Covert et al., 2020). However, the Shapley explanation
is known to be an NP-hard problem with extremely high
computational complexity, which prevents its application
to real-world scenarios. The brute-force algorithm to calculate the exact Shapley values requires the enumeration of
all possible input feature coalitions, where the complexity
grows exponentially with the feature number (Van D. B.
et al., 2021). Hence, it is crucial to reduce the computational complexity of Shapley explanation. Existing work
can be categorized into two groups to overcome this challenge. The first group studies specific approximation of
Shapley value for DNN models (Chen et al., 2018; Ancona et al., 2019; Jia et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021). Even
though these kinds of work contribute to efficient explanations for the prediction of DNN models, they suffer from
the inevitable gap with the ground-truth Shapley explanation due to the approximation (Liu et al., 2021), and lack of
flexibility to deal with different types of models. Another
group proposes the regression of Shapley values based on
model evaluation on either the sampling of feature coalitions or permutations (Kokhlikyan et al., 2020; Covert et al.,
2020). Although these kinds of methods provide the effective Shapley explanation for DNN models, they require
large numbers of model evaluations, which is inefficient and
often performs an undesirable trade-off between the computational complexity and interpretation performance (Covert

