Minimum Cost Intervention Design for Causal Effect Identification

Sina Akbari 1 Jalal Etesami 1 Negar Kiyavash 1

Abstract
Pearl’s do calculus is a complete axiomatic approach to learn the identifiable causal effects from
observational data. When such an effect is not
identifiable, it is necessary to perform a collection of often costly interventions in the system
to learn the causal effect. In this work, we consider the problem of designing the collection of
interventions with the minimum cost to identify
the desired effect. First, we prove that this problem is NP-hard and subsequently propose an algorithm that can either find the optimal solution
or a logarithmic-factor approximation of it. This
is done by establishing a connection between our
problem and the minimum hitting set problem.
Additionally, we propose several polynomial time
heuristic algorithms to tackle the computational
complexity of the problem. Although these algorithms could potentially stumble on sub-optimal
solutions, our simulations show that they achieve
small regrets on random graphs.

1. Introduction
Causal inference plays a key role in many applications such
as psychology (Foster, 2010), econometrics (Hoover, 1990),
education, social sciences (Murnane & Willett, 2010; Gangl,
2010), etc. Causal effect identification, one of the most fundamental topics in causal inference, is concerned with estimating the effect of intervening on a set of variables, say X
on another set of variables, say Y denoted by P (Y |do(X)).
The estimation is performed having access to a set of observational and/or interventional distributions under causal
assumptions that are usually encoded in the form of a causal
graph. The causal graph of a system of variables captures
the interconnection among the variables and can be inferred
from a combination of observations, experiments, and expert knowledge about the phenomenon under investigation
1

College of Management of Technology, EPFL. Correspondence to: Sina Akbari <sina.akbari@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Spirtes et al., 2000). Throughout this work, we assume that
the causal graph is given as a side information.
Given a causal graph, it is known that in the absence of unobserved (latent) variables, every causal effect is identifiable
from mere observational data (Robins, 1987; Spirtes et al.,
2000). On the other hand, inferring causal effects from data
becomes challenging in the presence of latent variables. In
the setting where only observational data is available, the
do-calculus, introduced by Pearl (Pearl, 1995), has been
shown to be complete. That is, it provides a complete set
of rules to compute a causal effect (if identifiable) given
a causal graph and observational data (Huang & Valtorta,
2006). Moreover, polynomial time algorithms exist that
can determine the identifiability of a causal effect using the
do-calculus (Shpitser & Pearl, 2006).
In recent years, there has been an increase in the effort to
generalize Pearl’s do-calculus to the setting in which data
from both observational and interventional data are available
for identifying a causal effect. For instance, Bareinboim &
Pearl (2012) studied the problem of estimating the causal
effect of intervening on a set of variables X on the outcome Y when we experiment on a different set Z. This
problem is known as z-identifiability, and (Bareinboim &
Pearl, 2012) provides a complete algorithm for computing
P (Y |do(X)) using information provided by experiments
on all subsets of Z. A slightly more general version of
z-identifiability is called g-identifiability, which considers
the problem of identifying P (Y |do(X)) from an arbitrary
collection of distributions. Lee et al. (2020) studied the gidentifiability problem and claimed that Pearl’s do-calculus
is also complete in this setting. This was proved by Kivva
et al. (2022). All three of the aforementioned works study
the identifiability of P (Y |do(X)).There are also various
works that consider the more general problem of identifying a conditional causal effect of the form P (Y |do(X), W ).
However, most of these works do not manage to provide
complete results a la Pearl’s do-calculus. See (Tikka et al.,
2019), for a complete review on causal effect identification.
When a causal effect is not identifiable from the observations, it is necessary to perform a collection of interventions
to infer the effect of interest. However, such interventions
could be costly, impossible, or unethical to perform. Therefore, naturally we are interested in the problem of designing

