A Unified Weight Initialization Paradigm
for Tensorial Convolutional Neural Networks
Yu Pan 1 Zeyong Su 2 Ao Liu 3 Jingquan Wang 1 Nannan Li 4 5 Zenglin Xu 1 6

Abstract
Tensorial Convolutional Neural Networks (TCNNs) have attracted much research attention for
their power in reducing model parameters or enhancing the generalization ability. However, exploration of TCNNs is hindered even from weight
initialization methods. To be specific, general initialization methods, such as Xavier or Kaiming
initialization, usually fail to generate appropriate
weights for TCNNs. Meanwhile, although there
are ad-hoc approaches for specific architectures
(e.g., Tensor Ring Nets), they are not applicable to
TCNNs with other tensor decomposition methods
(e.g., CP or Tucker decomposition). To address
this problem, we propose a universal weight initialization paradigm, which generalizes Xavier
and Kaiming methods and can be widely applicable to arbitrary TCNNs. Specifically, we first
present the Reproducing Transformation to convert the backward process in TCNNs to an equivalent convolution process. Then, based on the convolution operators in the forward and backward
processes, we build a unified paradigm to control
the variance of features and gradients in TCNNs.
Thus, we can derive fan-in and fan-out initialization for various TCNNs. We demonstrate that
our paradigm can stabilize the training of TCNNs,
leading to faster convergence and better results.

1

Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China 3 Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
4
State Key Laboratory for Management and Control of Complex
Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China 5 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 6 Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Yu Pan <iperryuu@gmail.com>, Zenglin Xu <zenglin@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Tensorial Convolutional Neural Networks (TCNNs) are important variants of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).
TCNNs usually adopt various tensor decomposition techniques to factorize large convolutional kernels into lowerrank tensor nodes, aiming to reduce the number of parameters. For example, Tensor Ring (TR) is utilized to
decompose CNNs (Wang et al., 2018), leading to a high
compression rate while maintaining comparably good performance. Tensor Train (TT) was used to improve performance of CNNs for image classification with parameter
reduction (Yin et al., 2021). The CP-Higher-Order convolution (CP-HOConv) was proposed to factorize higherorder convolutional neural networks and has achieved the
state-of-the-art results in spatio-temporal facial emotion
analysis (Kossaifi et al., 2020).
In addition to the advantages in reducing model parameters, TCNNs are promising to be explored as a more general family of CNNs if the corresponding structures can
be represented with hypergraphs. A hypergraph is a tensor
diagram with a dummy tensor (as illustrated in Figure 1(c))
and a hyperedge (as illustrated in Figure 1(d)). Equipped
with the hypergraph representation, TCNNs can include
not only factorized CNNs based on tensor decomposition
methods (e.g., Tensor Ring (TR) decomposition (Wang
et al., 2018), Tensor Train (TT) decomposition (Novikov
et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2019; Garipov et al., 2016), CANDECAMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition (Lebedev et al.,
2015; Pan et al., 2022), Tucker decomposition (Kim et al.,
2016; Elhoushi et al., 2019), Block-Term Tucker decomposition (Ye et al., 2018; 2020)), but also traditional CNN
variants (e.g., low-rank convolution (Rigamonti et al., 2013;
Idelbayev & Carreira-Perpiñán, 2020), factoring convolution (Szegedy et al., 2016), and even the vanilla convolution),
since each of them can be represented as a hypergraph.
Despite these merits, TCNNs suffer from unstable training
due to inappropriate weight initialization (Wang et al., 2018;
Elhoushi et al., 2019). A common and direct initialization
method generates weights by sampling from a probability
distribution (Pan et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021). Unfortunately,
this initialization method is sensitive to the choice of distribution variance; the distribution parameters are usually

