Scalable MCMC Sampling for Nonsymmetric Determinantal Point Processes

Insu Han 1 Mike Gartrell 2 Elvis Dohmatob 3 Amin Karbasi 1

Abstract
A determinantal point process (DPP) is an elegant
model that assigns a probability to every subset
of a collection of n items. While conventionally a
DPP is parameterized by a symmetric kernel matrix, removing this symmetry constraint, resulting
in nonsymmetric DPPs (NDPPs), leads to significant improvements in modeling power and predictive performance. Recent work has studied an
approximate Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
sampling algorithm for NDPPs restricted to size-k
subsets (called k-NDPPs). However, the runtime
of this approach is quadratic in n, making it infeasible for large-scale settings. In this work, we
develop a scalable MCMC sampling algorithm for
k-NDPPs with low-rank kernels, thus enabling
runtime that is sublinear in n. Our method is
based on a state-of-the-art NDPP rejection sampling algorithm, which we enhance with a novel
approach for efficiently constructing the proposal
distribution. Furthermore, we extend our scalable
k-NDPP sampling algorithm to NDPPs without
size constraints. Our resulting sampling method
has polynomial time complexity in the rank of
the kernel, while the existing approach has runtime that is exponential in the rank. With both
a theoretical analysis and experiments on realworld datasets, we verify that our scalable approximate sampling algorithms are orders of magnitude faster than existing sampling approaches for
k-NDPPs and NDPPs.

1. Introduction
Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs) are probability distributions defined on the set of all subsets of a collection
of n items. They have been applied to a variety of funda1

2

3

Yale University Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France Facebook
AI Lab, Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Insu Han
<insu.han@yale.edu>, Mike Gartrell <m.gartrell@criteo.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

mental machine learning problems, including robustness
learning (Pang et al., 2019), reinforcement learning (Yang
et al., 2020), and bandit optimization (Kathuria et al., 2016),
among many others. While conventionally a DPP is parameterized by a symmetric kernel matrix, Gartrell et al.
(2019) showed that any nonsymmetric and positive semidefinite matrix can define a valid DPP, which they refer to as a
nonsymmetric DPP (NDPP). In addition, they established a
number of useful properties of NDPPs. For example, NDPPs
are able to capture both positive and negative correlations
among items, while symmetric DPPs can only represent
negative correlations, leading to significant improvements
in modeling power and predictive performance.
Recent works have proposed efficient algorithms for various
NDPP tasks, including learning (Gartrell et al., 2021), MAP
inference (Anari & Vuong, 2021), and sampling (Han et al.,
2022), where the NDPP kernel is given by a low-rank factorization. In this paper we focus on developing an efficient
sampling algorithm for NDPPs restricted to size k subsets,
called k-NDPPs. Such size-constrained DPPs are often
more practical in applications such as video summarization (Sharghi et al., 2018), mini-batch optimization (Zhang
et al., 2017), document summarization (Dupuy & Bach,
2018) and coreset sampling (Tremblay et al., 2019). The
only existing approach for k-NDPP sampling is an approximate method based on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
sampling (Alimohammadi et al., 2021; Anari & Vuong,
2021). The algorithm is based on a random walk, where in
every iteration a pair of items is exchanged with some probability. These prior works primarily focused on the number
of iterations required for convergence, and proved that with
time polynomial in k, the sampling algorithm converges
to the k-NDPP target distribution. However, each transition step needs time quadratic in n, making this approach
infeasible for large-scale settings.
1.1. Contributions
In this work, we develop a scalable MCMC sampling algorithm for k-NDPPs with low-rank kernels. In particular, we
accelerate the transition step of the MCMC sampling algorithm so that it runs in sublinear (polynomial-logarithmic)
time in n. We first show that this step is equivalent to
sampling a subset of size 2 from a conditional NDPP. To
achieve fast 2-NDPP sampling, we make use of a state-

