End-to-End Balancing for Causal Continuous Treatment-Effect Estimation

Mohammad Taha Bahadori 1 Eric J. Tchetgen Tchetgen 1 2 David E. Heckerman 1

Abstract
We study the problem of observational causal inference with continuous treatment. We focus on
the challenge of estimating the causal response
curve for infrequently-observed treatment values.
We design a new algorithm based on the framework of entropy balancing which learns weights
that directly maximize causal inference accuracy
using end-to-end optimization. Our weights can
be customized for different datasets and causal inference algorithms. We propose a new theory for
consistency of entropy balancing for continuous
treatments. Using synthetic and real-world data,
we show that our proposed algorithm outperforms
the entropy balancing in accuracy of treatment
effect estimation.

1. Introduction
In many applications in business, social, and health sciences,
we wish to infer the effect of a continuous treatment such as
drug dosage or administration duration on a health outcome
variable. Often, several confounding factors are common
factors of influencing both treatment and response variable,
therefore for accurate causal estimation of the treatment
in view, we must appropriately account for their potential
impact. Unlike binary treatments, causal inference with
continuous treatments is largely understudied and far more
challenging than binary treatments. (Galagate, 2016; Ai
et al., 2021). This is primarily because continuous treatments induce uncountably many potential outcomes per
unit, only one of which is observed for each unit and across
units, a sparse coarsening of the underlying information
needed to infer causal effects without uncertainty.
Propensity score weighting (Robins et al., 2000; Imai &
Van Dyk, 2004), stand-alone or combined with regressionbased models to achieve double robustness (Díaz & van der
1

Amazon.com, Inc. 2 Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Mohammad Taha Bahadori
<bahadorm@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Laan, 2013; Kennedy et al., 2017), has quickly become the
state of the art for causal inference. If the weights, inversely
proportional to the conditional distribution of the treatment
given the confounders, are correctly modeled, the weighted
population will appear to come from a randomized study.
However, this approach faces several challenges: (1) The
weights only balance the confounders in expectation, not
necessarily in the given data (Zubizarreta et al., 2011). (2)
The weights can be very large for some of units, leading to
unstable estimation and uncertain inference. As a possible
remedy, entropy balancing (Hainmueller, 2012) estimates
the weights such that they balance confounders subject to
a measure of dispersion on the weights to prevent extreme
weights.
In this work, we note that low-entropy weights do not directly optimize the quality of subsequent weighted regression, and we introduce an alternative approach that does.
We propose End-to-End Balancing (E2B) to improve the accuracy of the weighted regression used for causal inference.
E2B uses end-to-end training to estimate the base weights
in the entropy balancing framework. The E2B weights are
thus customized for different datasets and causal inference
algorithms that are based on weighting. Because we do
not know the true treatment response function in real data,
we propose a new approach to generate synthetic training
datasets for end-to-end training.
To theoretically analyze end-to-end balancing, we define
Generalized Stable Weights (GSW) for causal inference as
a generalization of the stable weights proposed by Robins
et al. (2000). We prove that weights learned by entropy
balancing for continuous treatments, including E2B weights,
are unbiased estimators of generalized stable weights. We
also show that E2B weights are asymptotically consistent
and efficient estimators of the population weights.
We perform three sets of experiments to demonstrate accuracy improvements by E2B. Two experiments with synthetic
data, one with linear and another with non-linear response
functions show that the E2B is more accurate than the baseline entropy balancing and inverse propensity score techniques. We also study the impact of mis-specification in
synthetic data generation process. In the experiments on
real-world data, we qualitatively evaluate the average treatment effect function learned by E2B. We also show that

