Fast Aquatic Swimmer Optimization with Differentiable Projective Dynamics
and Neural Network Hydrodynamic Models

Elvis Nava 1 2 3 John Z. Zhang 2 Mike Y. Michelis 2 Tao Du 4 Pingchuan Ma 4 Benjamin F. Grewe 3
Wojciech Matusik 4 Robert K. Katzschmann 2

Abstract
Aquatic locomotion is a classic fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problem of interest to biologists
and engineers. Solving the fully coupled FSI equations for incompressible Navier-Stokes and finite
elasticity is computationally expensive. Optimizing robotic swimmer design within such a system generally involves cumbersome, gradient-free
procedures on top of the already costly simulation. To address this challenge we present a novel,
fully differentiable hybrid approach to FSI that
combines a 2D direct numerical simulation for
the deformable solid structure of the swimmer
and a physics-constrained neural network surrogate to capture hydrodynamic effects of the fluid.
For the deformable solid simulation of the swimmer’s body, we use state-of-the-art techniques
from the field of computer graphics to speed up
the finite-element method (FEM). For the fluid
simulation, we use a U-Net architecture trained
with a physics-based loss function to predict the
flow field at each time step. The pressure and
velocity field outputs from the neural network
are sampled around the boundary of our swimmer using an immersed boundary method (IBM)
to compute its swimming motion accurately and
efficiently. We demonstrate the computational
efficiency and differentiability of our hybrid simulator on a 2D carangiform swimmer. Due to
differentiability, the simulator can be used for
computational design of controls for soft bodies
immersed in fluids via direct gradient-based optimization.
1
ETH AI Center, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 2 Soft
Robotics Lab, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 3 Institute
of Neuroinformatics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
4
CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Elvis Nava <elvis.nava@ai.ethz.ch>, Robert K. Katzschmann
<rkk@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Soft robotics is a rapidly advancing branch of robotics,
showing promising results in non-standard settings in which
compliant structures and bio-inspired designs are needed to
solve tasks in natural environments (Hawkes et al., 2021).
Aquatic locomotion is one such setting where soft robotic
designs are uniquely able to take advantage of hydrodynamic properties, mimicking biological fish designs selected
through evolutionary pressures for maximum fitness in nature (Katzschmann et al., 2018).
Simulation is a non-trivial challenge in the design of soft
robots, as opposed to the rigid domain, for which established techniques have been developed and built upon in the
span of decades. As for aquatic locomotion, solving fluidstructure interaction (FSI) for incompressible Navier-Stokes
is a hard problem, traditionally extremely computationally
expensive and thus often impossible in practice. Leveraging
these simulations for design and control optimization generally involves an additional computational burden, through
slow evolutionary or otherwise gradient-free optimization
procedures. In this work, we leverage recent advances in
machine learning for physics to take a step towards solving this problem, proposing a FSI simulation that is both
orders of magnitude faster than standard approaches and
fully differentiable, thus allowing for simple gradient-based
optimization of design and control objectives.
To address the FSI challenge, our hybrid approach uses
a differentiable numerical simulation for the deformable
solid structure and a neural network surrogate to capture
hydrodynamic effects of the fluid. To perform fast and differentiable soft body simulation of a flapping 2D carangiform
swimmer, we leverage the finite-element method (FEM)
combined with the novel approach of Differentiable Projective Dynamics (DiffPD) (Du et al., 2021b). For the fluid
simulation, we train a physics-constrained neural network
for hydrodynamics as proposed by Wandel et al. (2021a),
which approximates fluidic flow on a discretized marker
and cell (MAC) grid (Harlow & Welch, 1965). Their approach requires no training data but is instead trained using
a physics-constrained loss based on the Navier-Stokes differential equation.

