Simultaneous Graph Signal Clustering and Graph Learning

Abdullah Karaaslanli 1 Selin Aviyente 1

Abstract
Graph learning (GL) aims to infer the topology of
an unknown graph from a set of observations on
its nodes, i.e., graph signals. While most of the
existing GL approaches focus on homogeneous
datasets, in many real world applications, data
is heterogeneous, where graph signals are clustered and each cluster is associated with a different graph. In this paper, we address the problem
of learning multiple graphs from heterogeneous
data by formulating an optimization problem for
joint graph signal clustering and graph topology
inference. In particular, our approach extends
spectral clustering by partitioning the graph signals not only based on their pairwise similarities but also their smoothness with respect to the
graphs associated with the clusters. The proposed
method also learns the representative graph for
each cluster using the smoothness of the graph
signals with respect to the graph topology. The
resulting optimization problem is solved with an
efficient block-coordinate descent algorithm and
results on simulated and real data indicate the
effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
In many modern data science applications, relationships
between entities, such as features or data samples, are well
described with a graph structure. While many real-world
data are intrinsically graph-structured, e.g. social and traffic
networks, there is still a large number of applications, where
the graph topology is not readily available. For instance,
gene regulations in biological applications or neuronal connections in the brain are not known. In these applications,
the graphs need to be learned since they reveal the relational
structure and may assist in a variety of learning tasks. GL
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, US. Correspondence to:
Abdullah Karaaslanli <karaasl1@msu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

deals with the inference of a topological structure among entities from a set of observations on these entities, i.e., graph
signals.
Methodologies to learn a graph from data include naive
methods such as k-nearest neighborhood (k-NN), probabilistic graphical models (Banerjee et al., 2008; d’Aspremont
et al., 2008; Mazumder & Hastie, 2012; Hsieh et al., 2011)
and more recently graph signal processing (GSP) (Mateos
et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2019) and graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Zhang et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020; Bronstein et al.,
2017). While the probabilistic graphical models assume the
normality of the data, which is not true for most real-world
data, GSP-based GL methods define observations on a collection of nodes as graph signals and fall into two categories.
The first category assumes graph signals are outcomes of
diffusion processes on graphs and reconstructs a graph from
signals according to the diffusion model (Thanou et al.,
2017; Pasdeloup et al., 2017; Shafipour et al., 2021; Segarra
et al., 2017). The second category of methods promotes
the smoothness of graph signals quantified by the Laplacian
quadratic form or more generally via total variation (Dong
et al., 2016; Kalofolias, 2016b; Berger et al., 2020). GNNbased methods, on the other hand, typically require a large
volume of training data and the learned connectivity is often
less explainable compared to probabilistic graph models and
GSP methods.
Most of the work on GSP-based GL has focused on the
case where all data points follow the same relational model
described by a single graph. However, in practice, the data
may be coming from multiple graphs, i.e., multiview graphs.
Examples of this setup include gene regulation networks
where regulations vary across different cell types, and in
social networks, where a set of users have varying interactions across different social media platforms. In this paper,
we address the problem of multiple graph learning from
a heterogeneous set of graph signals, where each cluster
is associated with a different graph structure. To this end,
we propose GRASCale algorithm for simultaneous GRAph
Signal Clustering And graph LEarning. Previous works that
perform the same task employ only relations of the graph signals to the graphs associated with the clusters for clustering
assignment. However, clustering algorithm can also benefit from side information in the form of pairwise relations
between graph signals. For instance, in a recommendation

