MASER: Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Subgoals Generated from
Experience Replay Buffer

Jeewon Jeon 1 Woojun Kim 1 Whiyoung Jung 1 Youngchul Sung 1

Abstract
In this paper, we consider cooperative multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) with sparse reward. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel
method named MASER: MARL with subgoals
generated from experience replay buffer. Under
the widely-used assumption of centralized training with decentralized execution and consistent
Q-value decomposition for MARL, MASER automatically generates proper subgoals for multiple agents from the experience replay buffer by
considering both individual Q-value and total Qvalue. Then, MASER designs individual intrinsic reward for each agent based on actionable
representation relevant to Q-learning so that the
agents reach their subgoals while maximizing the
joint action value. Numerical results show that
MASER significantly outperforms StarCraft II
micromanagement benchmark compared to other
state-of-the-art MARL algorithms.

1. Introduction
Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is an
active research field to handle many real-world problems
such as games, traffic control, and connected self-driving
cars, which can be modeled as multi-agent systems (Li
et al., 2019; Andriotis & Papakonstantinou, 2019). Since
the introduction of the simplest approach of independent
Q-learning (IQL) (Tan, 1993), many advanced MARL algorithms have been developed recently, e.g., VDN (Sunehag
et al., 2017), QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018b), QTRAN (Son
et al., 2019), COMA (Foerster et al., 2018b), MADDPG
(Lowe et al., 2017), Social Influence (Jaques et al., 2018),
Intention Sharing (Kim et al., 2020b). Although these recent algorithms effectively handle the increased dimensions
1

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Youngchul Sung <ycsung@kaist.ac.kr>,
Woojun Kim <woojun.kim@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of joint state and action spaces associated with multiple
agents and alleviate the burden of inter-agent communication (OroojlooyJadid & Hajinezhad, 2019; Rashid et al.,
2018a), they were primarily developed under the assumption of dense reward. However, many multi-agent problems
are modeled as sparse-reward environments in which a nonzero reward is not given to agents’ actions in every time
step but given only when certain conditions are met. For
example, in multi-agent robot soccer an actual non-zero
reward occurs only when scoring a goal, and individual
actions such as passes, dribbles or tackles do not receive
non-zero rewards. Thus, non-zero rewards come very seldom in such sparse-reward environments. Reinforcement
learning in sparse-reward environments is difficult in general and is more challenging in multi-agent environments
since a global reward is shared among multiple agents and
the combination of multiple agents’ actions jointly affects
the state evolution in multi-agent systems.
A common approach to tackle sparse-reward MARL is learning with efficient exploration (Liu et al., 2021; Christianos
et al., 2020; Ryu et al., 2020; Mahajan et al., 2019; Kim
et al., 2020a), which has been shown effective in some tasks.
However, with exploration only, it is difficult to learn which
action induces rare non-zero rewards. As an alternative to
direct learning of assigning credit to trajectory, which is an
essential difficulty in sparse environments, subgoal-based
methods are recently emerging as an effective approach
to sparse-reward MARL (Tang et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2020a;b), inspired by the methods using subgoals in singleagent systems (Kulkarni et al., 2016; Andrychowicz et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2020; Chane-Sane et al., 2021). In
subgoal-based methods, typically subgoals for maximizing
the total episodic reward are determined or designed and
learning is performed to reach the subgoals to attain the final
goal. The key elements here are how to determine or design
subgoals and how to learn to reach the subgoals. One way to
determine subgoals is to select from a set of pre-defined subgoals designed based on domain knowledge for a given task
(Tang et al., 2018; Kulkarni et al., 2016). However, such an
approach is task-specific and not general enough to be applicable to a variety of different tasks. Thus, automatic subgoal
generation is desirable for subgoal-based approaches to be
applicable to various tasks without being dependent on task-

