Divergence-Regularized Multi-Agent Actor-Critic

Kefan Su 1 Zongqing Lu 1

Abstract
Entropy regularization is a popular method in reinforcement learning (RL). Although it has many
advantages, it alters the RL objective of the original Markov Decision Process (MDP). Though
divergence regularization has been proposed to
settle this problem, it cannot be trivially applied
to cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). In this paper, we investigate divergence regularization in cooperative MARL and
propose a novel off-policy cooperative MARL
framework, divergence-regularized multi-agent
actor-critic (DMAC). Theoretically, we derive
the update rule of DMAC which is naturally offpolicy and guarantees monotonic policy improvement and convergence in both the original MDP
and divergence-regularized MDP. We also give a
bound of the discrepancy between the converged
policy and optimal policy in the original MDP.
DMAC is a flexible framework and can be combined with many existing MARL algorithms. Empirically, we evaluate DMAC in a didactic stochastic game and StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge
and show that DMAC substantially improves the
performance of existing MARL algorithms.

1. Introduction
Regularization is a common method for single-agent reinforcement learning (RL). The optimal policy learned by
traditional RL algorithms is always deterministic (Sutton &
Barto, 2018). This property may result in the inflexibility of
the policy facing unknown environments (Yang et al., 2019).
Entropy regularization is proposed to settle this problem
by learning a policy according to the maximum-entropy
principle (Haarnoja et al., 2017). Moreover, entropy regularization is beneficial to exploration and robustness for
RL algorithms (Haarnoja et al., 2018). However, entropy
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University. Correspondence to: Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

regularization is imperfect. Eysenbach & Levine (2019)
pointed out that maximum-entropy RL modifies the original
RL objective because of the entropy regularizer. Maximumentropy RL is actually learning an optimal policy for the
entropy-regularized Markov Decision Process (MDP) rather
than the original MDP, i.e., the converged policy may be biased. Nachum et al. (2017) analyzed a more general case for
regularization in RL and proposed what we call divergence
regularization. Divergence regularization is beneficial to
exploration and may be helpful to the bias issue.
Regularization can also be applied to cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Agarwal et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2021). However, most cooperative MARL algorithms do not use regularizers (Lowe et al., 2017; Foerster
et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2018; Son et al., 2019; Jiang et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2021a). Only few cooperative MARL
algorithms such as FOP (Zhang et al., 2021) use entropy
regularization, which may suffer from the drawback aforementioned. Divergence regularization, on the other hand,
could potentially benefit cooperative MARL. In addition
to its advantages mentioned above, divergence regularization can also help to control the step size of policy update
which is similar to conservative policy iteration (Kakade &
Langford, 2002) in single-agent RL. Conservative policy
iteration and its successive methods such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) can
stabilize policy improvement (Touati et al., 2020). These
methods use a surrogate objective for policy update, but the
policies in centralized training with decentralized execution
(CTDE) paradigm may not preserve the properties of the
surrogate objective. Moreover, DAPO (Wang et al., 2019),
a single-agent RL algorithm using divergence regularizer,
cannot be trivially extended to cooperative MARL settings.
Even with some tricks like V-trace (Espeholt et al., 2018) for
off-policy correction, DAPO is essentially an on-policy algorithm and thus may not be sample-efficient in cooperative
MARL settings.
In the paper, we propose divergence-regularized multi-agent
actor-critic (DMAC), a novel off-policy cooperative MARL
framework. We analyze the general iteration of DMAC and
theoretically show that DMAC guarantees the monotonic
policy improvement and convergence in both the original
MDP and the divergence-regularized MDP. We also derive a
bound of the discrepancy between the converged policy and

