Efﬁcient Online ML API Selection for Multi-Label Classiﬁcation Tasks
Lingjiao Chen 1 Matei Zaharia 1 James Zou 1 2

Abstract
Multi-label classiﬁcation tasks such as OCR and
multi-object recognition are a major focus of the
growing machine learning as a service industry.
While many multi-label APIs are available, it is
challenging for users to decide which API to use
for their own data and budget, due to the heterogeneity in their prices and performance. Recent work has shown how to efﬁciently select
and combine single-label APIs to optimize performance and cost. However, its computation
cost is exponential in the number of labels, and
is not suitable for settings like OCR. In this work,
we propose FrugalMCT, a principled framework
that adaptively selects the APIs to use for different data in an online fashion while respecting the
user’s budget. It allows combining ML APIs’ predictions for any single data point, and selects the
best combination based on an accuracy estimator.
We run systematic experiments using ML APIs
from Google, Microsoft, Amazon, IBM, Tencent,
and other providers for tasks including multilabel image classiﬁcation, scene text recognition
and named entity recognition. Across these tasks,
FrugalMCT can achieve over 90% cost reduction
while matching the accuracy of the best single
API, or up to 8% better accuracy while matching
the best API’s cost.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning users are starting to adopt machine
learning as a service (MLaaS) APIs to obtain high-quality
predictions. One of the most common tasks these APIs
target is multi-label classiﬁcation. For example, one can
use Google’s computer vision API (Goo) to tag an image
with a wide range of possible labels for $0.0015, or Mi1
Department of Computer Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, USA 2 Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford
University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Lingjiao Chen
<lingjiao@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

crosoft’s API (Mic) for $0.0010. Another example is to
extract all text strings from an image for $0.005 via iFLYTEK’s API (Iﬂ) or $0.021 via Tencent’s API (Ten). In practice, these APIs also provide different performance on different types of input data (e.g., English vs Chinese text).
The heterogeneity in APIs’ performance and prices makes
it hard for users to decide which API, or combination of
APIs, to use for their own datasets and budgets.
Recent work (Chen et al., 2020) proposed FrugalML, an
algorithmic framework that adaptively decides which APIs
to call for a data point to optimize accuracy and cost. Their
approach learns a fast decision rule for each possible output
label that can signiﬁcantly improve cost-performance over
the individual APIs. However, FrugalML requires a large
amount of training data and involves solving a non-convex
optimization problem with complexity exponential in the
number of distinct labels. This prevents it from being used
for tasks with large number of labels, such as multi-label
classiﬁcation. Furthermore, FrugalML ignores correlation
between different APIs’ predictions, potentially limiting its
accuracy. For example, APIs A and B may output {person, car} and {car, bike} separately for an image whose
true keywords are {person, car, bike}. FrugalML would select one of the two label sets, but combining them results
in the true label set and thus higher accuracy. Thus, this paper aims to solve these signiﬁcant limitations and address
the question: how do we design efﬁcient ML API selection
strategies for multi-label classiﬁcation tasks to maximize
accuracy within a budget?
We propose FrugalMCT, a principled framework that
learns the relative strengths of different combinations of
multi-label classiﬁcation APIs and efﬁciently selects the
optimal combinations of APIs to call for different data and
budget constraints. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), FrugalMCT directly estimates the accuracy of each API combination on
a particular input based on the features and predicted labels of that input. Then it uses a fast service selector based
on the estimated accuracy to balance accuracy and budget.
For example, we might ﬁrst call API A on an input. If A
returns person and teddy bear and the accuracy predictor
gives relatively high estimated accuracy (Fig. 1 (c)), then
we stop and report {person, teddy bear} as the label set.
If A returns person and tennis racket, and we predict that
combining it with API B’s output gives a much higher ac-

