Data Determines Distributional Robustness
in Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)

Alex Fang 1 Gabriel Ilharco 1 Mitchell Wortsman 1 Yuhao Wan 1
Vaishaal Shankar 2 Achal Dave 2 Ludwig Schmidt 1 3

Abstract
Contrastively trained language-image models
such as CLIP, ALIGN, and BASIC have demonstrated unprecedented robustness to multiple challenging natural distribution shifts. Since these
language-image models differ from previous training approaches in several ways, an important question is what causes the large robustness gains. We
answer this question via a systematic experimental investigation. Concretely, we study five different possible causes for the robustness gains:
(i) the training set size, (ii) the training distribution, (iii) language supervision at training time,
(iv) language supervision at test time, and (v) the
contrastive loss function. Our experiments show
that the more diverse training distribution is the
main cause for the robustness gains, with the other
factors contributing little to no robustness. Beyond our experimental results, we also introduce
ImageNet-Captions, a version of ImageNet with
original text annotations from Flickr, to enable
further controlled experiments of language-image
training.

1. Introduction
Large pre-trained language-image models such as CLIP
(Radford et al., 2021), ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), and BASIC
(Pham et al., 2021) have recently demonstrated unprecedented robustness on a variety of natural distribution shifts.
In contrast to prior models that are trained on images with
class annotations, CLIP and relatives1 are directly trained on
images and their corresponding unstructured text from the
web. The resulting models achieve large robustness even on
1

University of Washington 2 Amazon 3 Allen Institute for
Artificial Intelligence.
Correspondence to: Alex Fang
<apf1@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Following Radford et al. (2021), we use CLIP as a name for
the general training technique, not only their specific models.

challenging distribution shifts such as ImageNetV2 (Recht
et al., 2019) and ObjectNet (Barbu et al., 2019). No prior
algorithmic techniques had enhanced robustness on these
datasets even after multiple years of intensive research in
reliable machine learning (Djolonga et al., 2021; Taori et al.,
2020). As CLIP also improves robustness on a wide range
of other distribution shifts, an important question emerges:
What causes CLIP’s unprecedented robustness?
The fact that language-image models were the first to
achieve large robustness gains suggests that multimodal
learning on language and image data may be key to more robust image representations. However, pinpointing the exact
cause of CLIP’s robustness is complicated by the fact that
CLIP relied on several changes to the common supervised
training paradigm for image classification models. For instance, the CLIP models with highest accuracy follow the
vision transformer (ViT) architecture (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020). Radford et al. (2021) already investigated model architecture and size, showing that these factors do not affect
the robustness of their CLIP models. Nevertheless, there is
still a long list of possible causes for CLIP’s robustness:
• The large training set size (400 million images)
• The training distribution
• Language supervision at training time
• Language supervision at test time via prompts
• The contrastive loss function
Understanding the mechanism underlying CLIP’s robustness is important as it may guide the way towards more
reliable machine learning more broadly.
In this paper, we answer the question of CLIP’s robustness
via a series of controlled experiments that test the five possible causes listed above. Our main result is that CLIP’s
robustness is determined almost exclusively by the training
distribution. Language supervision at training time does
not make the resulting models more robust than standard
supervised learning when the images in the training set are
the same. Hence language supervision only has an indirect
effect on robustness. In particular, language supervision
simplifies training on a diverse distribution of images by removing the need for consistent annotation with class labels.

