An Exact Symbolic Reduction of Linear Smart Predict+Optimize
to Mixed Integer Linear Programming

Jihwan Jeong 1 2 Parth Jaggi 1 Andrew Butler 1 Scott Sanner 1 2

Abstract
Predictive models are traditionally optimized independently of their use in downstream decisionbased optimization. The ‘smart, predict then optimize’ (SPO) framework addresses this shortcoming by optimizing predictive models in order to
minimize the final downstream decision loss. To
date, several local first-order methods and convex approximations have been proposed. These
methods have proven to be effective in practice,
however, it remains generally unclear as to how
close these local solutions are to global optimality. In this paper, we cast the SPO problem as
a bi-level program and apply Symbolic Variable
Elimination (SVE) to analytically solve the lower
optimization. The resulting program can then
be formulated as a mixed-integer linear program
(MILP) which is solved to global optimality using
standard off-the-shelf solvers. To our knowledge,
our framework is the first to provide a globally
optimal solution to the linear SPO problem. Experimental results comparing with state-of-the-art
local SPO solvers show that the globally optimal
solution obtains up to two orders of magnitude
reduction in decision regret.

1. Introduction
Many problems in engineering and statistics involve both
predictive forecasting and decision-based optimization. A
prototypical ‘predict, then optimize’ framework would first
fit the predictive models (for example by maximum likelihood or least-squares) and then ‘plug-in’ those estimates
to the corresponding decision-based optimization program.
However, an ‘objective mismatch’ (Lambert et al., 2020)
1
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute,
Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Jihwan Jeong <jhjeong@mie.utoronto.ca>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

can occur when the prediction and optimization are treated
separately such that improved prediction accuracy does not
necessarily translate into lower decision error.
Recent work advocates for training prediction models based
on their downstream decision loss (Elmachtoub et al., 2020;
Donti et al., 2017; Mandi & Guns, 2020; Wilder et al., 2019).
In particular, Elmachtoub & Grigas (2017) propose the SPO
(Smart “Predict, then Optimize”) loss, which measures the
decision regret on optimized decisions induced by a particular prediction model. In this paper, we consider an important
subset of SPO problems, with a linear decision-based optimization program (LP) and a linear predictive model.
Optimizing the SPO loss function directly is difficult as
the SPO loss is non-differentiable and non-convex. Empirical evidence demonstrates the efficacy of surrogate loss
functions (Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2017; Elmachtoub et al.,
2020; Grigas et al., 2021) and local optimization methods
(Mandi & Guns, 2020; Wilder et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2020).
However, in general, there does not exist strong theoretical
justification for the observed performance of these approximate solutions and, to date, a globally optimal solution
and measurement of optimality gap remains unknown. For
example, Figure 1 illustrates the surfaces of the true SPO
loss and the convex surrogate SPO+ loss as introduced in
(Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2017). Note that the surrogate loss
fails to capture the complex piecewise structure of the true
loss. Notably, a slight perturbation of the optimum of the
SPO+ loss can incur a huge increase in the true SPO loss.
In this paper, we present the first global optimization framework for the linear SPO problem, thus providing a benchmark and measurement of optimality gap for the aforementioned approximate techniques. We use the bi-level program
formulation of SPO, with a linear upper-level objective and
multiple LP arg min instances (one per datum) in the lowerlevel. We apply the symbolic case calculus (Boutilier et al.,
2001) to analytically solve the lower-level arg min problem
by reformulating the LP in a generic disjoint bilinear program form (Konno, 1975). We extend the symbolic arg min
operator (Jeong et al., 2021) to retrieve the solution to the bilinear program and demonstrate that the general solution is
a piecewise linear function of the model parameters. Finally,
by substituting the lower-level solution into the upper-level

