Sparsity in Partially Controllable Linear Systems

Yonathan Efroni 1 Sham Kakade 1 Akshay Krishnamurthy 1 Cyril Zhang 1

Abstract
A fundamental concept in control theory is that
of controllability, where any system state can be
reached through an appropriate choice of control inputs. Indeed, a large body of classical and
modern approaches are designed for controllable
linear dynamical systems. However, in practice,
we often encounter systems in which a large set of
state variables evolve exogenously and independently of the control inputs; such systems are only
partially controllable. The focus of this work
is on a large class of partially controllable linear dynamical systems, specified by an underlying sparsity pattern. Our main results establish
structural conditions and finite-sample guarantees
for learning to control such systems. In particular, our structural results characterize those state
variables which are irrelevant for optimal control, an analysis which departs from classical control techniques. Our algorithmic results adapt
techniques from high-dimensional statistics—
specifically soft-thresholding and semiparametric
least-squares—to exploit the underlying sparsity
pattern in order to obtain finite-sample guarantees that significantly improve over those based
on certainty-equivalence. We also corroborate
these theoretical improvements over certaintyequivalent control through a simulation study.

1. Introduction
A recurring theme in modern sequential decision making
and control applications is the presence of high-dimensional
signals containing much irrelevant information. Operating
on raw signals provides flexibility to learn much higherquality policies than what may be expressed using handengineered inputs or features, but it poses new challenges for
reinforcement learning (RL) and control. In the context of
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research
New York, NY. Correspondence to:
<jonathan.efroni@gmail.com>.

Yonathan Efroni

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

controls, high-dimensionality inevitably leads to many state
variables that do not affect and cannot be affected by the
controller inputs. Hence, these state variables are irrelevant
for optimal control. In this work, we consider the question
of how to efficiently learn to control partially controllable
systems, while ignoring these irrelevant variables.
Example 1 (Turbine Orientation (Stanfel et al., 2020)).
Consider the problem of learning to orient turbines in a
wind farm in response to sensor measurements of wind
speed and direction. To learn a high-quality controller that
can anticipate local wind patterns, it is desirable to collect
measurements from a broad region. However geographical
features such as mountains and valleys may render some of
these measurements irrelevant for the control task, although
this may not be known to the system designer in advance.
As such, we would like our controller to efficiently learn to
ignore these irrelevant sensors while relying on the relevant
ones for decision making.
Systems like this contain two challenging elements for learning to control. First, a large part of the system state —
namely the wind speed and direction at all locations — is
completely uncontrollable, as the wind turbines negligibly
affect weather patterns. Rather, the controller must react
to these state variables even though they cannot be controlled. Second, some of the uncontrollable variables may
be completely irrelevant, meaning they have no bearing on
the optimal control decisions. To complicate matters, which
variables are controllable, uncontrollable, and irrelevant
must be learned, ideally in a sample-efficient manner.
In the broader literature, there are two well-studied approaches for addressing high dimensionality. One approach
is through feature engineering or the use of kernel machines,
while the other exploits sparsity to recover certain lowdimensional structural information. Both approaches have
been utilized in the context of decision making, the former
via dimension-free linear control (Perdomo et al., 2021) and
the Kernelized Nonlinear Regulator (Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011; Mania et al., 2020; Kakade et al., 2020), and
the latter both in RL (Agarwal et al., 2020; Hao et al., 2021)
and some works on continuous control (Fattahi and Sojoudi,
2018; Wang and Yang, 2020; Sun et al., 2020). This work
contributes to the latter line of work on structure recovery
in continuous control.

