Dual Decomposition of Convex Optimization Layers for
Consistent Attention in Medical Images

Tom Ron * 1 Michal Weiler-Sagie 2 3 Tamir Hazan * 1

Abstract
A key concern in integrating machine learning
models in medicine is the ability to interpret their
reasoning. Popular explainability methods have
demonstrated satisfactory results in natural image
recognition, yet in medical image analysis, many
of these approaches provide partial and noisy explanations. Recently, attention mechanisms have
shown compelling results both in their predictive
performance and in their interpretable qualities.
A fundamental trait of attention is that it leverages
salient parts of the input which contribute to the
model’s prediction. To this end, our work focuses
on the explanatory value of attention weight distributions. We propose a multi-layer attention mechanism that enforces consistent interpretations between attended convolutional layers using convex
optimization. We apply duality to decompose
the consistency constraints between the layers by
reparameterizing their attention probability distributions. We further suggest learning the dual
witness by optimizing with respect to our objective; thus, our implementation uses standard backpropagation, hence it is highly efficient. While
preserving predictive performance, our proposed
method leverages weakly annotated medical imaging data and provides complete and faithful explanations to the model’s prediction.

1. Introduction
Since the emergence of artificial intelligence, there has been
great interest in machine learning algorithms’ reasoning
*

Equal contribution 1 The Faculty of Industrial Engineering
and Management, Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 Department of Nuclear Medicine, Rambam Health Care
Campus, Haifa, Israel 3 Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence
to: Tom Ron <tomron27@campus.technion.ac.il>, Tamir Hazan
<tamir.hazan@technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. We propose a multi-layer visual attention mechanism
for obtaining comprehensive explanations in medical image recognition. One layer is closer to the input and it obtains a detailed
attention of the input, while the other is closer to the output and it
obtains a detailed attention of the prediction. The decision is performed only on attended areas in the image and consequently we
encourage comprehensive explanation. Using a spatial marginalization layer, we enforce consistency between the two attention
units to ensure a consistent explanation.

processes. In high-stakes domains, such as medical image
analysis, understanding the inner workings behind a model’s
decision is crucial for building trust and accountability between end-users and algorithms. The field of explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI) generally addresses two notions
regarding model interpretation: the ”how” and the ”why”.
The former is often focused on the model’s architecture and
optimization process, which grew to be challenging as models became complex. By contrast, the latter can be viewed
from a data-centered perspective: which particular attributes
of the input inclined the model towards a specific decision.
To this end, a magnitude of explainability methods has been
proposed in recent years, including local linear approximations, gradient-based methods, post-hoc explanations and
attention-based explanations: A theoretically solid class of
explainers are based on local linear approximations (Ribeiro
et al., 2016; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Bach et al., 2015;
Shrikumar et al., 2017). These methods often require a reference point for computing an explanation for a specific input.
However, finding an appropriate reference point for each
input is unwieldy, particularly in neural networks with nonlinear activations (Samek et al., 2021). Gradient-based meth-

