SPECTRE: Spectral Conditioning Helps to Overcome the Expressivity Limits
of One-shot Graph Generators

Karolis Martinkus 1 Andreas Loukas * 2 Nathanaël Perraudin * 3 Roger Wattenhofer 1
True Graph

1. Introduction
The ability to generate new samples from a distribution is
a central problem in machine learning. Most of the work
has focused on data with a regular structure, such as images
and audio (Brock et al., 2018; Oord et al., 2016a). For such
data, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017) have emerged as a
powerful paradigm, managing to balance generation novelty
and fidelity in a manner previously thought impossible.
The present work considers the use of GANs for graph data.
The generation of novel graphs is relevant for numerous
applications in molecule (Jin et al., 2018; De Cao & Kipf,
*

Equal contribution 1 ETH Zurich 2 EPFL and Prescient Design, Genentech 3 Swiss Data Science Center. Correspondence to:
Karolis Martinkus <martinkus@ethz.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Generated Graph

We approach the graph generation problem from
a spectral perspective by first generating the dominant parts of the graph Laplacian spectrum and
then building a graph matching these eigenvalues
and eigenvectors. Spectral conditioning allows
for direct modeling of the global and local graph
structure and helps to overcome the expressivity
and mode collapse issues of one-shot graph generators. Our novel GAN, called SPECTRE, enables
the one-shot generation of much larger graphs
than previously possible with one-shot models.
SPECTRE outperforms state-of-the-art deep autoregressive generators in terms of modeling fidelity, while also avoiding expensive sequential
generation and dependence on node ordering. A
case in point, in sizable synthetic and real-world
graphs SPECTRE achieves a 4-to-170 fold improvement over the best competitor that does not
overfit and is 23-to-30 times faster than autoregressive generators.

SPECTRE (Real Spectra) SPECTRE (Generated Spectra)

Spectral Embedding

Abstract

Figure 1. Generating the spectrum first allows SPECTRE to control
the global graph structure prior to the local connectivity. SPECTRE is also able to correct for imperfect generated spectra. Top:
Conditioning spectral embedding. Bottom: The generated graph,
plotted using its final spectral embedding.

2018; Liu et al., 2018), protein (Huang et al., 2016), network, and circuit design (Mirhoseini et al., 2021). Yet, despite recent efforts, the problem remains largely unresolved:
current state-of-the-art approaches are constrained to small
graphs and often fail to strike a beneficial trade-off between
capturing the essential properties of the training distribution
and exhibiting high novelty. We argue that the one-shot generators used in current GAN models face expressivity issues
that hinder them from capturing the global graph properties.
We refer to a model as one-shot if it generates all edges
between nodes at once. In contrast, auto-regressive models
build a graph by progressively adding new nodes and edges.
One-shot generators are typically confronted with the demanding task of controlling global graph structure emergent
from a large number of local node interactions. As a thought
experiment, consider the toy problem of generating a tree by
sampling node embeddings and then connecting them using
some similarity kernel (Krawczuk et al., 2020; Serviansky
et al., 2020; Vignac & Frossard, 2021). Even if the extended
neighborhood of each node is locally tree-like, the overall
graph will not be valid unless all nodes are positioned appropriately w.r.t. each other. Misplacing even a few nodes can

