The Geometry of Robust Value Functions

Kaixin Wang 1 Navdeep Kumar 2 Kuangqi Zhou 3 Bryan Hooi 1 4 Jiashi Feng 5 Shie Mannor 2 6

Abstract
The space of value functions is a fundamental
concept in reinforcement learning. Characterizing its geometric properties may provide insights
for optimization and representation. Existing
works mainly focus on the value space for Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs). In this paper, we
study the geometry of the robust value space for
the more general Robust MDPs (RMDPs) setting, where transition uncertainties are considered. Specifically, since we find it hard to directly
adapt prior approaches to RMDPs, we start with
revisiting the non-robust case, and introduce a
new perspective that enables us to characterize
both the non-robust and robust value space in a
similar fashion. The key of this perspective is to
decompose the value space, in a state-wise manner, into unions of hypersurfaces. Through our
analysis, we show that the robust value space is
determined by a set of conic hypersurfaces, each
of which contains the robust values of all policies
that agree on one state. Furthermore, we find that
taking only extreme points in the uncertainty set
is sufficient to determine the robust value space.
Finally, we discuss some other aspects about the
robust value space, including its non-convexity
and policy agreement on multiple states.

1. Introduction
The space of value functions for stationary policies is a
central concept in Reinforcement Learning (RL), since
many RL algorithms are essentially navigating this space
to find an optimal policy that maximizes the value function,
1

Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 2 Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion, Haifa,
Israel 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 4 School of Computing,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 5 ByteDance, Singapore 6 NVIDIA Research, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Kaixin
Wang <kaixin.wang@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The value space can be decomposed in a state-wise manner as an intersection of unions of hypersurfaces. Each union
corresponds to a state and each hypersurface contains the value
functions of policies agreeing on that state.

such as policy gradient (Sutton et al., 1999), policy iteration (Howard, 1960) and evolutionary strategies (de Boer
et al., 2005). Characterizing the geometric properties for
the space of the value function (i.e., the value space) would
offer insights for RL research. A recent work (Dadashi
et al., 2019) shows that the value space for Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) is a possibly non-convex polytope,
which inspires new methods in representation learning in
RL (Bellemare et al., 2019; Dabney et al., 2021).
Compared to MDPs, Robust MDPs (RMDPs) are more general, since they do not assume that the transition dynamics
are known exactly but instead may take any value from a
given uncertainty set (Xu & Mannor, 2006; Iyengar, 2005;
Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005; Wiesemann et al., 2013). This
makes RMDPs more suitable for real-world problems where
parameters may not be precisely given. Therefore, characterizing the geometric properties of the value space for RMDPs
(i.e., robust value space) is of interest.
However, we find it hard to directly adapt the prior approach (Dadashi et al., 2019) from MDPs to RMDPs. Their
method builds upon on a key theorem (the Line Theorem),
but we find it difficult to prove a robust counterpart of this
theorem (see more discussions in Section 5.3).
In this work, we introduce a new perspective for investigating the geometry of the space of value functions. Specifically, we start with revisiting the non-robust case due to its

