SoQal: Selective Oracle Questioning for Consistency Based
Active Learning of Cardiac Signals

Dani Kiyasseh 1 Tingting Zhu 2 David Clifton 2

Abstract
Clinical settings are often characterized by abundant unlabelled data and limited labelled data.
This is typically driven by the high burden placed
on oracles (e.g., physicians) to provide annotations. One way to mitigate this burden is via active
learning (AL) which involves the (a) acquisition
and (b) annotation of informative unlabelled instances. Whereas previous work addresses either
one of these elements independently, we propose
an AL framework that addresses both. For acquisition, we propose Bayesian Active Learning
by Consistency (BALC), a sub-framework which
perturbs both instances and network parameters
and quantifies changes in the network output probability distribution. For annotation, we propose
SoQal, a sub-framework that dynamically determines whether, for each acquired unlabelled instance, to request a label from an oracle or to
pseudo-label it instead. We show that BALC can
outperform start-of-the-art acquisition functions
such as BALD, and SoQal outperforms baseline
methods even in the presence of a noisy oracle.

1. Introduction
Deep learning algorithms often need access to abundant,
high-quality, labelled data. Such access, though, is a rarity
within healthcare. For example, in low-resource clinical
settings, data can be collected in abundance via wearable
sensors however physicians, who are typically required to
annotate such data, are either in low-supply or ill-trained to
complete the task. As such, these settings are often characterized by abundant unlabelled data and limited labelled
data. In light of this observation, we focus on the following
1
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, California, USA 2 Department of
Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Dani Kiyasseh <dkiyass1@caltech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

question: how can we design clinical algorithms that exploit
abundant, unlabelled data and limited, labelled data while
minimizing the labelling burden placed on physicians?
One way to address this question is via the active learning
(AL) framework (Settles, 2009) which iterates over three
main steps. 1) acquisition - a learner (e.g., neural network) is
tasked with acquiring unlabelled instances 2) annotation - an
oracle (e.g., physician) is tasked with labelling such acquired
instances, and 3) aggregation - the learner is trained on the
existing and newly-labelled instances. Whereas previous
work addresses either one of the first two steps of active
learning, in this work, we aim to modify both.
The acquisition of unlabelled instances is commonly performed via an acquisition function, an example of which
is Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement (BALD)
(Houlsby et al., 2011). It quantifies the degree to which
a network is uncertain about the classification of an instance. To do so, Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD) (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016) is exploited wherein network parameters are stochastically perturbed while an unlabelled instance
is passed through a network. These parameter perturbations
manifest in the form of distinct hypotheses (decision boundaries), as shown in Fig. 1 (left). However, MCD, as we later
outline, can erroneously overlook informative instances for
acquisition due to its misspecification of parameter perturbations. As for annotating acquired instances, it is often
assumed that oracles are continuously available and sufficiently skilled to provide such annotations, an assumption
that is rarely satisfied within healthcare settings.
In this paper, we make the following contributions. First,
we propose an AL framework, Monte Carlo Perturbations
(MCP), that involves perturbing instances and observing
concomitant changes in the network output distribution. We
show that MCP performs on par with MCD in several settings. Second, we take inspiration from consistency training
and propose an AL framework, Bayesian Active Learning
by Consistency (BALC), that involves perturbing both instances and parameters and observing changes in the output
distribution. Moving away from uncertainty-based acquisition functions, we introduce two consistency-based acquisition functions, BALCKLD and BALCJSD , and show that
they can outperform state-of-the-art acquisition functions

