ProxSkip: Yes! Local Gradient Steps Provably Lead
to Communication Acceleration! Finally!†

Konstantin Mishchenko 1 Grigory Malinovsky 2 Sebastian Stich 3 Peter Richtárik 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
We study optimization problems of the form

We introduce ProxSkip—a surprisingly simple
and provably efficient method for minimizing the
sum of a smooth (f ) and an expensive nonsmooth
proximable (ψ) function. The canonical approach
to solving such problems is via the proximal gradient descent (ProxGD) algorithm, which is based
on the evaluation of the gradient of f and the prox
operator of ψ in each iteration. In this work we are
specifically interested in the regime in which the
evaluation of prox is costly relative to the evaluation of the gradient, which is the case in many applications. ProxSkip allows for the expensive prox
operator to be skipped in most iterations: while
its iteration complexity is O(κ log 1/ε), where κ
is the condition number
of f , the number of prox
√
evaluations is O( κ log 1/ε) only. Our main motivation comes from federated learning, where
evaluation of the gradient operator corresponds
to taking a local GD step independently on all
devices, and evaluation of prox corresponds to
(expensive) communication in the form of gradient averaging. In this context, ProxSkip offers
an effective acceleration of communication complexity. Unlike other local gradient-type methods,
such as FedAvg, SCAFFOLD, S-Local-GD and
FedLin, whose theoretical communication complexity is worse than, or at best matching, that of
vanilla GD in the heterogeneous data regime, we
obtain a provable and large improvement without
any heterogeneity-bounding assumptions.

1

CNRS, ENS, Inria Sierra, Paris, France 2 Computer Science,
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Saudi Arabia 3 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Peter Richtárik
<peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

min f (x) + ψ(x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a smooth function, and ψ : Rd →
R ∪ {+∞} is a proper, closed and convex regularizer.
Such problem are ubiquitous, and appear in numerous applications associated with virtually all areas of science
and engineering, including signal processing (Combettes
& Pesquet, 2009), image processing (Luke, 2020), data science (Parikh & Boyd, 2014) and machine learning (ShalevShwartz & Ben-David, 2014).
1.1. Proximal gradient descent
One of the most canonical methods for solving (1), often
used as the basis for further extensions and improvements,
is proximal gradient descent (ProxGD), also known as the
forward-backward algorithm (Combettes & Pesquet, 2009;
Nesterov, 2013). This method solves (1) via the iterative
process defined by
xt+1 = proxγt ψ (xt − γt ∇f (xt )),

(2)

where γt > 0 is a suitably chosen stepsize at time t, and
proxγψ (·) : Rd → Rd is the proximity operator of ψ, defined via


1
ky − xk2 + γψ(y) . (3)
proxγψ (x) := arg min
y∈Rd 2
It is typically assumed that the proximity operator (3) can
be evaluated in closed form, which means that the iteration
(2) defining ProxGD can be performed exactly. ProxGD
is most suited to situations when the proximity operator
is relatively cheap to evaluate, so that the bottleneck of
(2) is in the forward step (i.e., computation of the gradient
∇f ) rather than in the backward step (i.e., computation of
proxγψ ). This is the case for many regularizers, including
the L1 norm (ψ(x) = kxk1 ), the L2 norm (ψ(x) = kxk22 ),
and elastic net (Zhou & Hastie, 2005). For many further
examples, we refer the reader to the books (Parikh & Boyd,
2014; Beck, 2017).

