Deep Network Approximation in Terms of Intrinsic Parameters

Zuowei Shen 1 Haizhao Yang 2 Shijun Zhang * 1

Abstract
One of the arguments to explain the success of
deep learning is the powerful approximation capacity of deep neural networks. Such capacity is
generally accompanied by the explosive growth
of the number of parameters, which, in turn,
leads to high computational costs. It is of great
interest to ask whether we can achieve successful deep learning with a small number of learnable parameters adapting to the target function.
From an approximation perspective, this paper
shows that the number of parameters that need
to be learned can be significantly smaller than
people typically expect. First, we theoretically
design ReLU networks with a few learnable parameters to achieve an attractive approximation.
We prove by construction that, for any Lipschitz
continuous function f on [0, 1]d with a Lipschitz
constant λ > 0, a ReLU network with n + 2
intrinsic parameters (those depending on f ) can
approximate
f with an exponentially small er√
ror 5λ d 2−n . Such a result is generalized to
generic continuous functions. Furthermore, we
show that the idea of learning a small number of
parameters to achieve a good approximation can
be numerically observed. We conduct several experiments to verify that training a small part of
parameters can also achieve good results for classification problems if other parameters are prespecified or pre-trained from a related problem.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have recently achieved great success
in a large number of real-world applications. However, the
success in deep neural networks is generally accompanied
by the explosive growth of computation and parameters.
1
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Department of Mathematics, University of
Maryland, College Park, United States. * Correspondence to: Shijun Zhang <zhangshijun@u.nus.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

This follows a natural problem: how to handle computationally expensive deep learning models with limited computing resources. This problem is challenging and has been
widely studied. Numerous model compression and acceleration methods have recently been proposed, e.g., parameter
pruning and quantization (Han et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2016;
Gupta et al., 2015), low-rank factorization (Denton et al.,
2014; Jaderberg et al., 2014), transferred compact convolutional filters (Howard et al., 2017; Sandler et al., 2018; Qin
et al., 2019), knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015;
Zhang et al., 2019; 2021). See a survey of these methods
in (Cheng et al., 2017). This paper explores an approximation perspective for the problem mentioned above. We
adopt the approximation perspective since the approximation power is a key ingredient for the performance of deep
neural networks. In other words, The goal of this paper
is to investigate how to reduce the number of parameters
that need to be learned from an approximation perspective.
We will provide both theoretical and numerical examples to
show that adjusting only a small number of parameters is
enough to achieve good results if the network architecture
is properly designed.
To design a simple and computable hypothesis function ϕ
to approximate a target function f ∈ F well via adjusting only a small number of f -dependent parameters, where
F is a given target function space, we have the following
two main ideas, motivated by the power of deep neural networks via function composition:
• The main component of ϕ is determined by F and can
be shared as fixed parameters for all functions in F .
These shared parameters can be determined a priori or
learned from any function in F .
• ϕ is constructed via the composition of a few functions, only two of which is determined by f with a
small number of f -dependent parameters.
In particular, we have the following construction
ϕ = ϕf,R ◦ ϕout ◦ ϕf ◦ ϕin ,

(1)

where ϕin and ϕout are f -independent functions designed
based on prior knowledge. We call ϕin and ϕout innerfunction and outer-function, respectively. ϕf and ϕf,R

