A Context-Integrated Transformer-Based Neural Network for Auction Design

Zhijian Duan 1 Jingwu Tang 1 Yutong Yin 1 Zhe Feng 2 Xiang Yan 3 Manzil Zaheer 4 Xiaotie Deng 1

Abstract
One of the central problems in auction design
is developing an incentive-compatible mechanism that maximizes the auctioneer’s expected
revenue. While theoretical approaches have encountered bottlenecks in multi-item auctions, recently, there has been much progress on finding
the optimal mechanism through deep learning.
However, these works either focus on a fixed
set of bidders and items, or restrict the auction
to be symmetric. In this work, we overcome
such limitations by factoring public contextual
information of bidders and items into the auction
learning framework. We propose CITransNet, a
context-integrated transformer-based neural network for optimal auction design, which maintains permutation-equivariance over bids and contexts while being able to find asymmetric solutions. We show by extensive experiments that
CITransNet can recover the known optimal solutions in single-item settings, outperform strong
baselines in multi-item auctions, and generalize
well to cases other than those in training.

1. Introduction
Auction design is a classical problem in computational economics, with many applications on sponsored search (Jansen
& Mullen, 2008), resource allocation (Huang et al., 2008)
and blockchain (Galal & Youssef, 2018). Designing an
incentive-compatible mechanism that maximizes the auctioneer’s expected revenue is one of the central topics in
auction design. The seminal work by Myerson (1981) provides an optimal auction design for the single-item setting;
however, designing a revenue-optimal auction is still not
fully understood even for two bidders and two items setting
1

Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Google Research, Mountain View, US 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China 4 Google DeepMind, Mountain View, US. Correspondence
to: Zhijian Duan <zjduan@pku.edu.cn>, Xiaotie Deng <xiaotie@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

after four decades (Dütting et al., 2019).
Recently, pioneered by Dütting et al. (2019), there is rapid
progress on finding (approximate) optimal auction through
deep learning, e.g., (Shen et al., 2019; Luong et al., 2018;
Tacchetti et al., 2019; Nedelec et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2020;
Brero et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021). Typically, we can
formulate auction design as a constrained optimization problem and find near-optimal solutions using standard machine
learning pipelines. However, existing methods only consider
simple settings: they either focus on a fixed set of bidders
and items, e.g. (Dütting et al., 2019; Rahme et al., 2021b) or
ignore the identity of bidders and items so that the auction
is restricted to be symmetric (Rahme et al., 2021a). As a
comparison, in practice, auctions are much more complex
beyond the aforementioned simple settings. For instance, in
e-commerce advertising, there are a large number of bidders
and items (i.e., ad slots) with various features (Liu et al.,
2021), and each auction involves a different number of bidders and items. To handle such a practical problem, we need
a new architecture that can incorporate public features and
take a different number of bidders and items as inputs.
Main Contributions. In this paper, we consider contextual
auction design, in which each bidder or item is equipped
with context. In contextual auctions, the bidder-contexts and
item-contexts can characterize various bidders and items to
some extent, making the auctions close to those in practice.
We formulate the contextual auction design as a learning
problem and extend the learning framework proposed in
Dütting et al. (2019) to our setting. Furthermore, we present
a sample complexity result to bound the generalization error
of the learned mechanism.
To overcome the aforementioned limitations of the previous works, we propose CITransNet: a Context-Integrated
Transformer-based neural Network architecture as the parameterized mechanism to be optimized. CITransNet incorporates the bidding profile along with the bidder-contexts
and item-contexts to develop an auction mechanism. It
is built upon the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017), which can capture the complex mutual influence
among different bidders and items in an auction. As a result, CITransNet is permutation-equivariant (Rahme et al.,
2021a) over bids and contexts, i.e., any permutation of bidders (or items) in the bidding profile and bidder-contexts (or

