Recurrent Model-Free RL Can Be a Strong Baseline for Many POMDPs

Tianwei Ni 1 Benjamin Eysenbach 2 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 2
https://github.com/twni2016/pomdp-baselines

Abstract
Many problems in RL, such as meta-RL, robust
RL, generalization in RL, and temporal credit assignment, can be cast as POMDPs. In theory,
simply augmenting model-free RL with memorybased architectures, such as recurrent neural networks, provides a general approach to solving
all types of POMDPs. However, prior work has
found that such recurrent model-free RL methods tend to perform worse than more specialized
algorithms that are designed for specific types
of POMDPs. This paper revisits this claim. We
find that careful architecture and hyperparameter
decisions can often yield a recurrent model-free
implementation that performs on par with (and
occasionally substantially better than) more sophisticated recent techniques. We compare to 21
environments from 6 prior specialized methods
and find that our implementation achieves greater
sample efficiency and asymptotic performance
than these methods on 18/21 environments. We
also release a simple and efficient implementation
of recurrent model-free RL for future work to use
as a baseline for POMDPs.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is typically cast as a problem
of learning a single fully observable task (an MDP), training
and testing on that same task. However, most real-world
applications of RL demand some degree of transfer and
handling of partial observability. For example, visual navigation (Zhu et al., 2017) requires that robots adapt to unseen
scenes with occlusion in observations, and human-robot collaboration requires that robots infer the intentions of human
collaborators (Chen et al., 2018).
Work was primarily done when TN was at Carnegie Mellon
University. 1 Université de Montréal & Mila – Quebec AI Institute 2 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Tianwei Ni <tianwei.ni@mila.quebec>, Benjamin Eysenbach <beysenba@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: The importance of implementation for recurrent
model-free RL. This paper identifies important design decisions for recurrent model-free RL. Our implementation outperforms prior implementations (e.g. PPO-GRU and A2C-GRU
from Kostrikov (2018)) and purpose-designed methods (e.g. VRM
from Han et al. (2020)) on their respective POMDP benchmarks.

Many subareas in RL study problems that are special cases
of POMDPs (see Table 1). For example, meta-RL (Schmidhuber, 1987; Thrun & Pratt, 2012; Duan et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2017) is a POMDP where certain aspects of the reward function or (less commonly) dynamics function are
unobserved but held constant through one episode. The
robust RL problem (Bagnell et al., 2001; Rajeswaran et al.,
2017a; Pinto et al., 2017; Pattanaik et al., 2018) assumes
that certain aspects of the dynamics or reward function are
unknown, and aims to find optimal policies that perform
well against adversarially-chosen perturbations. Generalization in RL (Whiteson et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2018a;
Packer et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2019) focuses on unobserved aspects of the dynamics or reward function that are
novel during testing, using an average-case objective instead
of the worst-case objective of robust RL. Temporal credit assignment (Sutton, 1984; Arjona-Medina et al., 2019; Hung
et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2021) assumes that the reward function is history-dependent and aims to learn to assign credits
of current actions to future rewards.
Recent work has proposed efficient and performant algorithms to solve each of these specialized problem settings.
However, these algorithms often make assumptions that
preclude their application to other POMDPs. For example,
methods for robust RL are rarely used for generalization in

