Towards Scaling Difference Target Propagation by Learning Backprop Targets

Maxence Ernoult 1 Fabrice Normandin * 2 Abhinav Moudgil * 2 3 Sean Spinney 2 4 Eugene Belilovsky 2 3
Irina Rish 2 4 Blake Richards 2 5 6 Yoshua Bengio 2 4

Abstract
The development of biologically-plausible learning algorithms is important for understanding
learning in the brain, but most of them fail to
scale-up to real-world tasks, limiting their potential as explanations for learning by real brains. As
such, it is important to explore learning algorithms
that come with strong theoretical guarantees and
can match the performance of backpropagation
(BP) on complex tasks. One such algorithm is Difference Target Propagation (DTP), a biologicallyplausible learning algorithm whose close relation
with Gauss-Newton (GN) optimization has been
recently established. However, the conditions under which this connection rigorously holds preclude layer-wise training of the feedback pathway
synaptic weights (which is more biologically plausible). Moreover, good alignment between DTP
weight updates and loss gradients is only loosely
guaranteed and under very specific conditions for
the architecture being trained. In this paper, we
propose a novel feedback weight training scheme
that ensures both that DTP approximates BP and
that layer-wise feedback weight training can be restored without sacrificing any theoretical guarantees. Our theory is corroborated by experimental
results and we report the best performance ever
achieved by DTP on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet
32×32.

1. Introduction
Although artificial neural networks were originally inspired
by the brain, the strict implementation of the backpropagation algorithm (BP) violates biological constraints, and no
*

Equal contribution 1 IBM Research, Paris. Work done during a
remote internship at Mila. 2 Mila. 3 Concordia University. 4 UdeM.
5
McGill University. 6 Montreal Neurological Institute. Correspondence to: Maxence Ernoult <maxence.ernoult@ibm.com>,
Yoshua Bengio <yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

θ0
F (0)
x

θ1

θ2

F (1)
s1

F (2)
s2

F (N −1)
···

sN

n
n ⊤
δ 2 ∂G ≈ (∂F )

δ2
t1

θN −1

t2
G(1)
ω1

···
G(2)
ω2

δn
tN

G(N −1)
ω N −1

y

Figure 1. Computational graph of the feedforward pathway F (on
the left, shaded) with input x and associated DTP feedback pathway with ground-truth label y (right). The targets tn (purple
nodes) are forward-propagated through the Gn+1 operator whose
Jacobian has been made to approximately match that of the transpose of F n . This way, the resulting local activation differences
δ n ∝ tn − sn encode backprop error signals. We thus learn to
estimate layer-wise backprop targets.

known biologically plausible candidate algorithm can match
its performance on challenging tasks. Conversely, bridging
this gap could bring a better understanding of biological
learning (Richards et al., 2019). Recent efforts towards
this goal suggest that it could be achieved by developing
learning algorithms that relax the requirements of BP while
preserving strong theoretical guarantees.
Target Propagation (TP) (LeCun, 1987) and its Difference
Target Propagation (DTP) variants (Bengio, 2014; Lee et al.,
2015; Bartunov et al., 2018; Ororbia & Mali, 2019; Bengio,
2020; Meulemans et al., 2020) constitute a family of such
algorithms which, from the biological prospective, sidesteps
two issues of BP. Most importantly, TP computes error
signals in feedforward architectures by propagating target
values for the neurons rather than error gradients, thereby
aligning better with our understanding of what feedback
pathways in the brain communicate (Lillicrap et al., 2020).
A major consequence of handling neural activation targets
across all layers is that feedforward weights can be updated
in a fully local fashion to push neural activations closer to

