Understanding Robust Overfitting of Adversarial Training and Beyond

Chaojian Yu 1 † Bo Han 2 Li Shen 3 Jun Yu 4 Chen Gong 5 Mingming Gong 6 Tongliang Liu 1

Abstract
Robust overfitting widely exists in adversarial
training of deep networks. The exact underlying
reasons for this are still not completely understood. Here, we explore the causes of robust overfitting by comparing the data distribution of nonoverfit (weak adversary) and overfitted (strong
adversary) adversarial training, and observe that
the distribution of the adversarial data generated
by weak adversary mainly contain small-loss data.
However, the adversarial data generated by strong
adversary is more diversely distributed on the
large-loss data and the small-loss data. Given
these observations, we further designed data ablation adversarial training and identify that some
small-loss data which are not worthy of the adversary strength cause robust overfitting in the strong
adversary mode. To relieve this issue, we propose
minimum loss constrained adversarial training
(MLCAT): in a minibatch, we learn large-loss
data as usual, and adopt additional measures to
increase the loss of the small-loss data. Technically, MLCAT hinders data fitting when they
become easy to learn to prevent robust overfitting; philosophically, MLCAT reflects the spirit
of turning waste into treasure and making the best
use of each adversarial data; algorithmically, we
designed two realizations of MLCAT, and extensive experiments demonstrate that MLCAT can
eliminate robust overfitting and further boost adversarial robustness.
† This work is done during an internship at JD Explore Academy.
1 TML Lab, Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney,

Australia 2 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist
University, Hong Kong, China 3 JD Explore Academy, Beijing,
China 4 Department of Automation, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, China 5 School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing, China 6 School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Correspondence to:
Tongliang Liu <tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 39𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Adversarial examples easily mislead deep neural networks
(DNNs) to produce incorrect outputs, which raises security
concerns in various real-world applications since adversarial
noise is usually small and human-imperceptible (Szegedy
et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014). The vulnerability of
DNNs has attracted extensive attention and led to a large
number of defense techniques. Across existing defenses,
adversarial training (AT) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry
et al., 2017) is one of the strongest empirical defenses (Athalye et al., 2018). AT incorporates adversarial examples into
the training process and can be viewed as solving a min-max
optimization problem (Madry et al., 2017).
Unfortunately, robust overfitting seems inevitable in adversarial training of deep networks: after a certain point in AT,
i.e., shortly after the first learning rate decay, the robust performance on test data will continue to degrade with further
training (Rice et al., 2020). More pessimistically, conventional remedies for overfitting in deep learning, including
explicit regularizations, data augmentation, etc., cannot gain
improvements upon early stopping (Rice et al., 2020). Nevertheless, early stopping might not be our desideratum since
the expectation of double descent phenomena occurred in
adversarial training (Nakkiran et al., 2019).
Robust overfitting widely exists in adversarial training of
deep networks, and the exact underlying reasons for this are
still not completely understood. To explore the causes of
robust overfitting, we compare the data distribution of nonoverfit adversarial training (weak adversary) and overfitted
adversarial training (strong adversary). We observed that
the training data of non-overfit adversarial training mainly
contains small-loss data; while the distribution of training
data of overfitted adversarial training is more divergent, usually mixed with a considerable proportion of small-loss data
and large-loss data. Given these observations, we conduct
a range of data ablation adversarial training experiments.
By removing training data from various loss ranges, we
study the impact of small-loss data and large-loss data on
robust overfitting. Our results show that robust overfitting is
actually caused by some small-loss data in overfitted adversarial training. Adversarial data that are not worthy of the
adversary strength make adversarial training worse, which
might be explained by the fact the network becomes more

