Solving Stackelberg Prediction Game with Least Squares Loss via Spherically
Constrained Least Squares Reformulation

Jiali Wang 1 Wen Huang 2 Rujun Jiang 1 Xudong Li 1 Alex L. Wang 3

Abstract
The Stackelberg prediction game (SPG) is popular in characterizing strategic interactions between
a learner and an attacker. As an important special case, the SPG with least squares loss (SPGLS) has recently received much research attention. Although initially formulated as a difficult
bi-level optimization problem, SPG-LS admits
tractable reformulations which can be polynomially globally solved by semidefinite programming
or second order cone programming. However,
all the available approaches are not well-suited
for handling large-scale datasets, especially those
with huge numbers of features. In this paper,
we explore an alternative reformulation of the
SPG-LS. By a novel nonlinear change of variables, we rewrite the SPG-LS as a spherically
constrained least squares (SCLS) problem. Theoretically, we show that an ϵ optimal solution to
the SCLS
√ (and the SPG-LS) can be achieved in
Õ(N/ ϵ) floating-point operations, where N is
the number of nonzero entries in the data matrix.
Practically, we apply two well-known methods for
solving this new reformulation, i.e., the Krylov
subspace method and the Riemannian trust region
method. Both algorithms are factorization free
so that they are suitable for solving large scale
problems. Numerical results on both synthetic
and real-world datasets indicate that the SPG-LS,
equipped with the SCLS reformulation, can be
solved orders of magnitude faster than the state
of the art.

1
School of Data Science, Fudan University, China 2 School
of Mathematical Sciences, Xiamen University, China 3 School of
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to: Rujun Jiang <rjjiang@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The big data era has led to an explosion in the availability of
data from which to make decisions. It is thus indispensable
to use machine learning techniques to gain deep insights
from massive data. In practice, many classic data analytic
approaches start by splitting available data into the training
and test sets. Then, learning algorithms are fed with the
training set and are expected to produce results which generalize well to the test set. However, this paradigm only works
under the key implicit assumption that the available data in
both training and test sets are independently and identically
distributed, which, unfortunately, is not always the truth in
practice. For example, in the context of email spam filtering,
an attacker often adversarially generates spam emails based
on his knowledge of the spam filter implemented by the
email service provider (Brückner & Scheffer, 2011; Zhou
et al., 2019). In addition to malicious attacks, sometimes the
data providers may manipulate data for their own interests.
For instance, health insurance policy holders may decide to
modify self-reported data to reduce their premiums. On the
other hand, the insurers (the “defenders” in this scenario)
aim to select a good price model for the true data despite
only seeing the modified data.
In fact, these scenarios can be modeled by the Stackelberg
prediction game (SPG) (Brückner & Scheffer, 2011; Shokri
et al., 2012; Zhou & Kantarcioglu, 2016; Wahab et al., 2016;
Zhou et al., 2019; Bishop et al., 2020) which characterizes
the interactions between two players, a learner (or, a leader)
and a data provider (or, a follower). In this setting, the
learner makes the first move by selecting a learning model.
Then the data provider, with full knowledge of the learner’s
model, is allowed to modify its data. The learner’s goal
is to minimize its own loss function under the assumption
that the training data has been optimally modified from the
data provider’s perspective. From the above description, we
see that the SPG model concerns two levels of optimization
problems: The follower optimally manipulates its data and
the leader makes its optimal decision taking into account
the data manipulation. Formally, it is often formulated as a
hierarchical mathematical problem or a bi-level optimization
problem, which is generally NP-hard even in the simplest
case with linear constraints and objectives (Jeroslow, 1985).

