A Differential Entropy Estimator for Training Neural Networks

Georg Pichler * 1 Pierre Colombo * 2 Malik Boudiaf * 3 Günther Koliander 4 Pablo Piantanida 5

Abstract
Mutual Information (MI) has been widely used
as a loss regularizer for training neural networks.
This has been particularly effective when learn disentangled or compressed representations of high
dimensional data. However, differential entropy
(DE), another fundamental measure of information, has not found widespread use in neural network training. Although DE offers a potentially
wider range of applications than MI, off-the-shelf
DE estimators are either non differentiable, computationally intractable or fail to adapt to changes
in the underlying distribution. These drawbacks
prevent them from being used as regularizers in
neural networks training. To address shortcomings in previously proposed estimators for DE,
here we introduce K NIFE, a fully parameterized,
differentiable kernel-based estimator of DE. The
flexibility of our approach also allows us to construct K NIFE-based estimators for conditional (on
either discrete or continuous variables) DE, as
well as MI. We empirically validate our method
on high-dimensional synthetic data and further
apply it to guide the training of neural networks
for real-world tasks. Our experiments on a large
variety of tasks, including visual domain adaptation, textual fair classification, and textual finetuning demonstrate the effectiveness of K NIFEbased estimation. Code can be found at https:
//github.com/g-pichler/knife.

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Telecommunications, TU
Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria 2 Laboratoire des Signaux et Systèmes
(L2S),Paris-Saclay CNRS CentraleSupélec, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette,
France 3 ÉTS Montreal, Quebec H3C 1K3, Canada 4 Acoustics
Research Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1040, Vienna,
Austria 5 International Laboratory on Learning Systems (ILLS),
Université McGill - ETS - MILA - CNRS - Université Paris-Saclay
- CentraleSupélec , Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Correspondence
to: Georg Pichler <georg.pichler@ieee.org>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Learning tasks requires information (Principe et al., 2006) in
the form of training data. Thus, information measures (Shannon, 1948) (e.g. entropy, conditional entropy and mutual
information) have been a source of inspiration for the design of learning objectives in modern machine learning (ML)
models (Linsker, 1989; Torkkola, 2008). Over the years,
a plethora of estimators have been introduced to estimate
the value of the aforementioned measures of information
and they have been applied to many different problems,
including information and coding theory, limiting distributions, model selection, design of experiment and optimal
prior distribution, data disclosure, and relative importance
of predictors (Ebrahimi et al., 2010). In these applications,
traditional research focused on both developing new estimators and obtaining provable guarantees on the asymptotic
behavior of these estimators (Liu et al., 2012; Verdú, 2019).
However, when used for training deep neural networks, additional requirements need to be satisfied. In particular,
the estimator needs to be differentiable w.r.t. the data distribution (R1), computationally tractable (R2), and able
to rapidly adapt to changes in the underlying distribution
(R3). For instance, Mutual Information (MI), a fundamental measure of dependence between variables, only
became a popular (standalone or regularizing) learning objective for DNNs once estimators satisfying the above requirements were proposed (Poole et al., 2019; Barber &
Agakov, 2003). Although MI is notoriously difficult to estimate in high dimensions (Kraskov et al., 2004; Pichler
et al., 2020; McAllester & Stratos, 2020), these estimators
have demonstrated promising empirical results in unsupervised representation learning (Krause et al., 2010; Bridle
et al., 1992; Hjelm et al., 2019; Tschannen et al., 2020),
discrete/invariant representations (Hu et al., 2017; Ji et al.,
2019), generative modeling (Chen et al., 2016; Zhao et al.,
2017), textual disentangling (Cheng et al., 2020b; Colombo
et al., 2021), and applications of the Information Bottleneck
(IB) method (Mahabadi et al., 2021; Devlin et al., 2019;
Alemi et al., 2016) among others. Compared to MI, Differential Entropy (DE) has received less attention from the
ML community while offering a potentially wider range of
applications than MI.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of differentiable, flex-

