A Statistical Manifold Framework for Point Cloud Data
Yonghyeon Lee * 1 Seungyeon Kim * 1 Jinwon Choi 2 Frank C Park 1 3

Abstract
Many problems in machine learning involve data
sets in which each data point is a point cloud
in RD . A growing number of applications require a means of measuring not only distances
between point clouds, but also angles, volumes,
derivatives, and other more advanced concepts.
To formulate and quantify these concepts in a
coordinate-invariant way, we develop a Riemannian geometric framework for point cloud data.
By interpreting each point in a point cloud as a
sample drawn from some given underlying probability density, the space of point cloud data can
be given the structure of a statistical manifold
– each point on this manifold represents a point
cloud – with the Fisher information metric acting
as a natural Riemannian metric. Two autoencoder
applications of our framework are presented: (i)
smoothly deforming one 3D object into another
via interpolation between the two corresponding
point clouds; (ii) learning an optimal set of latent
space coordinates for point cloud data that best
preserves angles and distances, and thus produces
a more discriminative representation space. Experiments with large-scale standard benchmark
point cloud data show greatly improved classification accuracy vis-á-vis existing methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/seungyeon-k/SMFpublic.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning problems involve data sets in which
each data point is a point cloud in RD . For example, to
measure the similarity between two shapes, point cloud
representations of the two shapes can be obtaind with a
depth camera, and a distance metric on the space of point
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea 2 Kakao Enterprise,
Seongnam, Kyonggi-do, South Korea 3 Saige Research, Seoul,
South Korea. Correspondence to: Frank C Park <fcp@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Illustration of statistical manifold obtained from
the 1-1 mapping between the space of point cloud data and
the space of probability density functions.

clouds, e.g., the Hausdorff distance, the chamfer distance
(Hausdorff, 1914), or earth mover distance (Rubner et al.,
2000) used to measure their similarity.
The distance metric measures just one aspect of point cloud
data; other applications may require more advanced concepts and tools. For example, in the case of a moving point
cloud, one may seek any number of quantities such as the velocity, acceleration, relative heading direction, or the swept
volume. For multiple point cloud samples, one may seek a
measure of their dispersion, e.g., the covariance or higher
moments.
In fact, a growing number of applications involving point
cloud data require a means of measuring not only distances,
but also angles, volumes, derivatives, and other advanced
geometric and analytical concepts. In principle one could
choose some arbitrary coordinates to parametrize the space
of point clouds, and extend the usual Euclidean notions
of angles, volumes, and derivatives, but such an approach
would not only be ad hoc, but likely not be invariant with
respect to the choice of coordinates.
To formulate and quantify these concepts in a coordinateinvariant, geometrically meaningful way, as a first contribution we develop a Riemannian geometric framework
for point cloud data. The key idea behind our approach
draws upon information geometry (Amari & Nagaoka, 2000;
Amari, 2016): by interpreting each point in a point cloud
as a sample drawn from some known probability density,
the space of point cloud data can be given the structure of a
statistical manifold – each point on this manifold represents
a point cloud – with the Fisher information metric acting

