Improving Adversarial Robustness via Mutual Information Estimation

Dawei Zhou 1 Nannan Wang 1 † Xinbo Gao 2 Bo Han 3 Xiaoyu Wang 4 Yibing Zhan 5 Tongliang Liu 6

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are found to be
vulnerable to adversarial noise. They are typically
misled by adversarial samples to make wrong predictions. To alleviate this negative effect, in this
paper, we investigate the dependence between
outputs of the target model and input adversarial
samples from the perspective of information theory, and propose an adversarial defense method.
Specifically, we first measure the dependence
by estimating the mutual information (MI) between outputs and the natural patterns of inputs
(called natural MI) and MI between outputs and
the adversarial patterns of inputs (called adversarial MI), respectively. We find that adversarial
samples usually have larger adversarial MI and
smaller natural MI compared with those w.r.t. natural samples. Motivated by this observation, we
propose to enhance the adversarial robustness by
maximizing the natural MI and minimizing the
adversarial MI during the training process. In this
way, the target model is expected to pay more
attention to the natural pattern that contains objective semantics. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that our method could effectively improve
the adversarial accuracy against multiple attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been demonstrated to
be vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014;
Goodfellow et al., 2015; Liao et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2019;
Ma et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2020a; Zhou et al., 2021a). The
1

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University
2
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications 3 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen) 5 JD Explore Academy 6 TML Lab,
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney. Correspondence to:
Nannan Wang <nnwang@xidian.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

adversarial samples are typically generated by adding imperceptible but adversarial noise to natural samples. The
vulnerability of DNNs seriously threatens many decisioncritical deep learning applications, such as image processing
(LeCun et al., 1998; Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016; Kaiming et al., 2017; Xia et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2021; Xia et al.,
2021), natural language processing (Sutskever et al., 2014)
and speech recognition (Sak et al., 2015). The urgent demand to reduce these security risks prompts the development
of adversarial defenses.
Many researchers have made extensive efforts to improve
the adversarial robustness of DNN. A major class of adversarial defense focuses on exploiting adversarial samples to
help train the target model to achieve adversarially robust
performance (Madry et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021b; Zheng
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021). However, the dependence
between the output of the target model and the input adversarial sample has not been well studied yet. Explicitly
measuring this dependence could help train the target model
to make predictions that are closely relevant to the given
objectives (Belghazi et al., 2018; Sanchez et al., 2020).
In this paper, we investigate the dependence from the perspective of information theory. Specifically, we exploit the
mutual information (MI) to explicitly measure the dependence of the output on the adversarial sample. MI is an
entropy-based measure that can reflect the dependence degree between variables. A larger MI typically indicates
stronger dependence between the two variables. However,
directly exploiting MI between the input and its corresponding output (called standard MI) to measure the dependence
has limitations in improving classification accuracy for adversarial samples.
Note that adversarial samples contain natural and adversarial patterns. As shown in Figure 1, given a target model and
an adversarial sample, the natural pattern is derived from the
corresponding natural sample, and the adversarial pattern is
derived from the adversarial noise in the adversarial sample.
The adversarial pattern controls the flip of the prediction
from the correct label to the wrong label (Ilyas et al., 2019).
The standard MI of the adversarial sample reflects the confused dependence of the output on the natural pattern and
the adversarial pattern. Maximizing the standard MI of the

