Content Addressable Memory Without Catastrophic Forgetting by
Heteroassociation with a Fixed Scaffold
Sugandha Sharma 1 Sarthak Chandra * 1 Ila R. Fiete * 1

Abstract
Content-addressable memory (CAM) networks,
so-called because stored items can be recalled
by partial or corrupted versions of the items, exhibit near-perfect recall of a small number of
information-dense patterns below capacity and a
‘memory cliff’ beyond, such that inserting a single
additional pattern results in catastrophic loss of all
stored patterns. We propose a novel CAM architecture, Memory Scaffold with Heteroassociation
(MESH), that factorizes the problems of internal
attractor dynamics and association with external
content to generate a CAM continuum without
a memory cliff: Small numbers of patterns are
stored with complete information recovery matching standard CAMs, while inserting more patterns
still results in partial recall of every pattern, with
a graceful trade-off between pattern number and
pattern richness. Motivated by the architecture of
the Entorhinal-Hippocampal memory circuit in
the brain, MESH is a tripartite architecture with
pairwise interactions that uses a predetermined
set of internally stabilized states together with
heteroassociation between the internal states and
arbitrary external patterns. We show analytically
and experimentally that for any number of stored
patterns, MESH nearly saturates the total information bound (given by the number of synapses) for
CAM networks, outperforming all existing CAM
models.

1. Introduction
Content-addressable memory (CAM) networks are compelling models of long-term human memory: Humans are
Equal contribution 1 Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, McGovern Institute for Brain Research, & Integrative Computational Neuroscience Center (ICoN), Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Sugandha
Sharma <susharma@mit.edu>.

experts at recognizing situations or items they have encountered before, and often fill in the details from partial or
noisy information. Similarly, when presented by a partial
or corrupted version of a previously memorized input, a
recurrently iterated (autoassociative) CAM can reconstruct
the learned pattern by flow to fixed points. For example,
the Hopfield network (Hopfield, 1982; 1984) encodes the
memorized states as fixed points of its dynamics. Because
the state remains at a fixed point once it reaches there, such
CAM networks can thus also function as short-term memory
networks for the acquired long-term memories.
Several recurrent network architectures support CAM dynamics, including the Hopfield network (Hopfield, 1982;
1984) (Fig. 1a), several variants of the Hopfield network
(Personnaz et al., 1985; Tsodyks & Feigel’man, 1988; Krotov & Hopfield, 2020) (Fig. 1a,b), and overparameterized autoencoders (Radhakrishnan et al., 2020) (Fig. 1c). However,
all of them exhibit a memory cliff, beyond which adding
a single pattern leads to catastrophic loss of all patterns
(Fig. 1d). The total information content of CAM networks
is bounded theoretically by O(N 2 ), the number of synapses
in the network (Abu-Mostafa, 1989; Gardner, 1988), Fig. 1e,
defining a total information budget to be split between the
number of stored patterns and information per pattern. However, most CAM networks approach that bound only when
storing a fixed, specific number of pattterns (Fig. 1e): Different CAM networks (defined by their inputs, architecture,
or weight and activity update rules) touch this total information envelope at different points, with some storing a small
number of maximally detailed memory states, others storing a larger number of less-detailed states. None of these
models have the flexibility to span the memory envelope
such that the information recalled per pattern is continuously
traded off for increasing numbers of stored patterns in an
online way, while preserving a constant total information
that remains close to the information envelope.

*

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this paper we propose a novel and biologically motivated
memory architecture, Memory Scaffold with Heteroassociation (MESH), that generates a CAM continuum (see
Fig. 1f for a schematic of the network architecture). MESH
factorizes the problem of associative memory into two separate pieces: a part that does memory through a pre-defined
“memory scaffold”, and a part that does association through

