Adversarial Vulnerability of Randomized Ensembles

Hassan Dbouk 1 Naresh R. Shanbhag 1

Abstract
Despite the tremendous success of deep neural
networks across various tasks, their vulnerability to imperceptible adversarial perturbations has
hindered their deployment in the real world. Recently, works on randomized ensembles have empirically demonstrated significant improvements
in adversarial robustness over standard adversarially trained (AT) models with minimal computational overhead, making them a promising solution for safety-critical resource-constrained applications. However, this impressive performance
raises the question: Are these robustness gains
provided by randomized ensembles real? In this
work we address this question both theoretically
and empirically. We first establish theoretically
that commonly employed robustness evaluation
methods such as adaptive PGD provide a false
sense of security in this setting. Subsequently,
we propose a theoretically-sound and efficient
adversarial attack algorithm (ARC) capable of
compromising random ensembles even in cases
where adaptive PGD fails to do so. We conduct
comprehensive experiments across a variety of
network architectures, training schemes, datasets,
and norms to support our claims, and empirically
establish that randomized ensembles are in fact
more vulnerable to ℓp -bounded adversarial perturbations than even standard AT models. Our
code can be found at https://github.com/
hsndbk4/ARC.

15%

20%

Figure 1. The adversarial vulnerability of randomized ensembles
across various network architectures (from left to right: ResNet20, MobileNetV1, VGG-16, ResNet-18, and WideResNet-28-4)
against ℓ∞ norm-bounded perturbations on CIFAR-10. Compared
to a standard adversarially trained (AT) single model (•), a randomized ensemble of two models obtained via BAT (◀) (Pinot et al.,
2020) offers significant improvement in robustness at iso-FLOPs,
when evaluated using an adaptive PGD adversary. However, the
robust accuracy of the BAT ensemble suffers a massive drop and
becomes worse than even the single model AT baseline when
evaluated using the proposed ARC (⋆) adversary, rendering the
ensemble obsolete.

2018; Zhang et al., 2017). Yet, their vulnerability to imperceptible adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2013;
Goodfellow et al., 2014; Ilyas et al., 2019) has caused major concerns regarding their security, and hindered their
deployment in safety-critical applications.

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA. Correspondence to: Hassan Dbouk <hdbouk2@illinois.edu>.

Various attack algorithms for crafting such perturbations
have been proposed in the literature (Kurakin et al., 2016;
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Carlini & Wagner, 2017); the
majority of which rely on moving the input along the gradient to maximize a certain loss function. Powerful attacks,
such as projected gradient descent (PGD) (Madry et al.,
2018), perform this process iteratively until a perturbation is
found, and can successfully fool undefended DNNs causing
them to misclassify every test sample in the test set.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In order to robustify DNNs against adversarial perturbations, several defense strategies have been proposed (Cisse
et al., 2017; Pang et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Zhang

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are ubiquitous today, cementing themselves as the de facto learning model for various
machine learning tasks (Sarwar et al., 2001; He et al., 2016;
Girshick, 2015; Farhadi & Redmon, 2018; Devlin et al.,
1

