A Self-Play Posterior Sampling Algorithm for Zero-Sum Markov Games

Wei Xiong 1 Han Zhong 2 Chengshuai Shi 3 Cong Shen 3 Tong Zhang 1 4

Abstract
Existing studies on provably efficient algorithms
for Markov games (MGs) almost exclusively
build on the “optimism in the face of uncertainty”
(OFU) principle. This work focuses on a different approach of posterior sampling, which is
celebrated in many bandits and reinforcement
learning settings but remains under-explored for
MGs. Specifically, for episodic two-player zerosum MGs, a novel posterior sampling algorithm
is developed with general function approximation. Theoretical analysis demonstrates
√ that the
posterior sampling algorithm admits a T -regret
bound for problems with a low multi-agent decoupling coefficient, which is a new complexity
measure for MGs, where T denotes the number
of episodes. When specialized to linear MGs, the
obtained regret bound matches the state-of-the-art
results. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first provably efficient posterior sampling algorithm for MGs with frequentist regret guarantees,
which enriches the toolbox for MGs and promotes
the broad applicability of posterior sampling.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) focuses on the
sequential decision-making problem involving more than
one agent, each of which aims to optimize her own longterm return by interacting with the environment and other
agents (Zhang et al., 2021). Today, MARL has a diverse
set of real-world applications, including Go (Silver et al.,
2016; 2017), autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al.,
2016), Poker (Brown & Sandholm, 2019), and Dota (Berner
et al., 2019), just to name a few. Due to the large state
space of these practical problems, function approximation
(with neural networks) is often used in these applications for
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology;
Center for Data Science, Peking University; 3 University of
Virginia; 4 Google Research. Correspondence to: Tong Zhang
<tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the generalization across different state-action pairs. While
there is a long line of related works on the theoretical understanding of single-agent RL with general function approximation (Jiang et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2020; Jin et al., 2021a; Du et al., 2021; Dann et al., 2021),
the theory of MARL with general function approximation is
substantially less explored. In this paper, we aim to explore
this topic in the context of two-player zero-sum Markov
games (MGs) (Shapley, 1953; Littman, 1994).
The goal of learning in a two-player zero-sum MG is to learn
the Nash equilibrium at which the policy of each player
maximizes her own cumulative rewards, provided that the
policies of other agents are fixed. Intuitively speaking, Nash
equilibrium characterizes the point from which no agent
will deviate. Since the reward and the state transition are
determined jointly by the actions of both agents, in addition
to the unknown environment, each agent must also handle
the dynamics of other strategic agents. Due to this gametheoretical feature, algorithms designed for MDP cannot be
directly extended to the MARL case. However, recent studies (Jin et al., 2021b; Huang et al., 2021) have shown that
with an innovative asymmetrical structure, similar theoretical results can be established for the two-player zero-sum
MG with general function approximation.
Nevertheless, despite a handful of recent progress on the
theory of the two-player zero-sum MG with general function approximation, the existing works are mainly confined
to algorithms based on the optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) principle. In contrast, the theory of posteriorsampling-based algorithms is less developed (in the frequentist setting). Various empirical studies indicate that the
OFU-based algorithms can be far too optimistic for average
instances and is inferior to posterior sampling algorithms,
including Chapelle & Li (2011) for bandit, and Osband et al.
(2016) for RL. Recent works in the context of contextual
multi-armed bandit and single-agent RL demonstrate that
there is no statistical efficiency gap between OFU and posterior sampling algorithms (Dann et al., 2021; Zhang, 2021).
However, whether we can design model-free posterior sampling algorithms in MARL that achieve similar theoretical
guarantees remains open.
In this paper, we are interested in the application of posterior sampling in the two-player zero-sum MG with general

