Deep Neural Network Fusion via Graph Matching with Applications to
Model Ensemble and Federated Learning

Chang Liu 1 Chenfei Lou 1 Runzhong Wang 1 Alan Yuhan Xi 2 Li Shen 3 Junchi Yan 1 4

Abstract
Model fusion without accessing training data in
machine learning has attracted increasing interest due to the practical resource-saving and data
privacy issues. During the training process, the
neural weights of each model can be randomly
permuted, and we have to align the channels of
each layer before fusing them. Regrading the
channels as nodes and weights as edges, aligning
the channels to maximize weight similarity is a
challenging NP-hard assignment problem. Due to
its quadratic assignment nature, we formulate the
model fusion problem as a graph matching task,
considering the second-order similarity of model
weights instead of previous work merely formulating model fusion as a linear assignment problem.
For the rising problem scale and multi-model consistency issues, we propose an efficient graduated
assignment-based model fusion method, dubbed
GAMF, which iteratively updates the matchings
in a consistency-maintaining manner. We apply
GAMF to tackle the compact model ensemble task
and federated learning task on MNIST, CIFAR10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny-Imagenet. The performance shows the efficacy of our GAMF compared
to state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
If we have two or more independently trained neural networks, how should we utilize them with the best accuracy?
(Utans, 1996) propose the model fusion problem, which
aims at fusing several neural networks into a single network
without accessing the training data. Compared to the traditional prediction-based model ensemble, the advantage of
fusing multiple networks into one is to save memory and
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, and MoE
Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of Wisconsin Madison 3 JD Explore Academy 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Neural
Channel

Weight
Similarity

~

Graph
Node

To be
~ Matched
~

Speed up
for 20
rounds

Edge
Similarity

Boost by
GAMF

Boost by
Moon

Figure 1: Left: Connection between model fusion and graph
matching; Right: For federated learning, the performance
boost and convergence speed up of GAMF on CIFAR-10.
inference time, as the prediction ensemble needs to maintain
all individual models. Also, it can be applied to privacyintensive federated learning (FL), where how to efficiently
aggregate all locally-trained models remains open.
A vanilla strategy is to simply average the weights, assuming that the channels of different networks do not need any
alignment. However, due to the randomness and orthogonal invariance of deep neural networks, the channels from
different networks are always randomly permuted. The previous study (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) has demonstrated the
harmfulness if the channels are not aligned in model fusion
because the effective components of the network will be
interfered with and canceled by each other.
Recent works (Singh & Jaggi, 2020; Wang et al., 2020a)
raise the awareness of the importance of alignment in model
fusion. However, they simplify it into a linear assignment problem, which ignore the rich edge-wise information between channels. Graph matching (GM) (Yan et al.,
2020; Loiola et al., 2007), which aims at matching nodes to
nodes among graphs exploiting the structural information
in graphs, appears to be the natural tool for model fusion
since the network channels can be regarded as nodes and
the weights connecting channels as edges (see Fig. 1).
One step further, multi-model fusion is a more challenging yet frequently encountered scenario where more than
two networks needing to be jointly aligned. Existing solution for multiple models are relatively heuristic, e.g. OTFu-

