Perfectly Balanced: Improving Transfer and Robustness of Supervised
Contrastive Learning

Mayee F. Chen * 1 Daniel Y. Fu * 1 Avanika Narayan 1 Michael Zhang 1
Zhao Song 2 Kayvon Fatahalian 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
An ideal learned representation should display
transferability and robustness. Supervised contrastive learning (SupCon) is a promising method
for training accurate models, but produces representations that do not capture these properties due
to class collapse—when all points in a class map
to the same representation. Recent work suggests
that “spreading out” these representations improves them, but the precise mechanism is poorly
understood. We argue that creating spread alone is
insufficient for better representations, since spread
is invariant to permutations within classes. Instead,
both the correct degree of spread and a mechanism
for breaking this invariance are necessary. We first
prove that adding a weighted class-conditional
InfoNCE loss to SupCon controls the degree
of spread. Next, we study three mechanisms to
break permutation invariance: using a constrained
encoder, adding a class-conditional autoencoder,
and using data augmentation. We show that the
latter two encourage clustering of latent subclasses
under more realistic conditions than the former.
Using these insights, we show that adding a
properly-weighted class-conditional InfoNCE loss
and a class-conditional autoencoder to SupCon
achieves 11.1 points of lift on coarse-to-fine
transfer across 5 standard datasets and 4.7 points
on worst-group robustness on 3 datasets, setting
state-of-the-art on CelebA by 11.5 points.

1. Introduction
Learning a representation with a favorable geometry is
a critical challenge for modern machine learning. Good
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford
University 2 Adobe Research. Correspondence to: Mayee F. Chen,
Daniel Y. Fu <{mfchen, danfu}@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright
2022 by the author(s).

geometries can engender strong downstream transfer performance and robustness to subgroup imbalances, whereas poor
geometries may have low transferability and be brittle (Islam
et al., 2021; Sohoni et al., 2020). However, producing—or
even characterizing—a good geometry can be difficult.
We focus on the challenges in doing so with supervised contrastive learning (SupCon). SupCon is a promising method
for training accurate machine learning models (Khosla et al.,
2020), but suffers from class collapse—wherein each point
in the same class has the same representation, as in Figure 1
far left (Graf et al., 2021). Collapsed representations cannot
distinguish fine-grained details within classes—in particular
latent subclasses—resulting in poor transferability and robustness. Modifications to SupCon that heuristically “spread
out” its representations have shown empirical promise (Islam
et al., 2021), but a precise understanding of spread—how
separated individual points are in representation space—and
how to control it is lacking.
Furthermore, spread alone is not sufficient to explain
improved representations. We observe that modifications
to SupCon that increase spread are invariant to class-fixing
permutations. That is, the loss value does not change when
points of the same class are arbitrarily permuted in representation space. For example, Figure 1 right visualizes two
geometries that both have spread but differ in representation
quality, as suggested by the significant gap in transfer
learning performance (35.4 points). Thus, while spread
may be important, another mechanism is needed to break
class-fixing permutation invariance for good performance.
We argue that these are the two key challenges to improving
SupCon’s representations: creating the correct degree of
spread, and breaking class-fixing permutation invariance.
This paper makes progress on these challenges.
Challenge 1: Balancing Spread. We first prove a simple
result that a class-collapsed representation cannot have good
transfer performance, which motivates spread. We then analyze whether Lspread , a loss function that combines SupCon
with a class-conditional InfoNCE loss, can induce spread.
We find that previous approaches for analyzing contrastive
losses encounter a technical challenge because SupCon

