Invariant Ancestry Search

Phillip B. Mogensen 1 Nikolaj Thams 1 Jonas Peters 1

Abstract
Recently, methods have been proposed that exploit the invariance of prediction models with respect to changing environments to infer subsets
of the causal parents of a response variable. If
the environments influence only few of the underlying mechanisms, the subset identified by invariant causal prediction (ICP), for example, may
be small, or even empty. We introduce the concept of minimal invariance and propose invariant
ancestry search (IAS). In its population version,
IAS outputs a set which contains only ancestors
of the response and is a superset of the output of
ICP. When applied to data, corresponding guarantees hold asymptotically if the underlying test for
invariance has asymptotic level and power. We
develop scalable algorithms and perform experiments on simulated and real data.

1. Introduction
Causal reasoning addresses the challenge of understanding
why systems behave the way they do and what happens
if we actively intervene. Such mechanistic understanding
is inherent to human cognition, and developing statistical
methodology that learns and utilizes causal relations is a
key step in improving both narrow and broad AI (Jordan,
2019; Pearl, 2018). Several approaches exist for learning
causal structures from observational data. Approaches such
as the PC-algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2000) or greedy equivalence search (Chickering, 2002) learn (Markov equivalent)
graphical representations of the causal structure (Lauritzen,
1996). Other approaches learn the graphical structure under
additional assumptions, such as non-Gaussianity (Shimizu
et al., 2006) or non-linearity (Hoyer et al., 2009; Peters et al.,
2014). Zheng et al. (2018) convert the problem into a continuous optimization problem, at the expense of identifiability
guarantees.
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Phillip B. Mogensen
<pbm@math.ku.dk>, Jonas Peters <jonas.peters@math.ku.dk>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Invariant causal prediction (ICP) (Peters et al., 2016; HeinzeDeml et al., 2018; Pfister et al., 2019; Gamella & HeinzeDeml, 2020; Martinet et al., 2021) assumes that data are sampled from heterogeneous environments (which can be discrete, categorical or continuous), and identifies direct causes
of a target Y , also known as causal parents of Y . Learning
ancestors (or parents) of a response Y yields understanding
of anticipated changes when intervening in the system. It is
a less ambitious task than learning the complete graph but
may allow for methods that come with weaker assumptions
and stronger guarantees. More concretely, for predictors
X1 , . . . , Xd , ICP searches for subsets S ⊆ {1, . . . , d} that
are invariant; a set XS of predictors is called invariant if it
renders Y independent of the environment, conditional on
XS . ICP then outputs the intersection of all invariant predictor sets SICP := ∩S invariant S. Peters et al. (2016) show
that if invariance is tested empirically from data at level α,
the resulting intersection ŜICP is a subset of direct causes
of Y with probability at least 1 − α.1
In many cases, however, the set learned by ICP forms a strict
subset of all direct causes or may even be empty. This is
because disjoint sets of predictors can be invariant, yielding
an empty intersection, which may happen both for finite
samples as well as in the population setting. In this work,
we introduce and characterize minimally invariant sets of
predictors, that is, invariant sets S for which no proper
subset is invariant. We propose to consider the union SIAS of
all minimally invariant sets, where IAS stands for invariant
ancestry search. We prove that SIAS is a subset of causal
ancestors of Y , invariant, non-empty and contains SICP .
Learning causal ancestors of a response may be desirable
for several reasons: e.g., they are the variables that may have
an influence on the response variable when intervened on. In
addition, because IAS yields an invariant set, it can be used
to construct predictions that are stable across environments
(e.g., Rojas-Carulla et al., 2018; Christiansen et al., 2022).
In practice, we estimate minimally invariant sets using a test
for invariance. If such a test has asymptotic power against
some of the non-invariant sets (specified in Section 5.2), we
show that, asymptotically, the probability of ŜIAS being a
1

Rojas-Carulla et al. (2018); Magliacane et al. (2018); Arjovsky
et al. (2019); Christiansen et al. (2022) propose techniques that
consider similar invariance statements with a focus on distribution
generalization instead of causal discovery.

