Compressed-VFL: Communication-Efficient Learning with Vertically
Partitioned Data
Timothy Castiglia 1 Anirban Das 1 Shiqiang Wang 2 Stacy Patterson 1

Abstract
We propose Compressed Vertical Federated
Learning (C-VFL) for communication-efficient
training on vertically partitioned data. In C-VFL,
a server and multiple parties collaboratively train
a model on their respective features utilizing several local iterations and sharing compressed intermediate results periodically. Our work provides the first theoretical analysis of the effect
message compression has on distributed training
over vertically partitioned data. We prove convergence of non-convex objectives at a rate of
O( √1T ) when the compression error is bounded
over the course of training. We provide specific
requirements for convergence with common compression techniques, such as quantization and topk sparsification. Finally, we experimentally show
compression can reduce communication by over
90% without a significant decrease in accuracy
over VFL without compression.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (McMahan et al., 2017) is a distributed
machine learning approach that has become of much interest in both theory (Li et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2020) and practice (Bonawitz et al., 2019; Rieke
et al., 2020; Lim et al., 2020) in recent years. Naive distributed learning algorithms may require frequent exchanges
of large amounts of data, which can lead to slow training
performance (Lin et al., 2020). Further, participants may be
globally distributed, with high latency network connections.
To mitigate these factors, Federated Learning algorithms
aim to be communication-efficient by design. Methods such
as local updates (Moritz et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2019), where
1
Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY, USA 2 IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Timothy
Castiglia <castit@rpi.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

parties train local parameters for multiple iterations without communication, and message compression (Stich et al.,
2018; Wen et al., 2017; Karimireddy et al., 2019) reduce
message frequency and size, respectively, with little impact
on training performance.
Federated Learning methods often target the case where
the data among parties is distributed horizontally: each
party’s data shares the same features but parties hold data
corresponding to different sample IDs. This is known as
Horizontal Federated Learning (HFL) (Yang et al., 2019).
However, there are several application areas where data is
partitioned in a vertical manner: the parties store data on
the same sample IDs but different feature spaces.
An example of a vertically partitioned setting includes a hospital, bank, and insurance company seeking to train a model
to predict something of mutual interest, such as customer
credit score. Each of these institutions may have data on the
same individuals but store medical history, financial transactions, and vehicle accident reports, respectively. These
features must remain local to the institutions due to privacy concerns, rules and regulations (e.g., GDPR, HIPAA),
and/or communication network limitations. In such a scenario, Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) methods must be
employed. Although VFL is less well-studied than HFL,
there has been a growing interest in VFL algorithms recently (Hu et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2021; Cha et al., 2021),
and VFL algorithms have important applications including risk prediction, smart manufacturing, and discovery of
pharmaceuticals (Kairouz et al., 2021).
Typically in VFL, each party trains a local embedding function that maps raw data features to a meaningful vector
representation, or embedding, for prediction tasks. For example, a neural network can be an embedding function for
mapping the text of an online article to a vector space for
classification (Koehrsen, 2018). Referring to Figure 1, suppose Party 1 is a hospital with medical data features x1 . The
hospital computes its embedding h1 (θ1 ; x1 ) for the features
by feeding x1 through a neural network. The other parties
(the bank and insurance company), compute embeddings
for their features, then all parties share the embeddings in a
private manner (e.g., homomorphic encryption, secure multiparty computation, or secure aggregation). The embeddings

