Building Robust Ensembles via Margin Boosting

Dinghuai Zhang 1 Hongyang Zhang 2 Aaron Courville 1 Yoshua Bengio 1
Pradeep Ravikumar 3 Arun Sai Suggala 4

Abstract
In the context of adversarial robustness, a single
model does not usually have enough power to defend against all possible adversarial attacks, and
as a result, has sub-optimal robustness. Consequently, an emerging line of work has focused
on learning an ensemble of neural networks to
defend against adversarial attacks. In this work,
we take a principled approach towards building
robust ensembles. We view this problem from the
perspective of margin-boosting and develop an algorithm for learning an ensemble with maximum
margin. Through extensive empirical evaluation
on benchmark datasets, we show that our algorithm not only outperforms existing ensembling
techniques, but also large models trained in an
end-to-end fashion. An important byproduct of
our work is a margin-maximizing cross-entropy
(MCE) loss, which is a better alternative to the
standard cross-entropy (CE) loss. Empirically, we
show that replacing the CE loss in state-of-the-art
adversarial training techniques with our MCE loss
leads to significant performance improvement.

1. Introduction
The output of deep neural networks can be vulnerable to
even a small amount of perturbation to the input (Szegedy
et al., 2013). These perturbations, usually referred to as
adversarial perturbations, can be imperceptible to humans
and yet deceive even state-of-the-art models into making
incorrect predictions. Owing to this vulnerability, there has
been a great interest in understanding the phenomenon of
these adversarial perturbations (Fawzi et al., 2018; Bubeck
et al., 2019; Ilyas et al., 2019), and in designing techniques
to defend against adversarial attacks (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Madry et al., 2017; Raghunathan et al., 2018; Zhang
1

Mila and Université de Montréal 2 University of Waterloo 3
Carnegie Mellon University 4 Google Research. Correspondence
to: Dinghuai Zhang <dinghuai.zhang@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2019b). However, coming up with effective defenses
has turned out to be a hard problem as many of the proposed
defenses were eventually circumvented by novel adversarial
attacks (Athalye et al., 2018a; Tramer et al., 2020). Even
the well performing techniques, such as adversarial training
(AT) (Madry et al., 2017), are unsatisfactory as they do not
yet achieve high enough adversarial robustness.
One of the reasons for the unsatisfactory performance of
existing defenses is that they train a single neural network to
defend against all possible adversarial attacks. Such single
models are often not powerful enough to defend against all
the moves of the adversary and as a result, have sub-optimal
robustness. Consequently, an emerging line of work in adversarial robustness has focused on constructing ensembles
of neural networks (Kariyappa & Qureshi, 2019; Verma &
Swami, 2019; Pinot et al., 2020). These ensembling techniques work under the hypothesis that an ensemble with
a diverse collection of classifiers can be more effective at
defending against adversarial attacks, and can lead to better
robustness guarantees. This hypothesis was in fact theoretically proven to be true by Pinot et al. (2020). However,
many of the existing ensemble based defenses were not
successful, and were defeated by stronger attacks (Tramer
et al., 2020). In this paper, we show that the recently proposed ensembling technique of Pinot et al. (2020) can be
defeated (Appendix F.6), thus adding the latter to the growing list of “circumvented ensemble defenses”. This shows
that the problem of designing ensembles that are robust to
adversarial attacks is pretty much unsolved.
In this work, we take a principled approach towards constructing robust ensembles. We view this problem from the
perspective of boosting and ask the following question:
How can we combine multiple base classifiers into a strong
classifier that is robust to adversarial attacks?
Our answer to this question relies on the key machine learning notion of margin, which is known to govern the generalization performance of a model (Bartlett, 1998). In particular, we develop a margin-maximizing boosting framework that aims to find an ensemble with maximum margin via a two-player zero-sum game between the learner
and the adversary, the solution to which is the desired
max-margin ensemble. One of our key contributions is

