DNA: Domain Generalization with Diversified Neural Averaging

Xu Chu * 1 Yujie Jin * 2 Wenwu Zhu 1 Yasha Wang 2 Xin Wang 1 Shanghang Zhang 2 Hong Mei 2

Abstract
The inaccessibility of the target domain data
causes domain generalization (DG) methods
prone to forget target discriminative features, and
challenges the pervasive theme in existing literature in pursuing a single classifier with an
ideal joint risk. In contrast, this paper investigates model misspecification and attempts to
bridge DG with classifier ensemble theoretically
and methodologically. By introducing a pruned
Jensen-Shannon (PJS) loss, we show that the target square-root risk w.r.t. the PJS loss of the
ρ-ensemble (the averaged classifier weighted by
a quasi-posterior ρ) is bounded by the averaged
source square-root risk of the Gibbs classifiers.
We derive a tighter bound by enforcing a positive principled diversity measure of the classifiers.
We give a PAC-Bayes upper bound on the target square-root risk of the ρ-ensemble. Methodologically, we propose a diversified neural averaging (DNA) method for DG, which optimizes
the proposed PAC-Bayes bound approximately.
The DNA method samples Gibbs classifiers transversely and longitudinally by simultaneously considering the dropout variational family and optimization trajectory. The ρ-ensemble is approximated by averaging the longitudinal weights in
a single run with dropout shut down, ensuring a
fast ensemble with low computational overhead.
Empirically, the proposed DNA method achieves
the state-of-the-art classification performance on
standard DG benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
In real-world challenges, the identically distributed condition between the training (source domain) data and the
*
Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University 2 Peking University.
Correspondence to: Wenwu Zhu <wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Yasha Wang <wangyasha@pku.edu.cn>,
Xin Wang
<xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

testing (target domain) data is likely to be violated. For
example, the patient population in the medical image processing task (Li et al., 2020), the weather condition in
the autonomous driving recognition task (Michaelis et al.,
2019), and the visual resolution in multi-modality data analysis (Zhu et al., 2015) could be varied. Traditional machine
learning algorithms based on the empirical risk minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1999) are error-prone to such distributional shifts, whence the empirical source risk does not
necessarily converge to the population target risk. Deep
learning algorithms are acknowledged as being especially
sensitive to distributional shifts (Su et al., 2019; Recht et al.,
2019). Such concerns on deploying machine learning algorithms in critical systems urge increasing attention to
domain generalization (DG).
DG aims at generalizing a classifier trained by the source
domain(s) data to an unseen target domain in the presence
of distributional shift (Blanchard et al., 2011; Muandet et al.,
2013). A significant challenge of DG manifests as the
inaccessibility of the target data, differing DG from domain adaptation (DA) where comparing covariates of the
source domain and the target domain is possible during
training (Ben-David et al., 2007). Many principles have
been proposed to tackle DG over the last decade (Muandet
et al., 2013; Volpi et al., 2018; Piratla et al., 2020). Nevertheless, a predominant theme of existing DG literature is
setting the model misspecification (whence the hypothesis
space’s support may not contain an ideal classifier David
et al. (2010)) at negligible, and assuming the support of
the deep hypothesis space during training contains an ideal
classifier, whose joint risks over the source domain and the
target domain are ideal (Muandet et al., 2013; Zhang et al.,
2021a). Such an ideal joint risk assumption is challenged
by the information bottleneck principle of the deep neural
networks (DNNs) (Tishby et al., 2000; Tishby & Zaslavsky,
2015): When training on the source data, a deep classifier
tends to remember only discriminative features of seen training data and forget any other information, including those
that might be target-discriminative. The inaccessibility of
the target data during training implies that the deep classifiers’ hypothesis space tends to support on the subspace
of low source risk, not necessarily on the subspace of low
target risk. In a word, the ideal classifier is possibly depart
from the training stage hypothesis space’s effective support.

