Multiple-Play Stochastic Bandits with Shareable Finite-Capacity Arms

Xuchuang Wang 1 Hong Xie 2 John C.S. Lui 1

Abstract
We generalize the multiple-play multi-armed bandits (MP-MAB) problem with a shareable arms
setting, in which several plays can share the same
arm. Furthermore, each shareable arm has a
finite reward capacity and a “per-load” reward
distribution, both of which are unknown to the
learner. The reward from a shareable arm is loaddependent, which is the “per-load” reward multiplying either the number of plays pulling the arm,
or its reward capacity when the number of plays
exceeds the capacity limit. When the “per-load”
reward follows a Gaussian distribution, we prove
a sample complexity lower bound of learning the
capacity from load-dependent rewards and also a
regret lower bound of this new MP-MAB problem. We devise a capacity estimator whose sample complexity upper bound matches the lower
bound in terms of reward means and capacities.
We also propose an online learning algorithm to
address the problem and prove its regret upper
bound. This regret upper bound’s first term is
the same as regret lower bound’s, and its second
and third terms also evidently correspond to lower
bound’s. Extensive experiments validate our algorithm’s performance and also its gain in 5G & 4G
base station selection.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (MAB) (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) is a classic sequential decision
making problem. In the canonical MAB problem, a learner
sequentially pulls one arm from K ∈ N+ arms per time
slot and the pulled arm generates a stochastic reward whose
mean is unknown to the learner. To maximize the accumulative reward, the learner needs to either optimistically
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 College of Computer Science,
Chongqing University, China. Correspondence to: Hong Xie
<xiehong2018@foxmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

choose the arm with high uncertainty in reward (exploration)
or myopically select the one with high empirical mean
reward (exploitation). Multiple-play multi-armed bandits
(MP-MAB) (Anantharam et al., 1987) generalizes the canonical MAB in that the learner can select N ∈ {2, . . . , K − 1}
different arms out of K arms in each time slot.
To model many real world applications, one often needs
to extend the simple MP-MAB where each arm can be assigned at most one play in each time slot. In this work, we
consider arms with a shareable nature: an arm can be shared
by several plays in each time slot. For example, consider
a cognitive radio network (Cai et al., 2018) consisting of
K channels (arms) and N secondary users (plays). These
so-called secondary users collaborate with each other and
follow the rules set by the operator (learner). The secondary
users can transmit data via channels that are not occupied
by primary users. Each channel is available with a certain
probability which is unknown to the operator. The operator
needs to repeatedly allocate N secondary users to these K
channels, observe the availability of these selected channels,
and maximize the total amount of information transmission. Since some of these channels may have high quality
(bandwidth) that can support the traffic demand of more
than one secondary user, therefore, the operator can assign
several secondary users to share a high quality channel, especially when the channel also has a high availability rate.
Another application of our generalized MP-MAB is mobile
edge computing, where each edge server (arm) may have
multiple computing units (e.g., CPU cores), and thus can
be shared by multiple users (plays). A third application is
in online advertisement placement, where one profitable
advertisement (arm) may appear (be shared) at several different positions (plays) on a website. In above examples, the
learner can assign several plays to share a good arm. Otherwise, the learner would not be able to utilize these arms’
reward capacities and fail to maximize the total reward.
In this paper, we introduce a new bandit model in formalizing the shareable arms setting such that “several plays
can share the same arm”. In our model, each arm k is associated with a “per-load” reward random variable Xk and
a finite reward capacity mk ∈ N+ , both of which are unknown to the learner. An arm’s reward is load-dependent:
when ak plays are assigned to share the arm k, the reward
is min{ak , mk }Xk . That is, if the number of plays ak

