Accelerated, Optimal and Parallel:
Some results on model-based stochastic optimization

Karan Chadha * 1 Gary Cheng * 1 John Duchi 1 2

Abstract
The Approximate-Proximal Point (A P ROX) family of model-based stochastic optimization algorithms improve over standard stochastic gradient
methods, as they are robust to step size choices,
adaptive to problem difficulty, converge on a
broader range of problems than stochastic gradient methods, and converge very fast on interpolation problems, all while retaining nice minibatching properties (Asi & Duchi, 2019b; Asi et al.,
2020). In this paper, we propose an acceleration
scheme for the A P ROX family and provide nonasymptotic convergence guarantees, which are
order-optimal in all problem-dependent constants
and provide even larger minibatching speedups.
For interpolation problems where the objective
satisfies additional growth conditions, we show
that our algorithm achieves linear convergence
rates for a wide range of stepsizes. In this setting,
we also prove matching lower bounds, identifying new fundamental constants and showing the
optimality of the A P ROX family. We corroborate
our theoretical results with empirical testing to
demonstrate the gains accurate modeling, acceleration, and minibatching provide.

1. Introduction
We move beyond stochastic and “minibatch”-gradient methods for stochastic optimization problems to extend (Asi
et al., 2020)’s work on parallelizable and minibatch aware
model-based and (approximate) proximal point methods for
the problem
Z
minimize f (x) := EP [F (x; S)] =
F (x; s)dP (s) (1)
x∈X

S

*

Equal contribution; authors listed in alphabetical order.
Electrical Engineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 2 Statistics Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Correspondence to: Karan Chadha <knchadha@stanford.edu>,
Gary Cheng <chenggar@stanford.edu>.

Here, S denotes the sample space, and S ∼ P is an Svalued random variable, where for each sample s ∈ S,
F (·; s) : Rn → R ∪ {+∞} is a closed convex function,
subdifferentiable on the closed convex domain X .
First order stochastic methods are the default choice for
solving problem (1). They enjoy numerous convergence
guarantees (Zinkevich, 2003; Nemirovski et al., 2009; Bottou & Bousquet, 2007; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2011), and
extensions to parallelism and distributed computing that
make them practically attractive (Lan, 2012; Dekel et al.,
2012; Duchi et al., 2012). However, they are not robust
to noise and hyperparameter tuning (Li et al., 2017; Asi &
Duchi, 2019a;b); in fact, they may even diverge with slightly
mis-specified stepsizes (Asi & Duchi, 2019b; Nemirovski
et al., 2009). Motivated by the limitations of gradient methods, researchers (Bertsekas, 2011; Kulis & Bartlett, 2010;
Davis & Drusvyatskiy, 2019; Duchi & Ruan, 2018; Asi
& Duchi, 2019b) have developed stochastic (approximate)
proximal-point (A P ROX) and model-based methods as a
more robust alternative.
These A P ROX methods, as we explain in Section 2, construct
a model of the function and iterate by minimizing regularized versions of the model. They improve over standard
stochastic gradient methods, as they are adaptive to problem
difficulty, converge on a broader range of problems than
stochastic gradient methods, while retaining nice minibatching properties (Duchi & Ruan, 2018; Asi & Duchi, 2019b;
Asi et al., 2020). Argubly most excitingly A P ROX also
converge very fast on interpolation problems—that is, problems for which there exists x⋆ ∈ X minimizing F (·; s) with
P -probability 1—for a (very) wide selection of step size
choices. Such problems arise in numerous modern machine
learning applications (Belkin et al., 2018; 2019)—where one
can achieve zero training error—or, for example, in finding
a point in the intersection of convex sets ∩N
i=1 Ci , where one
takes S = {1, . . . , N } and F (x; i) = dist(x, Ci ).

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In spite of this progress, many questions remain open.
A P ROX does not attain the classical smooth optimization

lower bound as the noise tends to 0 (Nesterov, 2004); an
improvement here could lead to even larger minibatching
speedups. Additionally, the minibatch convergence rates
(Asi et al., 2020) shown in the interpolation setting require

