AGNAS: Attention-Guided Micro- and Macro-Architecture Search
Zihao Sun 1 2 3 Yu Hu 1 2 3 Shun Lu 1 2 3 Longxing Yang 1 2 3 Jilin Mei 1 2 3 Yinhe Han 1 2 3 Xiaowei Li 2 3

Abstract

?

?
?

?
?

Research Center for Intelligent Computing Systems, Institute
of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China 2 State Key Laboratory of Computer Architecture, Institute
of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Yu Hu <huyu@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Attention

(c) AGNAS for Micro Search

Attention

. . .

. . .

(b) Macro Search

(d) AGNAS for Macro Search

Node in Cell

1

(a) Micro Search

?
?

Blocks in Layer

Micro- and macro-architecture search have
emerged as two popular NAS paradigms recently.
Existing methods leverage different search strategies for searching micro- and macro- architectures. When using architecture parameters to
search for micro-structure such as normal cell
and reduction cell, the architecture parameters
can not fully reflect the corresponding operation importance. When searching for the macrostructure chained by pre-defined blocks, many
sub-networks need to be sampled for evaluation, which is very time-consuming. To address the two issues, we propose a new search
paradigm, that is, leverage the attention mechanism to guide the micro- and macro-architecture
search, namely AGNAS. Specifically, we introduce an attention module and plug it behind
each candidate operation or each candidate block.
We utilize the attention weights to represent the
importance of the relevant operations for the
micro search or the importance of the relevant
blocks for the macro search. Experimental results show that AGNAS can achieve 2.46% test
error on CIFAR-10 in the DARTS search space,
and 23.4% test error when directly searching
on ImageNet in the ProxylessNAS search space.
AGNAS also achieves optimal performance on
NAS-Bench-201, outperforming state-of-the-art
approaches. The source code can be available at
https://github.com/Sunzh1996/AGNAS.

?
?

?

Attention

Figure 1. Comparison of Micro search or Macro search with our
AGNAS. Micro search assigns architecture parameters α for candidate operations to search for the cell, and Macro search samples
numerous single choice paths for evaluating. Instead, we insert
the attention module to the output of each edge in a cell or to the
output of each layer, with the aim that the attention weights can
represent the importance of associated operations or choice blocks.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has attracted lots of attention in recent years, because it can automatically find
optimal neural networks in the pre-defined search space for
target tasks. More importantly, the searched architecture can
perform better than hand-crafted neural networks in many
computer vision tasks, such as image classification (Zoph
& Le, 2016; Zoph et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2020), object
detection (Chen et al., 2019; Ghiasi et al., 2019), semantic
segmentation (Chen et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019). Early
NAS methods adopted reinforcement learning (RL) (Baker
et al., 2016; Bello et al., 2017; Zoph et al., 2018) or evolutionary algorithms (EA) (Real et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018b;
Real et al., 2019), requiring to train many sub-networks from
scratch, which takes thousands or even tens of thousands
of GPU-hours. To alleviate this issue, ENAS (Pham et al.,
2018) proposed weight sharing among child architectures
in a pre-defined search space, which dramatically reduced
the search cost to a few GPU-days.
Search space plays a vital role in NAS, and can be broadly
categorized into micro search space and macro search space.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 1 (a), the micro search,
which is also referred to as operation search, aims to determine the operation associated with each pair of nodes in a

