Winning the Lottery Ahead of Time: Efficient Early Network Pruning

John Rachwan 1 Daniel Zügner 1 Bertrand Charpentier 1 Simon Geisler 1 Morgane Ayle 1
Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract
Pruning, the task of sparsifying deep neural networks, received increasing attention recently. Although state-of-the-art pruning methods extract
highly sparse models, they neglect two main challenges: (1) the process of finding these sparse
models is often very expensive; (2) unstructured
pruning does not provide benefits in terms of GPU
memory, training time, or carbon emissions. We
propose Early Compression via Gradient Flow
Preservation (EarlyCroP), which efficiently extracts state-of-the-art sparse models before or
early in training addressing challenge (1), and can
be applied in a structured manner addressing challenge (2). This enables us to train sparse networks
on commodity GPUs whose dense versions would
be too large, thereby saving costs and reducing
hardware requirements. We empirically show that
EarlyCroP outperforms a rich set of baselines for
many tasks (incl. classification, regression) and
domains (incl. computer vision, natural language
processing, and reinforcment learning). EarlyCroP leads to accuracy comparable to dense training while outperforming pruning baselines.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art deep learning typically operates in the overparametrized regime. However, a large body of literature has shown that a high number of carefully chosen parameters can be removed (i.e. pruned) while maintaining
the network’s predictive performance (LeCun et al., 1990;
Molchanov et al., 2017; Evci et al., 2020; Su et al., 2020;
Lee et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020).
It was first believed that sparse networks obtained from
pruning pre-trained networks cannot be retrained from
scratch. However, (Frankle & Carbin, 2019) presented
1
Technical University Munich, Germany. Correspondence to:
John Rachwan <john.rachwan@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Our EarlyCroP-S provides the best trade-off between
GPU RAM consumption and test accuracy, outperforming the
accuracy of the dense model and other structured pruning baselines. Unstructured baselines hardly bring benefits in GPU RAM
or training time, but can achieve better test accuracy, with our
EarlyCroP-U reaching the highest values. Dataset: CIFAR-100,
architecture: VGG16.

the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH): randomly initialized
deep neural networks contain sparse sub-networks (winning
tickets) that – when trained in isolation – achieve test performance comparable to the fully trained dense model. This
hypothesis suggests that we could prune a large number of a
network’s weights at initialization (i.e., before training) and
still obtain the full performance after training. That being
said, the procedure proposed in (Frankle & Carbin, 2019)
involves training the dense model to convergence multiple
times, which is computationally very expensive. SNIP (Lee
et al., 2019) and GraSP (Wang et al., 2020) were then proposed with the goal of pruning a randomly initialized model
at initialization using a sensitivity criterion for each weight.
Due to its decreased performance on large network/dataset
combinations, the LTH was later revised for very deep
networks. The authors note that for training the sparse
model, we need to initialize its weights to the dense model’s
weights from a certain point early in training (Frankle et al.,
2020a). This suggests that the best performing subnetworks
can be found early in training (instead of before). Finding

