A Completely Tuning-Free and Robust Approach to
Sparse Precision Matrix Estimation

Chau Tran 1 Guo Yu 1

Abstract
Despite the vast literature on sparse Gaussian
graphical models, current methods either are
asymptotically tuning-free (which still require
fine-tuning in practice) or hinge on computationally expensive methods (e.g., cross-validation) to
determine the proper level of regularization. We
propose a completely tuning-free approach for estimating sparse Gaussian graphical models. Our
method uses model-agnostic regularization parameters to estimate each column of the target precision matrix and enjoys several desirable properties. Computationally, our estimator can be computed efficiently by linear programming. Theoretically, the proposed estimator achieves minimax
optimal convergence rates under various norms.
We further propose a second-stage enhancement
with non-convex penalties which possesses the
strong oracle property. Through comprehensive
numerical studies, our methods demonstrate favorable statistical performance. Remarkably, our
methods exhibit strong robustness to the violation
of the Gaussian assumption and significantly outperform competing methods in the heavy-tailed
settings.

1. Introduction
Undirected graphical models are ubiquitous in the general
field of machine learning. Learning the edge of an undirected graph G with nodes X1 , . . . , Xd is equivalent to
estimating the dependence structure among these d random variables. Specifically, if (j, k) is an edge in the
graph G, then Xj and Xk are dependent conditioned on
the rest of variables. In Gaussian graphical models, where
X = (X1 , . . . , Xd ) ∼ Nd (0, Σ), the conditional depen1

Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, University
of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Chau
Tran <chautran@ucsb.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

dence structure is encoded in the sparsity pattern of the
precision matrix Ω = Σ−1 : Ωjk = 0 when (j, k) is not
an edge in G (Lauritzen, 1996). Also known as the covariance selection problem (Dempster, 1972), we are primarily
interested in estimating Ω using n observations of the ddimensional random vector X.
It is well-known that this problem becomes challenging in
the high dimensional settings where d > n. Regularization
becomes a common strategy for feasible estimation of highdimensional Gaussian graphical models. Inducing sparsity
is an especially favorable choice of regularization since
non-zero entries in Ω correspond to the edges in G.
In literature, there are essentially two types of sparsityinducing estimators in Gaussian graphical models. One
type of methods is based on penalized likelihood estimation,
which includes the graphical lasso (GLasso) (Yuan & Lin,
2007; Friedman et al., 2007; Banerjee et al., 2008) as an
example. Likelihood-based methods are usually less favorable in terms of theoretical properties (Rothman et al., 2008;
Ravikumar et al., 2011; Mazumder & Hastie, 2012; Yu &
Bien, 2017). An alternative type of approach that is more
amenable to theoretical analysis estimates Ω in a columnby-column fashion, where each column is estimated by a
regularized linear regression problem. For example, to estimate each column of Ω, Meinshausen & Bühlmann (2006)
use Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996), Yuan (2010) use the Dantzig
selector (Candes & Tao, 2007), Sun & Zhang (2013) use the
scaled Lasso (Sun & Zhang, 2012), Liu & Wang (2017) use
the SQRT-Lasso (Belloni et al., 2011).
The optimal performance of these methods typically depends on choosing the proper value of regularization parameter, which usually relies on unknown population quantities. In practice, determining the level of regularization involves computationally intensive procedures, such as crossvalidation. The only exceptions, as far as we know, are the
strongly related TIGER (Liu & Wang, 2017) and the scaled
Lasso (Sun & Zhang, 2013). Although both methods greatly
simplify the tuning procedure, the claimed tuning-free property only holds asymptotically. The computational caveats
of these methods include (1) enforcing the same tuning parameter value to be used for estimating all columns of Ω,
and (2) the common tuning parameter value includes a con-

