Dimension-free Complexity Bounds for
High-order Nonconvex Finite-sum Optimization

Dongruo Zhou 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
Stochastic high-order methods for finding firstorder stationary points in nonconvex finite-sum
optimization have witnessed increasing interest
in recent years, and various upper and lower
bounds of the oracle complexity have been proved.
However, under standard regularity assumptions,
existing complexity bounds are all dimensiondependent (e.g., polylogarithmic dependence),
which contrasts with the dimension-free complexity bounds for stochastic first-order methods
and deterministic high-order methods. In this
paper, we show that the polylogarithmic dimension dependence gap is not essential and can be
closed. More specifically, we propose stochastic high-order algorithms with novel first-order
and high-order derivative estimators, which can
achieve dimension-free complexity bounds. With
the access to p-th order derivatives of the objective function, we prove that our algorithm finds stationary points with O(n(2p−1)/(2p) /(p+1)/p )
high-order oracle complexities, where n is the
number of individual functions. Our result strictly
improves the complexity bounds of existing highorder deterministic methods with respect to the dependence on n, and it is dimension-free compared
with existing stochastic high-order methods.

1. Introduction
We study the following nonconvex finite-sum optimization
problem:
n

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1.1)

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

where n is the number of individual functions and each
fi : Rd → R can possibly be a nonconvex function. Due to
the lack of convexity, it can, in the worst case, be NP-hard to
find the global minimum of (1.1) for some specific function
f (Hillar & Lim, 2013). Thus, our goal is to instead find an
-stationary point x, which is defined by
k∇f (x)k2 ≤ .
Understanding the complexity of finding stationary points
for nonconvex finite-sum optimization has been a central
problem in both the machine learning and the optimization
communities. Gradient descent, which is probably the most
basic algorithm for the above goal, can find -stationary
points within O(−2 ) number of iterations, or equivalently,
O(n−2 ) number of gradient evaluations of the individual
functions. Starting from gradient descent and its complexity,
numerous algorithms have been proposed with improvement
from different aspects. The improvement can be mainly
summarized into three categories:
• Better dependence on  with the help of high-order information. By only gradient information, it is well-known
that O(−2 ) is the optimal iteration complexity (Nesterov,
2013). To break the −2 barrier, high-order information
including Hessian and higher-order derivatives have to
be employed, and better dependence on −1 can indeed
be achieved. Representative algorithms include cubic
regularization (Nesterov & Polyak, 2006) with O(−3/2 )
iteration complexity and high-order regularized method
(HR) (Birgin et al., 2017) with O(−(p+1)/p ) iteration
complexity, where p is the order of derivatives being
used.
• Better dependence on n with the variance-reduction
technique. To improve the dependence on n, variance
reduction technique is often employed. More specifically, a semi-stochastic gradient estimator called variancereduced gradient has been firstly proposed for finite-sum
convex optimization (Roux et al., 2012; Johnson & Zhang,
2013) with a better gradient complexity. Latter on, a recursive (Nguyen et al., 2017; Fang et al., 2018) and a
nested gradient estimator (Zhou et al., 2018c) have been

