Virtual Homogeneity Learning: Defending against Data Heterogeneity in
Federated Learning

Zhenheng Tang * 1 Yonggang Zhang * 1 Shaohuai Shi 2 Xin He 1 Bo Han 1 Xiaowen Chu 3 2 1

Abstract
In federated learning (FL), model performance
typically suffers from client drift induced by data
heterogeneity, and mainstream works focus on
correcting client drift. We propose a different
approach named virtual homogeneity learning
(VHL) to directly “rectify” the data heterogeneity. In particular, VHL conducts FL with a virtual
homogeneous dataset crafted to satisfy two conditions: containing no private information and
being separable. The virtual dataset can be generated from pure noise shared across clients, aiming
to calibrate the features from the heterogeneous
clients. Theoretically, we prove that VHL can
achieve provable generalization performance on
the natural distribution. Empirically, we demonstrate that VHL endows FL with drastically improved convergence speed and generalization performance. VHL is the first attempt towards using
a virtual dataset to address data heterogeneity, offering new and effective means to FL.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) has
emerged as an important paradigm that enables decentralized data collection and model training. In the FL scenario, a
large number of clients collaboratively train a shared model
without sharing their natural (or private) data (Kairouz et al.,
2021), enabling various real-world applications (Yang et al.,
2018; Hsu et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2019). However, FL
faces heterogeneity challenges caused by Non-IID data distributions from different clients as well as their diversity of
computing and communication capabilities (Li et al., 2020a;
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Hong
Kong Baptist University 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Data Science and Analytics Thrust, The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology (Guangzhou). Correspondence to:
Xiaowen Chu <xwchu@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Zhao et al., 2018; Hsu et al., 2020). Severe heterogeneity can easily cause client drift (Karimireddy et al., 2020),
leading to unstable convergence (Li et al., 2020b) and poor
model performance (Wang et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2018).
To tackle federated heterogeneity, the first FL algorithm,
FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), proposes to conduct more
local computations and fewer communications during training. Though FedAvg addresses the diversity of computing
and communication, the client drift induced by the Non-IID
data distribution (data heterogeneity) has significant negative impact on FedAvg (Li et al., 2020a; Karimireddy et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020b; Wang et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2021).
To address client drift, many efforts have been devoted to
designing new learning paradigms, either on the client side,
e.g., local training strategy (Li et al., 2020a; Karimireddy
et al., 2020), or on the server side, e.g., model aggregation strategy (Yurochkin et al., 2019; Chen & Chao, 2020).
However, a recent benchmark work (Li et al., 2021a) shows
that FedAvg can outperform its variants in many experimental settings. This reveals that it is challenging for a single
method to address the client drift problem in multiple scenarios, reflecting the notoriety and subtlety of client drift.
Therefore, addressing client drift remains a fundamental
challenge of FL (Kairouz et al., 2021).
Another exciting direction is to directly “rectify” the cause
of client drift, i.e., data heterogeneity. Specifically, sharing
a small portion of private data (Zhao et al., 2018) or the
private statistical information (Shin et al., 2020; Yoon et al.,
2021) can make data located in different clients more homogeneous. Nonetheless, the data sharing approach exposes
FL to the danger of privacy leakage. Although differential
privacy is a competitive candidate for avoiding privacy leakage, employing differential privacy can cause performance
degradation (Tramer & Boneh, 2021). All these challenges
motivate the following fundamental question:
Is it possible to defend against data heterogeneity in FL
systems by sharing data containing no private information?
In this work, we provide an affirmative answer to the question by proposing a novel approach, called virtual homogeneity learning (VHL). The key insight of VHL is that introducing more homogeneous data shared across clients can

