FITNESS: (Fine Tune on New and Similar Samples) to detect anomalies in
streams with drift and outliers
Abishek Sankararaman 1 Balakrishnan (Murali) Narayanaswamy 1 Vikramank Singh * 1 Zhao Song * 1

Abstract
Technology improvements have made it easier
than ever to collect diverse telemetry at high resolution from any cyber or physical system, for
both monitoring and control. In the domain of
monitoring, anomaly detection has become an important problem in many research areas ranging
from IoT and sensor networks to devOps. These
systems operate in real, noisy and non-stationary
environments. A fundamental question is then,
‘How to quickly spot anomalies in a data-stream,
and differentiate them from either sudden or gradual drifts in the normal behaviour?’ Although
several heuristics have been proposed for detecting anomalies on streams, no known method has
formalized the desiderata and rigorously proven
that they can be achieved. We begin by formalizing the problem as a sequential estimation task.
We propose FITNESS, (Fine Tune on New and
Similar Samples), a flexible framework for detecting anomalies on data streams. We show that
in the case when the data stream has a gaussian
distribution, FITNESS is provably both robust
and adaptive. The core of our method is to finetune the anomaly detection system only on recent,
similar examples, before predicting an anomaly
score. We prove that this is sufficient for robustness and adaptivity. We further experimentally
demonstrate that FITNESS is flexible in practice,
i.e., it can convert existing offline AD algorithms
in to robust and adaptive online ones.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) on streaming high-dimensional
data has become increasingly important to a variety of ap*

1
Equal contribution
Amazon AWS AI Labs, Santa
Clara, CA. Correspondence to: Abishek Sankararaman
<abisanka@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

plications ranging from real-time monitoring of industrial
and sensor systems (Hill and Minsker, 2010), or software
security (Ahmed et al., 2016). Roughly speaking, the task
of AD is to identify which if any of a given set of data points
are surprising or inconsistent (Chandola et al., 2009). This
is typically achieved by algorithms that output a real valued
score for each input data point, where larger the score, the
more anomalous the input point is.
We study the online version of AD, where the data arrives sequentially, and the AD algorithm must produce an anomaly
score for a data point before it can see the next one. The
online version has attracted study recently due to its wide applicability - including e.g. in infrastructure monitoring (Xu
et al., 2018; Audibert et al., 2020) and security applications
(Bhatia et al., 2021a;b). We define and study a theoretical
framework that captures commonly encountered challenges
in design of AD algorithms — drift and noise — that make
anomalies hard to detect and model.
Drift typically manifests as a change in the distribution of
observed data over time. A comprehensive classification
of drifts is in (Gama et al., 2014). In an AD system, the
drift can either be gradual, but continuously occurring - for
example due to wear and tear of machines in an industrial
monitoring system (Martı́ et al., 2015), or it can be rare,
but abrupt for example due to seasonal variations or external interventions on the sensor (Hill and Minsker, 2010;
Saurav et al., 2018). Thus the first desideratum of a practical
anomaly detection system is that it be adaptive (Definition
3.5) to drifts in the data stream.
Being adaptive in an online setting however, requires us
to trade off adaptivity with robustness (Gama et al., 2014).
Roughly speaking, an online algorithm is said to be robust
(Definition 3.6), if it can tolerate a small number of adversarially corrupted data points. The trade-off is inherent
since drifts, when they occur, are hard to distinguish from
data corruptions. This trade-off is exacerbated in anomaly
detection systems, as anomalies are usually defined to be
those data-points that differ from the baseline, i.e., appear
like potential corruptions. On the other hand, being adaptive to changes is critical in practical anomaly detection
systems, since otherwise they will raise a large number of
false positives after a change. In practical AD systems, false

