Efficient PAC Learning from the Crowd with Pairwise Comparisons

Shiwei Zeng 1 Jie Shen 1

Abstract
We study crowdsourced PAC learning of threshold function, where the labels are gathered from
a pool of annotators some of whom may behave
adversarially. This is yet a challenging problem
and until recently has computationally and query
efficient PAC learning algorithm been established
by Awasthi et al. (2017). In this paper, we show
that by leveraging the more easily acquired pairwise comparison queries, it is possible to exponentially reduce the label complexity while retaining
the overall query complexity and runtime. Our
main algorithmic contributions are a comparisonequipped labeling scheme that can faithfully recover the true labels of a small set of instances,
and a label-efficient filtering process that in conjunction with the small labeled set can reliably
infer the true labels of a large instance set.

1. Introduction
The recent years have witnessed an unprecedented growth
of demands in annotating large-scale data sets via crowdsourcing. On the empirical side, crowdsourcing has been
serving as a successful tool to harness the crowd wisdom for
annotating images (Deng et al., 2009) and natural language
(Callison-Burch & Dredze, 2010), evaluating and debugging
machine learning models (Chang et al., 2009), performing
hybrid intelligent system diagnosis (Gomes et al., 2011;
Tamuz et al., 2011), aiding our understanding in the conversation between human and intelligent systems (Doshi-Velez
& Kim, 2017), to name a few (Vaughan, 2017).
Compared to the practical success, on the theoretical side,
less is known about how to learn a hypothesis class with
desired error rate from the noisy crowd annotations. This has
motivated a flurry of recent studies on improving the quality
of the annotations, such as pruning low-quality workers
1

Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Shiwei Zeng
<szeng4@stevens.edu>, Jie Shen <jie.shen@stevens.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Dekel & Shamir, 2009), adaptive task assignment (Khetan
& Oh, 2016), and self-correction (Shah & Zhou, 2016).
Orthogonal to these approaches, in this paper, we consider
the generalization ability of learning algorithms when instances are annotated by the crowd. In the standard probably approximately correct (PAC) learning model of Valiant
(1984), it is assumed that there is a perfect hypothesis that
incurs zero misclassification error (also known as the realizable setting), and the learner is always given correctly
labeled data. In the context of crowdsourcing, the correct labels are not available but the learner has access to
a large pool of workers and can give a task to multiple
workers to aggregate the results, since some workers may
behave adversarially (Karger et al., 2011; Ho et al., 2013).
For example, the learner is allowed to query k workers
on any instance x to gather a collection of noisy labels
Y (x) := {y1 (x), . . . , yk (x)} and may, for example, take
the majority vote as the final label for x. The goal is to find
a hypothesis close to the perfect one without requesting too
many crowd annotations. The crowdsourced PAC learning
model was recently put forward by Awasthi et al. (2017b),
where they showed that any hypothesis class that can be
efficiently learned in the standard PAC model can also be
efficiently learned from the crowd even facing a high level
of label noise. More importantly, it was shown that a carefully designed crowdsourcing algorithm collects an amount
of labels that is only within a constant multiplicative factor
of that needed in the standard PAC setting, which is called
a constant labeling overhead.
Generally speaking, the approach of Awasthi et al. (2017b)
crucially explores the wisdom of the crowd by adaptively
gathering a manageable number of labels that can be aggregated into a set of correct labels, thus reducing the problem
to the standard PAC learning setting. In this work, we consider the broad setting that the learner may additionally
request comparison tags of any pair of instances to reduce
the labeling cost, since in practice it is relatively easier to
compare than to label. For example, in a recommendation application, an annotator may be asked which one of
two movies she likes more; this is an easier task than to
provide an exact rating, say, from 1 to 10 (Fürnkranz &
Hüllermeier, 2010; Park et al., 2015). In general, we may
consider that there is an underlying real-valued function
f ∗ (x) that indicates the user’s preference to an instance x;

