On the Difficulty of Defending Self-Supervised Learning against Model
Extraction
Adam Dziedzic 1 2 Nikita Dhawan 1 2 Muhammad Ahmad Kaleem 1 2 Jonas Guan 1 2 Nicolas Papernot 1 2

Abstract
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) is an increasingly
popular ML paradigm that trains models to transform complex inputs into representations without
relying on explicit labels. These representations
encode similarity structures that enable efficient
learning of multiple downstream tasks. Recently,
ML-as-a-Service providers have commenced offering trained SSL models over inference APIs,
which transform user inputs into useful representations for a fee. However, the high cost involved
to train these models and their exposure over APIs
both make black-box extraction a realistic security threat. We thus explore model stealing attacks
against SSL. Unlike traditional model extraction
on classifiers that output labels, the victim models
here output representations; these representations
are of significantly higher dimensionality compared to the low-dimensional prediction scores
output by classifiers. We construct several novel
attacks and find that approaches that train directly
on a victim’s stolen representations are query efficient and enable high accuracy for downstream
models. We then show that existing defenses
against model extraction are inadequate and not
easily retrofitted to the specificities of SSL.

1. Introduction
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) trains encoder models to
transform unlabeled inputs into useful representations that
are amenable to sample-efficient learning of multiple downstream tasks. The ability of SSL models to learn from unlabeled data has made them increasingly popular in important
domains like computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recognition, where data are often abundant
but labeling them is expensive (Chen et al., 2020; Grill
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute. Correspondence to:
Adam Dziedzic <adam.dziedzic@utoronto.ca>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021). Recently,
ML-as-a-Service providers like OpenAI (Neelakantan et al.,
2022; Ope) and Cohere (coh) have begun offering trained
encoders over inference APIs. Users pay a fee to transform
their input data into intermediate representations, which are
then used for downstream models. High-performance SSL
models in these domains are often costly to train; training a
large BERT model can cost north of 1 million USD (Sharir
et al., 2020). The value of these models and their exposure over publicly-accessible APIs make black-box model
extraction attacks a realistic security threat.
In a model extraction attack (Tramèr et al., 2016), the attacker aims to steal a copy of the victim’s model by submitting carefully selected queries and observing the outputs.
The attacker uses the query-output pairs to rapidly train a
local model, often at a fraction of the cost of the victim
model (Jagielski et al., 2020). The stolen model can be used
for financial gains or as a reconnaissance stage to mount
further attacks like extracting private training data or constructing adversarial examples (Papernot et al., 2017b).
Past work on model extraction focused on the Supervised
Learning (SL) setting, where the victim model typically
returns a label or other low-dimensional outputs like confidence scores (Tramèr et al., 2016) or logits (Truong et al.,
2021). In contrast, SSL encoders return high-dimensional
representations; the de facto output for a ResNet-50 SimCLR model, a popular architecture in vision, is a 2048dimensional vector. We hypothesize this significantly higher
information leakage from encoders makes them more vulnerable to extraction attacks than SL models.
In this paper, we introduce and compare several novel encoder extraction attacks to empirically demonstrate their
threat to SSL models, and discuss the difficulties in protecting such models with existing defenses.
The framework of our attacks is inspired by Siamese networks: we query the victim model with inputs from a
reference dataset similar to the victim’s training set (e.g.
CIFAR10 against an ImageNet victim), and then use the
query-output pairs to train a local encoder to output the
same representations as the victim. We use two methods
to train the local model during extraction. The first method
directly minimizes the loss between the output layer of

