Interpretable and Generalizable Graph Learning via
Stochastic Attention Mechanism
Siqi Miao 1 Miaoyuan Liu 2 Pan Li 1

Abstract
Interpretable graph learning is in need as many
scientific applications depend on learning models to collect insights from graph-structured data.
Previous works mostly focused on using posthoc approaches to interpret pre-trained models
(graph neural networks in particular). They argue against inherently interpretable models because the good interpretability of these models
is often at the cost of their prediction accuracy.
However, those post-hoc methods often fail to
provide stable interpretation and may extract features that are spuriously correlated with the task.
In this work, we address these issues by proposing Graph Stochastic Attention (GSAT). Derived
from the information bottleneck principle, GSAT
injects stochasticity to the attention weights to
block the information from task-irrelevant graph
components while learning stochasticity-reduced
attention to select task-relevant subgraphs for interpretation. The selected subgraphs provably do
not contain patterns that are spuriously correlated
with the task under some assumptions. Extensive
experiments on eight datasets show that GSAT
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by up to
20%↑ in interpretation AUC and 5%↑ in prediction accuracy. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Graph-COM/GSAT.

1. Introduction
Graph learning models are widely used in science, such as
physics (Bapst et al., 2020) and biochemistry (Jumper et al.,
2021). In many such disciplines, building more accurate
predictive models is typically not the only goal. It is often
1
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, USA 2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, USA. Correspondence to: Siqi Miao
<miao61@purdue.edu>, Pan Li <panli@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

more crucial for scientists to discover the patterns from the
data that induce certain predictions (Cranmer et al., 2020).
For example, identifying the functional groups in a molecule
that yield its certain properties may provide insights to guide
further experiments (Wencel-Delord & Glorius, 2013).
Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have become almost the de fato graph learning models due to their great
expressive power (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Xu et al., 2019).
However, their expressivity is often built upon a highly nonlinear entanglement of irregular graph features. So, it is
often quite challenging to figure out the patterns in the data
that GNNs use to make predictions.
Many works have been recently proposed to extract critical
data patterns for the prediction by interpreting GNNs in
post-hoc ways (Ying et al., 2019; Yuan et al., 2020a; Vu &
Thai, 2020; Luo et al., 2020; Schlichtkrull et al., 2021; Yuan
et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2021; Henderson et al., 2021). They
work on a pre-trained model and propose different types of
combinatorial search methods to detect the subgraphs of the
input data that affect the model predictions the most.
In contrast to the above post-hoc methods, inherently interpretable models have been rarely investigated for graph
learning tasks. There are two main concerns regarding such
models. First, the prediction accuracy and inherent interpretability of a model often forms a trade-off (Du et al.,
2019). Practitioners may not allow sacrificing prediction accuracy for better interpretability. Second, the attention mechanism, a widely-used technique to provide inherent interpretability, often cannot provide faithful interpretation (Lipton, 2018). The rationale of the attention mechanism is to
learn weights for different features during the model training, and the rank of the learned weights can be interpreted
as the importance of certain features (Bahdanau et al., 2015;
Xu et al., 2015). However, recent extensive evaluations in
NLP tasks (Serrano & Smith, 2019; Jain & Wallace, 2019;
Mohankumar et al., 2020) have shown that the attention may
not weigh the features that dominate the model output more
than other features. In particular, for graph learning tasks,
the widely-used graph attention models (Veličković et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2016) seem unable to provide any reliable
interpretation of the data (Ying et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2021).
Along another line of research, invariant learning (Pearl

