Importance Weighting Approach in Kernel Bayes’ Rule

Liyuan Xu 1 Yutian Chen 2 Arnaud Doucet 2 Arthur Gretton 1

Abstract
We study a nonparametric approach to Bayesian
computation via feature means, where the expectation of prior features is updated to yield expected kernel posterior features, based on regression from learned neural net or kernel features
of the observations. All quantities involved in
the Bayesian update are learned from observed
data, making the method entirely model-free. The
resulting algorithm is a novel instance of a kernel Bayes’ rule (KBR). Our approach is based
on importance weighting, which results in superior numerical stability to the existing approach to
KBR, which requires operator inversion. We show
the convergence of the estimator using a novel
consistency analysis on the importance weighting estimator in the infinity norm. We evaluate
our KBR on challenging synthetic benchmarks,
including a filtering problem with a state-space
model involving high dimensional image observations. The proposed method yields uniformly
better empirical performance than the existing
KBR, and competitive performance with other
competing methods.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning applications are reduced to the problem of inferring latent variables in probabilistic models.
This is achieved using Bayes’ rule, where a prior distribution over the latent variables is updated to obtain the
posterior distribution, based on a likelihood function. Probabilities involved in the Bayes’ update have generally been
expressed as probability density functions. For many interesting problems, the exact posterior density is intractable; in
the event that the likelihood is known, we may use approximate inference techniques, including Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) and Variational inference (VI). When the
1
Gatsby Unit 2 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Liyuan Xu
<liyuan.jo.19@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

likelihood function is unknown, however, and only samples
drawn from it can be obtained, these methods do not apply.
We propose to use a kernel mean embedding representation
of our probability distributions as the key quantity in our
Bayesian updates (Smola et al., 2007), which will enable
nonparametric inference without likelihood functions. Kernel mean embeddings characterize probability distributions
as expectations of features in a reproducing kernel Hilbert
space (RKHS). When the space is characteristic, these embeddings are injective (Fukumizu et al., 2009; Sriperumbudur et al., 2010). Expectations of RKHS functions may
be expressed as dot products with the corresponding mean
embeddings. Kernel mean embeddings have been employed
extensively in nonparametric hypothesis testing (Gretton
et al., 2012; Chwialkowski et al., 2016), however they have
also been used in supervised learning for distribution-valued
inputs (Muandet et al., 2012; Szabo et al., 2016), and in various other inference settings (Song et al., 2009; Grunewalder
et al., 2012; Boots et al., 2013; Jitkrittum et al., 2015; Singh
et al., 2019; Muandet et al., 2021).
We will focus here on the Kernel Bayes’ Rule (KBR), where
a prior mean embedding is taken as input and is updated to
return the mean embedding of the posterior. The goal is to
express all quantities involved in the KBR updates as RKHS
functions learned from observed data: parametric models
should not be required at any stage in the computation. We
will address in particular the application of kernel Bayes’
rule to filtering, where a latent state evolves stochastically
over time according to Markovian dynamics, with noisy,
high dimensional observations providing information as to
the current state: the task is to construct a posterior distribution over the current state from the sequence of noisy
observations up to the present. In the event that a parametric
model is known for the latent dynamics, then filtering can
be achieved either by sampling from the model (Kanagawa
et al., 2016), or through closed-form updates (Nishiyama
et al., 2020), however, we propose here to make no modeling assumptions concerning the latent dynamics, beyond
observing them in a training stage. An alternative to kernel Bayes updates in the filtering setting was proposed by
Jasra et al. (2012) but, for high-dimensional observations, it
requires introducing summary statistics which have a high
impact on performance and are difficult to select.

