Generalized Data Distribution Iteration

1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 ByteDance, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Changnan Xiao <xiaochangnan@bytedance.com>,
Jiajun Fan <fanjj21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Mean HNS
Learning Efficiency

8000.0%

The Prior SOTA

6000.0%

4

Learning Efficiency

To obtain higher sample efficiency and superior
final performance simultaneously has been one
of the major challenges for deep reinforcement
learning (DRL). Previous work could handle one
of these challenges but typically failed to address them concurrently. In this paper, we try
to tackle these two challenges simultaneously. To
achieve this, we firstly decouple these challenges
into two classic RL problems: data richness and
exploration-exploitation trade-off. Then, we cast
these two problems into the training data distribution optimization problem, namely to obtain
desired training data within limited interactions,
and address them concurrently via i) explicit modeling and control of the capacity and diversity
of behavior policy and ii) more fine-grained and
adaptive control of selective/sampling distribution of the behavior policy using a monotonic
data distribution optimization. Finally, we integrate this process into Generalized Policy Iteration (GPI) and obtain a more general framework
called Generalized Data Distribution Iteration
(GDI). We use the GDI framework to introduce
operator-based versions of well-known RL methods from DQN to Agent57. Theoretical guarantee of the superiority of GDI compared with GPI
is concluded. We also demonstrate our state-ofthe-art (SOTA) performance on Arcade Learning Environment (ALE), wherein our algorithm
has achieved 9620.33% mean human normalized
score (HNS), 1146.39% median HNS and surpassed 22 human world records using only 200M
training frames. Our performance is comparable
to Agent57’s while we consume 500 times less
data. We argue that there is still a long way to go
before obtaining real superhuman agents in ALE.

1e 7 5

10000.0%

3

4000.0%

2

2000.0%

1

0.0%

0

GDI-I3 (Ours)
GDI-H3 (Ours)
RAINBOW
IMPALA
LASER
R2D2
NGU
Agent57
MuZero
DreamerV2
SimPLe
Muesli
Go-Explore

Abstract

Mean Human Normalized Score

Jiajun Fan 1 Changnan Xiao 2

Figure 1. Performance of algorithms of Atari 57 games on mean
HNS(%) and corresponding learning/sample efficiency calculated
Mean HNS
by Training
. For more benchmark results, can see App. J.
Scale (frames)

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, when combined
with high-capacity deep neural networks, have shown
promise in domains ranging from video games (Mnih et al.,
2015) to robotic manipulation (Schulman et al., 2015;
2017b). However, it still suffers from high sample complexity and unsatisfactory final performance, especially compared to human learning (Tsividis et al., 2017). Prior work
could handle one of these problems but commonly failed to
tackle both of them simultaneously.
Model-free RL methods typically obtain remarkable final
performance via finding a way to encourage exploration and
Conditions
improve the data richness (e.g., Seen
All Conditions ) that guarantees
traversal of all possible conditions. These methods (Ecoffet
et al., 2019; Badia et al., 2020a) could perform remarkably
well when interactions are (nearly) limitless but normally
fail when interactions are limited. We argue that when interactions are limited, finding a way to guarantee traversal of all
unseen conditions is unreasonable, and perhaps we should
find a way to traverse the nontrivial conditions (e.g., unseen
(Ecoffet et al., 2019) and high-value (Kumar et al., 2020))
first and avoid traversing the trivial/low-value conditions
repeatedly. In other words, we should explicitly control the
training data distribution in RL and maximize the probabil-

