G-Mixup: Graph Data Augmentation for Graph Classification
Xiaotian Han 1 Zhimeng Jiang 1 Ninghao Liu 2 Xia Hu 3

Abstract
This work develops mixup for graph data. Mixup
has shown superiority in improving the generalization and robustness of neural networks by
interpolating features and labels between two random samples. Traditionally, Mixup can work on
regular, grid-like, and Euclidean data such as image or tabular data. However, it is challenging to
directly adopt Mixup to augment graph data because different graphs typically: 1) have different
numbers of nodes; 2) are not readily aligned; and
3) have unique typologies in non-Euclidean space.
To this end, we propose G-Mixup to augment
graphs for graph classification by interpolating
the generator (i.e., graphon) of different classes
of graphs. Specifically, we first use graphs within
the same class to estimate a graphon. Then, instead of directly manipulating graphs, we interpolate graphons of different classes in the Euclidean
space to get mixed graphons, where the synthetic
graphs are generated through sampling based on
the mixed graphons. Extensive experiments show
that G-Mixup substantially improves the generalization and robustness of GNNs.

1. Introduction
Recently deep learning has been widely adopted to graph
analysis. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Wu et al., 2020;
Zhou et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2018)
have shown promising performance on graph classification.
Meanwhile, data augmentation (e.g., DropEdge (Rong et al.,
2020), Subgraph (You et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020a) )
has also been adopted to graph analysis by generating synthetic graphs to create more training data for improving
the generalization of graph classification models. However,
existing graph data augmentation strategies typically aim to
1
Department of Computer Science&Engineering, Texas A&M
University 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Georgia 3 Department of Computer Science, Rice University. Correspondence to: Xiaotian Han <han@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

augment graphs at a within-graph level by either modifying
edges or nodes in an individual graph, which does not enable information exchange between different instances. The
between-graph augmentation methods (i.e., data augmentation between graphs) are still under-explored.
In parallel with the development of graph neural networks,
Mixup (Zhang et al., 2017) and its variants (e.g., Manifold
Mixup (Verma et al., 2019)), as data augmentation methods,
have been theoretically and empirically shown to improve
the generalization and robustness of deep neural networks
in image recognition (Zhang et al., 2017; Verma et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2021) and natural language processing (Guo
et al., 2019a; Guo, 2020). The basic idea of Mixup is to
linearly interpolate continuous values of random sample
pairs to generate more synthetic training data. The formal
mathematical expression of Mixup is xnew = λxi + (1 −
λ)xj , ynew = λyi +(1−λ)yj , where (xi , yi ) and (xj , yj )
are two samples drawn at random from training data and the
target y are one-hot labels. With graph neural networks and
mixup in mind, the following question naturally arises:
Can we mix up graph data to improve the generalization
and robustness of GNNs?
It remains an open and challenging problem to mix up graph
data due to the characteristics of graphs and the requirements
of applying Mixup. Typically, Mixup requires that original
data instances are regular and well-aligned in Euclidean
space, such as image data and table data. However, graph
data is distinctly different from them due to the following
reasons: (i) graph data is irregular, since the number of
nodes in different graphs are typically different from each
other; (ii) graph data is not well-aligned, where nodes in
graphs are not naturally ordered and it is hard to match
up nodes between different graphs; (iii) graph topology
between classes are divergent, where the topologies of a
pair of graphs from different classes are usually different
while those from the same class are usually similar. Thus, it
is nontrivial to directly adopt the Mixup to graph data.
To tackle the aforementioned problems, we propose GMixup, a class-level graph data augmentation method, to
mix up graph data based on graphons. The graphs within one
class are produced under the same generator (i.e., graphon).
We mix up the graphons of different classes and then generate synthetic graphs. Informally, a graphon can be thought
of as a probability matrix (e.g., the matrix WG and WH

