Generalization Bounds using Lower Tail Exponents in Stochastic Optimizers

Liam Hodgkinson 1 Umut Şimşekli 2 Rajiv Khanna 3 Michael W. Mahoney 1

Abstract
Despite the ubiquitous use of stochastic optimization algorithms in machine learning, the
precise impact of these algorithms and their dynamics on generalization performance in realistic non-convex settings is still poorly understood.
While recent work has revealed connections between generalization and heavy-tailed behavior in
stochastic optimization, this work mainly relied
on continuous-time approximations; and a rigorous treatment for the original discrete-time iterations is yet to be performed. To bridge this gap,
we present novel bounds linking generalization
to the lower tail exponent of the transition kernel associated with the optimizer around a local
minimum, in both discrete- and continuous-time
settings. To achieve this, we first prove a dataand algorithm-dependent generalization bound in
terms of the celebrated Fernique–Talagrand functional applied to the trajectory of the optimizer.
Then, we specialize this result by exploiting the
Markovian structure of stochastic optimizers, and
derive bounds in terms of their (data-dependent)
transition kernels. We support our theory with empirical results from a variety of neural networks,
showing correlations between generalization error
and lower tail exponents.

1. Introduction
Fundamental to the operation of modern machine learning
is stochastic optimization: the process of minimizing an
objective function via the simulation of random elements.
Its practical utility is matched by its theoretical depth; for
decades, optimization theorists have sought to explain the
1
ICSI and Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 INRIA — Département d’Informatique de
l’École Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, Paris,
France 3 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, Indiana, USA. Correspondence to: Liam Hodgkinson
<liam.hodgkinson@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Discrete sample path approximations of a heavytailed α-stable Lévy process (α “ 1.5), and standard
Brownian motion. Estimates of our normalized Fernique–
Talagrand functional γ21 p¨q is reported under each figure
(see Section 2.3). Observe this functional is reduced with
smaller tail index and “tighter clustering" of the trajectory.
surprising generalization ability of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its various extensions for non-convex problems — most recently in the context of neural networks
and deep learning. Classical convex optimization-centric
approaches fail to explain this phenomenon.
There has been an increasing number of attempts for developing generalization bounds for non-convex learning
settings. This work has approached the problem from
different perspectives, such as information theory, compression/sparsity/intrinsic dimension, or implicit (algorithmic) regularization (details to be provided in Section 1.2).
Among these approaches, a promising direction has been to
consider optimization trajectories, rather than single point
estimates obtained during (or at the end of) the optimization process (e.g., Neyshabur et al. (2017); Xu & Raginsky
(2017); Arora et al. (2018)). This addresses a plausible
concern that single points may not necessarily be able to
capture all the information regarding generalization. There
has also been significant empirical evidence (using a wide
variety of approaches) supporting this idea (Jastrzebski et al.,
2018; Xing et al., 2018; Martin & Mahoney, 2021a; Martin
et al., 2021; Jastrzebski et al., 2020; 2021). Of particular
interest to us are the recent empirical developments linking heavy-tailed fluctuations in optimization trajectories to
generalization performance (Simsekli et al., 2019b; Gurbuzbalaban et al., 2020; Hodgkinson & Mahoney, 2020).
The heavy-tailed dynamics observed in SGD exhibit qualitatively different behavior from Gaussian dynamics (see

