Nearly Optimal Policy Optimization with Stable at Any Time Guarantee

Tianhao Wu * 1 Yunchang Yang * 2 3 Han Zhong * 2 Liwei Wang 4 Simon S. Du 5 Jiantao Jiao 1

Abstract
Policy optimization methods are one of the most
widely used classes of Reinforcement Learning
(RL) algorithms. However, theoretical understanding of these methods remains insufficient.
Even in the episodic (time-inhomogeneous) tabular setting, the state-of-the-art theoretical result
of policy-based
method in Shani et al. (2020)
√
is only e
O( S 2 AH 4 K) where S is the number
of states, A is the number of actions, H is the
horizon, and
√ K is the number of episodes, and
there is a SH gap compared with
√ the information theoretic lower bound e
Ω( SAH 3 K) (Jin
et al., 2018). To bridge such a gap, we propose
a novel algorithm Reference-based Policy Optimization with Stable at Any Time guarantee
(RPO-SAT), which features the property “Stable at Any Time”.
√ We prove
√ that our algoO( SAH 3 K + AH 4 K) regret.
rithm achieves e
When S > H, our algorithm is minimax optimal
when ignoring logarithmic factors. To our best
knowledge, RPO-SAT is the first computationally
efficient, nearly minimax optimal policy-based
algorithm for tabular RL.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved phenomenal
successes in solving complex sequential decision-making
problems (Silver et al., 2016; 2017; Levine et al., 2016;
Gu et al., 2017). Most of these empirical successes are
driven by policy-based (policy optimization) methods, such
as policy gradient (Sutton et al., 1999), natural policy gradient (NPG) (Kakade, 2001), trust region policy optimization
*

1
Equal contribution
University of California, Berke2
ley Center for Data Science, Peking University 3 Peng
Cheng Laboratory 4 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
MOE, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
University of Washington. Correspondence to: Tianhao Wu
<thw@berkeley.edu>, Yunchang Yang <yangyc@pku.edu.cn>,
Han Zhong <hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015), and proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). For example,
Haarnoja et al. (2018) proposed a policy-based state-of-theart reinforcement learning algorithm, soft actor-critic (SAC),
which outperformed value-based methods in a variety of real
world robotics tasks including manipulation and locomotion.
In fact, Kalashnikov et al. (2018) observed that compared
with value-based methods such as Q-learning, policy-based
methods work better with dense reward. On the other hand,
for sparse reward cases in robotics, value-based methods
perform better.
Motivated by this, a line of recent work (Fazel et al., 2018;
Bhandari & Russo, 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019;
Agarwal et al., 2021) provides global convergence guarantees for these popular policy-based methods. However, to
achieve this goal, they made several assumptions. Agarwal
et al. (2021) assumes they have the access to either the exact
population policy gradient or an estimate of it up to certain
precision for all states uniformly compared with the state
distribution induced by π ∗ , bypassing the hardness of exploration. They showed that even with this stringent assumption, the convergence rate would depend on the distribution
∗

dπ
s0 (s)
mismatch coefficient D∞ = maxs µ(s)
, where µ is the
∗

starting state distribution of the algorithm and dπs0 (s) is the
stationary state distribution of the optimal policy π ∗ starting
from s0 . This dependency is problematic since D∞ is small
only when the initial distribution has a good coverage of the
optimal stationary distribution, which may not happen in
practice.
However, in online value-based RL, algorithm such as Azar
et al. (2017) can achieve fast convergence rate (or regret)
independent of the distribution mismatch coefficient, or
equivalently, without the coverage assumption. Though
value-based methods have achieved the information theoretical optimal regret in tabular (Azar et al., 2017) and linear
MDPs settings (Zanette et al., 2020), it remains unclear
whether policy-based methods can achieve information theoretically optimal regret in the same settings. To address
this issue, Cai et al. (2020) proposed the idea of optimism
in policy optimization, which seems similar to the valuebased optimism but different in nature, since it encourages
optimism for Qπ instead of Q∗ (Section 4). With this new
idea, Cai et al. (2020); Shani et al. (2020) managed to estab-

