Deduplicating Training Data Mitigates Privacy Risks in Language Models

Nikhil Kandpal 1 Eric Wallace 2 Colin Raffel 1

Past work has shown that large language models
are susceptible to privacy attacks, where adversaries generate sequences from a trained model
and detect which sequences are memorized from
the training set. In this work, we show that the
success of these attacks is largely due to duplication in commonly used web-scraped training
sets. We first show that the rate at which language
models regenerate training sequences is superlinearly related to a sequence’s count in the training
set. For instance, a sequence that is present 10
times in the training data is on average generated ∼1000× more often than a sequence that is
present only once. We next show that existing
methods for detecting memorized sequences have
near-chance accuracy on non-duplicated training
sequences. Finally, we find that after applying
methods to deduplicate training data, language
models are considerably more secure against these
types of privacy attacks. Taken together, our results motivate an increased focus on deduplication
in privacy-sensitive applications and a reevaluation of the practicality of existing privacy attacks.

1. Introduction
Neural language models (LMs)—systems trained to predict the next-word in a sequence of text—have become
fundamental building blocks for numerous NLP tasks and
domains. The performance and generality of these models
make it important to study the extent to which they maintain
the privacy of their training data, because many of their
applications involve training on private information (e.g.,
emails, health records, chat logs, and source code).
Unfortunately, when training on private data, LMs may
memorize and leak information to adversaries. Past work
has demonstrated the practicality of these so-called model
1
UNC Chapel Hill 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Nikhil
Kandpal <nkandpa2@cs.unc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Expected Number of Generations

Abstract

102

tion
oriza

em
fect M

101

Per

100
10 1
10 2

Language Model
1.5B (Lee et. al.)
345M (Mistral)
117M (Mistral)
1.5B (West et. al.)

10 3
10 4
10 5

100

101
102
Number of Duplicates in Train

Figure 1. For a sequence duplicated d times in a language model’s
training dataset, we measure how often that sequence is expected
to occur in a set of generated text that is equal in size to the training
data. Perfect Memorization amounts to generating a sequence at the
same frequency as it appears in the training data. All LMs tested
show a superlinear increase in the expected number of generations
(slopes > 1 on a log-log plot), i.e., training samples that are not
duplicated are very rarely generated, whereas samples that are
duplicated multiple times appear dramatically more frequently.

inversion attacks, which can successfully recover training
data with only black-box access to a trained model (Carlini
et al., 2019; 2021b; Inan et al., 2021). In particular, the
strongest attack, proposed by Carlini et al. (2021b), recovers training data from LMs by first generating sequences
from the models and then scoring those sequences with various membership inference methods. The highest-scoring
sequences are classified as belonging to the training data.
In this work, we show that the success of the Carlini et al.
(2021b) attack is largely due to duplicated sequences found
in commonly used web-scraped training datasets. We study
transformer LMs over various parameter scales and show
that (1) the attack’s likelihood of recovering a particular
training sequence is correlated with the number of occurrences of that sequence in the training data, and (2) the

