UNIREX: A Unified Learning Framework for
Language Model Rationale Extraction

Aaron Chan 1 Maziar Sanjabi 2 Lambert Mathias 2 Liang Tan 2
Shaoliang Nie 2 Xiaochang Peng 2 Xiang Ren 1 Hamed Firooz 2

Abstract
An extractive rationale explains a language
model’s (LM’s) prediction on a given task instance by highlighting the text inputs that most
influenced the prediction. Ideally, rationale extraction should be faithful (reflective of LM’s actual behavior) and plausible (convincing to humans), without compromising the LM’s (i.e., task
model’s) task performance. Although attribution
algorithms and select-predict pipelines are commonly used in rationale extraction, they both rely
on certain heuristics that hinder them from satisfying all three desiderata. In light of this, we
propose UNIREX, a flexible learning framework
which generalizes rationale extractor optimization
as follows: (1) specify architecture for a learned
rationale extractor; (2) select explainability objectives (i.e., faithfulness and plausibility criteria); and (3) jointly train the task model and rationale extractor on the task using selected objectives. UNIREX enables replacing prior works’
heuristic design choices with a generic learned
rationale extractor in (1) and optimizing it for
all three desiderata in (2)-(3). To facilitate comparison between methods w.r.t. multiple desiderata, we introduce the Normalized Relative Gain
(NRG) metric. On five English text classification
datasets, our best UNIREX configuration outperforms baselines by an average of 32.9% NRG.
Plus, UNIREX rationale extractors’ faithfulness
can even generalize to unseen datasets and tasks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, neural language models (LMs) have yielded
state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of natural lan1
University of Southern California 2 Meta AI. Correspondence
to: Aaron Chan <chanaaro@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

guage processing (NLP) tasks (Devlin et al., 2018; Liu et al.,
2019). However, LMs’ complex processes are notoriously
opaque (Rudin, 2019), posing concerns about the societal
implications of using LMs for high-stakes decision-making
(Bender et al., 2021). Thus, explaining LMs’ behavior is
crucial for promoting trust, ethics, and safety in NLP systems (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017; Lipton, 2018). Given a
LM’s (i.e., task model’s) predicted label on a text classification instance, an extractive rationale is a type of explanation
that highlights the tokens that most influenced the model to
predict that label (Luo et al., 2021). To provide meaningful
explanations, rationale extraction should be faithful (reflective of LM’s actual behavior) (Ismail et al., 2021; Jain et al.,
2020) and plausible (convincing to humans) (DeYoung et al.,
2019), without compromising the LM’s task performance
(DeYoung et al., 2019; Jacovi & Goldberg, 2020) (Fig. 1).
Configuring the rationale extractor and its training process
can greatly impact these desiderata, yet prior works have
commonly adopted at least one of the following suboptimal
heuristic design choices. First, many works rely in some
way on attribution algorithms (AAs), which extract rationales via handcrafted functions (Sundararajan et al., 2017;
Ismail et al., 2021; Situ et al., 2021). AAs may have built-in
faithfulness-related properties but cannot be directly trained
and tend to be compute-intensive (Bastings & Filippova,
2020). The most similar work to ours is SGT (Ismail et al.,
2021), which regularizes a task model to produce faithful
AA-based rationales. Still, AAs can be a bottleneck for
plausibility, as producing human-like rationales is a complex objective requiring high capacity rationale extractors
(Narang et al., 2020; DeYoung et al., 2019). Second, many
works use a specialized select-predict pipeline (SPP), where
a predictor module is trained to solve the task using only
tokens chosen by a selector module (Jain et al., 2020; Yu
et al., 2021; Paranjape et al., 2020). Instead of faithfulness
optimization, SPPs heuristically aim for “faithfulness by
construction” by treating the selected tokens as a rationale
for the predictor’s output (which depends only on those tokens). Still, SPPs typically have worse task performance
than vanilla LMs since SPPs hide the full input from the
predictor and are hard to train end-to-end (Jain et al., 2020;
Bastings et al., 2019; Lei et al., 2016). Both AAs and SPPs

