SpeqNets: Sparsity-aware Permutation-equivariant Graph Networks

Christopher Morris 1 2 3 Gaurav Rattan 1 Sandra Kiefer 4 Siamak Ravanbkash 2 3

Abstract
While message-passing graph neural networks have clear limitations in approximating
permutation-equivariant functions over graphs
or general relational data, more expressive,
higher-order graph neural networks do not scale
to large graphs. They either operate on k-order
tensors or consider all k-node subgraphs, implying an exponential dependence on k in memory
requirements, and do not adapt to the sparsity
of the graph. By introducing new heuristics for
the graph isomorphism problem, we devise a
class of universal, permutation-equivariant graph
networks, which, unlike previous architectures,
offer a fine-grained control between expressivity
and scalability and adapt to the sparsity of the
graph. These architectures lead to vastly reduced
computation times compared to standard higherorder graph networks in the supervised node- and
graph-level classification and regression regime
while significantly improving standard graph
neural network and graph kernel architectures in
terms of predictive performance.

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data is ubiquitous across application domains ranging from chemo- and bioinformatics (Barabasi
& Oltvai, 2004; Jumper et al., 2021; Stokes et al., 2020)
to image (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2017) and socialnetwork analysis (Easley & Kleinberg, 2010). To develop
successful machine-learning models in these domains, we
need techniques that exploit the rich information inherent
in the graph structure and the feature information within
nodes and edges. In recent years, numerous approaches have
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 2 Department of Computer
Science, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 3 Mila, Quebec AI
Institute 4 Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Saarland
Informatics Campus, Germany. Correspondence to: Christopher
Morris <chris@christophermorris.info>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

been proposed for machine learning with graphs—most notably, approaches based on graph kernels (Borgwardt et al.,
2020; Kriege et al., 2020) or using graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Chami et al., 2020; Gilmer et al., 2017; Grohe,
2021; Morris et al., 2021). Here, graph kernels based on
the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman algorithm (1-WL) (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968), a simple heuristic for the graph
isomorphism problem, and corresponding GNNs (Morris
et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019) have recently advanced the
state-of-the-art in supervised node- and graph-level learning.
However, the 1-WL operates via simple neighborhood aggregation, and the purely local nature of the related approaches
misses important patterns in the given data. Moreover, they
are only applicable to binary structures and therefore cannot
deal with general structures containing relations of higher
arity, e.g., hypergraphs. A more powerful algorithm for
graph isomorphism testing is the k-dimensional Weisfeiler–
Leman algorithm (k-WL) (Babai, 1979; Cai et al., 1992).1
The algorithm captures more global, higher-order patterns
by iteratively computing a coloring or labeling for k-tuples
defined over the set of nodes of a given graph based on a
certain notion of adjacency between tuples. See (Kiefer,
2020b) for a survey and more background. However, since
the algorithm considers all nk many k-tuples of an n-node
graph, it does not scale to large real-world graphs. Moreover,
the cardinality of the considered neighborhood is always
k · n. Hence, a potential sparsity of the input graph does not
reduce the running time.
New neural architectures that possess the same power as the
k-WL in terms of separating non-isomorphic graphs (Azizian & Lelarge, 2020; Geerts, 2020; Maron et al., 2019b)
suffer from the same drawbacks, i.e., their memory requirement is lower-bounded by nk for an n-node graph, and they
have to resort to dense matrix multiplication. Recently, Morris et al. (2020b) introduced the local variant (δ-k-LWL) of
the k-WL considering only a subset of the neighborhoods in
k-WL. However, like the original algorithm, the local variant
operates on the set of all possible k-tuples, again resulting
in the same (exponential) memory requirements, rendering
the algorithm not practical for large, real-world graphs.
1
In (Babai, 2016), László Babai mentions that he introduced
the algorithm in 1979 together with Rudolf Mathon.

