Global Optimization Networks

Sen Zhao 1 Erez Louidor 1 Maya Gupta 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a good
maximizer of a black-box function given noisy examples. We propose to fit a new type of function
called a global optimization network (GON), defined as any composition of an invertible function
and a unimodal function, whose unique global
maximizer can be inferred in O(D) time, and
used as the estimate. As an example way to
construct GON functions, and interesting in its
own right, we give new results for specifying
multi-dimensional unimodal functions using lattice models with linear inequality constraints. We
extend to conditional GONs that find a global
maximizer conditioned on specified inputs of
other dimensions. Experiments show the GON
maximizers are statistically significantly better
predictions than those produced by convex fits,
GPR, or DNNs, and form more reasonable predictions for real-world problems.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of predicting a maximizer x̂ for an
unknown function g(x) : RD → R, given only a fixed set
of N noisy input-output training pairs (xi , yi ) for xi ∈ RD ,
and yi = g(xi ) + i ∈ R, i = 1, . . . , N , where i is zeromean noise. The predicted maximizer x̂ will be judged by
how close its predicted output g(x̂) is to the true global
maximum g(x∗ ) where x∗ ∈ arg maxx g(x).
For example, a coffee chain may wish to optimize where it
puts its next cafe given features like local population density
and distances to other cafes. Doctors want to optimize the
best dosages of a cocktail of medicines to give a patient.
Businesses want to optimize the features or their new products. In each of these cases, we assume we have some past
examples to learn from, and want to make one best guess.
1
Google Research, Mountain View, CA 94043 USA. Correspondence to: Sen Zhao <senzhao@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Toy Example: A concave piecewise-linear function
h(x; φ) was fit to N = 23 noisy training examples to minimize
mean squared error. The fitted function’s prediction of the global
maximizer is marked as x̂. Because the training data is known to
be noisy, it is reasonable that the prediction’s maximum is lower
than the training data maximum, and in a different place.

We leave as future work extending the proposed methodology to the standard global optimization algorithm setting
where one is allowed to make a series of guesses (Horst
& Pardalos, 1995), that is, where one selects an x̂t and is
able to acquire the additional training label g(x̂t ) + t , for
t = 1, . . . , T . Here, we make only one guess x̂.
We take a machine-learning approach as illustrated in Fig.
1: we fit a function h(x; φ) with parameters φ to the N
training samples, and then take the global maximizer of the
fitted h(x; φ) as the estimate x̂.
A key question is which function class to use for h(x; φ).
Ideally h(x; φ) will have the right amount of model expressibility, and it will be easy to find its maximizer. Box &
Wilson (1951) proposed fitting a quadratic function as a surrogate function whose maximizer can be easily found, but
for many real-world applications a quadratic function will be
too inflexible. At the other extreme, one can fit an arbitrarily
flexible function like a DNN (Gorissen et al., 2010), but that
may overfit, producing a noisy estimate of the maximizer.
In addition, even if we regularize DNN models well, they
may still have multiple local maximizers. Hence, with any
randomly chosen starting point, gradient descent is unlikely
to find DNN’s global maximizer. One may need to try many
starting points to improve the maximizers found by gradient
descent, which could become exponentially more expensive
with larger input dimension D, and there is no guarantee
that the global maximizer of the DNN is found.
We propose a new function class called a global optimization network (GON) that generalizes unimodal functions.
GONs are more flexible than prior restricted surrogate functions, but have a well-defined global maximizer. We also

