Near-Exact Recovery for Tomographic Inverse Problems via Deep Learning

Martin Genzel * 1 Ingo Gühring * 2 Jan Macdonald * 2 Maximilian März * 2

Abstract
This work is concerned with the following fundamental question in scientific machine learning:
Can deep-learning-based methods solve noisefree inverse problems to near-perfect accuracy?
Positive evidence is provided for the first time,
focusing on a prototypical computed tomography (CT) setup. We demonstrate that an iterative
end-to-end network scheme enables reconstructions close to numerical precision, comparable
to classical compressed sensing strategies. Our
results build on our winning submission to the
recent AAPM DL-Sparse-View CT Challenge. Its
goal was to identify the state-of-the-art in solving
the sparse-view CT inverse problem with datadriven techniques. A specific difficulty of the challenge setup was that the precise forward model
remained unknown to the participants. Therefore, a key feature of our approach was to initially estimate the unknown fanbeam geometry
in a data-driven calibration step. Apart from an
in-depth analysis of our methodology, we also
demonstrate its state-of-the-art performance on
the open-access real-world dataset LoDoPaB CT.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning methods have been successfully applied to many problems of the natural sciences (LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015; Goodfellow et al.,
2016). A prominent example of such scientific machine
learning is the development of efficient solutions strategies for inverse problems (Arridge et al., 2019; Ongie
et al., 2020), such as those encountered in medical imaging. But despite unprecedented empirical performance in
various practical scenarios, a lack of evidence for the relia*

Equal contribution (the authors are ordered alphabetically by
last name). 1 Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, Germany (work done while at Utrecht University, Netherlands) 2 Technical University Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to:
Martin Genzel <martingenzel@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

bility of these methods remains. For instance, Sidky et al.
(2021a) have recently demonstrated that post-processing of
filtered backprojection images with the prominent UNetarchitecture may not yield satisfactory recovery precision
in sparse-view computed tomography (CT). This observation gave rise to the recent AAPM Grand Challenge “Deep
Learning for Inverse Problems: Sparse-View Computed Tomography Image Reconstruction”, with the goal “to identify
the state-of-the-art in solving the CT inverse problem with
data-driven techniques” (Sidky et al., 2021b). Here, the
term ‘solving’ is used to describe algorithms that provide
perfect recovery from incomplete, noiseless measurements.
The study of this desirable property was popularized by the
field of compressed sensing (Candès et al., 2006; Donoho,
2006; Foucart & Rauhut, 2013). Indeed, high precision in
the noiseless, undersampled regime can be used to benchmark reconstruction methods and is a driving factor for their
acceptance in practice. Therefore, an important open research question is whether deep-learning-based schemes
can achieve such (near-)perfect solutions, comparable to
model-based algorithms like total variation (TV) minimization. The present article makes first progress in this direction, building on our winning submission to the AAPM
challenge. Our main contributions are as follows:
(i) We show that end-to-end neural networks can achieve
near-perfect accuracy on the prescribed CT reconstruction
task. This underscores the reliability of deep-learning-based
solvers for inverse problems, in the sense that they can
match the precision of a widely-accepted benchmark (TV
minimization) in the noiseless limit.
(ii) We give a detailed analysis of our solution strategy,
which has significantly outperformed the runner-up teams.
Although the challenge amounts to a comparison with 24
competing methods, we also explicitly demonstrate the superiority over several popular baselines in this work. This
includes the learned primal-dual algorithm (Adler & Öktem,
2018), which is commonly considered as state-of-the-art for
solving inverse problems, cf. Leuschner et al. (2021); Ramzi
et al. (2020). In addition, we show the effectiveness of our
learning pipeline beyond synthetically generated image data:
The proposed neural network scheme produces state-of-theart results on the LoDoPaB CT dataset (Leuschner et al.,
2021), currently ranked first in the public leaderboard.

