Generalized Beliefs for Cooperative AI

Darius Muglich 1 Luisa Zintgraf 1 Christian Schroeder de Witt 1 Shimon Whiteson 1 Jakob Foerster 1

Abstract
Self-play is a common paradigm for constructing
solutions in Markov games that can yield optimal policies in collaborative settings. However,
these policies often adopt highly-specialized conventions that make playing with a novel partner
difficult. To address this, recent approaches rely
on encoding symmetry and convention-awareness
into policy training, but these require strong environmental assumptions and can complicate policy
training. We therefore propose moving the learning of conventions to the belief space. Specifically, we propose a belief learning model that
can maintain beliefs over rollouts of policies not
seen at training time, and can thus decode and
adapt to novel conventions at test time. We show
how to leverage this model for both search and
training of a best response over various pools of
policies to greatly improve ad-hoc teamplay. We
also show how our setup promotes explainability
and interpretability of nuanced agent conventions.

1. Introduction
One of the most popular ways of training a policy in
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is via self-play
(Samuel, 1959), where during training a joint policy controls
the strategies of every player. This can lead to convergence
to highly specialized policies that have enjoyed great success in zero-sum settings (Brown et al., 2020; Silver et al.,
2018). Self-play can also yield highly proficient policies
in cooperative settings (Hu & Foerster, 2019; Schroeder de
Witt et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2021); however, if self-play is left
unconstrained, agents that train independently with self-play
and then meet at test time to play a cooperative game (i.e.,
engage in cross-play) may do much worse than when they
were self-playing.
Agents in cooperative tasks often must learn to implicitly
1
University of Oxford, England, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Darius Muglich <dariusm1997@yahoo.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

communicate, particularly when the available communication channels are too narrow to fully resolve mutual uncertainty (Heider & Simmel, 1944; Tian et al., 2020). In the
case of the popular and frequently-studied card game Hanabi
(Bard et al., 2020) (see Appendix A for details on Hanabi),
consider the example convention that “hinting green” also
means that the rightmost held card of the player receiving
the hint is playable. One could then construct a second policy where instead “hinting yellow” bears this implicit cue.
While these two policies are essentially equivalent, if two
agents meet and one plays the former policy and the other
plays the latter, they will perform poorly because they have
each overfit to their respective conventions.
To improve the cross-play performance of independent selfplay trained agents (i.e., to effectively engage in zero-shot
coordination (Hu et al., 2020)), recent approaches have
explored explicitly encoding environmental symmetries
(where symmetry refers to state/action sequences that are
equivalent up to relabelling of the state/action space) into
policy training (Hu et al., 2020). However, this complicates
the training process and requires domain knowledge.
Others have explored modular approaches that separately
learn the complexities intrinsic to the task (i.e., ruledependent behaviour) and the conventions specific to a
partner (i.e., convention-dependent behaviour) (Shih et al.,
2021). However, their method comes at the expense of scalability, with experiments limited to bandit problems and
1-colour Hanabi.
Yet another approach that has been explored is in controlling
the cognitive-reasoning depth (i.e. controlling the extent
to which agents build more complex conventions on top of
the baseline expectation that earlier conventions are being
followed) so to avoid formation of arbitrary conventions
that can complicate cross-play (Hu et al., 2021b). While an
interesting direction, it mitigates policies from adopting a
large class of behaviours, and as well motivates the question
of whether the true absence of such convention formation is
strictly necessary for coordination?
We seek a paradigm to learn policies without the disadvantages listed above; that is, we seek to relax strong environmental assumptions, retain scalability, and to leave policy
learning unconstrained. As such, in this paper, we propose
shifting the burden of learning conventions and intent onto

