On the Finite-Time Complexity and Practical Computation of
Approximate Stationarity Concepts of Lipschitz Functions

Lai Tian 1 Kaiwen Zhou 2 Anthony Man-Cho So 1

Abstract

where f could be both nonsmooth and nonconvex (“non”setting for short). We are particularly interested in algorithms with a finite-time complexity for computing approximately stationary points of Problem (♢). Note that when
f is smooth, it is folkloric that computing an ϵ-stationary
point (i.e., ∥∇f (x)∥ ≤ ϵ) only requires O(ϵ−2 ) calls, which
is dimension-independent and finite, to the gradient oracle
with gradient descent (Nemirovskij & Yudin, 1983).

We report a practical finite-time algorithmic
scheme to compute approximately stationary
points for nonconvex nonsmooth Lipschitz functions. In particular, we are interested in two kinds
of approximate stationarity notions for nonconvex
nonsmooth problems, i.e., Goldstein approximate
stationarity (GAS) and near-approximate stationarity (NAS). For GAS, our scheme removes the
unrealistic subgradient selection oracle assumption in (Zhang et al., 2020, Assumption 1) and
computes GAS with the same finite-time complexity. For NAS, Davis & Drusvyatskiy (2019)
showed that ρ-weakly convex functions admit
finite-time computation, while Tian & So (2021)
provided the matching impossibility results of
dimension-free finite-time complexity for firstorder methods. Complement to these developments, in this paper, we isolate a new class of
functions that could be Clarke irregular (and thus
not weakly convex anymore) and show that our
new algorithmic scheme can compute NAS points
for functions in that class within finite time. To
demonstrate the wide applicability of our new theoretical framework, we show that ρ-margin SVM,
1-layer, and 2-layer ReLU neural networks, all
being Clarke irregular, satisfy our new conditions.

In the general Lipschitz “non”-setting, a widely used generalized subdifferential ∂f (x) is due to Clarke (1990, Section
2.1) (see also Definition 2.1), which reduces to the convex
subdifferential (resp. gradient) if f is convex (resp. smooth).
Therefore, by mimicking results in the smooth scenario, it
is natural to conjecture that we may be able to design algorithms to compute elements in {x : dist(0, ∂f (x)) ≤ ϵ}
in finite time with high probability. However, as shown by
Zhang et al. (2020, Theorem 5), that is impossible for any
first-order method. Thus, it is curious to ask: What kind of
approximate stationarity concept in the “non”-setting will
admit dimension-free finite-time computation?

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the following general optimization
problem for an L-Lipschitz function f : Rd → R
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(♢)

1

Department of Systems Engineering & Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong
Kong 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Anthony Man-Cho So <manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Davis & Drusvyatskiy (2019) gave a nice answer for the
class of ρ-weakly convex functions1 by introducing a notion named near-approximate stationarity (NAS, see Definition 2.5), which is closely related to the gradient of the
Moreau envelope of f . They showed that a subgradient-type
method computes an (ϵ, δ)-NAS point with O(ρ4 δ −4 + ϵ−4 )
calls to the subgradient oracle. However, many modern ML
models are indeed not weakly convex,2 e.g., neural networks
with ReLU activation functions. Even worse, by extending
the Lipschitz hardness results in (Kornowski & Shamir,
2021), Tian & So (2021) demonstrated that, for any finite
T , there exists a finte ρ(T ) such that, for any 0 ≤ ϵ, δ < 12
uniformly, computing an (ϵ, δ)-NAS point for ρ(T )-weakly
convex functions within T steps is impossible.
On the other front, starting from the seminal work of Goldstein (1977), a notion named Goldstein approximate stationarity (GAS, see Definition 2.4) exhibits favorable algorithmic consequences. The story begins with an approximation
Recall f is ρ-weakly convex if f (x)+ ρ2 ∥x∥2 is convex. Weak
convexity implies Clarke regularity (Vial, 1983, Proposition 4.5).
2
g(x) = − max{x, 0} is not Clarke regular (cf. (Clarke, 1990,
Definition 2.3.4)) and not ρ-weakly convex for any ρ ∈ R.
1

