Improving Task-free Continual Learning by
Distributionally Robust Memory Evolution

Zhenyi Wang 1 Li Shen 2 Le Fang 1 Qiuling Suo 1 Tiehang Duan 3 Mingchen Gao 1

Abstract
Task-free continual learning (CL) aims to learn a
non-stationary data stream without explicit task
definitions and not forget previous knowledge.
The widely adopted memory replay approach
could gradually become less effective for long
data streams, as the model may memorize the
stored examples and overfit the memory buffer.
Second, existing methods overlook the high uncertainty in the memory data distribution since
there is a big gap between the memory data distribution and the distribution of all the previous
data examples. To address these problems, for
the first time, we propose a principled memory
evolution framework to dynamically evolve the
memory data distribution by making the memory buffer gradually harder to be memorized with
distributionally robust optimization (DRO). We
then derive a family of methods to evolve the
memory buffer data in the continuous probability measure space with Wasserstein gradient flow
(WGF). The proposed DRO is w.r.t the worst-case
evolved memory data distribution, thus guarantees
the model performance and learns significantly
more robust features than existing memory-replaybased methods. Extensive experiments on existing benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed methods for alleviating forgetting.
As a by-product of the proposed framework, our
method is more robust to adversarial examples
than existing task-free CL methods.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, NY, USA 2 JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China
3
Meta, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Zhenyi Wang
<zhenyiwa@buffalo.edu>, Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>,
Mingchen Gao <mgao8@buffalo.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) is to learn on a sequence of tasks
without forgetting previous ones. Most CL methods assume
knowing task identities and boundaries during training. Instead, this work focuses on a more general and challenging setup, i.e., task-free continual learning (Aljundi et al.,
2019b). This learning scenario does not assume explicit
task definition, and data distribution gradually evolves without clear task boundaries, making it applicable to a broader
range of real-world problems.
The current widely adopted memory replay approach stores
a small portion of previous tasks in memory and replays
them with the new mini-batch data. The CL model would
overfit the memory buffer, and this approach could be gradually less effective for mitigating forgetting as the model
repeatedly learns the memory buffer (Jin et al., 2021), illustrated in Figure 1 (a). The model could memorize the
memory buffer, and previous knowledge will be quickly
lost. Furthermore, there is a big gap between memory data
distribution and the distribution of all the previous data examples. These methods ignore the high uncertainty of the
memory data distribution since a limited memory buffer
cannot accurately reflect the stationary distribution of all
examples seen so far in the data stream, illustrated in Figure
2 (a). Most existing CL works ignore this issue.
To address the above issues, we propose a distributionally
robust optimization framework (DRO) to evolve the memory
data distribution dynamically. This learning objective makes
the memory data increasingly harder to be memorized and
helps the model alleviate memory overfitting and improve
generalization, illustrated in Figure 1 (b) and (c). In addition,
the proposed DRO framework considers the underlying high
uncertainty of memory data distribution. It evolves memory
data distribution to fill the gap between the memory data
distribution and the ideal stationary distribution of all the
previous data, illustrated in Figure 2 (b). We optimize the
model performance under the worst-case evolved memory
data distribution since we cannot know the exact distribution of all the previous examples. The model can thus learn
substantially more robust features with performance guarantees than previous work. For the image domain, adversarial
examples can have the same appearance as natural images

