Gradient-Free Method for Heavily Constrained Nonconvex Optimization

Wanli Shi 1 2 Hongchang Gao 3 Bin Gu 1 2

Abstract
Zeroth-order (ZO) method has been shown to be
a powerful method for solving the optimization
problem where explicit expression of the gradients is difficult or infeasible to obtain. Recently,
due to the practical value of the constrained problems, a lot of ZO Frank-Wolfe or projected ZO
methods have been proposed. However, in many
applications, we may have a very large number of nonconvex white/black-box constraints,
which makes the existing zeroth-order methods
extremely inefficient (or even not working) since
they need to inquire function value of all the constraints and project the solution to the complicated
feasible set. In this paper, to solve the nonconvex problem with a large number of white/blackbox constraints, we proposed a doubly stochastic zeroth-order gradient method (DSZOG) with
momentum method and adaptive step size. Theoretically, we prove DSZOG can converge to the
ϵ-stationary point of the constrained problem. Experimental results in two applications demonstrate
the superiority of our method in terms of training time and accuracy compared with other ZO
methods for the constrained problem.

1. Introduction
Zeroth-order (gradient-free) method is a powerful method
for solving the optimization problem where explicit expression of the gradients are difficult or infeasible to obtain, such
as bandit feedback analysis (Agarwal et al., 2010), reinforcement learning (Choromanski et al., 2018), and adversarial
attacks on black-box deep neural networks (Chen et al.,
2017; Liu et al., 2018b). Recently, more and more zerothorder gradient algorithms have been proposed and achieved
great success, such as (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Wang et al.,
1
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology,
Jiangsu, China 2 MBZUAI, Abu Dhabi, UAE 3 Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, PA, USA.
Correspondence to: Bin Gu <jsgubin@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2018; Gu et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018b; Huang et al., 2020a;
Gu et al., 2021b; Wei et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2021a).
Due to several motivating applications, the study of the
zeroth-order methods in constrained optimization has gained
great attention. For example, ZOSCGD(Balasubramanian
& Ghadimi, 2018) uses the zeroth-order method to approximate the unbiased stochastic gradient of the objective, and
then uses the Frank-Wolfe framework to update the parameters. (Gao & Huang, 2020; Huang et al., 2020b) apply
the variance reduction technique (Fang et al., 2018; Nguyen
et al., 2017) or momentum method in ZOSCGD and obtain a
better convergence performance. In addition, ZOSPGD (Liu
et al., 2018c) uses the zeroth-order gradient to update the
parameters and then projects the parameters onto the feasible subset. The variance reduction and momentum methods
are also used to obtain a better performance (Huang et al.,
2020a). We have summarized several representative zerothorder methods for constrained optimization in Table 1.
However, all these methods are not scalable for the problems with a large number of constraints. On the one hand,
they all need to evaluate the values of all the constraints
in each iteration. On the other hand, the projected gradient methods and the Frank-Wolfe methods need to solve
a subproblem in each iteration. These makes the existing
methods time-consuming to find a feasible point. What’s
worse, all these methods need the constraints to be convex
white-box functions. However, in many real-world applications, the constraints could be nonconvex or black-box
functions, which means existing methods are extremely
inefficient or even not working. Therefore, how to effectively solve the nonconvex constrained problem with a large
number of nonconvex/convex white/black-box constraints,
which is denoted as heavily constrained problem, by using
the ZO method is still an open problem.
In this paper, to solve the heavily constrained nonconvex
optimization problem efficiently, we propose a new ZO
algorithms called doubly stochastic zeroth-order gradient
method (DSZOG). Specifically, we give a probability distribution over all the constraints and rewrite the original
problem as a nonconvex-strongly-concave minimax problem (Lin et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020a;
Guo et al., 2021) by using the penalty method. We sample a
batch of training points uniformly and a batch of constraints

