Robust Policy Learning over Multiple Uncertainty Sets

Annie Xie 1 Shagun Sodhani 2 Chelsea Finn 1 Joelle Pineau 2 Amy Zhang 2

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) agents need to be robust to variations in safety-critical environments.
While system identification methods provide a
way to infer the variation from online experience,
they can fail in settings where fast identification
is not possible. Another dominant approach is robust RL which produces a policy that can handle
worst-case scenarios, but these methods are generally designed to achieve robustness to a single
uncertainty set that must be specified at train time.
Towards a more general solution, we formulate
the multi-set robustness problem to learn a policy
robust to different perturbation sets. We then design an algorithm that enjoys the benefits of both
system identification and robust RL: it reduces
uncertainty where possible given a few interactions, but can still act robustly with respect to the
remaining uncertainty. On a diverse set of control
tasks, our approach demonstrates improved worstcase performance on new environments compared
to prior methods based on system identification
and on robust RL alone.

1. Introduction
Uncertainty is a prevalent challenge in most realistic reinforcement learning (RL) settings. Our work studies the
uncertainty that arises when an agent is transferred to a new
environment, after training on similar tasks related through
a common set of underlying parameters, often referred to as
the context. In safety-critical settings, we often care about
the agent’s worst-case performance on the distribution of
plausible environments.
Robust RL is one of the primary approaches to this problem
as it aims to learn a policy that performs well under worstcase perturbations to the context (Rajeswaran et al., 2016;
Pinto et al., 2017; Mankowitz et al., 2020; Tessler et al.,
1
Stanford University 2 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence
to: Annie Xie <anniexie@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Two peg-insertion tasks. The first (green) presents high
uncertainty in the peg size, while the second (orange) has high
uncertainty in the controller gain.

2019; Vinitsky et al., 2020; Abraham et al., 2020). However, these solutions require a prior uncertainty set over the
context, i.e., a set of its possible values, for the test-time environment to learn the robust policy for this set at train time.
Building in this prior ahead of time can limit the flexibility
of the resulting policy: a large uncertainty set produces an
overly conservative policy that can potentially underperform
in all environments, but a small uncertainty set can fail to
represent the target environment (Mozian et al., 2020).
We, therefore, formulate and study the multi-set robustness
problem (illustrated in Fig. 2) whose goal is to learn a policy with strong worst-case performance on new uncertainty
sets. Since the optimal robust policy varies across different perturbation sets, we incorporate the uncertainty set as
contextual information to the agent and learn a generalized
set-conditioned policy.
However, naively contextualizing existing robust methods
with the uncertainty set can still be sub-optimal as these
methods do not reduce uncertainty over the context. In particular, the parameters that make up the context can sometimes be quickly identified, given a history of interactions.
For example, consider a robot inserting a peg in one of the
boxes in Fig. 1. The box closer to the robot only fits smaller
pegs, while the box to the left can accommodate all sizes.
Hence, the optimal policy should select the closer box for
smaller pegs and the faraway box for larger ones. While the
size of the peg cannot be estimated without additional trial
and error, the strength of the robot’s actions, on the other
hand, can be identified after taking a handful of actions. Performing online system identification to reduce uncertainty

