Learning General Halfspaces with Adversarial Label Noise
via Online Gradient Descent
Ilias Diakonikolas * 1 Vasilis Kontonis * 1 Christos Tzamos * 1 Nikos Zarifis * 1

Abstract
We study the problem of learning general — i.e.,
not necessarily homogeneous — halfspaces with
adversarial label noise under the Gaussian distribution. Prior work has provided a sophisticated
polynomial-time algorithm for this problem. In
this work, we show that the problem can be solved
directly via online gradient descent applied to a
sequence of natural non-convex surrogates. This
approach yields a simple iterative learning algorithm for general halfspaces with near-optimal
sample complexity, runtime, and error guarantee.
At the conceptual level, our work establishes an intriguing connection between learning halfspaces
with adversarial noise and online optimization
that may find other applications.

1. Introduction
We study the distribution-specific PAC learnability of linear
classifiers (or halfspaces) in the presence of adversarial label
noise. Before we describe our contributions, we provide the
necessary context for this work.

we focus on the algorithmic problem of learning halfspaces
from labeled examples, arguably one of the most extensively
studied and influential problems in machine learning.
The computational problem of learning halfspaces from random examples is efficiently solvable without noise (Maass
& Turan, 1994) in the distribution-independent setting. The
complexity of the problem in the presence of corrupted data
depends on the contamination model and the underlying distributional assumptions. In this paper, we focus on learning
with adversarial label noise under the Gaussian distribution.
Formally, we have the following definition.
Definition 1.1 (Learning with Adversarial Label Noise).
Let C be a concept class of Boolean functions over X = Rd
and ϵ ∈ (0, 1/2). Let f be an unknown target function in
C. A noisy example oracle, EX(f, ϵ), works as follows:
Each time EX(f, ϵ) is invoked, it returns a labeled example
(x, y), such that: (a) x ∼ Dx , where Dx is the standard
normal distribution on Rd , and (b) y ̸= f (x) with probability at most ϵ. Let D denote the joint distribution on
(x, y) generated by the above oracle. We say that such a
distribution D is ϵ-corrupted. For some constant C ≥ 1,
a C-approximate learning algorithm is given i.i.d. samples
from D and its goal is to output a hypothesis h such that
with high probability it holds Pr(x,y)∼D [h(x) ̸= y] ≤ Cϵ.

1.1. Background and Motivation
A halfspace or Linear Threshold Function (LTF) is any
Boolean-valued function f : Rd 7→ {±1} of the form
f (x) = sign(w∗ ·x+t), for a vector w∗ ∈ Rd (known as the
weight vector) and a scalar t ∈ R (known as the threshold).
Halfspaces are a central class of Boolean functions that arise
in several areas of computer science, including complexity
theory, learning theory, and optimization (Rosenblatt, 1958;
Novikoff, 1962; Minsky & Papert, 1968; Yao, 1990; Goldmann et al., 1992; Freund & Schapire, 1997; Vapnik, 1998;
Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2000; O’Donnell, 2014). Here
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence
to: Vasilis Kontonis <kontonis@wisc.edu>, Nikos Zarifis <zarifis@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We remark that the agnostic PAC-learning model (Kearns
et al., 1994) requires that the hypothesis h(x) satisfies
Pr(x,y)∼D [h(x) ̸= y] ≤ Pr(x,y)∼D [f (x) ̸= y] + ϵ′ , for
any desired ϵ′ > 0. This guarantee corresponds to the C = 1
case of Definition 1.1. Without distributional assumptions,
learning with adversarial label noise is computationally hard
for any constant C > 1 (Daniely, 2016). This motivates
studying the problem under natural distributional assumptions. Interestingly, it is known (Klivans & Kothari, 2014)
that even when the underlying distribution is the standard
Gaussian, achieving an agnostic error guarantee (i.e., C = 1
in Definition 1.1) requires super-polynomial runtime (under a plausible complexity assumption about the hardness
of noisy parity). The latter hardness result does not rule
out constant factor approximations, i.e., achieving approximation ratio C > 1, where C is some universal constant.
Indeed, this is the regime where the algorithmic results of
this paper apply.

