Bayesian Imitation Learning for End-to-End Mobile Manipulation

Yuqing Du 1 Daniel Ho 2 Alexander A. Alemi 3 Eric Jang 4 Mohi Khansari 2

Abstract
In this work we investigate and demonstrate benefits of a Bayesian approach to imitation learning
from multiple sensor inputs, as applied to the task
of opening office doors with a mobile manipulator. Augmenting policies with additional sensor inputs—such as RGB + depth cameras—is a
straightforward approach to improvin grobot perception capabilities, especially for tasks that may
favor different sensors in different situations. As
we scale multi-sensor robotic learning to unstructured real-world settings (e.g. offices, homes) and
more complex robot behaviors, we also increase
reliance on simulators for cost, efficiency, and
safety. Consequently, the sim-to-real gap across
multiple sensor modalities also increases, making simulated validation more difficult. We show
that using the Variational Information Bottleneck
(Alemi et al., 2016) to regularize convolutional
neural networks improves generalization to heldout domains and reduces the sim-to-real gap in
a sensor-agnostic manner. As a side effect, the
learned embeddings also provide useful estimates
of model uncertainty for each sensor. We demonstrate that our method is able to help close the
sim-to-real gap and successfully fuse RGB and
depth modalities based on an understanding of the
situational uncertainty of each sensor. In a realworld office environment, we achieve 96% task
success, improving upon the baseline by +16%.

Figure 1. In this work we apply the Variational Information Bottleneck (VIB) to reduce the multi-sensor sim-to-real gap and carry
out sensor fusion for a challenging door opening task. The top
plot quantifies probabilistic uncertainty of RGB (blue) and Depth
(green) sensor modalities as a function of timestep in a sample
trajectory, as measured by the VIB rate (divergence of the state
representation posterior from its learned marginal). The rate is
computed from 8 samples, where the solid line is the mean value
and shaded region the standard deviation. The top row of images
is RGB observations at each labeled point in time, and the bottom
row is the corresponding depth images. In general, we find that
the rate is highest when the gripper contacts the door handle or
is unlatching the door, for both modalities, suggesting that more
information is required for this task-critical phase.

1. Introduction
A long-standing robotics research problem is to develop
agents capable of complex behaviours in the real world.
One promising approach is to learn from demonstrations
(Schaal et al., 1997), where the agent learns by modeling
1
UC Berkeley, work done while author was at Everyday Robots 2 Everyday Robots 3 Google Research 4 Work done
while author was at Google. Correspondence to: Yuqing Du
<yuqing du@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the distribution over expert actions. Within the imitation
learning paradigm, behavior cloning (BC) (Bain & Sammut,
1995; Torabi et al., 2018) is a simple supervised learning
method for imitating expert behaviors. In spite of wellknown shortcomings, such as compounding errors and the
inability to surpass expert performance, recent progress in
real-world robotics has shown the promise of BC across
different domains and tasks (Jang et al., 2022; Florence
et al., 2022).
That said, much progress remains to be made towards deploying robots in the real world, especially as we scale to

