Prompting Decision Transformer for Few-Shot Policy Generalization

Mengdi Xu 1 Yikang Shen 2 Shun Zhang 3 Yuchen Lu 2 Ding Zhao 1 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 4 Chuang Gan 3 5

Abstract
Human can leverage prior experience and learn
novel tasks from a handful of demonstrations. In
contrast to offline meta-reinforcement learning,
which aims to achieve quick adaptation through
better algorithm design, we investigate the effect of architecture inductive bias on the few-shot
learning capability. We propose a Prompt-based
Decision Transformer (Prompt-DT), which leverages the sequential modeling ability of the Transformer architecture and the prompt framework
to achieve few-shot adaptation in offline RL. We
design the trajectory prompt, which contains segments of the few-shot demonstrations, and encodes task-specific information to guide policy
generation. Our experiments in five MuJoCo control benchmarks show that Prompt-DT is a strong
few-shot learner without any extra finetuning on
unseen target tasks. Prompt-DT outperforms its
variants and strong meta offline RL baselines by a
large margin with a trajectory prompt containing
only a few timesteps. Prompt-DT is also robust
to prompt length changes and can generalize to
out-of-distribution (OOD) environments. Project
page: https://mxu34.github.io/PromptDT/.

1. Introduction
Offline Reinforcement Learning (offline RL) (Levine et al.,
2020) aims to learn an optimal policy from trajectories collected by a set of behavior policies without access to the
environments. This data-driven approach is essential in
many settings, where online interactions could be expensive (e.g., robotics or educational agents) and dangerous
(e.g., autonomous driving or healthcare). A number of recent works have illustrated the power of such approaches
in enabling data-driven learning of policies for game en1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Montreal, Mila
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 5 UMass Amherst. Correspondence to: Mengdi Xu
<mengdixu@andrew.cmu.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

vironments (Chen et al., 2021), robotic manipulation behaviors (Ebert et al., 2018; Kalashnikov et al., 2018), and
robotic navigation skills (Kahn et al., 2021).
However, we identify one of offline RL’s inherent difficulties as the failure to generalize to unseen tasks. While the
agent might be able to get good state coverage from the
training tasks, due to the distribution shift, it would still
struggle to find a good policy in the test tasks. As a result,
recent work from Mitchell et al. (2021) considers the offline meta-RL setting that aims to solve the generalization
problem in offline RL. It proposed the Meta-Actor Critic
with Advantage Weighting (MACAW) algorithm that uses
advantage-weighted regression (Peng et al., 2019) as a subroutine RL algorithm, and optimizes the agent’s adaptive
ability with a meta-learning objective (Finn et al., 2017a).
While meta-learning methods address this issue through
the algorithmic learning perspective, we aim to investigate
the power of architecture inductive bias in this work. It
is known that Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) models,
when pretrained on large-scale datasets, are able to perform
few-shot or zero-shot learning. Furthermore, recent works
from Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Liu et al., 2021;
Brown et al., 2020) suggest the prompt-based framework
as an effective paradigm for adaptation to new tasks, such
as translation and question-answering. In the prompt-based
framework, the prompt contains valuable information about
the task, and is pre-pended as a prefix to the input. As a
result, it casts the problem of few-shot or zero-shot generalization to a conditional sequence generation, which has
been the strength of these large Transformer models. Recently Chen et al. (2021) shows that beyond the natural language, the Transformer architecture can also have a strong
sequence modeling capability for trajectory data, achieving
state-of-art results on offline RL. In this work, we aim to
address the question: Can we leverage the prompt-based
framework from NLP, and adapt it to the context of offline
RL to enable few-shot generalization to unseen tasks?
It is worth noting that adapting the prompt-based method
to RL problems is non-trivial. In NLP, Language Models
(LMs) are pretrained on massive amounts of raw text, including almost all information on the internet. Moreover, most
NLP tasks can be rewritten into standard blank-filling formats as prompts. These prompts serve as queries to extract

