Three-stage Evolution and Fast Equilibrium for SGD with Non-degerate Critical
Points
Yi Wang 1 Zhiren Wang 2

Abstract
We justify the fast equilibrium conjecture on
stochastic gradient descent from (Li et al., 2020)
under the assumptions that critical points are nondegenerate and the stochastic noise is a standard
Gaussian. In this case, we prove an scaling invaraint SGD with constant effective learning rate
consists of three stages: descent, diffusion and
tunneling, and explicitly identify temporary equilibrium states that can be observed within practical training time. This interprets the gap between
the mixing time in the fast equilibrium conjecture
and the previously known upper bound. While our
assumptions do not represent typical implementations of SGD of neural networks in practice, this is
the first description of the three-stage mechanism
in any case. The main finding in this mechanism
is that a temporary equilibrium of local nature is
quickly achieved after polynomial time (in term
of the reciprocal of the intrinsic learning rate) and
then stabilizes within observable time scales; and
that the temporary equilibrium is in general different from the global Gibbs equilibrium, which will
only appear after an exponentially long period
beyond typical training limits. Our experiments
support that this mechanism may extend to the
general case.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background and motivation
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has been an indispensable tool in the training of neural networks and is known to
work in both convex and non-convex settings. One theme
that has recently attracted much attention is the descrip1
Department of Mathematics, Johns Hopkins University
Department of Mathematics, Pennsylvania State University. Correspondence to: Yi Wang <ywang@math.jhu.edu>, Zhiren Wang
<zhirenw@psu.edu>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tion of the asymptoic behavior of the SGD, especially how
learning rate schemes affect the distribution of random trajectories. A useful approach is to model the SGD
wk+1 ← (1 − λ)wk − η∇LBk (wk ),

(1)

where LBk is the loss function over a stochastic batch Bk
and λ and η are respectively the weight decay and the learning rate, by stochastic differential equations (SDE). In this
approach, the random noise in ∇LBk (wk ) is regarded, by
taking a continuous limit on time increments, as a Brownian
motion with covariance matrix Σ(wk ). A widely adopted
approach is to approximate the SGD (1) by the value at
t = kη of the SDE:
1

dWt = −η(∇L(Wt )dt + Σ(Wt ) 2 dBtd ) − λe Wt dt, (2)
starting from W0 = w0 , where λe = λη, and Btd stands for
the standard Brownian motion in Rd (see §2.1 for more details). The quantity λe is called the intrinsic learning rate
and is known to decide the limit behavior of the dynamics.
Modern neural networks often contain various normalization
steps, such as batch normalization, weight normalization
and layer normalization. Normalization makes the loss
function L scaling invariant and typically non-smooth near
the origin. A priori, it may take a long time for the SDE (2)
to reach an equilibrium as |Wt | may remain too large or too
small for a long period. Recently (Li et al., 2020) studied
how λe affects the distribution of the solutions through
−1
another quantity γt 2 := |Wt |−2 η, called the effective
learning rate. Under mild assumptions, they proved that
1
−1
γt 2 stabilizes to the magnitude O(λe2 ) after O( λ1e ) time.
They further conjectured:
Conjecture 1.1. (Fast Equilibrium Conjecture) (Li et al.,
2020) Suppose F (W , x) is the output of the neural network
with parameter W and input data x, then the distribution
of F (Wt , x) stabilizes in total variation distance for all x
after O( λ1e ) time to an equilibrium state. Moreover, this
distribution is independent of the initial parameter W0 .
Remark that the conjecture concerns the speed of convergence of a sequence of distributions towards an equilibrium
state in terms of the total variation distance between probability measures. An interesting but different question in

