Coordinated Double Machine Learning

Nitai Fingerhut 1 Matteo Sesia 2 Yaniv Romano 1

Abstract
Double machine learning is a statistical method
for leveraging complex black-box models to construct approximately unbiased treatment effect
estimates given observational data with highdimensional covariates, under the assumption of
a partially linear model. The idea is to first fit
on a subset of the samples two non-linear predictive models, one for the continuous outcome
of interest and one for the observed treatment,
and then to estimate a linear coefficient for the
treatment using the remaining samples through
a simple orthogonalized regression. While this
methodology is flexible and can accommodate
arbitrary predictive models, typically trained independently of one another, this paper argues that a
carefully coordinated learning algorithm for deep
neural networks may reduce the estimation bias.
The improved empirical performance of the proposed method is demonstrated through numerical
experiments on both simulated and real data.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in data science is to estimate from
high-dimensional observational data the effect of one variable, the treatment, on an outcome of interest, accounting
for all covariates. For example, one may want to understand
the effect of temperature on atmospheric pollution using
measurements from weather stations. Alternatively, in a
retrospective medical study one may want to estimate the relation between drug dosage and changes in blood pressure,
accounting for differences in patients characteristics and
clinical histories. These questions have traditionally been
addressed through multivariate parametric models. However, it is difficult to obtain exact inferences if the data
include many covariates. Further, simple modelling assump1
Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering and of
Computer Science, Technion, Israel 2 Department of Data Sciences
and Operations, University of Southern California, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Nitai Fingerhut <nitai@campus.technion.ac.il>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tions may not be appropriate if the outcome depends on the
covariates in an unknown and possibly complicated way.
Sophisticated machine learning (ML) algorithms, such as
deep neural networks and random forests, are playing increasingly relevant roles in estimation applications, even
though they were originally designed for prediction tasks.
Although generally difficult to analyze theoretically and often hard to interpret, ML models are sometimes appealing
for estimation because they can flexibly account for complex relations between the covariates and the outcome. For
example, the output of ML models can be translated into
treatment effect estimates using an approach known as double machine learning (DML) (Chernozhukov et al., 2018).
DML enjoys desirable theoretical properties—it leads to
approximately unbiased estimates of the treatment effect—
and it is becoming widely applied in many fields, including
public health (Chernozhukov et al., 2021; Torrats-Espinosa,
2021), finance (Feng et al., 2020), and economics (Knaus,
2020; Semenova et al., 2017).
The goal of this paper is to improve the estimation performance of DML by adapting the learning algorithms used to
fit its two underlying predictive models—one tasked with
predicting the outcome and the other with predicting the
treatment given the covariates. Concretely, a novel loss function is introduced to jointly fit the two ML models as to minimize the final DML estimation bias, and a cross-validation
technique is developed to tune the relevant hyperparameters.
They key idea is to coordinate the two predictive models
so that the impacts of their respective errors approximately
cancel out, in contrast with the typical practice of training
the two models separately. Concretely, this idea is explored
in this paper within the context of deep neural networks.
1.1. Problem Statement and Technical Background
Consider n data points (Xi , Di , Yi ) drawn i.i.d. from some
distribution assumed to follow a partially linear model
(Robinson, 1988):
Yi = g(Xi ) + Di θi + Ui ,

Di = m(Xi ) + Vi .

(1)

Above, the outcome Yi ∈ R may depend on the covariates
Xi ∈ Rd through the unknown function g. The treatment
Di ∈ R may depend on Xi through the unknown function
m, and it affects Yi linearly. The inferential target is the

