Generalizing Gaussian Smoothing for Random Search

Katelyn Gao 1 Ozan Sener 2

Abstract
Gaussian smoothing (GS) is a derivative-free optimization (DFO) algorithm that estimates the gradient of an objective using perturbations of the
current parameters sampled from a standard normal distribution. We generalize it to sampling
perturbations from a larger family of distributions.
Based on an analysis of DFO for non-convex functions, we propose to choose a distribution for perturbations that minimizes the mean squared error
(MSE) of the gradient estimate. We derive three
such distributions with provably smaller MSE
than Gaussian smoothing. We conduct evaluations of the three sampling distributions on linear regression, reinforcement learning, and DFO
benchmarks in order to validate our claims. Our
proposal improves on GS with the same computational complexity, and are competitive with and
usually outperform Guided ES (Maheswaranathan
et al., 2019) and Orthogonal ES (Choromanski
et al., 2018), two computationally more expensive algorithms that adapt the covariance matrix
of normally distributed perturbations.

1. Introduction
In many practical applications, machine learning is complicated by the lack of analytical gradients of the objective
with respect to the parameters of the predictor. For example,
a search and rescue robot could have complex mechanics
that may be impossible to accurately model even with full
knowledge of the terrain, and without a model of the system
dynamics, the analytical gradients of the success rate with
respect to the policy parameters would not be available. On
the other hand, noisy evaluations of the objective, such as
Booleans indicating success, are inexpensive to obtain. The
problem of optimizing a function with only zeroth-order
evaluations is called derivative-free optimization (DFO).
1

Intel Labs, Santa Clara, CA, USA 2 Intel Labs, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Katelyn Gao <katelyn.gao@intel.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Gaussian smoothing (GS) (Matyas, 1965; Nesterov &
Spokoiny, 2017) is a DFO algorithm that estimates the gradient using evaluations at perturbations of the parameters,
randomly sampled from the standard normal distribution
and computing finite differences. Current extensions of
GS add post-processing. Polyak (1987) and Flaxman et al.
(2005) normalize the perturbations; Orthogonal ES (Choromanski et al., 2018) orthogonalizes them. Guided ES (Maheswaranathan et al., 2019) rotates the perturbations to be
better aligned with recent gradient estimates; LMRS (Sener
& Koltun, 2019) rotates them to a learned subspace. The
last three approaches increase the computational complexity
as they require the Gram-Schmidt process.
Although Gaussian smoothing is shown to be effective, the
choice of standard normal distribution is rather arbitrary. In
this paper, we generalize GS to sample perturbations from
arbitrary distributions. We can choose distributions that
optimize any desired property thanks to the proposed generalization. Specifically, we show that a convergence bound
for stochastic gradient descent for smooth non-convex functions is proportional to the mean squared error (MSE) of the
gradients. Therefore, we select a distribution with reduced
MSE of the gradient estimate, computing the MSE under
the assumption that the entries of the perturbations are IID
with mean zero.
Our first algorithm to reduce the MSE is Bernoulli Smoothing (BeS), which replaces the standard normal distribution
with a standardized Bernoulli distribution with probability
0.5. After fixing the distributional family of perturbations
to be Gaussian or Bernoulli, we obtain distributions that
approximately minimize the MSE. The distributions have
simple analytical forms and do not require any information
about the objective. In fact, they are scaled versions of GS
and BeS, with smaller variance, and so we call the resulting
algorithms GS-shrinkage and BeS-shrinkage. Due to the
IID assumption of the entries of the perturbations, BeS, GSshrinkage, and BeS-shrinkage have the same computational
complexity as GS.
To validate the theory, we empirically evaluate our proposed
methods for derivative-free optimization on linear regression
since the analytical gradients are available to compute various statistics. Results confirm that GS-shrinkage and BeSshrinkage lead to gradient estimates with smaller MSE. We

