Adapting to Mixing Time in Stochastic Optimization with Markovian Data

Ron Dorfman 1 Kfir Y. Levy 1 2

Abstract

which samples are correlated (Hamilton & Susmel, 1994;
Kushner & Yin, 2003; Sutton & Barto, 2018).

We consider stochastic optimization problems
where data is drawn from a Markov chain. Existing methods for this setting crucially rely on
knowing the mixing time of the chain, which in
real-world applications is usually unknown. We
propose the first optimization method that does
not require the knowledge of the mixing time, yet
obtains the optimal asymptotic convergence rate
when applied to convex problems. We further
show that our approach can be extended to: (i)
finding stationary points in non-convex optimization with Markovian data, and (ii) obtaining better
dependence on the mixing time in temporal difference (TD) learning; in both cases, our method
is completely oblivious to the mixing time. Our
method relies on a novel combination of multilevel Monte Carlo (MLMC) gradient estimation
together with an adaptive learning method.

A natural and popular way to characterize temporal data
dependencies is to assume that the data evolves according
to a Markov chain (Levin & Peres, 2017). This gives rise to
stochastic optimization problems with Markovian data: In
such problems, the objective is the same as the one in Eq. (1);
nevertheless, the learner cannot access i.i.d. samples from µ,
but rather a sequence z1 , z2 , . . . of dependent samples that
arrive from a Markov chain whose stationary distribution
is µ. As we next describe, solving such problems poses a
challenge to standard training methods.
A key parameter in the analysis of optimization problems
with Markovian data is the mixing time τmix , which is the
minimal time difference between two approximately independent samples (see formal definition in Eq. (3)). Devising
efficient algorithms for such problems crucially rely on
knowing τmix , and a lack of this knowledge may lead to a
significant performance degradation.

1. Introduction
Stochastic optimization is one of the most important tools in
machine learning (ML). A stochastic optimization problem
is generally formalized as
min F (w) := Ez∼µ [f (w; z)] ,

w∈K

(1)

where K ⊆ Rd is the optimization domain, {w 7→ f (·; z)}
is a set of loss functions, and µ is some unknown data
distribution over z ∈ Ω. A typical assumption in ML is that
data samples are independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) according to µ. Under this assumption, there is a wide
variety of methods for solving the problem (1), especially
in the convex case (e.g., Nemirovski et al., 2009). However,
this setting fails to capture many real-world problems in
economics, control, and reinforcement learning (RL), in
1

Viterby Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 A Viterbi Fellow. Correspondence to: Ron
Dorfman <rdorfman@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Prior work on stochastic optimization with Markovian data
assume the knowledge of the mixing time and use it explicitly to obtain favorable performance guarantees (Duchi
et al., 2012; Bresler et al., 2020; Jain et al., 2021). Unfortunately, in real world applications, the mixing time is usually
unknown in-advance, which hurts the practicality of these
approaches. Alternatively, one may consider estimating
the mixing time directly from data; however, the sample
complexity of mixing time estimation is quite large, and it
depends on specific properties of the Markov chain (Hsu
et al., 2017; Wolfer & Kontorovich, 2019; Wolfer, 2020).
In this work, we propose an efficient first-order algorithm
for stochastic optimization with Markovian data that does
not require the knowledge of the mixing time, yet obtains
convergence rates as if the mixing time was known. In that
sense, our method is adaptive to the mixing time. Focusing
on the stochastic convex optimization setting, we show that
after T iterations and Õ(T ) data
p samples, our method obtains a convergence rate of Õ( τmix /T ), which is optimal
up to logarithmic factors (Duchi et al., 2012).
Our contribution goes beyond the convex setting as we also
provide convergence results for two additional settings: (i)
in the non-convex case, we show that after observing Õ(T )

