On the Adversarial Robustness of Causal Algorithmic Recourse

Ricardo Dominguez-Olmedo 1 2 Amir-Hossein Karimi 1 3 Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract
Algorithmic recourse seeks to provide actionable
recommendations for individuals to overcome unfavorable classification outcomes from automated
decision-making systems. Recourse recommendations should ideally be robust to reasonably small
uncertainty in the features of the individual seeking recourse. In this work, we formulate the adversarially robust recourse problem and show that
recourse methods that offer minimally costly recourse fail to be robust. We then present methods
for generating adversarially robust recourse for
linear and for differentiable classifiers. Finally,
we show that regularizing the decision-making
classifier to behave locally linearly and to rely
more strongly on actionable features facilitates
the existence of adversarially robust recourse.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) classifiers are increasingly being
used for consequential decision-making in sensitive domains
such as criminal justice and finance (e.g., granting pretrial
bail or loan approval). The need to preserve human agency
despite the rise in automated decisions faced by individuals has motivated the study of algorithmic recourse, which
aims to empower individuals by providing them with actionable recommendations to reverse unfavorable algorithmic decisions (Ustun et al., 2019). Prior works have argued that for recourse to warrant trust, the decision-maker
must commit to reversing an unfavorable decision upon the
decision-subject fully adopting their prescribed recourse
recommendations (Wachter et al., 2017; Venkatasubramanian & Alfano, 2020; Karimi et al., 2022). We argue that if
algorithmic recourse is indeed to be treated as a contractual
agreement, then recourse recommendations must be robust
to plausible uncertainties arising in the recourse process.
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Tübingen, Germany 3 ETH Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ricardo Dominguez-Olmedo <ricardo.olmedo@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Robust
recourse action

Non-robust
recourse action
x

Figure 1: Adversarially robust recourse actions must lead
to positive classification outcomes for all individuals in the
uncertainty set around the individual x seeking recourse.

For instance, consider a banking institution that promises
to approve the loan of an individual if they increase their
savings by some given amount. Suppose that by the time
the individual achieves the prescribed savings increase, the
individual’s weekly working hours have been slightly reduced due to unforeseen circumstances and the decisionmaking classifier still deems the individual likely to default
on the loan. Shielding recourse against uncertainty ex-post
by nonetheless granting the loan may be detrimental to
both the bank (e.g., monetary loss) and the individual (e.g.,
bankruptcy and inability to secure future loans), while breaking the recourse promise would negate the effort exerted by
the individual and erode trust in the decision maker. We
therefore argue for the necessity of ensuring that recourse
recommendations are ex-ante robust to uncertainty.
In this work, we direct our focus towards robustifying recourse recommendations against uncertainty in the features
of the individual seeking recourse. Such uncertainty may
arise due to the temporal nature of recourse (e.g., some
features may not be static), and/or the presence of noise,
adversarial manipulation and other misrepresentations or
errors. We adopt a robust optimization view and propose to
characterize the uncertainty around the reported features of
the individual x by defining an uncertainty set B(x) which
we assume contains the true features of the individual at
the time recourse is offered and/or plausible future feature
values arising from the temporal nature of recourse. We then
seek recourse recommendations that remain valid (i.e., lead

