Private optimization in the interpolation regime:
faster rates and hardness results
Hilal Asi * 1 Karan Chadha * 1 Gary Cheng * 1 John Duchi 1 2

Abstract
In non-private stochastic convex optimization,
stochastic gradient methods converge much faster
on interpolation problems—namely, problems
where there exists a solution that simultaneously
minimizes all of the sample losses—than on noninterpolating ones; similar improvements are not
known in the private setting. In this paper, we
investigate differentially private stochastic optimization in the interpolation regime. First, we
show that without additional assumptions, interpolation problems do not exhibit an improved
convergence rates with differential privacy. However, when the functions exhibit quadratic growth
around the optimum, we show (near) exponential
improvements in the private sample complexity.
In particular, we propose an adaptive algorithm
that improves the sample complexity to achieve
expected error α from ε√d α to α1ρ + dε log α1
for any fixed ρ > 0, while retaining the standard minimax-optimal sample complexity for noninterpolation problems. We prove a lower bound
that shows the dimension-dependent term in the
expression above is tight. Furthermore, we provide a superefficiency result which demonstrates
the necessity of the polynomial term for adaptive
algorithms: any algorithm that has a polylogarithmic sample complexity for interpolation problems
cannot achieve the minimax-optimal rates for the
family of non-interpolation problems.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the problem of differentially private
stochastic convex optimization (DP-SCO) where given a
*

Equal contribution;
authors ordered alphabetically.
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, USA 2 Department of Statistics, Stanford University,
Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Karan Chadha <knchadha@stanford.edu>, Gary Cheng <chenggar@stanford.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

iid

dataset S = S1n ∼ P we wish to solve
Z
minimize f (x) = EP [F (x; S)] =

F (x; s)dP (s)
Ω

subject to x ∈ X ,
(1)
under the constraint of differential privacy. In problem (1),
X ⊂ Rd is the parameter space, S is a sample space, and
{F (·; s) : s ∈ S} is a collection of convex losses. In
particular, we study the interpolation setting where there
exists a solution that simultaneously minimizes all of the
sample losses.
Interpolation problems are ubiquitous in machine learning
applications: for example, least squares problems with consistent solutions (Strohmer & Vershynin, 2009; Needell
et al., 2014), and problems with over-parametrized models
where a perfect predictor exists (Ma et al., 2018; Belkin
et al., 2018; 2019). This has led to a great deal of work
on the advantages and implications of interpolation (Srebro
et al., 2010; Cotter et al., 2011; Belkin et al., 2018; 2019).
Interpolation problems for non-private SCO are well understood, demonstrating significant improvements in rates
over non-interpolation problems (Srebro et al., 2010; Cotter
et al., 2011; Ma et al., 2018; Vaswani et al., 2019; Woodworth & Srebro, 2021). For general convex functions, Srebro et al. (2010) developed algorithms that obtain O( n1 )
sub-optimality, improving over the minimax-optimal rate
O( √1n ) for non-interpolation problems. Even more dramatic improvements are possible when the functions exhibit
growth around the minimizer, as Vaswani et al. (2019) show
that SGD achieves exponential rates in this setting compared
to polynomial rates without interpolation.
Despite the recent progress and increased interest in interpolation problems, they remain poorly understood in the
private setting. Current work in DP-SCO has made substantial progress in characterizing tight rates for private
optimization in a variety of settings (Bassily et al., 2014;
2019; Feldman et al., 2020; Asi et al., 2021b;c). However,
none of the existing works, to our knowledge, in private
optimization study interpolation problems.
Given (i) the importance of differential privacy and interpo-

