Score Matching Enables Causal Discovery of Nonlinear Additive Noise Models

Paul Rolland 1 Volkan Cevher 1 Matthäus Kleindessner 2 Chris Russel 2 Bernhard Schölkopf 2
Dominik Janzing 2 Francesco Locatello 2

Abstract
This paper demonstrates how to recover causal
graphs from the score of the data distribution
in non-linear additive (Gaussian) noise models.
Using score matching algorithms as a building
block, we show how to design a new generation of scalable causal discovery methods. To
showcase our approach, we also propose a new
efficient method for approximating the score’s
Jacobian, enabling to recover the causal graph.
Empirically, we find that the new algorithm,
called SCORE, is competitive with state-of-theart causal discovery methods while being significantly faster.

1. Introduction
In this work, we focus on causal discovery from purely
observational data, i.e., finding a causal Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG) underlying a given data set. This problem
is at the core of causality, since knowledge of the causal
graph support the prediction of the effect of interventions
(Peters et al., 2017; Schölkopf et al., 2021).
In general, the problem of causal discovery from observational data is ill-posed: there may be several generative
models with various causal structures that can produce the
same data distribution. Therefore, in order to make the
problem well-posed, we need to rely on extra assumptions
on the generative process. A popular solution is to assume
that the noise injected during the generation of each variable is additive (see equation (1)). Under additional assumptions on the link functions, it has been shown that such
model is identifiable from purely observational data (Peters
et al., 2014).
Many causal discovery algorithms maximize a suitable loss
1
École Polytechnique Fédéral de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland 2 Amazon, Tuebingen, Germany. Correspondence to:
Paul Rolland <paul.rolland@epfl.ch>, Francesco Locatello <locatelf@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

function over the set of (DAGs). Unfortunately, solving
such problem using classical loss functions is known to be
NP-hard (Chickering, 1996). Therefore, recent methods
focused on heuristic approximations, e.g., by using a
greedy approach (PC, FCI (Spirtes et al., 2000; Zhang,
2008), GES (Chickering, 2002), CAM (Bühlmann et al.,
2014) and others (Teyssier & Koller, 2012; Larranaga
et al., 1996; Singh & Valtorta, 1993; Cooper & Herskovits,
1992; Bouckaert, 1992)), by expressing the problem as a
continuous non-convex optimization problem and applying
first-order optimization methods (GraNDAG (Lachapelle
et al., 2019), NOTEARS (Zheng et al., 2018)), or by using
Reinforcement Learning methods (RL-BIC (Zhu et al.,
2019), CORL (Wang et al., 2021)).
There are two distinct aspects that make the search over
DAGs difficult: the size of the set of DAGs, which grows
super-exponentially with the number of nodes, and the
acyclicity constraint. In order to reduce the impact of
these two difficulties, approaches called order-based methods (Teyssier & Koller, 2012) tackle the problem in two
phases. First, they find a certain topological ordering of
the nodes, such that a node in the ordering can be a parent
only of the nodes appearing after it in the same ordering.
Second, the graph is constructed respecting the topological
ordering and pruning spurious edges, e.g., using sparse
regression (Bühlmann et al., 2014). While the first step still
requires to solve a combinatorial problem, the set of permutations is much smaller than the set of DAGs. Moreover,
once a topological order is fixed, the acyclicity constraint is
naturally enforced, making the pruning step easier to solve.
The method that we propose is an order-based one, where
the topological order is estimated based on an approximation of the score of the data distribution. The score of a
distribution with a differentiable probability density p(x)
is defined as the map ∇ log p(x).1 We show that for a nonlinear additive Gaussian noise model, it is possible to identify leaves of the causal graph by analysing its entailed observational score. By sequentially identifying the leaves
1

The term score has been used in the causality literature with
a different meaning. Classical works (Chickering, 2002) use this
term referring to the objective of an optimization problem yielding the causal structure as solution. In this paper, the term score
means ∇ log p(x) as in the statistics literature (Wilks, 1962).

