Inferring Cause and Effect in the Presence of Heteroscedastic Noise

Sascha Xu 1 Osman Mian 1 Alexander Marx ◦ 2 Jilles Vreeken ◦ 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Causal discovery based on conditional independence tests
can identify causal graphs up to Markov equivalence. To
learn fully directed graphs, we need to disambiguate between Markov equivalent graphs, which entails inferring
the causal direction between pairs of statistically dependent
variables. This problem is known as bi-variate causal inference. Pearl (2000) showed that it is impossible to tell cause
from effect from observational data without making additional assumptions about the data generating process.
What assumptions to make is the central question in causal
inference. While these should be strong enough as to permit formal guarantees on identifiability of the model, they
◦
Joint senior author 1 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany 2 ETH Zürich & ETH AI
Center, Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Sascha Xu
<sascha.xu@cispa.de>, Jilles Vreeken <jv@cispa.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Age

Weight

We study the problem of identifying cause and
effect over two univariate continuous variables
X and Y from a sample of their joint distribution. Our focus lies on the setting when the
variance of the noise may be dependent on the
cause. We propose to partition the domain of the
cause into multiple segments where the noise indeed is dependent. To this end, we minimize a
scale-invariant, penalized regression score, finding the optimal partitioning using dynamic programming. We show under which conditions
this allows us to identify the causal direction for
the linear setting with heteroscedastic noise, for
the non-linear setting with homoscedastic noise,
as well as empirically confirm that these results
generalize to the non-linear and heteroscedastic case. Altogether, the ability to model heteroscedasticity translates into an improved performance in telling cause from effect on a wide
range of synthetic and real-world datasets.

80

Children
Adults

150
100

60
40
20

50
20

40 60
Age

80

50

100

150

Weight

Figure 1. Age vs. Weight from the Tübingen cause-effect benchmark dataset (Mooij et al., 2016). Different noise variances for
adolescents/young adults and adults overlap in the anti-causal direction and create the asymmetry to distinguish cause from effect.

should at the same time be as likely as possible to hold
in practice. The perhaps most common assumption in bivariate causal inference is the additive noise model, where
the noise is independent of the cause (Bühlmann et al.,
2014; Peters et al., 2014; Shimizu et al., 2006; Hoyer et al.,
2009). As would be expected, methods based on this assumption are successful when it holds, but as Tagasovska
et al. (2020) show, these indeed fail when the noise does
depend on the cause, as for example, with location-scaled
noise.
In this work, we focus on the bi-variate setting and propose
a causal model that includes heteroscedastic noise distributions. That is, rather than wishing it away, we explicitly
permit the variance of the noise to depend on the cause.
We provide conditions under which this causal model is
identifiable by explicitly modelling the scale of the noise
with a regularized likelihood model. In particular, we give
proofs for the linear setting with heteroscedastic noise, and
for the non-linear setting with homoscedastic noise. Further, we empirically validate that our method can identify the causal direction for non-linear models with heteroscedastic noise, as well.
As an example, consider Fig. 1, in which we depict the Age
vs. Weight pair from the Tübingen cause-effect benchmark
dataset. In the causal direction (left) it is possible to find
two regions with different noise, while in the anti-causal
direction (right) it is not. Under our assumptions this translates into a higher negative log-likelihood for the causal direction, even if we rescale the variables between zero and

