On Numerical Integration in Neural Ordinary Differential Equations

Aiqing Zhu 1 2 Pengzhan Jin 3 Beibei Zhu 4 Yifa Tang 1 2

Abstract
The combination of ordinary differential equations and neural networks, i.e., neural ordinary
differential equations (Neural ODE), has been
widely studied from various angles. However,
deciphering the numerical integration in Neural ODE is still an open challenge, as many researches demonstrated that numerical integration
significantly affects the performance of the model.
In this paper, we propose the inverse modified differential equations (IMDE) to clarify the influence
of numerical integration on training Neural ODE
models. IMDE is determined by the learning task
and the employed ODE solver. It is shown that
training a Neural ODE model actually returns a
close approximation of the IMDE, rather than the
true ODE. With the help of IMDE, we deduce that
(i) the discrepancy between the learned model and
the true ODE is bounded by the sum of discretization error and learning loss; (ii) Neural ODE using
non-symplectic numerical integration fail to learn
conservation laws theoretically. Several experiments are performed to numerically verify our
theoretical analysis.

1. Introduction
Recently, Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Neural
ODE) (Chen et al., 2018) were proposed as a continuous
model by embedding neural networks into continuous dynamical systems, and became an important option of model
architecture. They offered dynamical systems perspectives
on deep learning researches and thus have attracted increas1
LSEC, ICMSEC, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190,
China 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
4
School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Science and
Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. Correspondence to:
Yifa Tang <tyf@lsec.cc.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ing attention. For example, Yan et al. (2020) proposed
TisODE to further enhance robustness according to the nonintersecting characteristics of ODE. Botev et al. (2021)
experimentally found that Neural ODE are the most effective approach to model latent dynamics from images due to
continuous and time-reversible priors.
Despite ODE dynamics benefit models, we have to apply a
numerical integration in Neural ODE, which prevents the
model from being consistent with the design. Gusak et al.
(2020) and Zhuang et al. (2020) observed that changing
the numerical solver yields performance degradation. Ott
et al. (2021) and Queiruga et al. (2020) studied how the
numerical integration influences the Neural ODE model and
they proposed to adjust the step size and use high order
solver to train Neural ODE, respectively. High-accuracy integration is able to loosen the impact of discretization error,
however, quantifying such influences stills remains open.
In this work, we also focus on the numerical integration
in Neural ODE but we aim to decipher it theoretically and
clarify the influence rigorously.
The main ingredient of this work is the formal analysis
(Feng, 1991). Historically, modified differential equation
is an important tool for understanding the numerical behavior of solving ODE (Eirola, 1993; Feng, 1991; 1993;
Sanz-Serna, 1992; Yoshida, 1993). The methodology is to
interpret the numerical solution of the original system as the
exact solution of a perturbed equation. Herein, this idea is
tailored to Neural ODE. We first search for a perturbed differential equation such that its numerical solution matches
the exact solution of the true system and then show that
training Neural ODE returns a close approximation of this
perturbed equation. The perturbed equation is named as
inverse modified differential equation (IMDE) in this paper.
Several experiments are performed to verify our theoretical
analysis. Although the closed-form expression of the IMDE
is inaccessible as it is calculated via the true system, we
can still clarify the influence of numerical integration on
Neural ODE with the help of IMDE. In summary, we list
several statements derived via the proposed IMDE that will
be documented in detail later:
• The trained Neural ODE model is a close approximation of the IMDE, i.e., the difference between the
learned Neural ODE model and the truncation of the

