Generative Cooperative Networks for Natural Language Generation

Sylvain Lamprier * 1 Thomas Scialom * 1 2 Antoine Chaffin 3 4 Vincent Claveau 3 5 Ewa Kijak 3 Jacopo Staiano 2
Benjamin Piwowarski 1 5

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have
known a tremendous success for many continuous generation tasks, especially in the field of
image generation. However, for discrete outputs
such as language, optimizing GANs remains an
open problem with many instabilities, as no gradient can be properly back-propagated from the
discriminator output to the generator parameters.
An alternative is to learn the generator network
via reinforcement learning, using the discriminator signal as a reward, but such a technique suffers from moving rewards and vanishing gradient
problems. Finally, it often falls short compared
to direct maximum-likelihood approaches. In this
paper, we introduce Generative Cooperative Networks, in which the discriminator architecture
is cooperatively used along with the generation
policy to output samples of realistic texts for the
task at hand. We give theoretical guarantees of
convergence for our approach, and study various
efficient decoding schemes to empirically achieve
state-of-the-art results in two main NLG tasks.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) have known a tremendous success for many
generation tasks. In GANs, a discriminator network is
trained to distinguish real data from fake ones, the latter
being generated via a generator network trained to fool the
discriminator. Both networks are trained as a min-max twoplayer game, which is referred to as adversarial training.
Under some strong assumptions, (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
gives theoretical guarantees of convergence of the generator
towards the distribution underlying observed training data.
*
Equal contribution 1 ISIR - Sorbonne Université, Paris, France
ReciTAL, Paris, France 3 IRISA, Rennes, France 4 IMATAG,
Rennes, France 5 CNRS. Correspondence to: Sylvain Lamprier
<sylvain.lamprier@isir.upmc.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Empirically, in continuous domains such as for image generation, these architectures have shown impressive abilities
to generate realistic – unobserved – data, and have been
extensively studied.
However, for discrete domains such as Natural Language Generation (NLG), optimizing GANs remains an
open-problem, as no gradient flow can be properly backpropagated from the discriminator output to the generator parameters. Language GANs require to be optimized
via Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods, with rewards
provided by discriminator networks (de Masson d’Autume
et al., 2019). Compared to classical NLG methods, such
approaches have the potential to 1) avoid the well-known exposure bias plaguing the traditional MLE (teacher-forcing)
training mode (Ranzato et al., 2015) and 2) automatically
discover useful metrics to optimize via RL – compared to
manually designed ones (Ranzato et al., 2015; Paulus et al.,
2017; Scialom et al., 2019). Still, GAN-based approaches
suffer from both high variance and non-stationary reward
distributions, leading to many instabilities, and therefore
usually fall short compared to traditional MLE approaches
(Caccia et al., 2020).
Theoretically sound attempts such as (Che et al., 2017) proposed to augment the discriminator scores with maximumlikelihood signals in order to stabilize rewards, but still
suffer from high variance in practice (Caccia et al., 2020).
Other attempts such as (Scialom et al., 2020a) proposed
to rather pick training samples close to generative distribution modes to smooth the learning process and thus prevent
abrupt changes in the reward function. However, this approach, if not employed with a carefully designed learning
rate scheduler, still exhibits high instabilities when training
until convergence – making it harder to adapt the learning
process for new NLG tasks or datasets.
Relying on the assumption that discrimination is easier than
generation, some recent approaches, such as (Deng et al.,
2020), (Scialom et al., 2020b) or (Scialom et al., 2021b),
have proposed to employ a cooperative decoding scheme
where the discriminator network is used along with the generator to output more realistic samples. (Scialom et al.,
2020b) bias the standard beam search with scores provided
by the discriminator network, to favor sequences that are

