Choosing Answers in ε-Best-Answer Identification for Linear Bandits

Marc Jourdan 1 Rémy Degenne 1

Abstract
In pure-exploration problems, information is gathered sequentially to answer a question on the
stochastic environment. While best-arm identification for linear bandits has been extensively
studied in recent years, few works have been dedicated to identifying one arm that is ε-close to the
best one (and not exactly the best one). In this
problem with several correct answers, an identification algorithm should focus on one candidate
among those answers and verify that it is correct.
We demonstrate that picking the answer with highest mean does not allow an algorithm to reach
asymptotic optimality in terms of expected sample complexity. Instead, a furthest answer should
be identified. Using that insight to choose the
candidate answer carefully, we develop a simple
procedure to adapt best-arm identification algorithms to tackle ε-best-answer identification in
transductive linear stochastic bandits. Finally, we
propose an asymptotically optimal algorithm for
this setting, which is shown to achieve competitive empirical performance against existing modified best-arm identification algorithms.

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) setting is an extensively
studied problem in sequential decision making (Robbins,
1952; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). The environment
is represented by a set of arms, each associated with an
unknown reward distribution. The agent interacts with it
by sequentially “pulling” arms, that is choosing an arm and
observing a sample from its distribution. We focus on the
pure-exploration framework in which the objective of the
agent is to answer a query as fast and reliably as possible,
while disregarding the accumulated cost. We consider noisy
linear observations depending on an unknown parameter µ.
1

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9198CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France. Correspondence to: Marc Jourdan <marc.jourdan@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The pure-exploration setting for stochastic bandits was first
studied in Even-Dar et al. (2002) and Bubeck et al. (2009).
It has been studied in two major theoretical frameworks
(Audibert et al., 2010; Gabillon et al., 2012; Jamieson &
Nowak, 2014; Kaufmann et al., 2016): the fixed-budget
setting and the fixed-confidence setting. In the fixed-budget
setting, the objective is to minimize the probability of
misidentifying a correct answer given a fixed number of
samples. We consider the fixed-confidence setting, where
the agent aims at minimizing the number of pulls to identify
a correct answer with confidence 1 − δ.
The most well known pure exploration setting is best-arm
identification (BAI) (Audibert et al., 2010; Chen et al.,
2017), in which the goal is to return the arm with largest
expected reward. Numerous variants of BAI have been considered in recent years: linear bandits (Soare et al., 2014;
Zaki et al., 2020; Degenne et al., 2020a), thresholding bandits (Locatelli et al., 2016; Cheshire et al., 2021), minimum
threshold (Kaufmann et al., 2018), combinatorial bandits
(Chen et al., 2014; Katz-Samuels et al., 2020; Jourdan et al.,
2021), top-m identification (Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2012;
Katz-Samuels & Scott, 2019; Réda et al., 2021), matching
bandits (Sentenac et al., 2021), logistic bandits (Jun et al.,
2021), identifying all ε-optimal answers (Mason et al., 2020;
Al Marjani et al., 2022), etc.
When the gap between the best and the second best arm is
small, BAI problems are difficult, meaning that an algorithm
needs a large number of samples to be correct. To avoid
wasteful queries, practitioners might be interested in the
easier task of identifying one answer that is ε-close to the
best one, but not exactly the best one.
In this work, we consider (ε, δ)-PAC best-answer identification (ε-BAI) for transductive linear bandits. In transductive
bandits (Fiez et al., 2019), the set of arms K that can be
pulled by the agent is different from the set of answers Z
on which the identification procedure focuses. In contrast
to best-answer identification, our agent aims at identifying
one ε-optimal answer (defined below) among the existing
ones (Mannor & Tsitsiklis, 2004; Even-Dar et al., 2006;
Sabato, 2019). Note that the ranking and selection literature
explores this question with a different approach, see Hong
et al. (2021) for a review. ε-BAI has been studied for MAB
(Garivier & Kaufmann, 2021), spectral bandits (Kocák &

