Cooperative Online Learning in Stochastic and Adversarial MDPs

Tal Lancewicki * 1 Aviv Rosenberg * 1 Yishay Mansour 1 2

Abstract
We study cooperative online learning in stochastic
and adversarial Markov decision process (MDP).
That is, in each episode, m agents interact with
an MDP simultaneously and share information
in order to minimize their individual regret. We
consider environments with two types of randomness: fresh – where each agent’s trajectory is sampled i.i.d, and non-fresh – where the realization is
shared by all agents (but each agent’s trajectory
is also affected by its own actions). More precisely, with non-fresh randomness the realization
of every cost and transition is fixed at the start
of each episode, and agents that take the same
action in the same state at the same time observe
the same cost and next state. We thoroughly analyze all relevant settings, highlight the challenges
and differences between the models, and prove
nearly-matching regret lower and upper bounds.
To our knowledge, we are the first to consider cooperative reinforcement learning (RL) with either
non-fresh randomness or in adversarial MDPs.

1. Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL;
see Zhang et al. (2021a)) achieved impressive empirical
success in many applications such as cyber-physical systems
(Adler & Blue, 2002; Wang et al., 2016), finance (Lee et al.,
2002; 2007) and sensor/communication networks (Cortes
et al., 2004; Choi et al., 2009). Many of the theoretical
work on MARL focus on Markov Games (MGs) (Jin et al.,
2021), where agents have a shared state, the transition and
cost is affected by all agents’ actions, and usually the goal
is to converge to an equilibrium. On the other hand, in
cooperative learning (Lidard et al., 2021), agents do not
affect each other and the notion of equilibrium becomes
irrelevant. In this model, agents share information with each
*

Equal contribution 1 Tel Aviv University 2 Google Research, Tel Aviv.
Correspondence to: Tal Lancewicki
<lancewicki@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

other and the goal here is to utilize the shared information
in order to obtain a significant improvement upon singleagent performance. This model is a generalization of the
extensively studied Multi-agent multi-armed bandit (MAB)
model (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2016) and reveals many new
challenges that are unique to MDPs.
In this paper we initiate the study of two topics not addressed before in the Cooperative MARL literature. First,
we differentiate between two types of randomness: fresh –
where each agent’s trajectory is sampled i.i.d, and non-fresh
– where at any time the cost and transition kernel’s randomness is shared by all agents. More precisely, if at the same
time two different agents perform the same action in the
same state, they observe the same cost and the same next
state. Second, we consider cooperation in the challenging
adversarial MDP setting that generalizes stochastic MDPs
and allows to model temporal changes in the environment
through costs that change arbitrarily and are chosen by an
adversary.
While previous works focus mostly on fresh randomness,
non-fresh randomness models are just as well-motivated
since different agents might experience the same dynamics and rewards when visiting the same state simultaneously. Conceptually, non-fresh randomness models cases
where the randomness is more a function of the time than
the agent. For example, drones that fly together experience similar weather conditions and autonomous vehicles
that drive on the same roads on the same time encounter
the same traffic congestion. Moreover, the non-fresh randomness model is theoretically highly challenging, as we
show in this paper. We indicate a gap in the lower bounds
between fresh and non-fresh randomness and identify the
weaknesses of current optimistic approaches in handling
non-fresh randomness, thus requiring us to develop new
algorithmic techniques.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows. First,
we derive multi-agent versions of known regret minimization algorithms in stochastic and adversarial MDPs, and thoroughly analyze their regret in the fresh randomness model.
To complement our bounds, we formally prove matching
lower bounds (the adversarial MDP with unknown transitions lower bound nearly-matches, as optimal regret has not
been achieved even for a single agent). Second, we point to

