Accelerated Federated Learning with Decoupled Adaptive Optimization

Jiayin Jin∗ 1 Jiaxiang Ren∗ 1 Yang Zhou 1 Lingjuan Lyu 2 Ji Liu 3 Dejing Dou 3 4

Abstract
The federated learning (FL) framework enables
edge clients to collaboratively learn a shared inference model while keeping privacy of training
data on clients. Recently, many heuristics efforts
have been made to generalize centralized adaptive optimization methods, such as SGDM, Adam,
AdaGrad, etc., to federated settings for improving
convergence and accuracy. However, there is still
a paucity of theoretical principles on where to and
how to design and utilize adaptive optimization
methods in federated settings. This work aims to
develop novel adaptive optimization methods for
FL from the perspective of dynamics of ordinary
differential equations (ODEs). First, an analytic
framework is established to build a connection
between federated optimization methods and decompositions of ODEs of corresponding centralized optimizers. Second, based on this analytic
framework, a momentum decoupling adaptive optimization method, F ED DA, is developed to fully
utilize the global momentum on each local iteration and accelerate the training convergence. Last
but not least, full batch gradients are utilized to
mimic centralized optimization in the end of the
training process to ensure the convergence and
overcome the possible inconsistency caused by
adaptive optimization methods.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in federated learning (FL) present a promising machine learning (ML) paradigm that enables collaborative training of shared ML models over multiple distributed devices without the need for data sharing, while
mitigating the data isolation as well as protecting the data
privacy (Konečný et al., 2016b;a; McMahan et al., 2016;
*
Equal contribution 1 Auburn University, USA 2 Sony AI, Japan
Baidu Research, China 4 University of Oregon, USA. Correspondence to: Yang Zhou <yangzhou@auburn.edu>, Lingjuan Lyu
<lingjuan.lv@sony.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2017a; Kairouz et al., 2021). In a FL model, end clients
(e.g., Android phones) use their local data to train a local
ML model, while keeping the local data decentralized. The
end clients send the parameter updates of local models (e.g.,
Android phone updates) rather than raw data to the central
server (e.g., Android cloud). The server produces a shared
global ML model by aggregating the local updates.
One of critical challenges in the FL paradigm is expensive communication cost between the clients and
server (Konečný et al., 2016b; Caldas et al., 2018a; Liu
et al., 2019; Hamer et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020). Traditional federated optimization methods, such as FedAvg
and its variants (Konečný et al., 2016b;a; McMahan et al.,
2017a; Kairouz et al., 2021), use local client updates, where
the clients perform multiple epochs of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) on their local datasets to update their models
before communicating to the server. This can dramatically
reduce the communication required to train a FL model.
Despite achieving remarkable performance, FL techniques
often suffer from two key challenging issues: (1) Client
drift. Too many SGD epochs on the same clients may result
in overfitting to their local datasets, such that the local models are far away from globally optimal models and the FL
training achieves slower convergence (Karimireddy et al.,
2020d; Woodworth et al., 2020; Reddi et al., 2021a; Karimireddy et al., 2021); and (2) lack of adaptivity. Standard
SGD optimization methods used in most FL models may be
unsuitable for federated settings and result in high communication costs (Zhang et al., 2019; Reddi et al., 2021a).
In centralized ML models, adaptive optimization methods,
such as SGD with Momentum (SGDM) (Rumelhart et al.,
1986; Qian, 1999; Sutskever et al., 2013), Adaptive Moment
Estimation (Adam) (Kingma & Ba, 2015), Adaptive Gradient (AdaGrad) (McMahan & Streeter, 2010; Duchi et al.,
2011b), etc., have achieved superior success in speeding up
the training convergence. Adaptive optimization methods
are designed to control possible deviations of mini-batch
gradients in centralized models. Several recent studies try
to adapt centralized optimization algorithms to the federated learning settings for achieving faster convergence and
higher test accuracy (Xie et al., 2019; Reddi et al., 2021a;
Karimireddy et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b).
The above adaptive optimization methods can be broadly

