Adversarially Robust Models may not Transfer Better: Sufficient Conditions for
Domain Transferability from the View of Regularization

Xiaojun Xu * 1 Jacky Yibo Zhang * 1 Evelyn Ma 1 Danny Son 1 Oluwasanmi Koyejo 1 Bo Li 1

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) robustness and domain
generalization are fundamentally correlated: they
essentially concern data distribution shifts under
adversarial and natural settings, respectively. On
one hand, recent studies show that more robust
(adversarially trained) models are more generalizable. On the other hand, there is a lack of theoretical understanding of their fundamental connections. In this paper, we explore the relationship
between regularization and domain transferability
considering different factors such as norm regularization and data augmentations (DA). We propose a general theoretical framework proving that
factors involving the model function class regularization are sufficient conditions for relative
domain transferability. Our analysis implies that
“robustness” is neither necessary nor sufficient for
transferability; rather, regularization is a more fundamental perspective for understanding domain
transferability. We then discuss popular DA protocols (including adversarial training) and show
when they can be viewed as the function class regularization under certain conditions and therefore
improve generalization. We conduct extensive
experiments to verify our theoretical findings and
show several counterexamples where robustness
and generalization are negatively correlated on
different datasets.

1. Introduction
Domain generalization (or domain transferability) is the task
of training machine learning models with data from one or
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign.
Correspondence to:
Xiaojun Xu <xiaojun3@illinois.edu>, Jacky Yibo Zhang <yiboz@illinois.edu>,
Oluwasanmi Koyejo <sanmi@illinois.edu>,
Bo Li
<lbo@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

more source domains that can be adapted to a target domain,
often via low-cost fine-tuning. Thus, domain generalization
refers to approaches designed to address the natural data
distribution shift problem (Muandet et al., 2013; Rosenfeld et al., 2021). A wide array of approaches have been
proposed to address domain transferability, including finetuning the last layer of DNNs (Huang et al., 2018), invariant
feature optimization (Muandet et al., 2013), efficient model
selection for fine-tuning (You et al., 2019), and optimal
transport based domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2016).
Understanding domain generalization has emerged as an
important task in the machine learning community.
On the other hand, robust machine learning aims to tackle
the problem of adversarial data distribution shift. Both empirical and certified robust learning approaches have been
proposed, such as empirical adversarial training (Madry
et al., 2018) and certified defenses based on both deterministic and probabilistic approaches (Cohen et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2019; 2021; 2020).
Recent studies (Salman et al., 2020; Utrera et al., 2020)
draw a connection between domain transferability and robustness, and suggest that adversarially robust models (i.e.,
models with good accuracy under adversarial attacks) are
more domain transferable. However, a theoretical analysis of their fundamental connections is still lacking, and
it is unclear whether robustness is necessary or sufficient.
To fill in this gap, this paper aims to answer the following
questions: Is model robustness sufficient or necessary for
domain transferability? What are sufficient conditions for
domain transferability?
To answer the first question, our analysis and experiments
show that adversarial robustness is neither sufficient nor
necessary for domain transferability and they can even be
negatively correlated. To answer the second question, we
first observe that domain transferability is fundamentally a
“relative” concept, as it by definition involves two domains,
i.e., the source/target domain. With the observation, we
propose a general theoretical framework that characterizes
sufficient conditions for the relative domain transferability
from the view of function class regularization. The relative
domain transferability, loosely speaking, is the performance
of the fine-tuned source model on the target domain relative

