Geometric Multimodal Contrastive Representation Learning

Petra Poklukar * 1 Miguel Vasco * 2 Hang Yin 1 Francisco S. Melo 2 Ana Paiva 2 Danica Kragic 1

Abstract
Learning representations of multimodal data that
are both informative and robust to missing modalities at test time remains a challenging problem
due to the inherent heterogeneity of data obtained from different channels. To address it,
we present a novel Geometric Multimodal Contrastive (GMC) representation learning method
consisting of two main components: i) a twolevel architecture consisting of modality-specific
base encoders, allowing to process an arbitrary
number of modalities to an intermediate representation of fixed dimensionality, and a shared
projection head, mapping the intermediate representations to a latent representation space; ii) a
multimodal contrastive loss function that encourages the geometric alignment of the learned representations. We experimentally demonstrate that
GMC representations are semantically rich and
achieve state-of-the-art performance with missing
modality information on three different learning
problems including prediction and reinforcement
learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Information regarding objects or environments in the world
can be recorded in the form of signals of different nature.
These different modality signals can be for instance images,
videos, sounds or text, and represent the same underlying
phenomena. Naturally, the performance of machine learning
models can be enhanced by leveraging the redundant and
complementary information provided by multiple modalities (Baltrušaitis et al., 2018). In particular, exploiting
such multimodal information has been shown to be successful in tasks such as classification (Tsai et al., 2019b;a),
*

Equal contribution 1 KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden 2 INESC-ID & Instituto Superior Técnico,
University of Lisbon, Portugal. Correspondence to: Miguel
Vasco <miguel.vasco@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>, Petra Poklukar <poklukar@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

7

7

z1

z1:2

z2

z1

z1:2

z2

5

5

Figure 1. We propose the Geometric Multimodal Contrastive
(GMC) framework to learn representations of multimodal data
by aligning the corresponding modality-specific (z1 or z2 ) and
complete (z1:2 ) representations (solid arrows, blue circles) and
contrasting with different modality-specific and complete pairs
(dashed lines, red circles).

generation (Wu & Goodman, 2018; Shi et al., 2019) and
control (Silva et al., 2020; Vasco et al., 2022a).
The advances of many of these methods can be attributed
to the efficient learning of multimodal data representations,
which reduces the inherent complexity of raw multimodal
data and enables the extraction of the underlying semantic correlations among the different modalities (Baltrušaitis
et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019). Generally, good representations of multimodal data i) capture the semantics from individual modalities necessary for performing a given downstream task. Additionally, in scenarios such as real-world
classification and control, it is essential that the obtained representations are ii) robust to missing modality information
during execution (Meo & Lanillos, 2021; Tremblay et al.,
2021; Zambelli et al., 2020). In order to fulfill i) and ii),
the unique characteristics of each modality need to be processed accordingly and efficiently combined, which remains
a challenging problem known as the heterogeneity gap in
multimodal representation learning (Guo et al., 2019).

