Asymptotically-Optimal Gaussian Bandits with Side Observations

Alexia Atsidakou * 1 Orestis Papadigenopoulos * 2 Constantine Caramanis 1 Sujay Sanghavi 1 3
Sanjay Shakkottai 1

Abstract
We study the problem of Gaussian bandits with
general side information, as first introduced by
Wu, Szepesvári, and György. In this setting, the
play of an arm reveals information about other
arms, according to an arbitrary a priori known
side information matrix: each element of this
matrix encodes the fidelity of the information
that the “row” arm reveals about the “column”
arm. In the case of Gaussian noise, this model
subsumes standard bandits, full-feedback, and
graph-structured feedback as special cases. In
this work, we first construct an LP-based asymptotic instance-dependent lower bound on the regret. The LP optimizes the cost (regret) required
to reliably estimate the suboptimality gap of each
arm. This LP lower bound motivates our main
contribution: the first known asymptotically optimal algorithm for this general setting.

1. Introduction
In the stochastic online learning framework, a player sequentially selects from a set of available actions (or “arms”)
and collects a stochastic reward associated with the chosen
action. Under the objective of maximizing the (expected)
cumulative reward collected over a number of rounds, the
“complexity” of an instance is greatly impacted by the nature of the feedback the player receives at the end of each
round. In the full-feedback case, for instance, where the
player observes the realized rewards of all actions, the most
reasonable (and provably optimal) strategy is to greedily
select at each round the action with maximum estimated
mean reward computed using the observed samples. In
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA 3 Amazon Science, USA. Correspondence
to: Alexia Atsidakou <atsidakou@utexas.edu>, Orestis Papadigenopoulos <papadig@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the bandit-feedback case (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Bubeck
& Cesa-Bianchi, 2012), on the other hand, where only the
reward of the chosen action is revealed to the player, more
sophisticated ideas have to be leveraged in order to align
the two conflicting objectives of the problem: exploration
(learning the best action) and exploitation (not playing suboptimal actions).
In a number of real world applications, however, the feedback does not fall into any of the above extreme categories,
since an action can potentially leak information regarding,
not only its own reward distribution, but also the distributions of other actions. Drawing an example from music
recommendation, the fact that a user likes a specific recommended song (corresponding to an action chosen by the
platform) can potentially imply that similar songs (e.g., of
the same artist or genre) might also be appreciated by the
user. In another example, encouraging a certain user of a
social network to advertise a purchased product (potentially
by offering a discount as part of a promotion campaign), the
seller can obtain valuable information about other neighboring users by recording their reactions.
Motivated by such practical scenarios, researchers have focused their attention on online learning models with richer
information structures – namely, feedback which interpolates between full and bandit (Mannor & Shamir, 2011;
Caron et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2014; Yun et al., 2018; Cortes
et al., 2020). While the presence of side observations permits improved regret guarantees compared to those of standard multi-armed bandits, techniques and algorithms that
have been proved successful for bandit-feedback (e.g., optimism principle and the UCB method) fail to achieve optimality. Indeed, enriching the feedback model severely
perplexes the role of exploration and exploitation. To illustrate, one can think of the following example: K − 1 arms
provide to the player standard bandit feedback. In addition
to these, there also exists an “information-revealing” arm
with (deterministically) zero reward, such that, once played,
the player gets full-feedback on the realized rewards of the
round, for all arms. Even in the above simple example, the
number of times (if any) this “information-revealing” arm
should played in a minimum regret solution is now a complex function of K and the (a priori unknown) suboptimality
gaps.

