Decomposing Temporal High-Order Interactions via Latent ODEs

Shibo Li 1 Robert M. Kirby 1 2 Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract
High-order interactions between multiple objects
are common in real-world applications. Although
tensor decomposition is a popular framework for
high-order interaction analysis and prediction,
most methods cannot well exploit the valuable
timestamp information in data. The existent methods either discard the timestamps or convert them
into discrete steps or use over-simplistic decomposition models. As a result, these methods might
not be capable enough of capturing complex, finegrained temporal dynamics or making accurate
predictions for long-term interaction results. To
overcome these limitations, we propose a novel
Temporal High-order Interaction decompoSition
model based on Ordinary Differential Equations
(THIS-ODE). We model the time-varying interaction result with a latent ODE. To capture the
complex temporal dynamics, we use a neural network (NN) to learn the time derivative of the ODE
state. We use the representation of the interaction
objects to model the initial value of the ODE and
to constitute a part of the NN input to compute the
state. In this way, the temporal relationships of the
participant objects can be estimated and encoded
into their representations. For tractable and scalable inference, we use forward sensitivity analysis
to efficiently compute the gradient of ODE state,
based on which we use integral transform to develop a stochastic mini-batch learning algorithm.
We demonstrate the advantage of our approach in
simulation and four real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Many applications involve interactions between multiple
objects. For example, customers purchase items at different grocery stores, and people take outdoor exercises at
1

2

School of Computing, University of Utah Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute, University of Utah. Correspondence to: Shandian Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

various places. From the results of those interactions, e.g.,
purchase amount and heart rates, an important task is to
learn a representation of the participant objects, i.e., embeddings, from which we can discover hidden structures
of the objects, such as communities and outliers, and build
predictive tools or pipelines for downstream applications,
such as recommendation and health counseling.
In practice, interaction data often includes valuable time information, namely the timestamp at which each interaction
occurred. This information implies rich, complex temporal
dynamics within the observed interactions. While tensor
decomposition (Tucker, 1966; Harshman, 1970; Chu and
Ghahramani, 2009; Choi and Vishwanathan, 2014; Zhe et al.,
2016b) is a popular framework for representation learning
and prediction of high-order interactions, current methods
has yet fully exploited the fine-grained temporal information.
Most methods either simply drop the timestamps (Pan et al.,
2020b; Fang et al., 2021a) or truncate the timestamps to
coarse steps, e.g., weeks or months, and learn a representation of the time steps (Xiong et al., 2010; Rogers et al., 2013;
Zhe et al., 2016a; Du et al., 2018). The temporal dependencies within each step are therefore ignored. While the most
recent work (Zhang et al., 2021) introduces time-varying
coefficients to support continuous time, the multilinear decomposition structure and polynomial spline modeling of
the coefficients might be oversimplistic, and restrict the
approach from capturing highly-nonlinear temporal relationships in data. As a result, the existent methods might not
be capable enough of learning complex, fine-grained temporal dynamics underlying the data and accurately predicting
long-term interaction results. Although recent works (Zhe
and Du, 2018; Pan et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2020) also use
point processes to estimate the temporal dependencies between the interaction events (e.g., excitation and inhibition),
they focus on event modeling and ignore the interaction
results. These methods cannot make use of the observed or
predict future interaction results.
To address these issues, we propose THIS-ODE, a novel decomposition model of temporal high-order interactions. Our
model can fully leverage continuous timestamps, flexibly
capture all kinds of complex temporal dynamics within the
interactions, and encode nonlinear temporal relationships
of the participant objects into their representations. Specifically, we model the result of each interaction with a latent

