A Hierarchical Bayesian Approach to Inverse Reinforcement Learning with
Symbolic Reward Machines

Weichao Zhou 1 Wenchao Li 1

Abstract
A misspecified reward can degrade sample efficiency and induce undesired behaviors in reinforcement learning (RL) problems. We propose
symbolic reward machines for incorporating highlevel task knowledge when specifying the reward
signals. Symbolic reward machines augment existing reward machine formalism by allowing transitions to carry predicates and symbolic reward
outputs. This formalism lends itself well to inverse reinforcement learning, whereby the key
challenge is determining appropriate assignments
to the symbolic values from a few expert demonstrations. We propose a hierarchical Bayesian approach for inferring the most likely assignments
such that the concretized reward machine can discriminate expert demonstrated trajectories from
other trajectories with high accuracy. Experimental results show that learned reward machines can
significantly improve training efficiency for complex RL tasks and generalize well across different
task environment configurations.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents rely on rewards to
measure the utility of each interaction with the environment (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016). As the complexity of RL tasks increases, it becomes difficult for the
agent to grasp the intricacies of the task solely from goaldriven reward functions – rewarding the agent only at the
end of each episode (Riedmiller et al., 2018; Parr & Russell, 1998). Reward machine (RM) is a formalism proposed
by (Icarte et al., 2022) for representing a reward function
as a finite-state automaton (FSA) (Baier & Katoen, 2008).
However, the design of RMs can quickly become cumbersome as the complexity of the tasks increases (Wainwright
1
Department of ECE, Boston University. Correspondence to:
Weichao Zhou <zwc662@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

& Jordan, 2008). In this paper, we draw inspiration from
symbolic finite automaton (SFA) and symbolic finite transducer (SFT) (Antoni & Veanes, 2017) and propose symbolic
reward machines (SRMs) which augment FSA-based RMs
by allowing the internal state transitions of an RM to carry
predicates and functions on the trajectory. In addition to
improving interpretability and conciseness of the reward
model, SRMs facilitate the expression of complex task scenarios and reward design patterns.
Given a reward structure, such as an RM, determining the appropriate reward assignments for individual conditions can
be challenging and time-consuming. Ill-assigned rewards
can undermine the effectiveness of the resulting reward functions (Abel et al., 2021). For instance, if a learning agent is
excessively awarded for the completion of a certain stage
of a task, the agent may end up repeatedly completing the
same stage to accumulate rewards instead of proceeding
to the next stage, a phenomenon known as reward hacking (Amodei et al., 2016). We envision that, in a typical
design routine of an SRM, a human engineer constructs the
SRM to incorporate high-level task information, but leave
the low-level details, such as the right amount of reward for
a specific event, empty or as holes. The SRM formalism
also facilitates the specification of symbolic constraints over
the holes for capturing important task-specific nuances.
Another contribution of this paper is a novel learning-based
approach for concretizing the holes in an SRM. Similar to
other inverse reinforcement learning settings (Fu et al., 2018;
Finn et al., 2016b; Ng & Russell, 2000; Finn et al., 2016a),
our approach makes use of example trajectories demonstrated by a human expert. We leverage the generative
adversarial approaches from (Finn et al., 2016a; Jeon et al.,
2018) to construct a discriminator with a neural-network
reward function to distinguish the expert trajectories from
the trajectories of an agent policy. However, our approach
works in a hierarchical Bayesian manner (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008). To circumvent the issue of non-differentiability
of SRMs, we employ a sampler to sample candidate instantiations of the holes to concretize the SRM. We introduce
a stochastic reward signal as the latent variable dependent
on the output of the concretized SRM and use a neuralnetwork reward function to perform importance sampling

