Input Dependent Sparse Gaussian Processes

Bahram Jafrasteh * 1 2 Carlos Villacampa-Calvo * 2 Daniel Hernández-Lobato 2

Abstract

Gaussian Processes (GPs) are non-parametric
models that provide accurate uncertainty estimates. Nevertheless, they have a cubic cost in
the number of data instances N . To overcome
this, sparse GP approximations are used, in which
a set of M  N inducing points is introduced.
The location of the inducing points is learned by
considering them parameters of an approximate
posterior distribution q. Sparse GPs, combined
with stochastic variational inference for inferring
q have a cost per iteration in O(M 3 ). Critically,
the inducing points determine the flexibility of the
model and they are often located in regions where
the latent function changes. A limitation is, however, that in some tasks a large number of inducing
points may be required to obtain good results. To
alleviate this, we propose here to amortize the
computation of the inducing points locations, as
well as the parameters of q. For this, we use a
neural network that receives a data instance as
an input and outputs the corresponding inducing
points locations and the parameters of q. We evaluate our method in several experiments, showing
that it performs similar or better than other stateof-the-art sparse variational GPs. However, in our
method the number of inducing points is reduced
drastically since they depend on the input data.
This makes our method scale to larger datasets
and have faster training and prediction times.

*

1
Equal contribution
Biomedical Research and Innovation Institute of Cádiz (INiBICA) Research Unit,
Puerta del Mar University, Cádiz, Spain 2 Computer Science Department, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
Madrid, Spain.
Correspondence to: Bahram Jafrasteh
<jafrasteh.bahram@inibica.es;bahram.jafrasteh@uam.es>,
Carlos Villacampa-Calvo <carlos.villacampa@uam.es>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Gaussian Processes (GPs) are non-parametric models that
can be used to address regression and classification machine
learning problems (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). GPs
become more expressive as the number of training instances
N grows and, since they are Bayesian models, they provide
a predictive distribution that estimates the uncertainty associated to the predictions made. This uncertainty estimation
or ability to know what is not known is critical in many
practical applications (Gal, 2016). Nevertheless, GPs suffer
from poor scalability as their training cost is O(N 3 ) per iteration due to the need of computing the inverse of a N × N
covariance matrix. Another limitation is that approximate
inference is needed with non-Gaussian likelihoods.
Sparse approximations can improve the cost of GPs. The
most popular ones introduce a set of M  N inducing
points. The inducing points and their associated posterior
values completely specify the posterior process at test points.
In Snelson & Ghahramani (2006), the computational gain
is obtained by assuming independence among the process
values at the training points given the inducing points and
their values. This can also be seen as using an approximate
GP prior (Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005). By contrast, in Titsias (2009) the computational gain is obtained
by combining variational inference (VI) with a posterior
approximation q that has a fixed part and a tunable part. In
both methods the cost is O(N M 2 ) per iteration and the inducing points, considered as model’s hyper-parameters, are
found by maximizing an estimate of the marginal likelihood.
Importantly, the VI approach of Titsias (2009) maximizes a
lower bound on the log-marginal likelihood as an indirect
way of minimizing the KL-divergence between an approximate posterior distribution for the process values at the
inducing points and the corresponding exact posterior. The
advantage is that the objective is expressed as a sum over
the training instances, allowing for mini-batch training and
stochastic optimization techniques to be applied on the objective (Hensman et al., 2015b). This reduces the cost to
O(M 3 ) per iteration, making GPs scalable to large datasets.
In sparse approximations one often observes in practice
that after the optimization process the inducing points are
located in regions of the input space in which the latent
function changes (Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006; Titsias,

