Algorithms for the Communication of Samples

Lucas Theis 1 Noureldin Yosri 2

Abstract

noisy channel with as few errors as possible, reverse channel coding attempts to do the opposite, namely to simulate
a noisy channel over a digital channel. This problem has
therefore also been referred to as “channel simulation” (e.g.,
Cuff, 2008) and is closely related to “relative entropy coding”
(Flamich et al., 2020).

The efficient communication of noisy data has
applications in several areas of machine learning, such as neural compression or differential
privacy, and is also known as reverse channel coding or the channel simulation problem. Here we
propose two new coding schemes with practical
advantages over existing approaches. First, we
introduce ordered random coding (ORC) which
uses a simple trick to reduce the coding cost of
previous approaches. This scheme further illuminates a connection between schemes based on
importance sampling and the so-called Poisson
functional representation. Second, we describe a
hybrid coding scheme which uses dithered quantization to more efficiently communicate samples
from distributions with bounded support.

The reverse channel coding problem occurs in many applications. In neural compression, differentiable channels enable
gradient-based methods to optimize encoders but these channels are necessarily noisy if we want to limit their capacity.
For example, it is common to approximate quantization with
uniform noise when training neural networks for lossy compression (Ballé et al., 2017). Reverse channel coding allows
us to implement such noisy channels at test time (Agustsson
& Theis, 2020) and to use arbitrary distributions in place of
uniform noise (Havasi et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Consider a problem where a sender has information x and
wants to communicate a noisy version of it over a digital
channel,
Z ∼ x + U.

(1)

The sender does not care which value the noise U takes as
long as it follows a given distribution. For example, it may
be desired that the noise is a fair sample from a Gaussian
distribution. Can we exploit the sender’s indifference to the
exact value of the noise to save bits in the communication?
More generally, we may want to send a sample from a given
distribution,
Z ∼ qx .

(2)

How can we communicate such a sample most efficiently?
This is the problem of reverse channel coding. While channel coding tries to communicate digital information over a
1
Google, London, UK 2 Google, Dublin, Ireland. Correspondence to: Lucas Theis <theis@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In differential privacy, most mechanisms seek to limit the
amount of sensitive information revealed to another party
by adding noise to the data (Dwork et al., 2006). Efficiently
communicating such private information is an active area of
research (e.g., Chen et al., 2020; Shah et al., 2022) and the
goal of reverse channel coding.
Quantum teleportation can be viewed as another instance
of reverse channel coding where classical bits are used to
communicate stochastic information in the form of a qubit.
Some of the earliest results on reverse channel coding were
obtained in quantum mechanics (Bennett & Shor, 2002).
The naive approach to our problem would be to let the
sender generate a sample and then to encode this noisy data.
If the data or the noise stems from a continuous distribution, lossless coding is impossible as it would require an
infinite number of bits. On the other hand, lossy coding (by
first quantizing) leads to further corruption of the data and
still wastes bits on encoding the remaining noise. In contrast, efficient reverse channel coding techniques are able to
communicate such information with a coding cost which is
close to the mutual information between the data X and the
sample Z (e.g., Li & El Gamal, 2018),
I[X, Z] = h[Z] − h[Z | X] = E[DKL [qX k p]],

(3)

where h is the differential entropy and p is the marginal
distribution of Z. Unlike the naive approach, the coding
cost actually decreases as we introduce more noise, that is,

