Iterative Hard Thresholding with Adaptive Regularization: Sparser Solutions
Without Sacrificing Runtime

Kyriakos Axiotis 1 Maxim Sviridenko 2

Abstract
We propose a simple modification to the iterative
hard thresholding (IHT) algorithm, which recovers asymptotically sparser solutions as a function
of the condition number. When aiming to minimize a convex function f (x ) with condition number κ subject to x being an s-sparse vector, the
standard IHT guarantee is a solution with relaxed
sparsity O(sκ2 ), while our proposed algorithm,
regularized IHT, returns a solution with sparsity
O(sκ). Our algorithm significantly improves over
ARHT (Axiotis & Sviridenko, 2021b) which also
finds a solution of sparsity O(sκ), as it does not
require re-optimization in each iteration (and so
is much faster), is deterministic, and does not require knowledge of the optimal solution value
f (x ∗ ) or the optimal sparsity level s. Our main
technical tool is an adaptive regularization framework, in which the algorithm progressively learns
the weights of an `2 regularization term that will
allow convergence to sparser solutions. We also
apply this framework to low rank optimization,
where we achieve a similar improvement of the
best known condition number dependence from
κ2 to κ.

1. Introduction
Sparse optimization is the task of optimizing a function f
over s-sparse vectors, i.e. those with at most s non-zero
entries. Examples of such optimization problems arise in
machine learning, with the goal to make models smaller
for efficiency, generalization, or interpretability reasons,
and compressed sensing, where the goal is to recover an
s-sparse signal from a small number of measurements. A
closely related problem is low rank optimization, where
the sparsity constraint is instead placed on the spectrum of
1
MIT 2 Yahoo! Research. Correspondence to: Kyriakos Axiotis
<kaxiotis@mit.edu>, Maxim Sviridenko <sviri@yahooinc.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the solution (which is a matrix). This problem is central in
matrix factorization, recommender systems, robust principal
components analysis, among other tasks. More generally,
structured sparsity constraints have the goal of capturing the
special structure of a particular task by restricting the set of
solutions to those that are “simple” in an appropriate sense.
Examples include group sparsity, tree- and graph-structured
sparsity. For more on generalized sparsity measures see
e.g. (Schmidt, 2018).
Among the huge number of algorithms that have been developed for the sparse optimization problems, three stand
out as the most popular ones:
• The LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996), which works by relaxing the `0 (sparsity) constraint to an `1 constraint, thus
convexifying the problem.
• Orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) (Pati et al.,
1993), which works by building the solution greedily
in an incremental fashion.
• Iterative hard thresholding (IHT) (Blumensath &
Davies, 2009), which performs projected gradient descent on the set of sparse solutions.
Among these, IHT is generally the most efficient, since
it has essentially no overhead over plain gradient descent,
making it the tool of choice for large-scale applications.
1.1. Iterative Hard Thresholding (IHT)
Consider the sparse convex optimization problem
min f (x ) ,

kx k0 ≤s

(1)

where f is convex and kx k0 is the number of non-zero
entries in the vector x , i.e. the sparsity of x . IHT works by
repeatedly performing the following iteration

x t+1 = Hs0 x t − η · ∇f (x t ) ,
(2)
where Hs0 is the hard thresholding operator that zeroes
out all but the top s0 entries, for some (potentially relaxed)
sparsity level s0 , and η > 0 is the step size.

