Neuron Dependency Graphs: A Causal Abstraction of Neural Networks

Yaojie Hu 1 Jin Tian 1

Abstract
We discover that neural networks exhibit approximate logical dependencies among neurons, and
we introduce Neuron Dependency Graphs (NDG)
that extract and present them as directed graphs.
In an NDG, each node corresponds to the boolean
activation value of a neuron, and each edge models an approximate logical implication from one
node to another. We show that the logical dependencies extracted from the training dataset
generalize well to the test set. In addition to providing symbolic explanations to the neural network’s internal structure, NDGs can represent a
Structural Causal Model. We empirically show
that an NDG is a causal abstraction of the corresponding neural network that “unfolds” the same
way under causal interventions using the theory
by Geiger et al. (2021a). Code is available at
https://github.com/phimachine/ndg.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are “black-box” statistical models that do
not provide explanations (Benı́tez et al., 1997; Samek et al.,
2017) despite ability to accurately model ambiguous patterns (LeCun et al., 2015; Alom et al., 2019). Deep learning
is a different AI paradigm compared to the traditional symbolic AI (Haugeland, 1989), which may be the fundamental
cause to its “black-box” nature. Neural networks can consist
of billions of low-level parameters that are interdependent as
an entangled system, while meaningful concepts are usually
high-level, disentangled, causal factors (Bengio, 2017). Traditional symbolic AI may not have exact equations to define
ambiguous patterns such as “dog” or computations such as
“annotate an image”, but they do enjoy better explainability
due to recursive computation of well-understood rules on interpretable states of information. Unfortunately, traditional
symbolic tools such as first order logic are not central to
1

Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University,
United States. Correspondence to: Yaojie Hu <jhu@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the analysis and explanation of neural networks, because
neural networks are considered not intrinsically symbolic or
logical by default (Rudin, 2019).
We introduce Neuron Dependency Graphs (NDGs), a tool
to extract and present approximate logical dependencies
between pairs of neurons in a selected layer of a neural
network. Once extracted, an NDG represents an internal
logical structure of the neural network. By inspecting the
logical structure, we discover a new general phenomenon
that, for trained models, approximate logical dependencies
exist commonly for a wide family of neural network architectures, datasets, and selected layers, even between two
independently trained models. As a post-hoc explanation
method (Das & Rad, 2020; Marcinkevičs & Vogt, 2020),
NDGs do not require any architectural changes to the neural
network explained. The graph is discovered from data and
requires no a priori expert modeling.
Although an NDG is extracted from a neural network, it performs computation based on logical deduction, as opposed
to tensor algebra of neural networks. To confirm that the
extracted NDG is an accurate explanation of the internal
structure of the neural network, we turn to the counterfactual
theories of causation (Pearl, 2009; 2001; Morgan & Winship, 2015) and the theories of causal abstraction (Geiger
et al., 2021a; Beckers & Halpern, 2019). The key of causal
abstraction is to identify a function mapping between the
two causal processes that ties the two together in terms of
variables’ values and intervention results. We show that
an NDG can represent a causal abstraction of the neural
network, which assures the faithfulness of the explanation
even when counterfactual interventions are encountered.
To summarize, the main contributions of the paper are:
1. We introduce Neuron Dependency Graph as a new
post-hoc explainable AI (XAI) method that provides
logic-based, faithful explanations about the internal
logical structure of a neural network.
2. We use NDGs to reveal a new general phenomenon
that approximate logical dependency exists among neurons and can generalize to unseen data as a meaningful
statistical model. The existence of neuron dependency
occurs commonly for different datasets and architectures, even between independently trained models.

