Neural Tangent Kernel Empowered Federated Learning

Kai Yue 1 Richeng Jin 1 Ryan Pilgrim 2 Chau-Wai Wong 1 Dror Baron 1 Huaiyu Dai 1

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a privacy-preserving
paradigm where multiple participants jointly
solve a machine learning problem without sharing
raw data. Unlike traditional distributed learning,
a unique characteristic of FL is statistical heterogeneity, namely, data distributions across participants are different from each other. Meanwhile,
recent advances in the interpretation of neural networks have seen a wide use of neural tangent kernels (NTKs) for convergence analyses. In this paper, we propose a novel FL paradigm empowered
by the NTK framework. The paradigm addresses
the challenge of statistical heterogeneity by transmitting update data that are more expressive than
those of the conventional FL paradigms. Specifically, sample-wise Jacobian matrices, rather than
model weights/gradients, are uploaded by participants. The server then constructs an empirical
kernel matrix to update a global model without explicitly performing gradient descent. We further
develop a variant with improved communication
efficiency and enhanced privacy. Numerical results show that the proposed paradigm can achieve
the same accuracy while reducing the number of
communication rounds by an order of magnitude
compared to federated averaging.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a popular paradigm
involving a large number of clients collaboratively solving
a machine learning problem (Kairouz et al., 2021). In a
typical FL framework, a server broadcasts a global model
to selected clients and collects model updates without accessing the raw data. One popular algorithm is known as
federated averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017), in
which clients perform stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to
1
NC State University 2 Independent Scholar. Correspondence
to: Chau-Wai Wong <chauwai.wong@ncsu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

update the local models and then upload the weight vectors
to the server. A new global model is constructed on the
server by averaging the received weight vectors.
Li et al. (2020) characterized some unique challenges for
FL. First, client data are generated locally and remain decentralized, which implies that they may not be independent
and identically distributed (IID). Prior work has shown that
statistical heterogeneity can negatively affect the convergence of FedAvg (Zhao et al., 2018). This phenomenon
may be explained by noting that local updating under data
heterogeneity will cause cost-function inconsistency (Wang
et al., 2020). A more challenging issue is the system heterogeneity, including the diversity of client hardware, battery
power, and network connectivity. Local updating schemes
often exacerbate the straggler issue caused by heterogeneous
system characteristics (Li et al., 2020).
Recent studies have proposed various strategies to alleviate the statistical heterogeneity. One possible solution is to
share a globally available dataset with participants to reduce
the distance between client-data distributions and the population distribution (Zhao et al., 2018). In practice, though,
such a dataset may be unavailable or too small to meaningfully compensate for the heterogeneity. Some researchers
replaced the coordinate-wise weight averaging strategy in
FedAvg with nonlinear aggregation schemes (Wang et al.,
2020; Chen & Chao, 2021). The nonlinear aggregation relies on a separate optimization routine, which can be elusive,
especially when the federated model does not perform well.
Another direction is to modify the local objectives or local
update schemes to cancel the effects of client drift (Li et al.,
2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020). However, some studies
reported that these methods are not consistently effective
when evaluated in various settings (Reddi et al., 2021; Haddadpour et al., 2021; Chen & Chao, 2021).
In this work, we present a neural tangent kernel empowered
federated learning (NTK-FL) paradigm. NTK-FL outperforms state-of-the-art methods by achieving the target accuracy with fewer communication rounds. We summarize our
contributions as follows.
• We propose a novel FL paradigm without requiring clients
to perform local gradient descent. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work using the NTK method

