Neural Network Weights Do Not Converge to Stationary Points:
An Invariant Measure Perspective

Jingzhao Zhang 1 Haochuan Li 2 Suvrit Sra 2 Ali Jadbabaie 2

Abstract
This work examines the deep disconnect between
existing theoretical analyses of gradient-based algorithms and the practice of training deep neural networks. Specifically, we provide numerical
evidence that in large-scale neural network training (e.g., ImageNet + ResNet101, and WT103
+ TransformerXL models), the neural network’s
weights do not converge to stationary points
where the gradient of the loss is zero. Remarkably,
however, we observe that even though the weights
do not converge to stationary points, the progress
in minimizing the loss function halts and training
loss stabilizes. Inspired by this observation, we
propose a new perspective based on ergodic theory of dynamical systems to explain it. Rather
than studying the evolution of weights, we study
the evolution of the distribution of weights. We
prove convergence of the distribution of weights
to an approximate invariant measure, thereby explaining how the training loss can stabilize without weights necessarily converging to stationary
points. We further discuss how this perspective
can better align optimization theory with empirical observations in machine learning practice.

1. Introduction
It would not be controversial to claim that currently there
exists a wide gulf between theoretical investigations of convergence to (approximate) stationary points for non-convex
optimization problems and the empirical performance of
popular algorithms used in deep learning practice. Due to
the intrinsic intractability of general nonconvex problems,
theoretical analysis of nonconvex optimization problems
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to:
Jingzhao
Zhang <jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Haochuan Li
<haochuan@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

often focuses on the rates of convergence of gradient norm
∥∇f (θ)∥ instead of the suboptimality f (θ) − minθ f (θ).
The vast theoretical literature on optimization for machine
learning has documented the recent progress in this area. In
particular, optimal gradient-based algorithms and rates have
been identified in various nonconvex settings, including deterministic, stochastic and finite-sum problems (Carmon
et al., 2017; Arjevani et al., 2019; Fang et al., 2018).
In addition to theoretical interest in nonconvex problems, a
practical motivation for studying nonconvex convergence
analyses is to improve the large-scale optimization methods that are used in machine learning practice, especially
in training deep neural networks. As neural network models allow for efficient gradient evaluations, gradient-based
algorithms remain the dominant methods to tune network
parameters. Naturally, great effort has been dedicated to
theoretical understanding of gradient-based optimizers.
But despite the rapid progress in the theory of gradientbased algorithms, this theory has had a limited impact on
real-world neural network training. And the gap between
theory and practice is as wide as ever. For example, even
though the variance reduction technique theoretically accelerates convergence, recent empirical evidence in (Defazio & Bottou, 2018) suggests that it may be ineffective
in speeding up neural network training. On the other extreme, ADAM (Kingma & Ba, 2014) is among the most
popular algorithms in neural network training, yet its theoretical convergence was proven to be incorrect (Reddi et al.,
2019). Despite dubious theoretical properties, ADAM is
still among the most effective optimizers.
Our goal is to address the ineffectiveness of applying theoretical convergence rates to stationarity in neural network training by identifying a fundamental gap between theoretical
convergence and empirical convergence. First, we provide
evidence that in many challenging experiments (e.g., ImageNet, Wiki103) where the model does not overfit the data,
gradient-based optimization methods do not converge to stationary points as theory mandates. This mismatch questions
applicability of usual theory as applied to training neural
networks. The reason for such a surprising divide is that
most optimization analyses for deep learning either assume
smoothness directly which leads to convergence to station-

