Simple and near-optimal algorithms
for hidden stratification and multi-group learning

Christopher Tosh 1 Daniel Hsu 2

Abstract
Multi-group agnostic learning is a formal learning
criterion that is concerned with the conditional
risks of predictors within subgroups of a population. The criterion addresses recent practical
concerns such as subgroup fairness and hidden
stratification. This paper studies the structure of
solutions to the multi-group learning problem, and
provides simple and near-optimal algorithms for
the learning problem.

1. Introduction
Despite its status as the de facto selection criterion for machine learning models, accuracy is an aggregate statistic
that often obscures the underlying structure of mistaken
predictions. Oakden-Rayner et al. (2020) recently raised
this concern in the context of medical image analysis. Consider the problem of diagnosing an image as cancerous or
not. Certain types of aggressive cancers may be less common than some non-aggressive types. Thus, classifiers that
concentrate their errors on images of these rarer and more
aggressive cancers can achieve higher overall accuracy than
classifiers that spread their errors more evenly over all types
of cancer. However, choosing classifiers that concentrate
their errors on these rarer cancers is clearly not ideal, as
it could lead to harmful misdiagnoses for those who need
treatment the most. Oakden-Rayner et al. refer to this
general phenomenon as the hidden stratification problem,
where there is some latent grouping of the data domain and
performance on these latent groups is just as important as
performance on the entire domain.
Similar scenarios arise in areas where fairness is a concern (see, e.g., Hardt et al., 2016). Here, the concern is that
for applications such as credit recommendation or loan ap1
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New
York, NY. Correspondence to: Christopher Tosh <christopher.j.tosh@gmail.com>, Daniel Hsu <djhsu@cs.columbia.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

proval the errors of models may be concentrated on certain
demographic groups and potentially exacerbate pre-existing
social disadvantages. This issue can persist even when protected class information such as race or age is not explicitly
included in the model, as other features often serve as good
proxies for protected class information.
The multi-group (agnostic) learning setting, formalized by
Rothblum & Yona (2021a), is a learning-theoretic model
for addressing these scenarios. This setting is specified by a
collection of groups G, where each group g ∈ G is a subset
of the input space, and a set of reference predictors H. Here,
the groups in G can overlap in arbitrary ways, and |G| need
not be finite. The multi-group learning objective is to find a
predictor f such that, for all groups g ∈ G simultaneously,
the average loss of f among examples in g is comparable
with that of the best predictor hg ∈ H specific to g. This
learning objective thus pays attention to the group that is
worst off with respect to H. Note that because a good
reference predictor hg for one group g may be very poor
for another group g 0 , a successful multi-group learner may
need to choose its predictor f from outside of H.
Rothblum & Yona (2021a) obtained initial results for multigroup learning (and, in fact, study a broader class of objectives compared to what we consider here), but they leave
open several theoretical questions that we address in this
paper. First, while it is known that uniform convergence
of empirical risks with respect to H is necessary and sufficient for the standard agnostic learning model, it is not clear
whether the same holds for multi-group learning, let alone
whether the sample complexities are equivalent. Second,
Rothblum & Yona focus on finite G, but the motivation from
hidden stratification may require the use of rich and infinite
families of groups in order to well-approximate the potentially unknown strata of importance. Finally, Rothblum &
Yona obtained their algorithm via a blackbox reduction to
a more general problem, leaving open the possibility of
simpler algorithms and prediction rules with multi-group
learning guarantees.
1.1. Summary of results
We introduce some notation in order to state our results.
Given n i.i.d. training examples drawn from a distribution

