Constrained Optimization with Dynamic Bound-scaling for Effective NLP
Backdoor Defense
Guangyu Shen * 1 Yingqi Liu * 1 Guanhong Tao 1 Qiuling Xu 1 Zhuo Zhang 1 Shengwei An 1 Shiqing Ma 2
Xiangyu Zhang 1

Abstract
Modern language models are vulnerable to backdoor attacks. An injected malicious token sequence (i.e., a trigger) can cause the compromised
model to misbehave, raising security concerns.
Trigger inversion is a widely-used technique for
scanning backdoors in vision models. It cannot be directly applied to NLP models due to
their discrete nature. In this paper, we develop
a novel optimization method for NLP backdoor
inversion. We leverage a dynamically reducing
temperature coefficient in the softmax function
to provide changing loss landscapes to the optimizer such that the process gradually focuses
on the ground truth trigger, which is denoted as
a one-hot value in a convex hull. Our method
also features a temperature rollback mechanism
to step away from local optimals, exploiting the
observation that local optimals can be easily determined in NLP trigger inversion (while not in
general optimization). We evaluate the technique
on over 1600 models (with roughly half of them
having injected backdoors) on 3 prevailing NLP
tasks, with 4 different backdoor attacks and 7
architectures. Our results show that the technique is able to effectively and efficiently detect
and remove backdoors, outperforming 5 baseline methods. The code is available at https:
//github.com/PurduePAML/DBS.

1. Introduction
Backdoor attack (Gu et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017) poses
a severe threat to the state-of-the-art NLP models (Devlin
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Guangyu Shen <shen447@purdue.edu>, Yingqi Liu
<liu1751@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Difficult loss landscape with a low temperature
et al., 2018b; Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019). By
trojaning a model, attackers can induce model misclassification with some pre-defined token sequence (i.e., trigger).
Some recent attacks can even use specific sentence structure
and para-phrasing behavior as the trigger (Qi et al., 2021a;b),
making the attacks very stealthy. Hence, detecting backdoor in a pre-trained model and removing such backdoor
are critical for secure applications of these models. Trigger
inversion is an effective approach for scanning model backdoors in the vision domain. It leverages gradient descent
to derive a trigger. However, these approaches cannot be
simply extended to NLP models due to the discrete nature of
these models. Specifically, the input space of NLP models
are words or tokens that are sparse in the input space. A
naive trigger inversion algorithm may yield input values that
do not correspond to any valid words or tokens.
There are a number of pioneering works in defending NLP
model backdoors, for example, identifying and removing
triggers from input sentences via grammar checking (Pruthi
et al., 2019), language model (Qi et al., 2020) and model
internal analysis (Chen & Dai, 2021). More can be found
in Section 2. These techniques have encouraging results
in their targeted scenarios. However, some have certain
assumptions such that they may not be as effective when the
assumptions are not satisfied, for example, when the trigger
contains multiple tokens.

