In Defense of Dual-Encoders for Neural Ranking

Aditya Krishna Menon 1 Sadeep Jayasumana 1 Ankit Singh Rawat 1 Seungyeon Kim 1 Sashank J. Reddi 1
Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract
Transformer-based models have proven successful in information retrieval problems, which seek
to identify relevant documents for a given query.
There are two broad flavours of such models:
cross-attention (CA) models, which learn a joint
query-document embedding, and dual-encoder
(DE) models, which learn separate embeddings
for the query and the document. Empirically, CA
models are often more accurate, which has motivated several works that seek to bridge this performance gap. However, a fundamental question
remains less explored: does this gap reflect a limitation in DE models’ capacity, or training procedure? In this paper, we study this question, with
three contributions. First, we establish theoretically that with a sufficiently large encoder size,
DE models can capture a broad class of scores
without cross-attention. Second, we show that
on real-world problems, the gap between CA and
DE models may be due to the latter overfitting
to the training set. To mitigate this, we propose
a distillation strategy that focuses on preserving
the ordering amongst documents, and confirm its
efficacy on neural re-ranking benchmarks.

1. Transformer-Based Neural Ranking
Information retrieval (Mitra & Craswell, 2018) is the classic problem of identifying relevant documents for a given
query. Typically, such retrieval is performed in a two-step
manner (Matveeva et al., 2006): one uses an initial model to
efficiently retrieve a candidate set of documents for a query,
and then uses a second model to re-rank these candidates.
The retrieval stage is generally implemented by a model
with low inference cost, for which candidate generation
is tractable; if this candidate set is reasonably small, it is
1
Google Research, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Aditya
Krishna Menon <adityakmenon@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

feasible to use more complex models for re-ranking.
Transformer-based models such as BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019) have proven successful in both the retrieval and reranking stages. Such neural ranking models have two
flavours: dual-encoder (DE) modelss (Lee et al., 2019;
Chang et al., 2020; Karpukhin et al., 2020) which learn separate (factorised) embeddings for the query and document;
and cross-attention (CA) models (Nogueira & Cho, 2019;
Dai & Callan, 2019; Yilmaz et al., 2019), which learn a joint
embedding for the query and document. Only DE models
are applicable for retrieval, as they admit efficient nearest
neighbour search (Guo et al., 2020; Johnson et al., 2021) to
identify candidate documents. Both CA and DE models are
applicable for re-ranking; however, empirically, CA models
perform better (Hofstätter et al., 2020a).
Does the re-ranking performance gap between CA and DE
models reflect a limitation in DE models’ inherent capacity,
or in their training procedure? While several works have explored means of improving DE models — e.g., by changing1
the scoring layer (Khattab & Zaharia, 2020; MacAvaney
et al., 2020; Hofstätter et al., 2020b), and by distilling predictions from a CA model (Lu et al., 2020; Izacard & Grave,
2020; Hofstätter et al., 2020a) — the root cause of the gap
between CA and DE models remains elusive. This is not
purely of conceptual interest: enabling usage of DE models for re-ranking is desirable, as they afford more efficient
inference owing to their ability to pre-compute document
embeddings (Khattab & Zaharia, 2020).
In this paper, we study this question with the aim of shedding
light on the fundamental differences between CA and DE
models. We further give a simple yet effective distillation
strategy to improve the latter. Our contributions are:
(i) we establish theoretically that with a sufficiently large
embedding dimension (and mild assumptions), any continuous ground-truth scores can be modelled by generic
DE models (Proposition 3.1), and in particular by sufficiently deep transformer-based DE models (Proposition 3.2). Thus, in principle, there is no fundamental
restriction in using DE versus CA models for re-ranking.
1

Unless otherwise stated, we use “DE” to mean a dual-encoder
with dot-product scoring per (2).

