Bregman Power k-Means for Clustering Exponential Family Data

Adithya Vellal 1 Saptarshi Chakraborty 2 Jason Xu 1

Abstract
Recent progress in center-based clustering algorithms combats poor local minima by implicit
annealing, using a family of generalized means.
These methods are variations of Lloyd’s celebrated k-means algorithm, and are most appropriate for spherical clusters such as those arising
from Gaussian data. In this paper, we bridge these
algorithmic advances to classical work on hard
clustering under Bregman divergences, which enjoy a bijection to exponential family distributions
and are thus well-suited for clustering objects arising from a breadth of data generating mechanisms.
The elegant properties of Bregman divergences
allow us to maintain closed form updates in a
simple and transparent algorithm, and moreover
lead to new theoretical arguments for establishing
finite sample bounds that relax the bounded support assumption made in the existing state of the
art. Additionally, we consider thorough empirical analyses on simulated experiments and a case
study on rainfall data, finding that the proposed
method outperforms existing peer methods in a
variety of non-Gaussian data settings.

1. Introduction and Background
Clustering, the task of finding naturally occurring groups
within a dataset, is a cornerstone of the unsupervised learning paradigm. Among a vast literature on clustering algorithms, center-based methods remain widely popular, and
k-means (MacQueen, 1967; Lloyd, 1982) remains the most
prominent example 60 years after its introduction. Given n
data points X = {X i : i = 1, . . . , n} ⊂ Rp , k-means seeks
to partition the data into k groups in a way that minimizes
the within-cluster variance. Representing the cluster centroids Θ = {θ 1 , . . . , θ k } ⊂ Rp and for some dissimilarity
1
Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA. 2 Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Jason Xu <jason.q.xu@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

measure d(·, ·), k-means is formulated as the minimization
of the objective function
fk-means (Θ) =

n
X
i=1

min d(X i , θ j ).

1≤j≤k

(1)

Taking the squared Euclidean distance d(x, y) = ∥x − y∥22
yields the classical k-means formulation, while Bregman
hard clustering (Banerjee et al., 2005b) allows d to be any
Bregman divergence.
Unfortunately, k-means and its variants suffer from welldocumented shortcomings such as sensitivity to initial guess
(Vassilvitskii & Arthur, 2006; Bachem et al., 2017; Deshpande et al., 2020), stopping at poor local minima (Zhang
et al., 1999; Xu & Lange, 2019), and fragility to outliers
(Paul et al., 2021b) that continue to be addressed in recent work. In particular, a drawback we seek to address in
this article is the implicit assumption behind k-means that
the data can be clustered spherically, which works well in
Gaussian settings but can fail to separate even simple data
examples otherwise (Ng et al., 2002). To ameliorate this
issue, researchers have proposed various dissimilarity measures (Banerjee et al., 2005b; De Amorim & Mirkin, 2012;
Chakraborty & Das, 2017; Brécheteau et al., 2021) that
admit non-elliptical contours. Among these, the choice of
Bregman divergences is appealing (Telgarsky & Dasgupta,
2012; Paul et al., 2021a) as their many nice mathematical
properties are amenable to analysis and effective algorithms.
Their connection to exponential families makes them ideal
for many common data generating mechanisms.
Like classic k-means, analogs such as Bregman hard clustering are susceptible to local optima due to non-convexity of
the objective. Wrapper methods such as k-means ++ (Arthur
& Vassilvitskii, 2007) and its variants alleviate the problem
to an extent, though methods continue to struggle as dimension increases (Aggarwal et al., 2001). Recently, (Xu &
Lange, 2019; Chakraborty et al., 2020) tackle this problem
by gradually annealing the optimization landscape in the
Euclidean case. Theoretical work by (Paul et al., 2021b)
proposes a clustering framework that encompasses Bregman divergences, establishing desirable properties such as
robustness, but does not implement or empirically analyze
the Bregman case. The authors advocate generic iterative
optimization, using adaptive gradient descent for the general
case (Duchi et al., 2011).

