Learning Pseudometric-based Action Representations
for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Pengjie Gu 1 Mengchen Zhao * 2 Chen Chen 2 Dong Li 2 Jianye Hao 3 2 Bo An 1

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning is a promising approach for practical applications since it does not
require interactions with real-world environments.
However, existing offline RL methods only work
well in environments with continuous or small
discrete action spaces. In environments with large
and discrete action spaces, such as recommender
systems and dialogue systems, the performance
of existing methods decreases drastically because
they suffer from inaccurate value estimation for
a large proportion of out-of-distribution (o.o.d.)
actions. While recent works have demonstrated
that online RL benefits from incorporating semantic information in action representations, unfortunately, they fail to learn reasonable relative distances between action representations, which is
key to offline RL to reduce the influence of o.o.d.
actions. This paper proposes an action representation learning framework for offline RL based on
a pseudometric, which measures both the behavioral relation and the data-distributional relation
between actions. We provide theoretical analysis
on the continuity of the expected Q-values and
the offline policy improvement using the learned
action representations. Experimental results show
that our methods significantly improve the performance of two typical offline RL methods in environments with large and discrete action spaces.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) approaches have been applied
successfully in many decision-making tasks. In a conven* Corresponding author 1 School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei 3 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University. Correspondence to: Mengchen Zhao
<zhaomengchen@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tional setting, RL agents learn policies through an online
fashion, where they collect trial-and-error experiences directly from the environment to improve the current policy.
This can be done when the environment can be easily established, and the cost of deploying new policies online
is low (e.g., computer games). However, many real-world
scenarios allow only offline access to the environment due
to cost or safety concerns (Thomas, 2015), meaning that the
algorithm cannot access the environment during the training phase. This setting is known as offline RL, or batch
RL (Levine et al., 2020). Despite the success that offline
RL has achieved in robotic control tasks (Fujimoto et al.,
2019b) and some Atari games (Gulcehre et al., 2021), the
applicability of offline RL is still limited in many practical
scenarios where the action space is extremely large, including recommender systems and dialogue systems.
Existing offline RL methods focus on the setting that the
action space is continuous or discrete but with a few actions.
To address the issue of overestimating the values of o.o.d.
actions, they constrain the learned policy to stay close to
the data-generating policies (Fujimoto et al., 2019b; Kumar
et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2020; Kostrikov
et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2020). However, the performance of
these algorithms decreases drastically with the size of action
space increasing. There are two main reasons. First, the
value function hardly generalizes over the entire action space
without proper action representations, especially when the
semantics of actions are missing. Note that the success of
offline RL in continuous control tasks benefits from the fact
that actions can be naturally represented by their physical
semantics (e.g., directions, forces), which also demonstrates
the importance of action representations. Second, with the
size of the action space increasing, the state-action pairs are
more sparse to the entire state-action space, resulting in a
large proportion of o.o.d. actions. Consequently, the learned
policies would be overly restrictive – they are constrained
to only select actions within the support of in-distribution
actions, without considering a large number of other o.o.d.
actions that might contain the optimal action (Zhou et al.,
2020; Kumar et al., 2019).
It has been demonstrated that online RL benefits from using action representations to exploit underlying structures

