POEM: Out-of-Distribution Detection with Posterior Sampling

Yifei Ming * 1 Ying Fan * 1 Yixuan Li 1

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is indispensable for machine learning models deployed in the
open world. Recently, the use of an auxiliary outlier dataset during training (also known as outlier
exposure) has shown promising performance. As
the sample space for potential OOD data can be
prohibitively large, sampling informative outliers
is essential. In this work, we propose a novel posterior sampling-based outlier mining framework,
POEM, which facilitates efficient use of outlier
data and promotes learning a compact decision
boundary between ID and OOD data for improved
detection. We show that POEM establishes stateof-the-art performance on common benchmarks.
Compared to the current best method that uses a
greedy sampling strategy, POEM improves the relative performance by 42.0% and 24.2% (FPR95)
on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, respectively. We
further provide theoretical insights on the effectiveness of POEM for OOD detection.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has become a central
challenge in safely deploying machine learning models in
the open world, where the test data can naturally arise from
a different distribution. Concerningly, modern neural networks are shown to produce overconfident and therefore
untrustworthy predictions for OOD inputs (Nguyen et al.,
2015). To mitigate the issue, recent works have explored
training with a large auxiliary outlier dataset, where the
model is regularized to produce lower confidence (Lee et al.,
2018a; Hendrycks et al., 2018; Meinke & Hein, 2020; Chen
et al., 2021) or higher energy (Liu et al., 2020) on the outlier
training data. These methods have demonstrated promising
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA. Correspondence to: Yifei
Ming <ming5@wisc.edu>, Ying Fan <yfan87@wisc.edu>, Yixuan Li <sharonli@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

OOD detection performance over the counterpart (without
auxiliary data).
Despite encouraging results, existing methods suffer from
ineffective use of outliers, and have largely underlooked
the importance of outlier mining. In particular, the sample
space for potential outlier data can be prohibitively large,
making the majority of outliers uninformative for model
regularization. As recently observed by Chen et al. (2021),
randomly selecting outlier samples during training yields
a large portion of uninformative samples that do not meaningfully improve the estimated decision boundary between
in-distribution (ID) and OOD data. The above limitations
motivate the following important yet underexplored question: how can we efficiently utilize the auxiliary outlier data
for model regularization?
In this work, we propose a novel Posterior Sampling-based
Outlier Mining (POEM) framework for OOD detection —
selecting the most informative outlier data from a large pool
of auxiliary data points, which can help the model estimate
a compact decision boundary between ID and OOD for improved OOD detection. For example, Figure 1 shows the
evolution of decision boundaries, as a result of outlier mining. Our novel idea is to formalize outlier mining as sequential decision making, where actions correspond to outlier
selection, and the reward function is based on the closeness
to the boundary between ID and OOD data. In particular,
we devise a novel reward function termed boundary score,
which is higher for outliers close to the boundary. Key to
our framework, we leverage Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933), also known as posterior sampling, to balance
exploration and exploitation during reward optimization.
As an integral part of our framework, POEM maintains and
updates the posterior over models to encourage better exploration. For efficient outlier mining, POEM chooses samples with the highest boundary scores based on the posterior distribution. Because the exact posterior is often
intractable, we approximate it by performing Bayesian linear regression on top of feature representations extracted
via a neural network (Riquelme et al., 2018). Posterior
updates are performed periodically during training, which
help shape the estimated decision boundary between ID and
OOD accordingly (see Figure 1). Unlike the greedy mining
approach (Chen et al., 2021) that focuses on exploitation,

