U NDER G RAD: A Universal Black-Box Optimization Method
with Almost Dimension-Free Convergence Rate Guarantees

Kimon Antonakopoulos 1 2 Dong Quan Vu 3 2 Volkan Cevher 1 Kfir Y. Levy 4 5 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 6 7

Abstract
Universal methods for optimization are designed
to achieve theoretically optimal convergence rates
without any prior knowledge of the problem’s
regularity parameters or the accurarcy of the gradient oracle employed by the optimizer. In this regard, existing state-of-the-art algorithms achieve
an O(1/T 2 ) value convergence rate in Lipschitz
smooth problems
√ with a perfect gradient oracle,
and an O(1/ T ) convergence rate when the underlying problem is non-smooth and/or the gradient oracle is stochastic. On the downside, these
methods do not take into account the problem’s
dimensionality, and this can have a catastrophic
impact on the achieved convergence rate, in both
theory and practice. Our paper aims to bridge
this gap by providing a scalable universal gradient method – dubbed U NDER G RAD – whose oracle complexity is almost dimension-free in problems with a favorable geometry (like the simplex,
linearly constrained semidefinite programs and
combinatorial bandits), while retaining the orderoptimal dependence on T described above. These
“best-of-both-worlds” results are achieved via a
primal-dual update scheme inspired by the dual
exploration method for variational inequalities.

1. Introduction
The analysis of first-order methods for convex minimization typically revolves around the following basic regularity
conditions: a) Lipschitz continuity of a problem’s objective
1 Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, IEL STI EPFL,

1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 2 This work was done when KA and DQV
were with Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000
Grenoble, France. 3 Safran Tech, Magny-Les-Hameaux, France. 4 Technion,
Haifa, Israel. 5 A Viterbi Fellow. 6 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria,
Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France. 7 Criteo AI Lab. Correspondence to: Kimon Antonakopoulos <kimon.antonakopoulos@epfl.ch>,
Dong Quan Vu <dong-quan.vu@safrangroup.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine Learning,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the
author(s).

function and / or b) Lipschitz continuity of the objective’s
gradients. Depending on these conditions and the quality
of the gradient oracle available to the optimizer, the optimal convergence rates that can be obtained by an iterative
first-order algorithm after T oracle queries are:
p

1. O ∥X ∥ (G2 + σ 2 )/T if the problem’s objective is
G-Lipschitz continuous and the oracle’s variance is σ.
√ 
2. O L∥X ∥2 /T 2 + σ∥X ∥/ T if the objective is LLipschitz smooth.
[In both cases, ∥X ∥ := supx,x′ ∈X ∥x′ − x∥ denotes the
diameter of the problem’s domain X ⊆ Rd ; for an in-depth
treatment, see [11, 38] and references therein.]
This stark separation of black-box guarantees has led to
an intense search for universal methods that are capable
of interpolating smoothly between these rates without any
prior knowledge of the problem’s regularity properties or the
oracle’s noise profile. As far as we are aware, the first algorithm with order-optimal rate guarantees for unconstrained
problems and no knowledge of the problem’s smoothness parameters was the ACCELE G RAD proposal of Levy et al. [28].
Subsequently, in the context of constrained convex problems (the focus of our work), Kavis et al. [24] combined the
extra-gradient / mirror-prox algorithmic template of Korpelevich [25] and Nemirovski [36] with an “iterate averaging”
scheme introduced by Cutkosky [16] to change the query
structure of the base algorithm and make it more amenable
to acceleration. In this way, Kavis et al. [24] obtained a
universal extra-gradient algorithm – dubbed U NIX G RAD
– which interpolates between the optimal rates mentioned
above, without requiring any tuning.
Our contributions. The starting point of our paper is the
observation that, even though the rates in question are optimal in T , they may be highly supoptimal in d, the problem’s
dimensionality. For example, if the √
noise in the oracle has
unit variance, σ would scale as O( d); this represents a
hidden dependence on d which could have a catastrophic impact on the method’s actual convergence rate. Likewise, in
problems with a favorable geometry (like the L1 -ball, traceconstrained semidefinite programs, combinatorial bandits,
etc.), methods based on the mirror descent [37] and mirror-

