Hardness and Algorithms for Robust and Sparse Optimization

Eric Price * 1 Sandeep Silwal * 2 Samson Zhou * 3

Abstract
We explore algorithms and limitations for sparse
optimization problems such as sparse linear regression and robust linear regression. The goal
of the sparse linear regression problem is to identify a small number of key features, while the
goal of the robust linear regression problem is to
identify a small number of erroneous measurements. Specifically, the sparse linear regression
problem seeks a k-sparse vector x ∈ Rd to minimize kAx−bk2 , given an input matrix A ∈ Rn×d
and a target vector b ∈ Rn , while the robust
linear regression problem seeks a set S that ignores at most k rows and a vector x to minimize k(Ax − b)S k2 . We first show bicriteria, NPhardness of approximation for robust regression
building on the work of (O’Donnell et al., 2015),
which implies a similar result for sparse regression. We further show fine-grained hardness of
robust regression through a reduction from the
minimum-weight k-clique conjecture. On the
positive side, we give an algorithm for robust regression that achieves arbitrarily accurate additive error and uses runtime that closely matches
the lower bound from the fine-grained hardness
result, as well as an algorithm for sparse regression with similar runtime. Both our upper and
lower bounds rely on a general reduction from
robust linear regression to sparse regression that
we introduce. Our algorithms, inspired by the
3SUM problem, use approximate nearest neighbor data structures and may be of independent
interest for solving sparse optimization problems.
For instance, we demonstrate that our techniques
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin. 2 Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 3 Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University.. Correspondence to: Eric Price <ecprice@gmail.com>,
Sandeep Silwal <silwal@mit.edu>, Samson Zhou <samsonzhou@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

can also be used for the well-studied sparse PCA
problem.

1. Introduction
Sparsity is often a key feature embedded within large
datasets and fundamentals tasks in data science and machine learning. For example, in the sparse linear regression
or variable selection problem, the goal is to find a k-sparse
vector x ∈ Rd to minimize kAx−bk2 , given an input matrix
A ∈ Rn×d and a target vector b ∈ Rn . The intuition is that
the target vector can be effectively summarized as the linear
combination of a small number of columns of A that denote
the important features of the data. Similarly, in the robust
linear regression or constraint selection problem, the goal
is to find a set S that ignores at most k rows and a vector
x ∈ Rd to minimize k(Ax − b)S k2 , given an input matrix
A ∈ Rn×d and a target vector b ∈ Rn , where the notation
(·)S means we only measure the loss over coordinates in S.
In other words, we suppose that up to k entries of the target
vector can be arbitrarily corrupted and thus ignored in the
computation of the resulting empirical risk minimizer. In
both the sparse and robust linear regression problems, the
L2 loss function can be naturally generalized to other loss
functions that align with specific goals, such as truncating
or mitigating the penalty beyond a certain threshold.
Sparsity is a desirable attribute for model design in machine learning, statistics, estimation, and signal processing.
Simpler models with a small number of variables not only
provide more ease for interpetability, but also tend to have
smaller generalization error (Foster et al., 2015). A common algorithmic approach for acquiring sparse vectors for
the task of sparse linear regression is to use greedy algorithms that iteratively select features, e.g., stepwise selection, backward elimination, and least angle regression. Another common technique for inducing sparse solutions is to
penalize the objective with a regularization function. For
example, the well-known LASSO adds a penalty term to the
regression objective that is proportional to the L1 norm of
the underlying minimizer x (Tibshirani, 1996) while ridge
regression (Hoerl & Kennard, 1970) often adds a penalty
that is proportional to the L2 norm of x.

