Adversarial Attacks on Gaussian Process Bandits
Eric Han 1 Jonathan Scarlett 1 2

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GP) are a widely-adopted
tool used to sequentially optimize black-box
functions, where evaluations are costly and
potentially noisy. Recent works on GP bandits
have proposed to move beyond random noise and
devise algorithms robust to adversarial attacks.
This paper studies this problem from the attacker’s
perspective, proposing various adversarial attack
methods with differing assumptions on the
attacker’s strength and prior information. Our
goal is to understand adversarial attacks on
GP bandits from theoretical and practical
perspectives. We focus primarily on targeted
attacks on the popular GP-UCB algorithm and
a related elimination-based algorithm, based on
adversarially perturbing the function f to produce
another function f˜ whose optima are in some
target region Rtarget . Based on our theoretical
analysis, we devise both white-box attacks
(known f ) and black-box attacks (unknown f ),
with the former including a Subtraction attack
and Clipping attack, and the latter including an
Aggressive subtraction attack. We demonstrate
that adversarial attacks on GP bandits can succeed
in forcing the algorithm towards Rtarget even
with a low attack budget, and we test our attacks’
effectiveness on a diverse range of objective
functions.

1. Introduction
Gaussian Processes (GPs) are commonly used to
sequentially optimize unknown objective functions whose
evaluations are costly. This method has successfully been
applied to a litany of applications, such as hyperparameter
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
Department of Mathematics & Institute of Data Science,
National University of Singapore. Correspondence to:
Eric Han <eric han@nus.edu.sg>, Jonathan Scarlett
<scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tuning (Snoek et al., 2012; Swersky et al., 2013), robotics
(Jaquier et al., 2020), recommender systems (Vanchinathan
et al., 2014) and more. In many of these applications,
corruptions in the measurements are not sufficiently well
captured by random noise alone. For instance, one may be
faced with rare outliers (e.g., due to equipment failures), or
bad actors may influence the observations (e.g., malicious
users in recommender systems).
These uncertainties have been addressed via the
consideration of an adversary in the GP bandit optimization
problem; function observations are not only subject
to random noise, but also adversarial noise. With this
additional requirement, the optimization not only becomes
more robust to uncertainty, but can also maintain robustness
in the presence of malicious adversaries. The notion of
adversarial attacks on bandit algorithms appears to have
been inspired by the extensive literature on adversarial
attacks on deep neural networks (Szegedy et al., 2014),
although the associated approaches are generally different.
1.1. Related Work
A myriad of GP optimization methods have been developed
in the literature to overcome the various forms of uncertainty,
and achieve some associated notion of robustness:
• Presence of outliers, where some function evaluations
are highly unreliable (Martinez-Cantin et al., 2018).
• Random perturbations to sampled points, where the
sampled points are subject to random uncertainty
(Beland & Nair, 2017; Nogueira et al., 2016).
• Adversarial perturbations to the final point, where the
final recommendation x may be perturbed up to some
level δ (Bertsimas et al., 2010; Bogunovic et al., 2018).
• Adversarial perturbations to samples, where the
observations are adversarially corrupted up to some
maximum budget (Bogunovic et al., 2020a).
These methods are primarily focused on proposing methods
that defend against the proposed uncertainty model to
improve robustness for GP optimization. There has been
minimal work studying the problem from an attacker’s
perspective in the literature, i.e., what kinds of attacks would
be successful against non-robust algorithms. We examine
such a perspective in this work, focusing on adversarial
perturbations to samples (Bogunovic et al., 2020a).

