Selective Network Linearization for Efficient Private Inference
Minsu Cho 1 Ameya Joshi 1 Siddharth Garg 1 Brandon Reagen 1 Chinmay Hegde 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Cloud-based machine learning frameworks motivate the
setting of private inference (PI). At a high level, the vision of
private inference is to enable a user to (efficiently) perform
inference of their data on a model owned by a cloud service
provider. But both parties wish to preserve their privacy and
both the user’s data and the service provider’s model are
encrypted prior to inference using cryptographic techniques.
Curiously, the difficulty in realizing this vision is the nonlinear operations of a deep network. Private execution of the
linear operations in a network using ciphertext can be made
essentially as fast as normal (plaintext) evaluation of the
1
New York University Tandon School of Engineering, New
York. Correspondence to: Minsu Cho <mc8065@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Test Accuracy (%)

Private inference (PI) enables inference directly
on cryptographically secure data. While promising to address many privacy issues, it has seen
limited use due to extreme runtimes. Unlike
plaintext inference, where latency is dominated
by FLOPs, in PI non-linear functions (namely
ReLU) are the bottleneck. Thus, practical PI
demands novel ReLU-aware optimizations. To
reduce PI latency we propose a gradient-based
algorithm that selectively linearizes ReLUs while
maintaining prediction accuracy. We evaluate
our algorithm on several standard PI benchmarks. The results demonstrate up to 4.25% more
accuracy (iso-ReLU count at 50K) or 2.2× less latency (iso-accuracy at 70%) than the current state
of the art and advance the Pareto frontier across
the latency-accuracy space. To complement
empirical results, we present a “no free lunch”
theorem that sheds light on how and when network linearization is possible while maintaining
prediction accuracy. Public code is available at
https://github.com/NYU-DICE-Lab/
selective_network_linearization.

80

75

SNL (ours)
DeepReduce
Sphynx
SAFENet
DELPHI
CryptoNAS

70

65
16

32

64

128

256

512

ReLU Count (K)

Figure 1. Our approach, SNL, achieves the Pareto frontier on
ReLU counts vs. test accuracy for CIFAR-100.

same operations with secret sharing techniques and input
independent preprocessing phases. However, to privately
evaluate ReLUs in the network, some version of Yao’s Garbled Circuits (GC) is necessary, resulting in proportionally
high latency costs and storage overheads. In a nutshell:
standard deep network architectures (such as ResNets) are
ill-suited for efficient PI, since they contain far too many ReLUs. See (Mishra et al., 2020; Ghodsi et al., 2020; 2021; Jha
et al., 2021) and a detailed discussion below in Section 2.
Thus, unlocking the full potential of fast, accurate, and
private neural inference require rethinking network design
to have as few ReLUs as possible. Numerous efforts in
this direction have already emerged. Prior work such as
MiniONN (Liu et al., 2017) focus on the security protocols
themselves, while more recent works such as Delphi (Mishra
et al., 2020) or Circa (Ghodsi et al., 2021) propose to replace
ReLUs with other activations. An alternative line of work
designs ReLU-efficient network skeletons using neural architecture search (NAS). CryptoNAS (Ghodsi et al., 2020)
uses evolutionary NAS, while Sphynx (Cho et al., 2021a)
uses micro-search NAS.
Our work in this paper pursues a new path, and applies to
several architectures that are used in imaging, computer
vision, or other perception problems (specifically, deep convolutional networks with/without residual connections and
ReLU activations). For these networks we study a problem
that we call deep network linearization. This refers to the
process of judiciously picking a subset of neurons in such a
network and eliminating their nonlinearities (i.e., replacing

