HyperTransformer: Model Generation for Supervised and Semi-Supervised
Few-Shot Learning

Andrey Zhmoginov 1 Mark Sandler 1 Max Vladymyrov 1

Abstract
In this work we propose a HyperTransformer,
a Transformer-based model for supervised and
semi-supervised few-shot learning that generates
weights of a convolutional neural network (CNN)
directly from support samples. Since the dependence of a small generated CNN model on a specific task is encoded by a high-capacity Transformer model, we effectively decouple the complexity of the large task space from the complexity
of individual tasks. Our method is particularly effective for small target CNN architectures where
learning a fixed universal task-independent embedding is not optimal and better performance is
attained when the information about the task can
modulate all model parameters. For larger models
we discover that generating the last layer alone
allows us to produce competitive or better results
than those obtained with state-of-the-art methods
while being end-to-end differentiable.

1. Introduction
In few-shot learning, a conventional machine learning
paradigm of fitting a parametric model to training data is
taken to a limit of extreme data scarcity where entire categories are introduced with just one or few examples. A
generic approach to solving this problem uses training data
to identify parameters φ of a solver aφ that given a small
batch of examples for a particular task (called a support set)
can solve this task on unseen data (called a query set).
One broad family of few-shot image classification methods
frequently referred to as metric-based learning, relies on
pretraining an embedding eφ (·) and then using some distance in the embedding space to label query samples based
on their closeness to known labeled support samples. These
1
Google Research. Correspondence to: Andrey Zhmoginov
<azhmogin@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

methods proved effective on numerous benchmarks (see
Tian et al. (2020) for review and references), however the
capabilities of the solver are limited by the capacity of the
architecture itself, as these methods try to build a universal
embedding function.
On the other hand, optimization-based methods such as seminal MAML algorithm (Finn et al., 2017) can fine-tune the
embedding eφ by performing additional SGD updates on all
parameters φ of the model producing it. This partially addresses the constraints of metric-based methods by learning
a new embedding for each new task. However, in many of
these methods, all the knowledge extracted during training
on different tasks and describing the solver aφ still has to
“fit” into the same number of parameters as the model itself.
Such limitation becomes more severe as the target models
get smaller, while the richness of the task set increases.
In this paper we propose a new few-shot learning approach
that allows us to decouple the complexity of the task space
from the complexity of individual tasks. The main idea is
to use the Transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017) that
given a few-shot task episode, generates an entire inference
model by producing all model weights in a single pass. This
allows us to encode the intricacies of the available training
data inside the Transformer model, while producing specialized tiny models for a given individual task. Reducing the
size of the generated model and moving the computational
overhead to the Transformer-based weight generator, we
can lower the cost of the inference on new images. This can
reduce the overall computation cost in cases where the tasks
change infrequently and hence the weight generator is only
used sporadically. Note that here we follow the inductive
inference paradigm with test samples processed one-by-one
(by the generated inference model) and do not target other
settings like, for example, transductive inference (Liu et al.,
2019) that consider relationships between test samples.
We start by observing that the self-attention mechanism
is well suited to be an underlying mechanism for a fewshot CNN weight generator. In contrast with earlier CNN(Zhao et al., 2020) or BiLSTM-based approaches (Ravi &
Larochelle, 2017), the vanilla1 Transformer model is in1

without attention masking or positional encodings

