Gating Dropout: Communication-efficient Regularization for
Sparsely Activated Transformers

Rui Liu * 1 Young Jin Kim 2 Alexandre Muzio 2 Hany Hassan Awadalla 2

Abstract
Sparsely activated transformers, such as Mixture
of Experts (MoE), have received great interest
due to their outrageous scaling capability which
enables dramatical increases in model size without significant increases in computational cost.
To achieve this, MoE models replace the feedforward sub-layer with Mixture-of-Experts sublayer in transformers and use a gating network to
route each token to its assigned experts. Since
the common practice for efficient training of such
models requires distributing experts and tokens
across different machines, this routing strategy
often incurs huge cross-machine communication
cost because tokens and their assigned experts
likely reside in different machines. In this paper,
we propose Gating Dropout, which allows tokens
to ignore the gating network and stay at their local
machines, thus reducing the cross-machine communication. Similar to traditional dropout, we
also show that Gating Dropout has a regularization effect during training, resulting in improved
generalization performance. We validate the effectiveness of Gating Dropout on multilingual machine translation tasks. Our results demonstrate
that Gating Dropout improves a state-of-the-art
MoE model (Kim et al., 2021) with faster wallclock time convergence rates and better BLEU
scores for a variety of model sizes and datasets.

1. Introduction
Large transformer models have been shown to be effective
and powerful in many natural language processing tasks
such as machine translation (Lewis et al., 2019; Conneau
*
Work done while a research intern at Microsoft 1 University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Microsoft.
Correspondence
to:
Rui Liu <ruixliu@umich.edu>, Young Jin Kim
<youki@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

& Lample, 2019) and also language understanding (Devlin
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Radford
et al., 2019). Sustaining the continued growth in size for
these dense models requires tremendous compute resources,
since all the parameters are used for all input examples.
Seeking better computational efficiency, sparsely activated
models have gained great interest; since they utilize a subset of the model weights for each input example (Shazeer
et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2020). This leads to a desirable characteristic: sparsely activated models can scale up
to an order of magnitude larger than dense models without significant increase in computational cost. However,
libraries and hardware accelerators widely used by machine
learning practitioners are much efficient in supporting dense
matrix operations. Mixture of Experts (MoE) models are
a specific type of sparsely activated models that have had
notable success in machine translation (Shazeer et al., 2018;
Lepikhin et al., 2020) and recently been explored in other
tasks (Riquelme et al., 2021) while running efficiently on
top of existing libraries and hardware accelerators. In this
paper, we focus on multilingual machine translation tasks.
A dense transformer model consists of a stack of layers
composed of two sub-layers: a multi-head self-attention
sub-layer followed by a feedforward network (FFN) sublayer. An MoE model replaces the FFN sub-layer with a
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) sub-layer which takes as input a
token representation and routes this token to the best top-k
experts. The MoE sub-layer is essentially a group of experts
with each expert still a FFN sub-layer. Typically, k is a
very small value. As with (Fedus et al., 2021; Kim et al.,
2021), we assume k = 1 by default. Note that our method
can also be extended to the case when k > 1. During
training and inference, an input token is routed to only one
expert (k = 1), resulting in constant computational cost for
one forward pass regardless of the total number of experts.
The target expert for each token is determined by a gating
network which is typically a small one-layer FFN.
To achieve highly efficient training, a combination of data,
expert, and model parallelism is adopted: (1) the part of
the model excluding MoE sub-layers is replicated across
multiple machines in a data-parallel fashion, (2) experts
from each MoE sub-layer are split across machines (i.e.,

