Robust Training of Neural Networks Using Scale Invariant Architectures

Zhiyuan Li 1 Srinadh Bhojanapalli 2 Manzil Zaheer 3 Sashank J. Reddi 2 Sanjiv Kumar 2

Abstract
In contrast to SGD, adaptive gradient methods
like A DAM allow robust training of modern deep
networks, especially large language models. However, the use of adaptivity not only comes at the
cost of extra memory but also raises the fundamental question: can non-adaptive methods like SGD
enjoy similar benefits? In this paper, we provide
an affirmative answer to this question by proposing to achieve both robust and memory-efficient
training via the following general recipe: (1) modify the architecture and make it scale invariant,
(2) train with SGD and weight decay, and optionally (3) clip the global gradient norm
q proportional

to weight norm multiplied by 2λ
η , where η is
learning rate and λ is weight decay. We show that
this general approach is robust to rescaling of parameter and loss by proving that its convergence
only depends logarithmically on the scale of initialization and loss, whereas the standard SGD
might not even converge for many initializations.
Following our recipe, we design a scale invariant version of B ERT, called S IBERT, which when
trained simply by vanilla SGD achieves performance comparable to B ERT trained by adaptive
methods like A DAM on downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Neural architectures like transformers are the cornerstone
for modern machine learning applications. However, training them is difficult and often results in training instability
(Liu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020b). To enable stable
training, one typically requires adaptive and carefully tuned
learning rates. However, the reason behind this issue is not
very well-understood and lacks a formal treatment.
1

Princeton University, the work is done when interning
at Google Research New York 2 Google Research New York
3
Google DeepMind New York. Correspondence to: Zhiyuan Li
<zhiyuanli@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this paper, we hypothesize that a primary cause of such
behavior is the k-homogeneous (k ≥ 2) nature of the network i.e., property where network’s output is scaled by sk
when its parameters are scaled by s. To illustrate our point,
we consider the following instructive toy model.
Example 1.1. Consider logistic regression with
1-dimensional non-separable data, {zi , yi }ni=1
∈
n
(R × {±1}) . The loss is defined as L(x1 , , . . . , x2k ) =
Pn
e
L(X)
:= − i=1 ln(1 + e−zi yi X ) where X = x1 . . . x2k
and k ≥ 2.
e is convex with bounded smoothness in X, there
Since L
exists step size that are independent of any initialization
that allow GD to converge to the optimal solution. In
sharp contrast, the reparametrized loss L(x1 , , . . . , x2k )
with 2k-homogeneous structure does not enjoy this nice
stability property — the learning rate has to be tuned
according to the initialization. In particular, when η ≥
1
2
(X(0)) k −1 and X(0) > X ∗ where X ∗ > 0 is
|∇ e
L(X(0))|
the global minimizer, X(t) will monotonically increase and
explode, if all xi are initialized to be the same.

We refer the reader to Appendix B for a formal justification of this example. In the above example, the success
of optimization is very sensitive to the right choice of the
learning rate that depends on the initialization. Furthermore,
the training cannot recover once the norm explodes due to
large gradient update.
In the above one-dimensional example it is still possible to
find a small workable learning rate by extensive grid search
that depends on the initial point, however, the situation
can get worse when the k-homogeneous structure has an
unbalanced initialization as below.
Example 1.2. Consider solving low-rank matrix decomposi2
tion by Gradient Descent. Let L(A, B) = 12 AB > − Y 2
where A, B ∈ Rd×r are both initialized i.i.d. gaussian with
−2
2
2
covariance σA
 σB
≈ σA
, Y ∈ Rd and d  r.
Solving this optimization problem requires A and B learning the column and row space of Y respectively, but the

