Multi-slots Online Matching with High Entropy

Xingyu Lu 1 Qintong Wu 1 Wenliang Zhong 1

Abstract
Online matching with diversity and fairness pursuit, a common building block in the recommendation and advertising, can be modeled as constrained convex programming with high entropy.
While most existing approaches are based on the
“single slot” assumption (i.e., assigning one item
per iteration), they cannot be directly applied to
cases with multiple slots, e.g., stock-aware topN recommendation and advertising at multiple
places. Particularly, the gradient computation and
resource allocation are both challenging under this
setting due to the absence of a closed-form solution. To overcome these obstacles, we develop
a novel algorithm named Online subGradient descent for Multi-slots Allocation (OG-MA). It uses
an efficient pooling algorithm to compute closedform of the gradient then performs a roulette swapping for allocation, yielding a sub-linear regret
with linear cost per iteration. Extensive experiments on synthetic and industrial data sets demonstrate that OG-MA is a fast and promising method
for multi-slots online matching.

1. Introduction
Online matching plays a crucial role in many real-world
applications, such as online advertising with guaranteed
contracts (Mehta et al., 2007; Feldman et al., 2009) and
goods recommendation under inventory constraints (Talluri
& Van Ryzin, 1998; Zhong et al., 2015). Many works have
been done to investigate the theoretical properties of this
problem, as well as the industrial deployment. Most of them
are built on a bipartite graph G(A, T, E) with the single-slot
assumption. Here A denotes nodes resource to assign, while
T refers to the node of users arriving one by one. And E is
the edge set representing valid assignments. For each node
1
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China.
Correspondence
to:
Xingyu Lu <sing.lxy@antgroup.com>, Qintong
Wu
<qintong.wqt@antgroup.com>,
Wenliang
Zhong
<yice.zwl@antgroup.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

hat

Search

AD

hat

Search

AD

AD

AD

Figure 1: Left figure illustrates the typical online matching
application that presents an advertisement in a single slot,
and right figure shows a practical search engine results page
where several advertisements are blended in multiple slots.
t ∈ T, a decision-maker takes an action to match one node
from t’s neighbors in A to maximize the sum weights of the
matched subset edges under the resource constraints on A.
Pioneered works modeled online matching as linear programming (LP) with a primal-dual framework that maintains
dual variables induced by resource constraints (Devanur &
Hayes, 2009; Agrawal et al., 2014; Li et al., 2020). When a
user node arrives, the primal solution is recovered (i.e. picking one item) , and then a gradient descent step is applied
to the dual. However, the LP approaches do not take the
diversity and fairness into consideration, and thus not suitable for specific tasks. To handle the above issue, the high
entropy regularization, encouraging desired properties in
advertising and recommendation (Qin & Zhu, 2013; Ahmed
et al., 2017; Di Noia et al., 2017), is introduced to online
matching (Zhong et al., 2015; Agrawal et al., 2018).
While the above works focus on the single-slots setting,
there are a large number of applications involving multislots , such as the product feed recommendation and search
result pages with ads (see Figure 1). However, it is nontrivial to extend existing methods to the multi-slots setting
with diversity pursuit (Zhang, 2009; Yan et al., 2020). They
either rely on a closed-form of gradient computation (Zhong
et al., 2015; Agrawal et al., 2018) or assume the primal
recovery is computationally lightweight (Balseiro et al.,
2020; 2021) , which fail to hold in the presence of N > 1
slots. To the best of our knowledge, a high entropy online
matching in the multi-slots setting remains unexplored and

