Robust SDE-Based Variational Formulations
for Solving Linear PDEs via Deep Learning

Lorenz Richter * 1 2 3 Julius Berner * 4

1. Introduction
In this paper we suggest novel methods for solving highdimensional linear Kolmogorov PDEs. In particular, those
methods allow for more efficient approximations by reducing the variance of loss estimators, as illustrated by numerical experiments like the one displayed in Figure 1.
High-dimensional PDEs are ubiquitous in applications appearing in economics, science, and engineering, however,
*

Equal contribution (the author order was determined by
numpy.random.rand(1)) 1 dida Datenschmiede GmbH, Germany 2 Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany 3 Institute of Mathematics, Freie Universität Berlin, Germany 4 Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna, Austria. Correspondence to:
Julius Berner <julius.berner@univie.ac.at>, Lorenz Richter
<lorenz.richter@fu-berlin.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

100

10 1

10 1

10 2

10 2

MSE

The combination of Monte Carlo methods and
deep learning has recently led to efficient algorithms for solving partial differential equations
(PDEs) in high dimensions. Related learning problems are often stated as variational formulations
based on associated stochastic differential equations (SDEs), which allow the minimization of
corresponding losses using gradient-based optimization methods. In respective numerical implementations it is therefore crucial to rely on
adequate gradient estimators that exhibit low variance in order to reach convergence accurately and
swiftly. In this article, we rigorously investigate
corresponding numerical aspects that appear in
the context of linear Kolmogorov PDEs. In particular, we systematically compare existing deep
learning approaches and provide theoretical explanations for their performances. Subsequently,
we suggest novel methods that can be shown to
be more robust both theoretically and numerically,
leading to substantial performance improvements.

estimator std.

Abstract

10 3
10 4

FK
detach
BSDE
grad
BSDE
grad
BSDE, eff
BSDE
BSDE, eff

10 3
10 4

102

104
batch size

102

104
batch size

Figure 1. Standard deviation and performance (in terms of the
mean squared error (MSE) on evaluation data) of different losses
as a function of the batch size after training a neural network for
30k steps, where due to memory constraints different losses allow
for different maximal batch size values.

their numerical treatment poses formidable challenges since
traditional grid-based methods suffer from the curse of dimensionality. Recently, the combination of Monte Carlo
methods and deep learning has led to feasible algorithms
(E et al., 2017; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2018; Han et al.,
2018; Raissi et al., 2019; Pfau et al., 2020; Berner et al.,
2021), which, at least in some settings, are able to beat
this curse (Jentzen et al., 2018; Reisinger & Zhang, 2019;
Berner et al., 2020b). The general idea is to rely on stochastic representations of the PDE which may be interpreted as
variational formulations that can subsequently be minimized
by iterative gradient decent methods (Nüsken & Richter,
2021a). In respective algorithms it is therefore crucial to
rely on adequate gradient estimators that exhibit low variance and eventually lead to robust numerical optimization
routines, where robustness refers to the ability of coping
with stochasticity in the optimization process.
In this article we focus on linear Kolmogorov PDEs for
which variational formulations may be based on the celebrated Feynman-Kac formula (Beck et al., 2021). This
method is handy from an implementational point of view,
however, we can demonstrate potential non-robustness issues that might deteriorate the numerical performance. To
overcome these issues, we suggest alternative approaches
resting on backward stochastic differential equations which
lead to variance-reduced estimators and robust algorithms.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We provide a systematic numerical comparison of loss

