Continuous-Time Analysis of Accelerated Gradient Methods via
Conservation Laws in Dilated Coordinate Systems

Jaewook J. Suh 1 Gyumin Roh 1 Ernest K. Ryu 1

Abstract
We analyze continuous-time models of accelerated gradient methods through deriving conservation laws in dilated coordinate systems. Namely,
instead of analyzing the dynamics of X(t), we
analyze the dynamics of W (t) = tα (X(t) − Xc )
for some α and Xc and derive a conserved quantity, analogous to physical energy, in this dilated
coordinate system. Through this methodology,
we recover many known continuous-time analyses in a streamlined manner and obtain novel
continuous-time analyses for OGM-G, an acceleration mechanism for efficiently reducing gradient
magnitude that is distinct from that of Nesterov.
Finally, we show that a semi-second-order symplectic Euler discretization in the dilated coordinate system leads to an O(1/k 2 ) rate on the
standard setup of smooth convex minimization,
without any further assumptions such as infinite
differentiability.

in a dilated coordinate system. Namely, instead of analyzing the dynamics of X(t), we analyze the dynamics of
W (t) = tα (X(t) − Xc ) for some α ∈ R and Xc ∈ Rn .
Through this methodology, we recover many known
continuous-time analyses in a streamlined manner. Furthermore, the methodology enables us to perform a novel analysis of an ODE model of OGM-G of Kim & Fessler (2021),
an acceleration mechanism distinct from that of (Nesterov,
1983). Finally, we show that a semi-second-order symplectic Euler discretization in the dilated coordinate system leads
to an O(1/k 2 ) rate on the standard setup of smooth convex minimization, without any further assumptions such as
infinite differentiability.
1.1. Preliminaries and notation
We review the standard definitions of convex optimization
and set up the notation (Nesterov, 2004; Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004; Bauschke & Combettes, 2017; Nesterov,
2018; Ryu & Yin, 2022). Throughout the paper, we use Rn
for the underlying Euclidean space with Euclidean norm
k · k and inner product h·, ·i. For L > 0, f : Rn → R is
L-smooth if f is differentiable and

1. Introduction
Despite the significance of acceleration within the study
of first-order optimization methods, a fundamental understanding of the acceleration phenomena remains elusive.
Recently, continuous-time analyses of accelerated gradient
methods have been extensively pursued, even using ideas
from mathematical physics. However, these continuoustime analyses still retain a component of mystery: They rely
on establishing that certain energy functions are nonincreasing but do not justify the origin of such energy functions.
In this work, we present a methodology for analyzing accelerated gradient methods through deriving a conservation
law, analogous to the conservation of energy of physics,
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Ernest K. Ryu
<ernestryu@snu.ac.kr>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

k∇f (x) − ∇f (y)k ≤ L kx − yk ,

∀ x, y ∈ Rn .

For µ > 0, g : Rn → R is µ-strongly convex if g(x) −
2
(µ/2) kxk is convex. When f is differentiable and convex,
f (x) − f (y) − h∇f (y), x − yi ≥ 0
holds for all x, y ∈ Rn , and we refer to this inequality as
the convexity inequality. Throughout this paper, consider
minimize
f (x),
n
x∈R

(1)

where f : Rn → R is convex and differentiable. When (1)
has a minimizer, write X? to denote a minimizer. Write
f? = inf x∈Rn f (x) for the optimal value of the problem.
Energy and conservation law. Let A : (0, ∞) → R be
differentiable and B : (0, ∞) → R be integrable. Suppose
0 = Ȧ(t) + B(t)

