Nonlinear Feature Diffusion on Hypergraphs

Konstantin Prokopchik 1 Austin R. Benson 2 Francesco Tudisco 1

Abstract
Hypergraphs are a common model for multiway relationships in data, and hypergraph semisupervised learning is the problem of assigning
labels to all nodes in a hypergraph, given labels on
just a few nodes. Diffusions and label spreading
are classical techniques for semi-supervised learning in the graph setting, and there are some standard ways to extend them to hypergraphs. However, these methods are linear models, and do not
offer an obvious way of incorporating node features for making predictions. Here, we develop a
nonlinear diffusion process on hypergraphs that
spreads both features and labels following the
hypergraph structure. Even though the process
is nonlinear, we show global convergence to a
unique limiting point for a broad class of nonlinearities and we show that such limit is the global
minimum of a new regularized semi-supervised
learning loss function which aims at reducing a
generalized form of variance of the node features
across the hyperedges. The limiting point serves
as a node embedding from which we make predictions with a linear model. Our approach is
competitive with popular graph and hypergraph
neural network baselines, and also takes less time
to train.

1. Introduction
In graph-based semi-supervised learning (SSL), one has
labels on a small number of nodes, and the goal is to predict
labels for the remaining nodes. Diffusions, label spreading,
and label propagation are classical techniques for this problem, where known labels are diffused, spread, or propagated
over the edges in a graph (Zhou et al., 2004; Zhu et al., 2003).
*

Equal contribution 1 Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila,
Italy 2 Cornell University, New York, USA. Correspondence
to: Konstantin Prokopchik <konstantin.prokopchik@gssi.it>,
Austin R. Benson <arb@cs.cornell.edu >, Francesco Tudisco
<francesco.tudisco@gssi.it>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

These methods were originally developed for graphs where
the set of nodes corresponds to a point cloud, and edges are
similarity measures such as -nearest neighbors; however,
they can also be used with relational data such as social
networks or co-purchasing (Chin et al., 2019; Gleich & Mahoney, 2015; Juan et al., 2020; Kyng et al., 2015). In the
latter case, diffusions are particularly well-suited because
they directly capture the idea of homophily (McPherson
et al., 2001) or assortativity (Newman, 2002), where labels
are smooth over the graph.
While graphs are widely-used models for relational data,
many complex systems and datasets are better described
by higher-order relations that go beyond pairwise interactions (Battiston et al., 2020; Benson et al., 2018; Torres
et al., 2021). For instance, co-authorship often involves
more than two authors, people in social network gather in
small groups and not just pairs, and emails can have several
recipients. A hypergraph is a standard representation for
such data, where a hyperedge can connect any number of
nodes. Directly modeling higher-order interactions has led
to improvements in several machine learning settings (Zhou
et al., 2007; Benson et al., 2016; Li & Milenkovic, 2017;
2018; Yadati et al., 2019; Srinivasan et al., 2021).
Along this line, there are a number of diffusions or
Laplacian-like regularization techniques for SSL on hypergraphs (Zhou et al., 2007; Hein et al., 2013; Zhang et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Veldt et al., 2020;
Tudisco et al., 2021), which are also built on principles
of similarity or assortativity. These methods are based on
the optimization of a quadratic Laplacian-based regularized
loss which enforces local and global consistency across
the hypergredges. This optimization formulation makes
it easy to interpret and to provide theoretical guarantees
on the learning strategy. However, unlike the graph case,
non-quadratic hypergraph consistency losses are typically
required to model real-world data interactions at higherorder (Chan & Liang, 2020; Neuhäuser et al., 2022; Tudisco
& Higham, 2021). Thus, the corresponding diffusion algorithms, based on e.g. gradient flow integration, are not
linear and are in general no longer easy to interpret nor to
analyze theoretically. Moreover, these methods are topically
designed for cases where only labels are available, and do
not take advantage of rich features or metadata associated
with hypergraphs that are potentially useful for making ac-

