From Dirichlet to Rubin: Optimistic Exploration in RL without Bonuses

Daniil Tiapkin 1 2 Denis Belomestny 3 1 Éric Moulines 4 1 Alexey Naumov 1 Sergey Samsonov 1 Yunhao Tang 5
Michal Valko 5 Pierre Ménard 6

Abstract
We propose the Bayes-UCBVI algorithm for reinforcement learning in tabular, stage-dependent,
episodic Markov decision process: a natural extension of the Bayes-UCB algorithm by Kaufmann
et al. (2012) for multi-armed bandits. Our method
uses the quantile of a Q-value function posterior
as upper confidence bound on the optimal Q-value
function. For Bayes-UCBVI,
we prove a regret
√
e H 3 SAT ) where H is the
bound of order O(
length of one episode, S is the number of states, A
the number of actions, T the number of
√ episodes,
that matches the lower-bound of Ω( H 3 SAT )
up to poly-log terms in H, S, A, T for a large
enough T . To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first algorithm that obtains an optimal dependence on the horizon H (and S) without the
need of an involved Bernstein-like bonus or noise.
Crucial to our analysis is a new fine-grained anticoncentration bound for a weighted Dirichlet sum
that can be of independent interest. We then explain how Bayes-UCBVI can be easily extended
beyond the tabular setting, exhibiting a strong link
between our algorithm and Bayesian bootstrap
(Rubin, 1981).

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent interacts with an
environment with the objective of maximizing the sum of
collected rewards (Puterman, 1994). In order to fulfill this
objective, the agent should balance between exploring the
environment and exploiting the current knowledge to accumulate rewards. In this paper aim at providing generic
solution to this exploration-exploitation dilemma.
1
HSE University 2 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Duisburg-Essen University 4 École Polytechnique 5 DeepMind
6
Otto von Guericke University. Correspondence to: Daniil Tiapkin
<dtyapkin@hse.ru>.

We model the environment as an unknown episodic tabular
Markov decision process (MDP) with S states, A actions,
and episodes of length H. After T episodes, we measure the
performance of the agent by its cumulative regret which is
the difference between the total reward collected by an optimal policy and the total reward collected by the agent during
the learning. In particular, we study the non-stationary setting where rewards and transitions can change within an
episode.
An effective and widely used way to solve the explorationexploitation dilemma is the application of the principle of
optimism in face of uncertainty. One line of work (Azar
et al., 2017; Dann et al., 2017; Zanette and Brunskill, 2019a)
for episodic MDPs and for non-episodic MDPs (Jaksch et al.,
2010; Fruit et al., 2018; Talebi and Maillard, 2018) implements this principle by injecting optimism through bonuses
added to the rewards. By adding these bonuses we can build
upper confidence bounds (UCBs) on the optimal Q-value
functions and act greedily with respect to them. Typically,
these bonuses are decreasing functions of counts on the
number of visits of state-action pairs. Notably, for such ap12
proach,
√ Azar et al. (2017) proved a regret bound of order
3
e
O( H SAT ). Note that this upper bound matches, in
the first order and up to poly-logarithmic terms, the known
lower bound
√ (Domingues et al., 2021b; Jin et al., 2018) of
order Ω( H 3 SAT ) for the considered setting. The exploration based on building UCBs and adding bonuses is besides model-based also used for model-free algorithms (Jin
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020). For example,
Zhang et al.
√
e H 3 SAT ) for an
(2020) proved a regret bound of order O(
optimistic version of the Q-learning algorithm (Watkins and
Dayan, 1992). One shortcoming of this exploration method
is that algorithms with bonuses designed to obtain optimal
problem-independent regret bound often perform poorly in
practice, even for simple MDPs (Osband et al., 2013; Osband and Van Roy, 2017). Furthermore, the notion of count
used in the bonuses does not easily generalize beyond the
tabular setting3 even if some solutions exist (Bellemare et al.,

3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1

We translate√all the bounds to the stage-dependent setting by
multiplying by H the regret bounds in the stage-independent
setting.
2
e notation we ignore terms poly-log in H, S, A, T .
In the O(·)
3
Or simple linearly parameterized settings.

