Uncertainty Modeling in Generative Compressed Sensing

Yilang Zhang * 1 Mengchu Xu * 1 Xiaojun Mao 2 Jian Wang 1

Abstract
Compressed sensing (CS) aims to recover a highdimensional signal with structural priors from its
low-dimensional linear measurements. Inspired
by the huge success of deep neural networks in
modeling the priors of natural signals, generative neural networks have been recently used to
replace the hand-crafted structural priors in CS.
However, the reconstruction capability of the generative model is fundamentally limited by the
range of its generator, typically a small subset
of the signal space of interest. To break this bottleneck and thus reconstruct those out-of-range
signals, this paper presents a novel method called
CS-BGM that can effectively expands the range
of generator. Specifically, CS-BGM introduces
uncertainties to the latent variable and parameters
of the generator, while adopting the variational inference (VI) and maximum a posteriori (MAP) to
infer them. Theoretical analysis demonstrates that
expanding the range of generators is necessary for
reducing the reconstruction error in generative CS.
Extensive experiments show a consistent improvement of CS-BGM over the baselines.

1. Introduction
Compressed sensing (CS) is a paradigm that recovers an
unknown signal x ∈ Rn from a small number of linear
measurements
y = Ax + n,
(1)
where A ∈ Rm×n (m  n) is the measurement or sensing matrix, and n ∈ Rm is the additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN). Since the data acquisition of CS allows
for a sampling rate far below the Nyquist rate, it provides
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 2 School of Mathematical Sciences,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Xiaojun Mao and Jian Wang <maoxj@sjtu.edu.cn;
jian wang@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

an efficient approach for data encoding and compression.
In particular, a broad range of real-world applications fall
into the field of CS. Examples include magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) (Lustig et al., 2007), computed tomography
(CT) (Chen et al., 2008), wireless channel estimation (Haupt
et al., 2010), super-resolution (Fang et al., 2016), and singlepixel camera (Duarte et al., 2008).
Generally speaking, to reconstruct x from the ill-posed linear system (1), additional information is needed to ensure
a unique solution. A widely adopted approach is to make
use of the sparsity prior of natural signals in some transform domains. For example, natural sounds and images
are often observed to be sparse under Fourier and wavelet
transformation, respectively. Under the sparsity assumption,
traditional CS seeks to find out the sparsest signal x that fits
the measurements y:
min kxk0 ,

s.t. y = Ax + n,

(2)

where kxk0 := |{xi |xi 6= 0}| is the `0 -norm (number of
non-zero elements) of x. It has been shown that if the
sensing matrix A satisfies some conditions such as the restricted isometry property (RIP) or restricted eigenvalue
condition (REC), CS guarantees robust recovery of k-sparse
signals (Candės & Tao, 2005). However, searching the sparsest solution to a linear system is known to be an NP-hard
problem (Natarajan, 1995), for which no polynomial-time
algorithm has been developed yet. In order to get a solution
within feasible time, therefore, existing CS algorithms often
employ greedy search principles, or make some relaxations
to problem (2). Representative examples include matching
pursuit (MP)-type algorithms (Tropp & Gilbert, 2007; Chen
et al., 1989; Needell & Tropp, 2009) and optimization-based
algorithms (Chen et al., 2001; Candės & Tao, 2005).
Although traditional CS algorithms have achieved great success in many applications, due to the fact that most natural
signals are not strictly sparse in given transform domains,
relying on sparsity as the sole prior for reconstruction could
lead to inaccurate results. Fortunately, natural signals often
possess a variety of features besides sparsity (Kim et al.,
2020). Hence, an alternate for CS reconstruction is to combine sparsity with additional refined priors of signals, such
as low-rank assumption (Fazel et al., 2008), total variation (Candes et al., 2006), and dictionary models (Shen
et al., 2015). Despite their progress in both practical appli-

