Marginal Distribution Adaptation for Discrete Sets
via Module-Oriented Divergence Minimization

Hanjun Dai 1 Mengjiao Yang 1 Yuan Xue 2 Dale Schuurmans 1 Bo Dai 1

Abstract
Distributions over discrete sets capture the essential statistics including the high-order correlation among elements. Such information provides powerful insight for decision making across
various application domains, e.g. product assortment based on product distribution in shopping
carts. While deep generative models trained on
pre-collected data can capture existing distributions, such pre-trained models are usually not capable of aligning with a target domain in the presence of distribution shift due to reasons such as
temporal shift or the change in the population
mix. We develop a general framework to adapt
a generative model subject to a (possibly counterfactual) target data distribution with both sampling and computation efficiency. Concretely, instead of re-training a full model from scratch, we
reuse the learned modules to preserve the correlations between set elements, while only adjusting
corresponding components to align with target
marginal constraints. We instantiate the approach
for three commonly used forms of discrete set
distribution—latent variable, autoregressive, and
energy based models—and provide efficient solutions for marginal-constrained optimization in
either primal or dual forms. Experiments on both
synthetic and real-world e-commerce and EHR
datasets show that the proposed framework is able
to practically align a generative model to match
marginal constraints under distribution shift.

1. Introduction
Discrete sets are a common datatype in real world applications, typically encountered, for example, in carts of products in online shopping, sets of diagnosis codes for individ1
Google Research, Brain Team 2 Google Cloud. Correspondence to: Hanjun Dai <hadai@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ual patients in their electronic health records (EHR), or even
bag-of-word representations of documents. Understanding correlations between set elements provides essential
insight in these domains, and has been a major topic in machine learning and data mining research (Han et al., 2011).
Deep generative models, including deep latent variable models (Kingma & Welling, 2014), autoregressive models (Uria
et al., 2016), and deep energy-based models (LeCun et al.,
2006), have recently provided powerful new tools for capturing high-order correlations between elements co-occurring
in a set. Generated samples of discrete sets from such models, such as synthetic online orders, are often used for evaluating downstream decisions in applications like supply chain
fulfillment and product assortment decisions.
Generative models have demonstrated success in discrete set
modeling for domains such as document (Blei et al., 2003)
and language (Vaswani et al., 2017) modeling, but these
successes have generally relied on a basic assumption: that
the target distribution matches the distribution that generated
the training data (Vapnik, 1999). However, distribution shift
is prevalent in real-world scenarios, which can cause poor
alignment between previously sampled training data and
a current target distribution. One typical reason for such
drift is seasonality, for example sales in summer differ from
those in winter. Another reason is the need to perform
counterfactual simulation for purposes like debiasing EHR
data or stress-testing logistic systems. Both cases require
the generative model to be adapted to satisfy a (possibly
counterfactual) target data distribution.
For discrete sets, the most natural statistics of interest are
element marginals, i.e., the occurrence frequency of a particular element in the generated sets. In practice, it is also
relatively easy to obtain estimates of such marginals, like
sales for a certain product or prevalence of a certain disease,
compared to obtaining joint occurrence statistics. In this
paper, we therefore focus on developing a practical answer
to the following question:
How can we efficiently align an existing generative model
to match target marginal specifications, while preserving
previously learned correlations between elements?
The most straightforward idea would be to retrain an entire generative model from scratch on data that respects

