Loss Function Learning for Domain Generalization by Implicit Gradient

Boyan Gao 1 Henry Gouk 1 Yongxin Yang 1 Timothy Hospedales 1 2

Abstract
Generalising robustly to distribution shift is a major challenge that is pervasive across most realworld applications of machine learning. A recent
study highlighted that many advanced algorithms
proposed to tackle such domain generalisation
(DG) fail to outperform a properly tuned empirical risk minimisation (ERM) baseline. We take
a different approach, and explore the impact of
the ERM loss function on out-of-domain generalisation. In particular, we introduce a novel metalearning approach to loss function search based
on implicit gradient. This enables us to discover
a general purpose parametric loss function that
provides a drop-in replacement for cross-entropy.
Our loss can be used in standard training pipelines
to efficiently train robust models using any neural
architecture on new datasets. The results show
that it clearly surpasses cross-entropy, enables
simple ERM to outperform some more complicated prior DG methods, and provides excellent
performance across a variety of DG benchmarks.
Furthermore, unlike most existing DG approaches,
our setup applies to the most practical setting of
single-source domain generalisation, on which we
show significant improvement.

1. Introduction
Deep learning is highly successful when the training and
testing samples meet the i.i.d. assumption. However, this
assumption is violated in many practical applications of machine learning from medical imaging to earth observation
imaging (Koh et al., 2021). This has led a large number of
studies to investigate approaches to training models with
increased robustness to distribution shift at testing-time, a
problem setting known as Domain Generalisation (DG). Despite the volume of research in this area (Zhou et al., 2021a),
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh 2 Samsung
AI Center, Cambridge. Correspondence to: Boyan Gao
<boyan.gao@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

a recent careful benchmarking exercise, DomainBed (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021) showed that simple empirical risk
minimisation (ERM) on a combination of training domains
is a very strong baseline when properly tuned. State-of-theart alternatives based on sophisticated architectures, regularisers, and data augmentation schemes failed to reliably
beat ERM (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021).
Rather than propose an alternative to ERM for DG, we investigate a previously unstudied hyperparameter of ERM,
namely the choice of loss function—which has been ubiquitously taken to be standard cross-entropy (CE) in prior
DG work. Loss function choice has been shown to impact
calibration (Mukhoti et al., 2020), overfitting (Gonzalez
& Miikkulainen, 2019), and label-noise robustness (Wang
et al., 2019) in standard supervised learning, so it is intuitive
that it would impact robustness to domain-shift. However,
it has not yet been studied in this context. Our preliminary
experiments showed that equipping ERM with some recent
robust loss functions in place of CE does lead to improvements in DG performance where sophisticated alternatives
have failed (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021). This raises the
question: can one design a loss function specialised for DG?
To answer this question, we define a meta-learning algorithm to learn a parametric (white-box) loss function suitable for DG. Our desiderata are: (1) Performing ERM with
this loss on a source domain should lead to good performance when tested on out-of-domain target data; and (2) It
should provide a ‘plug-and-play’ drop-in replacement for
cross-entropy that, once learned, can be used without further modification or computational expense with any new
dataset or model architecture. While there has been growing
interest in meta-learning for loss function design (Li et al.,
2019a), they mostly fail to meet these criteria. They learn
problem-specific—rather than re-usable—losses. If applied
to DG, this would imply replacing simple ERM learning
with sophisticated meta-learning pipelines to train a loss on
a per-problem basis. In contrast, as illustrated schematically
in Fig. 1, we learn a loss function once on a simple DG
task (RotatedMNIST) and demonstrate that it subsequently
provides a drop-in replacement for CE that improves an
array of more challenging DG recognition tasks.
To train a general purpose robust loss function we need a
search space that is flexible enough to include interesting

