General-purpose, long-context autoregressive modeling with Perceiver AR

Curtis Hawthorne * 1 Andrew Jaegle * 2 Cătălina Cangea 2 Sebastian Borgeaud 2 Charlie Nash 2
Mateusz Malinowski 2 Sander Dieleman 2 Oriol Vinyals 2 Matthew Botvinick 2 Ian Simon 1 Hannah Sheahan 2
Neil Zeghidour 1 Jean-Baptiste Alayrac † 2 João Carreira † 2 Jesse Engel † 1

Abstract
Real-world data is high-dimensional: a book,
image, or musical performance can easily contain hundreds of thousands of elements even after compression. However, the most commonly
used autoregressive models, Transformers, are
prohibitively expensive to scale to the number
of inputs and layers needed to capture this longrange structure. We develop Perceiver AR, an
autoregressive, modality-agnostic architecture
which uses cross-attention to map long-range inputs to a small number of latents while also maintaining end-to-end causal masking. Perceiver AR
can directly attend to over a hundred thousand tokens, enabling practical long-context density estimation without the need for hand-crafted sparsity
patterns or memory mechanisms. When trained
on images or music, Perceiver AR generates outputs with clear long-term coherence and structure.
Our architecture also obtains state-of-the-art likelihood on long-sequence benchmarks, including
64 × 64 ImageNet images and PG-19 books.

1. Introduction
A central goal of artificial intelligence research is the development of systems that can identify structure in the world
and use it to effectively perform tasks of interest. In the
past few years, autoregressive (AR) modeling with attention
architectures (sometimes referred to metonymically as “language modeling”) has emerged as a viable path to achieving
this goal. In AR modeling, a set of outputs are generated
by (i) using a model to map a set of inputs to an output, (ii)
appending that output to the set of inputs, and proceeding
again from step (i) until the full set of outputs has been
*
Equal contribution † Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team 2 DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
Curtis Hawthorne <fjord@google.com>, Andrew Jaegle
<drewjaegle@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

produced. This simple recipe can in principle be followed
to express any input-output relationship, and breakthrough
results have been achieved using Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017) or related models to learn the input → output
mapping (Vinyals et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Jumper
et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021). For this to work, the model
must be able to capture patterns in the input that are useful
for predicting the next output.
Patterns in real-world data often depend on the details of
many inputs (or “tokens,” each of which represents a row of
an input array), some of which are far away in space, time,
or setting from the current output. Many pieces of music,
for example, begin by stating a theme with clear melodic
and rhythmic elements. Over the piece, these elements are
gradually varied with increasingly elaborate restatements
designed to draw listeners in. How does the precise timing
of a phrase relate to its antecedents? How does a tonal
motif persist and develop as it is restated? How does a
new harmonization recontextualize a familiar melody? The
structure of the piece emerges when each component is
considered alongside many others.
There is a tension between this kind of long-form, contextual
structure and the computational properties of Transformers.
Transformers repeatedly apply a self-attention operation to
their inputs: this leads to computational requirements that
simultaneously grow quadratically with input length and
linearly with model depth. As the input data grows longer,
more input tokens are needed to observe it, and as the patterns in the input data grow more subtle and complicated,
more depth is needed to model the patterns that result. Computational constraints force users of Transformers to either
truncate the inputs to the model (preventing it from observing many kinds of long-range patterns) or restrict the depth
of the model (denuding it of the expressive power needed to
model complex patterns).
The goal of this work is to design an architecture that retains the well-known benefits of Transformers for autoregressive modeling while enabling long-range pattern recognition without adding extraneous complexity. To do this,
we build on the Perceiver family of attention architectures
(Jaegle et al., 2021; 2022), which have demonstrated excel-

