Not All Poisons are Created Equal: Robust Training against Data Poisoning

Yu Yang 1 Tian Yu Liu 1 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1

Abstract
Data poisoning causes misclassification of test
time target examples, by injecting maliciously
crafted samples in the training data. Existing defenses are often effective only against a specific
type of targeted attack, significantly degrade the
generalization performance, or are prohibitive for
standard deep learning pipelines. In this work, we
propose an efficient defense mechanism that significantly reduces the success rate of various data
poisoning attacks, and provides theoretical guarantees for the performance of the model. Targeted
attacks work by adding bounded perturbations
to a randomly selected subset of training data to
match the targets’ gradient or representation. We
show that: (i) under bounded perturbations, only
a number of poisons can be optimized to have a
gradient that is close enough to that of the target
and make the attack successful; (ii) such effective
poisons move away from their original class and
get isolated in the gradient space; (iii) dropping
examples in low-density gradient regions during
training can successfully eliminate the effective
poisons, and guarantees similar training dynamics
to that of training on full data. Our extensive experiments show that our method significantly decreases the success rate of state-of-the-art targeted
attacks, including Gradient Matching and Bullseye Polytope, and easily scales to large datasets1 .

1. Introduction
The impressive success of modern machine learning systems
is highly dependent on the quality of their large training data.
Many large datasets are scraped from the internet, or other
public and user-provided sources. Models trained on such
datasets are susceptible to data poisoning attacks, wherein
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, United States. Correspondence to: Yu Yang
<yuyang@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/YuYang0901/Epic.

an adversary places specially-constructed poisoned examples into the training data with the intention of manipulating
the behavior of the system at test time. These attacks create
security vulnerabilities that cannot be detected even if the
data is labeled and checked by human supervision. This
makes data poisoning arguably one of the most concerning threats to deep learning systems deployed in securityand safety-critical applications, such as financial services,
security cameras, autonomous cars, and medical devices.
Various types of poisoning attacks have been proposed in recent years. Most attacks fall into one of two main categories:
backdoor or triggerless poisoning. Backdoor data poisoning
augments the training data by a set of poisoned examples
that contain a (not necessarily visible) trigger pattern (Gu
et al., 2017; Turner et al., 2018; Souri et al., 2021). Finetuning the model on the augmented training data causes a model
to misclassify test-time samples containing the trigger. On
the other hand, triggerless poisoning attacks work by crafting small per-example perturbations so that the perturbed
training examples collide with the adversarially labeled target in the feature or gradient space (Shafahi et al., 2018;
Zhu et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020; Geiping et al., 2021b;
Aghakhani et al., 2021). Triggerless poisoning attacks cause
misclassification of particular instances and do not require
modification at inference time. In both cases, the poisoned
examples may be seemingly innocent and properly labeled,
and hence are hard to be detected by expert observers.
Existing defense mechanisms against data poisoning attacks
mainly rely on either anomaly detection based on nearest
neighbors, training loss, singular-value decomposition, feature and activation clustering (Cretu et al., 2008; Steinhardt
et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Peri et al.,
2020), or robust training based on strong data augmentation, randomized smoothing, ensembling, and adversarial
training (Weber et al., 2020; Levine & Feizi, 2020; Abadi
et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021; Tao et al.,
2021). However, such methods either drastically degrade
the generalization performance of the model (Geiping et al.,
2021a), or can only protect the model against certain types
of poisoning attacks (Koh et al., 2018; Tran et al., 2018),
or are computationally prohibitive for standard deep learning pipelines (Geiping et al., 2021a). Importantly, these
methods do not provide any theoretical guarantee for the
performance of the model (Weber et al., 2020; Levine &

