Black-Box Tuning for Language-Model-as-a-Service

Tianxiang Sun 1 Yunfan Shao 1 Hong Qian 2 Xuanjing Huang 1 Xipeng Qiu 1 3
Update Prompt

Abstract
Extremely large pre-trained language models
(PTMs) such as GPT-3 are usually released as
a service. It allows users to design task-specific
prompts to query the PTMs through some blackbox APIs. In such a scenario, which we call
Language-Model-as-a-Service (LMaaS), the gradients of PTMs are usually unavailable. Can we
optimize the task prompts by only accessing the
model inference APIs? This paper proposes the
black-box tuning framework to optimize the continuous prompt prepended to the input text via
derivative-free optimization. Instead of optimizing in the original high-dimensional prompt space,
which is intractable for traditional derivative-free
optimization, we perform optimization in a randomly generated subspace due to the low intrinsic
dimensionality of large PTMs. The experimental results show that the black-box tuning with
RoBERTa on a few labeled samples not only significantly outperforms manual prompt and GPT3’s in-context learning, but also surpasses the
gradient-based counterparts, i.e., prompt tuning
and full model tuning.

1. Introduction
Scaling pre-trained language models (PTMs) has shown
increasing power on a wide range of NLP tasks (Devlin
et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020; Fedus
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; 2021b; Zeng et al., 2021;
Sun et al., 2021; Qiu et al., 2020). Extremely large PTMs
can easily generalize to various downstream tasks with a
few labeled samples (Brown et al., 2020). However, making
these large PTMs benefit everyone is a challenge. On the
one hand, running such models can be very expensive or
even infeasible for most users. On the other hand, the model
parameters are often not open-sourced due to commercial
Fudan University 2 East China Normal University 3 Peng
Cheng Laboratory. Correspondence to: Tianxiang Sun <txsun19@fudan.edu.cn>, Xipeng Qiu <xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn>.

Task Prompt (Tunable)
Samples

Query
Response
Mixed-Task
Batch

Users

PTM Inference
(Black-Box)

Server

Figure 1. Illustration of Language-Model-as-a-Service (LMaaS).
Users can query the PTM deployed on the server through a blackbox API. In each query, users can input a task prompt and a batch
of texts. On the server side, the samples can be mixed in a large
batch to be fed into the PTM. By iteratively querying the PTM
through the black-box API, users can optimize and finally obtain
good prompts to solve the language tasks of interest.

considerations and the potential risk of misuse.1 Therefore,
large PTMs such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), ERNIE
3.0 (Sun et al., 2021) and Yuan 1.0 (Wu et al., 2021) are
usually released as a service, allowing users to access these
powerful models through black-box APIs.
In this scenario, called Language-Model-as-a-Service
(LMaaS), users can solve the language tasks of interest using
the black-box APIs by crafting task-specific text prompts
or including training samples in the input texts (a.k.a. incontext learning (Brown et al., 2020)). Due to the great
power of the general-purpose PTMs underlying the APIs,
such approaches can achieve considerable performance on
simple language tasks, and therefore have powered many
interesting applications2 . However, querying large PTMs
through hand-crafted text prompts cannot fully exploit labeled data, resulting in unsatisfactory performance in many
use cases.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Instead of designing discrete text prompts, recently much
effort has been devoted to continuous prompt tuning (Li
& Liang, 2021; Hambardzumyan et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
1
2

https://openai.com/blog/openai-api/
See https://gpt3demo.com/ for examples.

