Why Should I Trust You, Bellman?
The Bellman Error is a Poor Replacement for Value Error

Scott Fujimoto 1 2 David Meger 1 Doina Precup 1 3 Ofir Nachum 2 Shixiang Shane Gu 2

Abstract
In this work, we study the use of the Bellman
equation as a surrogate objective for value prediction accuracy. While the Bellman equation is
uniquely solved by the true value function over
all state-action pairs, we find that the Bellman
error (the difference between both sides of the
equation) is a poor proxy for the accuracy of the
value function. In particular, we show that (1) due
to cancellations from both sides of the Bellman
equation, the magnitude of the Bellman error is
only weakly related to the distance to the true
value function, even when considering all stateaction pairs, and (2) in the finite data regime, the
Bellman equation can be satisfied exactly by infinitely many suboptimal solutions. This means
that the Bellman error can be minimized without
improving the accuracy of the value function. We
demonstrate these phenomena through a series of
propositions, illustrative toy examples, and empirical analysis in standard benchmark domains.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), value functions are a measure of performance of a target policy. Value functions
are an important quantity in RL as they can be used to inform decision-making. Consequently, many modern RL
algorithms rely on a value function in some capacity (Mnih
et al., 2015; Gu et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017; Fujimoto
et al., 2018; Badia et al., 2020).
The Bellman equation is a fundamental relationship in RL
which relates the value of a state-action pair to the stateaction pair that follows and is uniquely satisfied over all
state-action pairs by the true value function. The existence
of the Bellman equation suggests a straightforward approach
1

Mila, McGill University 2 Google Research, Brain
Team 3 DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Scott Fujimoto
<scott.fujimoto@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

to approximate value function learning, where a function
is trained to minimize the Bellman error (the difference
of both sides of the equation). The Bellman equation has
played a prominent role in many historically significant
approaches (Schweitzer & Seidmann, 1985; Baird, 1995;
Bradtke & Barto, 1996; Antos et al., 2008; Sutton et al.,
2009), as well as the more modern family of deep RL algorithms (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Gu et al.,
2016; Hessel et al., 2018).
This work aims to better understand the relationship between the Bellman error and the accuracy of value functions
through theoretical analysis and empirical study. We do
so by focusing on the setting of policy evaluation, which
presents the task of learning the value function of a target policy with data gathered from a possibly separate and
unknown behavior policy. Policy evaluation, which is a
subcomponent of many RL algorithms, is an ideal setting
for evaluating value functions as it provides a clear metric
of performance (value error: the distance to the true value
function) and provides consistency across trials (via a fixed
dataset and policy). Our key discoveries are as follows:
The Bellman error is a poor replacement for value error.
We find that given an arbitrary value function, low Bellman
error does not indicate low value error. This problem is
highlighted by experiments which show that value functions trained to minimize the Bellman error directly (Baird,
1995) have lower average Bellman error, but higher average
value error, than value functions trained by iterative methods (Ernst et al., 2005). This inverse relationship holds even
when evaluated over on-policy data (Figure 2), and only
worsens further with off-policy data (Table 1). We show
that this breakdown between Bellman error and value error
is due to the following two phenomena.
The magnitude of the Bellman error hides bias. The
Bellman error of a value function is the difference between
the value estimates on each side of the Bellman equation. If
the value error of these estimates share the same sign (i.e.
they are biased in the same direction), then they can cancel
each other out. As a result, biased value functions will have
lower Bellman error than unbiased value functions, even if
they have the same absolute value error.

