Constrained Offline Policy Optimization

Nicholas Polosky 1 Bruno C. da Silva † 2 Madalina Fiterau † 2 Jithin Jagannath † 1

Abstract
In this work we introduce Constrained Offline
Policy Optimization (COPO), an offline policy
optimization algorithm for learning in MDPs with
cost constraints. COPO is built upon a novel offline cost-projection method, which we formally
derive and analyze. Our method improves upon
the state-of-the-art in offline constrained policy
optimization by explicitly accounting for distributional shift and by offering non-asymptotic confidence bounds on the cost of a policy. These
formal properties are superior to those of existing
techniques, which only guarantee convergence to
a point estimate. We formally analyze our method
and empirically demonstrate that it achieves stateof-the-art performance on discrete and continuous control problems, while offering the aforementioned improved, stronger, and more robust
theoretical guarantees.

1. Introduction
This work addresses the problem of identifying safe policies in reinforcement learning based on existing static data
sets of previously-collected experiences. In particular, we
tackle the problem of providing robust guarantees of the
performance of policies optimized under the Constrained
Markov Decision Process (CMDP) (Altman, 1999) framework, given a finite amount of offline data. We improve upon
the existing literature by designing the first algorithm that
offers non-asymptotic confidence bounds on the true cost of
a policy and that achieves state-of-the-art performance on a
variety of control problems. Our work combines ideas from
offline reinforcement learning (RL) and from constrained
Markov Decision Processes. Offline (or batch) RL (Levine
et al., 2020; Sascha Lange, 2012) is concerned with estimating the value of a policy, or directly learning a policy, from
† denotes shared senior authorship 1 ANDRO Computational
Solutions, Rome, NY 13440 2 University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, MA 01003. Correspondence to: Nicholas Polosky
<npolosky@androcs.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

a static data set. This is relevant whenever one needs to
evaluate novel candidate policies without directly deploying
them, which might be costly or risky. Furthermore, many
real-world applications of RL require the eventual safe operation of an agent. Safety is often modeled in the CMDP
framework, where constraint functions define behaviors an
agent should avoid.
Techniques that operate at the intersection of these areas,
i.e., that identify cost-safe policies given offline data, have
been studied. The Batch Policy Learning under Constraints
(BPLC) (Le et al., 2019) algorithm, for example, is currently considered the state-of-the-art in this field. It employs
ensemble policies and Fitted-Q methods to learn offline
constrained policies that are empirically shown to satisfy
a permissible cost budget once deployed. BPLC, however,
is limited in two ways: (i) it only provides high probability guarantees that a point estimate of the policy cost will
converge to a point below a pre-specified budget; importantly, however, (ii) this estimate is based on a (possibly
small) single set of experiences, which may not be sufficient
to fully characterize the stochasticity of the MDP and the
true distribution underlying the data generating policy. As
a result, the safety guarantees provided by BPLC are not
necessarily robust to variability inherent to finite data.
In this work, we improve upon the state-of-the-art by developing a new constrained offline policy optimization (COPO)
algorithm capable of producing high probability confidence
bounds on the true cost value of the policy. These confidence bounds provide a more robust way of estimating the
true cost of a policy in cases where the finite amount of
training data may not be sufficient to properly characterize
the process from which samples were generated. This type
of robust guarantee on the cost of a policy is paramount
in real-world scenarios where breaking a cost budget may
carry extreme consequences, such as in medical applications
of RL (Bastani, 2014; Saria, 2018).
In the next sections we (i) introduce the necessary mathematical background; (ii) formally derive our novel constrained projection technique; (iii) formally characterize
the high probability confidence intervals that can be guaranteed by it; (iv) provide a finite sample analysis of our
method; and (v) demonstrate empirically that it achieves
state-of-the-art performance on discrete and continuous con-

