Interpretable Off-Policy Learning via Hyperbox Search

Daniel Tschernutter 1 Tobias Hatt 1 Stefan Feuerriegel 1 2

Abstract
Personalized treatment decisions have become an
integral part of modern medicine. Thereby, the
aim is to make treatment decisions based on individual patient characteristics. Numerous methods have been developed for learning such policies from observational data that achieve the best
outcome across a certain policy class. Yet these
methods are rarely interpretable. However, interpretability is often a prerequisite for policy
learning in clinical practice. In this paper, we
propose an algorithm for interpretable off-policy
learning via hyperbox search. In particular, our
policies can be represented in disjunctive normal
form (i. e., OR-of-ANDs) and are thus intelligible. We prove a universal approximation theorem
that shows that our policy class is flexible enough
to approximate any measurable function arbitrarily well. For optimization, we develop a tailored
column generation procedure within a branch-andbound framework. Using a simulation study, we
demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms stateof-the-art methods from interpretable off-policy
learning in terms of regret. Using real-word clinical data, we perform a user study with actual
clinical experts, who rate our policies as highly
interpretable.

1. Introduction
Personalized treatment decisions have received wide attention in clinical practice (Chan & Ginsburg, 2011; Collins &
Varmus, 2015; Hamburg & Collins, 2010). Thereby, the aim
is to select treatments that are effective for individual patients. One way to formalize personalized decision-making
are so-called policies, which map patient-level characteristics to treatment decisions. Numerous methods have been
developed for learning such policies using data collected
1

ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 LMU, Germany. Correspondence
to: Daniel Tschernutter <dtschernutter@ethz.ch>, Tobias Hatt
<thatt@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

from existing clinical trials or observational studies, which
are subsumed under off-policy learning (Athey & Wager,
2021; Beygelzimer & Langford, 2009; Dudı́k et al., 2014;
Kallus, 2018; Kallus & Zhou, 2018; Kitagawa & Tetenov,
2018).
A major challenge for off-policy learning in clinical practice
is to learn policies that satisfy two requirements: (i) the
policy class must be sufficiently rich and (ii) the policies
must be interpretable (Kattan et al., 2016; Kosorok & Laber,
2019; Blümlein et al., 2022). A policy class is said to be
sufficiently rich if it contains a large class of policies. This is
desirable as it is directly related to policies that yield a low
regret (i. e., the difference between clinical outcome across
the population of the learned policy and the a priori best
policy should be small). A policy is said to be interpretable
if its decision can be explained in understandable terms
to humans (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). Particularly, in
a clinical setting, it is crucial for clinical practitioners to
understand which treatment is chosen when (Ahmad et al.,
2018).
Logical models can achieve interpretability by providing
a few descriptive rules that can help clinical practitioners to understand the decision process and get an intuition
about the underlying data (Wang et al., 2017; Rudin, 2019).
Thereby, each rule is a conjunction of conditions (Wang
et al., 2017). As an example, a set of rules for deciding
whether or not a patient should receive a specific treatment
with a drug could be:
IF a patient
OR
OR
THEN

(has an age ≤ 60 AND a weight ≤ 80 kg AND
has mild symptoms)
(has an age ≤ 40 AND a weight ≤ 80 kg AND
has severe symptoms)
(has an age ≤ 30 AND a weight ≤ 100 kg
AND has severe symptoms)
treat with drug

The above model suggests treatments and provides patient
characteristics that lead to the decision. As such, it makes it
easy for domain experts to understand and critically assess
the underlying logic. For instance, in the above example,
one observes that younger patients seem to better respond
to the drug treatment even if they have severe symptoms
and/or are too heavy. Thus, the age of a patient seems to
be crucial for when it is recommended to apply the drug.
Furthermore, patients over 60 years should not receive the

