On the Learning of Non-Autoregressive Transformers

Fei Huang * 1 † Tianhua Tao * 1 Hao Zhou 2 † Lei Li 3 Minlie Huang 1

1. Introduction
Non-Autoregressive Transformers (NATs, Gu et al., 2018;
Gu et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2021a; Gu &
Kong, 2021) have received growing attention due to their
significantly lower decoding latency and approaching accuracy compared to the autoregressive Transformers (ATs)
*
Equal contribution † This work is done while Fei Huang
was a research intern and Hao Zhou was a research scientist
at ByteDance AI Lab. 1 The CoAI group, Tsinghua University. Institute for Artificial Intelligence, State Key Lab of Intelligent Technology and Systems, Beijing National Research Center
for Information Science and Technology, DCST, Tsinghua University. 2 Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University. 3 University of California Santa Barbara. Correspondence
to: Hao Zhou <haozhou0806@gmail.com>, Minlie Huang <aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

4.4

Weight space direction 2

Non-autoregressive Transformer (NAT) is a family of text generation models, which aims to reduce the decoding latency by predicting the whole
sentences in parallel. However, such latency reduction sacrifices the ability to capture left-toright dependencies, thereby making NAT learning
very challenging. In this paper, we present theoretical and empirical analyses to reveal the challenges of NAT learning and propose a unified perspective to understand existing successes. First,
we show that simply training NAT by maximizing
the likelihood can lead to an approximation of
marginal distributions but drops all dependencies
between tokens, where the dropped information
can be measured by the dataset’s conditional total
correlation. Second, we formalize many previous
objectives in a unified framework and show that
their success can be concluded as maximizing the
likelihood on a proxy distribution, leading to a
reduced information loss. Empirical studies show
that our perspective can explain the phenomena in
NAT learning and guide the design of new training
methods.

log-likelihood
Weight space direction 2

Abstract

BLEU

5.0
5.7
6.6
8.0

Weight space direction 1

9.8

Weight space direction 1

20
18
16
14
10
6
0

Figure 1: The log-likelihood and the BLEU score on a 2D
section in NAT’s weight space. GLAT+KD (⋆) and MLE
(▲) are trained via different objectives starting from an initial checkpoint (♦) for 10k steps, where MLE achieve higher
log-likelihood but lower BLEU, and GLAT is the opposite.
Each point of the contour map is linearly interpolated from
the three checkpoints. All values are evaluated on one translation benchmark, the validation set of WMT14 En-De.
in text generation (Qian et al., 2021b; Huang et al., 2022b).
NATs generate the whole sequence in parallel based on the
assumption that each token can be predicted independently.
However, unlike ATs that can be easily trained via Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), NAT learning is very
challenging because it drops the left-to-right dependencies.
Gu et al. (2018) show that directly training NATs via MLE
leads to implausible outputs with repeated tokens, revealing
their inability to preserve the consistency in generated texts.
To address the problem, many training methods have been
proposed. For example, knowledge distillation (KD, Kim &
Rush, 2016; Gu et al., 2018) supervises NATs with target
sentences distilled from an AT teacher model. GLAT (Qian
et al., 2021a) improves the training by utilizing a masked
language model objective. These methods only change the
training objectives without modifying the model, but they
demonstrate significant improvements in generation quality.
Despite the empirical successes in NAT learning, there still
exists a surprising characteristic not well studied: the objectives leading to a good generation quality actually result in
a very low likelihood.1 As shown in Fig.1, we finetune two
NATs with different objectives from an initial checkpoint
and track the changes in the log-likelihood and the BLEU
score. The optimal training directions under the two metrics
1

In this paper, we mainly discuss the NATs that use the same
architecture and without iterative refinement unless otherwise specified. The likelihood is obtained on the validation set.

