Robust Counterfactual Explanations for Tree-Based Ensembles

Sanghamitra Dutta 1 Jason Long 1 Saumitra Mishra 1 Cecilia Tilli 1 Daniele Magazzeni 1

Abstract

Counterfactual explanations inform ways to
achieve a desired outcome from a machine learning model. However, such explanations are not
robust to certain real-world changes in the underlying model (e.g., retraining the model, changing
hyperparameters, etc.), questioning their reliability in several applications, e.g., credit lending. In
this work, we propose a novel strategy – that we
call RobX – to generate robust counterfactuals for
tree-based ensembles, e.g., XGBoost. Tree-based
ensembles pose additional challenges in robust
counterfactual generation, e.g., they have a nonsmooth and non-differentiable objective function,
and they can change a lot in the parameter space
under retraining on very similar data. We first
introduce a novel metric – that we call Counterfactual Stability – that attempts to quantify how
robust a counterfactual is going to be to model
changes under retraining, and comes with desirable theoretical properties. Our proposed strategy
RobX works with any counterfactual generation
method (base method) and searches for robust
counterfactuals by iteratively refining the counterfactual generated by the base method using our
metric Counterfactual Stability. We compare the
performance of RobX with popular counterfactual
generation methods (for tree-based ensembles)
across benchmark datasets. The results demonstrate that our strategy generates counterfactuals
that are significantly more robust (nearly 100%
validity after actual model changes) and also realistic (in terms of local outlier factor) over existing
state-of-the-art methods.

1
JP Morgan Chase AI Research. Correspondence to: Sanghamitra Dutta <sanghamitra2612@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Table 1. Validity of Counterfactuals Generated Using State-OfThe-Art Techniques (with L1 cost minimization) for XGBoost
Models on German Credit Dataset (Dua & Graff, 2017): Models
were retrained after dropping only a single data point. A large
fraction of the counterfactuals for the previous model no longer
remain valid for the new models obtained after retraining.
M ETHOD

FT

FOCUS

FACE

NN

VALIDITY

72.9%

72.8%

84.4%

92.5%

1. Introduction
Counterfactual explanations have generated immense interest in several high-stakes applications, e.g., lending, credit
decision, hiring, etc (Verma et al., 2020; Karimi et al., 2020;
Wachter et al., 2017). Broadly speaking, the goal of counterfactual explanations is to guide an applicant on how they
can change the outcome of a model by providing suggestions for improvement. Given a specific input value (e.g.,
a data point that is declined by a model), counterfactual
explanations attempt to find another input value for which
the model would provide a different outcome (essentially
get accepted). Such an input value that changes the model
outcome is often referred to as a counterfactual.
Several existing works usually focus on finding counterfactuals that are as “close” to the original data point as possible
with respect to various distance metrics, e.g., L1 cost or L2
cost. This cost is believed to represent the “effort” that an
applicant might need to make to get accepted by the model.
Thus, the “closest” counterfactuals essentially represent the
counterfactuals attainable with minimum effort.
However, the closest counterfactuals may not always be
the most preferred one. For instance, if the model changes
even slightly, e.g., due to retraining, the counterfactual may
no longer remain valid. In Table 1, we present a scenario
where we retrain an XGBoost model (Chen et al., 2015) with
same hyperparameters on the same dataset, leaving out just
one data point. We demonstrate that a large fraction of the
“closest” counterfactuals generated using the state-of-the-art
techniques for tree-based models no longer remain valid.
This motivates our primary question: how do we generate
counterfactuals for tree-based ensembles that are not only
close but also robust to changes in the model?

