Lie Point Symmetry Data Augmentation for Neural PDE Solvers

Johannes Brandstetter† 1 2 Max Welling 1 Daniel E. Worrall‡ 3

Abstract
Neural networks are increasingly being used to
solve partial differential equations (PDEs), replacing slower numerical solvers. However, a critical issue is that neural PDE solvers require highquality ground truth data, which usually must
come from the very solvers they are designed
to replace. Thus, we are presented with a proverbial chicken-and-egg problem. In this paper, we
present a method, which can partially alleviate
this problem, by improving neural PDE solver
sample complexity—Lie point symmetry data
augmentation (LPSDA). In the context of PDEs, it
turns out that we are able to quantitatively derive
an exhaustive list of data transformations, based
on the Lie point symmetry group of the PDEs
in question, something not possible in other application areas. We present this framework and
demonstrate how it can easily be deployed to improve neural PDE solver sample complexity by
an order of magnitude.

1. Introduction
Simulation of the physical world around us is an important
component of many numerate disciplines. From computational fluid dynamics to molecular modeling (Lelièvre &
Stoltz, 2016) or astronomical simulation (Courant et al.,
1967), solving the underlying dynamical equations is usually analytically intractable. The equations themselves are
regularly expressed as partial differential equations (PDEs),
solutions of which require efficient and accurate solvers. In
reality, however, classical solvers are expensive and custom
designed per PDE class (Quarteroni & Quarteroni, 2009).
In recent years, with the reascendance of deep learning, it
has become popular to learn PDE solvers (Greydanus et al.,
1
University of Amsterdam 2 Johannes Kepler University Linz
now at Microsoft Research 3 Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative
of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc ‡ now at Deepmind. Correspondence to: Johannes Brandstetter <brandstetter@ml.jku.at>.
†

th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2019; Bar-Sinai et al., 2019; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020;
Thuerey et al., 2021), circumventing the lengthy and often
tedious process of solver design. But we are left with a
proverbial ‘chicken-and-egg problem’. From where do we
obtain the abundant data needed to train said neural solvers?
It has to be generated with a classical solver, after all.
It seems the best we can do is to generate ‘groundtruth’ data
using a high-quality, slow ‘teacher’ and then clone its behavior with a cheaper neural ‘student’—a form of so-called
model order reduction (Schilders, 2008). This considered, a
natural question is whether we can train student models with
less of this ‘expensive’ data. More precisely, how do we
improve solver sample complexity? One potential route is
to exploit symmetries of the loss with respect to input transformations, building in equivariance (Wang et al., 2021).
However, the design of equivariant layers is a difficult task.
A much simpler traditional method is data augmentation (Simard et al., 2003). However, knowing how to augment data and to what extent is a routine question faced by
ML practitioners. It turns out that PDEs are uniquely special
in that it is possible to characterize the full set of permissible
augmentations for each PDE. We shall define permissible
augmentations as Lie point symmetries in Section 2. As
such, for learnable PDE solvers, we shall show that we
are able to define exactly what kinds of data augmentation
we need, placing a typically intuition-based aspect of deep
learning pipeline design on a firm mathematical footing.
The contributions of this paper are:
• Lie point symmetry data augmentation (LPSDA), a
mathematically-grounded treatment of data augmentation for neural PDE solvers. LPSDA comprises the full
set of solution-preserving, pointwise, continuous data
transformations for any (analytic) PDE.
• Demonstration that LPSDA improves neural PDE
solver sample complexity to over an order of magnitude on a SOTA neural PDE solver, across multiple
PDEs (of evolution type) and training modalities.
• Ablations and interpolation on the effect of individual
symmetries on neural PDE solvers.
• Demonstration that LPSDA is faster and stabler than
running a classical solver to produce the same solution trajectories and measurement of the equivariance
properties of classical and neural solvers.

