Fair Representation Learning through Implicit Path Alignment

Changjian Shui 1 Qi Chen 1 Jiaqi Li 2 Boyu Wang 2 Christian Gagné 1 3

Abstract
We consider a fair representation learning perspective, where optimal predictors, on top of the
data representation, are ensured to be invariant
with respect to different sub-groups. Specifically,
we formulate this intuition as a bi-level optimization, where the representation is learned in the
outer-loop, and invariant optimal group predictors
are updated in the inner-loop. Moreover, the proposed bi-level objective is demonstrated to fulfill
the sufficiency rule, which is desirable in various
practical scenarios but was not commonly studied
in the fair learning. Besides, to avoid the high
computational and memory cost of differentiating
in the inner-loop of bi-level objective, we propose
an implicit path alignment algorithm, which only
relies on the solution of inner optimization and the
implicit differentiation rather than the exact optimization path. We further analyze the error gap
of the implicit approach and empirically validate
the proposed method in both classification and regression settings. Experimental results show the
consistently better trade-off in prediction performance and fairness measurement.

1. Introduction
Machine learning has been widely used in the real world
decision-making practice such as job candidate screening
(Raghavan et al., 2020). However, it has been observed
that learning algorithms treated some groups of population
unfavorably, for example, predicting the likelihood of crime
on the grounds of ethnicity, gender or age (Hardt et al.,
2016). To that end, algorithmic fairness, which aims to
mitigate the prediction bias for the protected feature such as
gender, has recently received tremendous attentions.
1
Université Laval, Québec, Canada 2 University of Western
Ontario, Ontario, Canada 3 Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Mila. Correspondence to: Boyu Wang <bwang@csd.uwo.ca>, Christian
Gagné <christian.gagne@gel.ulaval.ca>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

With the advancements of deep learning (LeCun et al.,
2015), fair representation learning (Zemel et al., 2013) has
been recently highlighted. Specifically, the learned fair
representation can easily transfer the unbiased prior knowledge to various downstream learning-tasks. For example, in
language understanding, the fair embedding provides both
useful and unbiased representation for different goals such
as translation or recommendation (Chang et al., 2019; Ethayarajh, 2020). Besides, it has been investigated in other
scenarios such as computer vision (Kehrenberg et al., 2020)
and intelligent health (Fletcher et al., 2021).
Typically, fair representation learning is realized by introducing fair constraints during the training. Consequently, a
number of fair notions for various goals have been proposed.
Specifically, most existing approaches in classification or regression use independence or separation rule (see Sec.2 and
references therein) (Madras et al., 2018; Song et al., 2019;
Chzhen et al., 2020). However, in a variety of applications,
independence or separation are not always appropriate, and
other fair notions such as sufficiency rule (Chouldechova,
2017) are preferred. Intuitively, given the output of the
algorithm Ŷ , the sufficiency rule ensures the conditional
expectation of label E[Y |Ŷ ] is invariant across the different
sub-groups (see Sec.2 for the formal definition).
In practice, the negligence of sufficiency rule can lead to
the significant bias in intelligent health. For example, health
systems rely on commercial algorithms to identify and assist patients with complex health needs. Such algorithms
output a score of healthcare needs, where a higher score
indicates that the patient is sicker and requires additional
care. Notably, Obermeyer et al. (2019) reveals a industrywide used algorithm that affects millions of patients, exhibits significant racial bias. Under the same predicted score
Ŷ = t, Black patients are considerably sicker than White
patients (Eblack [Y |Ŷ = t] > Ewhite [Y |Ŷ = t]). Obermeyer
et al. (2019) further points out that eliminating this disparity
would increase the percentage of Black patients receiving
additional healthcare from 17.7% to 46.5%.
From the algorithmic perspective, sufficiency rule is generally non-compatible to independence or separation, as
demonstrated in Sec.2, indicating that existing fair algorithms for independence or separation do not improve or
even worsen the sufficiency rule. Therefore fair represen-

