Towards Coherent and Consistent Use of Entities in Narrative Generation
Pinelopi Papalampidi * 1 Kris Cao 2 Tomáš Kočiský 2

Abstract
Large pre-trained language models (LMs) have
demonstrated impressive capabilities in generating long, fluent text; however, there is little to no
analysis on their ability to maintain entity coherence and consistency. In this work, we focus on
the end task of narrative generation and systematically analyse the long-range entity coherence
and consistency in generated stories. First, we
propose a set of automatic metrics for measuring model performance in terms of entity usage.
Given these metrics, we quantify the limitations
of current LMs. Next, we propose augmenting a
pre-trained LM with a dynamic entity memory in
an end-to-end manner by using an auxiliary entityrelated loss for guiding the reads and writes to the
memory. We demonstrate that the dynamic entity
memory increases entity coherence according to
both automatic and human judgment and helps
preserving entity-related information especially
in settings with a limited context window. Finally,
we also validate that our automatic metrics are
correlated with human ratings and serve as a good
indicator of the quality of generated stories.

1

Introduction

Large pre-trained language models (LMs) (such as GPT-2
(Radford et al., 2019), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), and
other models based on the Transformer-XL architecture
(Dai et al., 2019)) have radically improved text generation,
producing seemingly fluent text – (Clark et al., 2021) even
showed that non-expert human judges cannot distinguish
between machine-written and human-authored texts, based
on surface cues. Assuming the quality of generated text as
given, most recent efforts have then focused on trying to
control generation with a desired topic, factual information,
or specific style (Keskar et al., 2019; Dathathri et al., 2019;
*

Work completed during an internship at DeepMind.
University of Edinburgh, UK 2 DeepMind, UK. Correspondence
to: Pinelopi Papalampidi <p.papalampidi@sms.ed.ac.uk>.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Shin et al., 2020; Li & Liang, 2021). However, anecdotally,
there are still common failure cases of machine generated
text in terms of entity coherence and consistency, which are
fundamental properties of language.
In this work, we specifically focus on the task of narrative
generation in order to analyse and improve entity coherence
and consistency. Entities play a central role in narratives,
since they guide the plot, and all events revolve around
them (Fludernik, 2002; Jannidis, 2009; Frow, 2014; Bamman et al., 2013). Despite the importance of entities, recent
work has mainly emphasised on controlling the topic of
the generated stories using outlines, keywords or other relevant knowledge (Xu et al., 2020; Rashkin et al., 2020; Fan
et al., 2019; Goldfarb-Tarrant et al., 2020). At the same
time, entity-related structure in narrative generation has
been largely understudied for large-scale pre-trained LMs.
First, we propose a set of metrics for automatically measuring entity coherence and consistency. Based on these
metrics, we observe that the current LMs fail to follow the
patterns of entity usage we find in human-written narratives.
Overall, the generated stories present significantly lower
coherence and consistency, and this is especially evident
for stories with complex events and many named entities.
We further validate these observations by performing a human evaluation study, showing that our automatic metrics
correlate with human judgment of entity coherence.
Next, in order to improve these properties in narrative generation, we propose augmenting a pre-trained LM with a
dynamic entity memory. Motivated by prior work on language modeling (Clark et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2017), which
uses dynamic entity representations for improving generation on smaller RNN-based models, we augment the LM
with an entity memory and cross-attention blocks at each
layer of the model for attending to entities that participate
in the narrative.
In contrast with prior work, we introduce an end-to-end
trainable network with soft attention for performing reads
and writes to the memory instead of separately training
models to predict entity detection and reference. We also
relax the hard constraints of Clark et al. (2018) and Ji et al.
(2017), who only condition on one entity per step and update an entity representation only when encountering one
of its mentions. In order to increase both efficiency in the

