FedNew: A Communication-Efficient and Privacy-Preserving
Newton-Type Method for Federated Learning

Anis Elgabli 1 Chaouki B. Issaid 1 Amrit S. Bedi 2 Ketan Rajawat 3 Mehdi Bennis 1 Vaneet Aggarwal 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the following federated learning
(FL) problem

Newton-type methods are popular in federated
learning due to their fast convergence. Still, they
suffer from two main issues, namely: low communication efficiency and low privacy due to the
requirement of sending Hessian information from
clients to parameter server (PS). In this work, we
introduced a novel framework called FedNew in
which there is no need to transmit Hessian information from clients to PS, hence resolving the
bottleneck to improve communication efficiency.
In addition, FedNew hides the gradient information and results in a privacy-preserving approach
compared to the existing state-of-the-art. The
core novel idea in FedNew is to introduce a two
level framework, and alternate between updating
the inverse Hessian-gradient product using only
one alternating direction method of multipliers
(ADMM) step and then performing the global
model update using Newton’s method. Though
only one ADMM pass is used to approximate the
inverse Hessian-gradient product at each iteration,
we develop a novel theoretical approach to show
the converging behavior of FedNew for convex
problems. Additionally, a significant reduction
in communication overhead is achieved by utilizing stochastic quantization. Numerical results
using real datasets show the superiority of FedNew compared to existing methods in terms of
communication costs.

1
University of Oulu 2 University of Marylad, College Park,
MD, USA 3 Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India
4
Purdue University, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Anis Elgabli
<anis.elgabli@oulu.fi>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

n

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

where d denotes the dimension of the model x ∈ Rd we
wish to train, n is the total number of clients/clients in the
system, fi (x) is a convex loss/risk associated with data
stored on client i ∈ [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}, and f (x) is the
empirical loss/risk. While first-order methods for FL problems are extensively studied in the literature, recently a
handful of second-order methods have been proposed for
FL problems. The main advantage of second-order methods
is their faster convergence rate, although they suffer from
high communication costs. Besides that, sharing the first
and second-order information (which contains client’s data)
may create a privacy issue. This is because the Hessian
matrix contains valuable information about the properties of
the local function/data, and when shared with the parameter
server (PS), privacy may be violated by eavesdroppers or an
honest-but-curious PS. For instance, authors in (Yin et al.,
2014) show that the eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix can
be used to extract important information of the input images.
In this work, we are interested in developing communication efficient second-order methods while still preserving
the privacy of the individual clients. To this end, we propose a novel framework that hides the gradients as well as
the Hessians of the local functions, yet uses second-order
information to solve the FL problem. In particular, we
divide the standard Newton step into outer and inner levels. The objective of the inner level is to learn what we
call the Hessian inverse-gradient product or Zeroth Hessian
inverse-gradient product for the computation-efficient version (i.e., (∇2 f (xk ))−1 ∇f (xk ) or (∇2 f (x0 ))−1 ∇f (xk ))
without sharing individual gradients and/or Hessians. We
use the ADMM method to solve the inner level problem due
to their faster convergence as compared to gradient descent
(GD) methods. Specifically, one ADMM step is used to
approximate the solution of the inner level problem at each
iteration. The solution of the inner level is used to perform
the outer level update, which is similar to Newton’s method.

