What Language Model Architecture and Pretraining Objective Work Best for
Zero-Shot Generalization?
Thomas Wang 1 * Adam Roberts 2 * Daniel Hesslow 3 Teven Le Scao 1 Hyung Won Chung 2 Iz Beltagy 4
Julien Launay 3 5 † Colin Raffel 1 †

Abstract
Large pretrained Transformer language models
have been shown to exhibit zero-shot generalization, i.e. they can perform a wide variety
of tasks that they were not explicitly trained
on. However, the architectures and pretraining objectives used across state-of-the-art models differ significantly, and there has been limited systematic comparison of these factors. In
this work, we present a large-scale evaluation
of modeling choices and their impact on zeroshot generalization. In particular, we focus on
text-to-text models and experiment with three
model architectures (causal/non-causal decoderonly and encoder-decoder), trained with two different pretraining objectives (autoregressive and
masked language modeling), and evaluated with
and without multitask prompted finetuning. We
train models with over 5 billion parameters for
more than 168 billion tokens, thereby increasing
the likelihood that our conclusions will transfer
to even larger scales. Our experiments show that
causal decoder-only models trained on an autoregressive language modeling objective exhibit the
strongest zero-shot generalization after purely
self-supervised pretraining. However, models
with non-causal visibility on their input trained
with a masked language modeling objective followed by multitask finetuning perform the best
among our experiments. We therefore consider
the adaptation of pretrained models across architectures and objectives. Code and checkpoints
are available at https://github.com/bigscienceworkshop/architecture-objective.
1
*Equal contribution †Equal supervision
Hugging
2
3
4
Face Google LightOn Allen Institute for AI 5 LPENS,
École Normale Supérieure.
Correspondence to: Thomas
Wang <thomas.wang@huggingface.co>,
Adam Roberts
<adarob@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) pretrained on unstructured
text data have been shown to be capable of performing
a wide variety of text processing tasks without additional
training or labeled data. This ability has been referred to as
zero-shot generalization since these models are typically
pretrained with a self-supervised objective with no regards
to specific downstream tasks. As such, there has been an
explosion of work on developing LLMs and training techniques that produce strong zero-shot generalization (Brown
et al., 2020; Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021; Du et al., 2021;
Lin et al., 2021; Rae et al., 2021; Hoffmann et al., 2022;
Chowdhery et al., 2022).
Modern LLMs are based on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). While the original Transformer included a separate encoder that processes input text
and a decoder that generates target text, most recent LLMs
are causal decoder-only (CD) models trained to autoregressively predict a text sequence (Liu et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2018; Al-Rfou et al., 2019). In contrast with
this trend, Raffel et al. (2020) has shown that encoderdecoder (ED) models outperform decoder-only LLMs for
transfer learning (i.e. where a pretrained model is finetuned
on a single downstream task). Non-causal decodersonly (ND) (Liu et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2019) use a modified attention mask to bridge the gap between decoder-only
and encoder-decoder models. However, they have seen limited adoption. One recent line of work has demonstrated
that adding an explicit multitask finetuning stage on
an ensemble of prompted tasks after pretraining can significantly boost the zero-shot capabilities of LLMs on both
encoder-decoder models (Sanh et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022)
and causal decoders-only model (Wei et al., 2021). This
begs the question as to which architecture would be a better choice for zero-shot generalization, especially if used in
conjunction with multitask finetuning.
Transformer models can be trained with a variety of
self-supervised training objectives . Typically, causal
decoder-only LLMs are pretrained using a full language
modeling (FLM) objective (Dai and Le, 2015; Radford
et al., 2018), and encoder-decoder models with a masked

