RetrievalGuard: Provably Robust 1-Nearest Neighbor Image Retrieval

Yihan Wu 1 Hongyang Zhang 2 Heng Huang 1

Abstract
Recent research works have shown that image
retrieval models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where slightly modified test inputs could
lead to problematic retrieval results. In this paper,
we aim to design a provably robust image retrieval
model which keeps the most important evaluation
metric Recall@1 invariant to adversarial perturbation. We propose the first 1-nearest neighbor (NN)
image retrieval algorithm, RetrievalGuard, which
is provably robust against adversarial perturbations within an ℓ2 ball of calculable radius. The
challenge is to design a provably robust algorithm
that takes into consideration the 1-NN search and
the high-dimensional nature of the embedding
space. Algorithmically, given a base retrieval
model and a query sample, we build a smoothed
retrieval model by carefully analyzing the 1-NN
search procedure in the high-dimensional embedding space. We show that the smoothed retrieval
model has bounded Lipschitz constant and thus
the retrieval score is invariant to ℓ2 adversarial
perturbations. Experiments on image retrieval
tasks validate the robustness of our RetrievalGuard method.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval has been an important and active research
area in computer vision with broad applications, such as
person re-identification (Zheng et al., 2015), remote sensing
(Chaudhuri et al., 2019), medical image search (Nair et al.,
2020), and shopping recommendation (Liu et al., 2016).
In a typical image retrieval task, given a query image, the
image retrieval algorithm selects semantically similar im1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Pittsburgh, USA 2 David R. Cheriton School of
Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada. Correspondence to: Yihan Wu <yiw154@pitt.edu>, Hongyang
Zhang <hongyang.zhang@uwaterloo.ca>, Heng Huang
<henghuanghh@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ages from a large gallery. To conduct efficient retrieval, the
high-dimensional images are often encoded into an embedding space by deep neural networks (DNNs). The encoder
is expected to cluster semantically similar images while
separating dissimilar images.
Despite a large amount of works on image retrieval, many
fundamental questions remain unresolved. For example,
DNNs are notorious for their vulnerability to adversarial
examples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Biggio et al., 2013; Yang
et al., 2020a; Blum et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022), i.e.
slightly modified test inputs can lead to the largely changed
and incorrect prediction results. In image retrieval, the encoders are oftentimes parameterized by DNNs and existing
approaches are susceptible to adversarial attacks. Though
adversarial training alleviates the issue by building a backbone that is robust against off-the-shelf attacks (Zhang et al.,
2019a), the backbone is not certifiably robust against attacks
with growing power. In fact, there has been long-standing
arms race between adversarial defenders and attackers: defenders design empirically robust algorithms which are later
exploited by new attacks designed to undermine those defenses (Athalye et al., 2018). Moreover, existing defenses
(Panum et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2020) only focus on one
type of attacks and fail to generalize to other types of attacks.
Thus, it is desirable to develop more powerful defenses for
image retrieval with provable adversarial robustness.
For image classification tasks, there are two types of provably robust methods against adversarial perturbations. The
first type is deterministic approaches represented by linear relaxations (Zhang et al., 2020b), mixed-integer linear
programming (Tjeng et al., 2019), and Lipschitz constant
estimation (Zhang et al., 2019b). But these approaches only
work with certain neural architectures and are hard to train.
The second category is randomized smoothing (Cohen et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2019a), which provides probabilistic robustness guarantees. The insight behind randomized smoothing
is a construction of smoothed model g by voting the prediction of vanilla model h over a smoothing distribution.
The smoothed model g is provably Lipschitz bounded. Additionally, randomized smoothing is model-agnostic and
can be applied to arbitrary backbones. Although recent
works show that randomized smoothing suffers from curse
of dimensionality (Blum et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020;
Wu et al., 2021), the method remains the state-of-the-art

