DreamerPro: Reconstruction-Free Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
with Prototypical Representations

Fei Deng 1 Ingook Jang 2 Sungjin Ahn 3

Abstract
Reconstruction-based Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) agents, such as Dreamer,
often fail to discard task-irrelevant visual distractions that are prevalent in natural scenes. In this
paper, we propose a reconstruction-free MBRL
agent, called DreamerPro, that can enhance robustness to distractions. Motivated by the recent
success of prototypical representations, a noncontrastive self-supervised learning approach in
computer vision, DreamerPro combines Dreamer
with prototypes. In order for the prototypes to
benefit temporal dynamics learning in MBRL, we
propose to additionally learn the prototypes from
the recurrent states of the world model, thereby
distilling temporal structures from past observations and actions into the prototypes. Experiments on the DeepMind Control suite show that
DreamerPro achieves better overall performance
than state-of-the-art contrastive MBRL agents
when there are complex background distractions,
and maintains similar performance as Dreamer in
standard tasks where contrastive MBRL agents
can perform much worse.

1. Introduction
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL, Sutton,
1991; Sutton & Barto, 2018) provides a solution to many
problems in contemporary reinforcement learning. It improves sample efficiency by training a policy through simulations of a learned world model. Learning a world model
also provides a way to efficiently represent experience data
as general knowledge simulatable and reusable in arbitrary
downstream tasks. In addition, it allows accurate and safe
1
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University 2 ETRI 3 School of Computing, KAIST. Correspondence to: Fei Deng <fei.deng@rutgers.edu>, Sungjin Ahn
<sungjin.ahn@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

decisions via planning.
Among recent advances in image-based MBRL, Dreamer is
particularly notable as the first MBRL agent outperforming
popular model-free RL agents with better sample efficiency
in both continuous and discrete control (Hafner et al., 2020;
2021). Unlike some previous MBRL methods (e.g., Kaiser
et al., 2020), Dreamer learns a world model that can be
rolled out in a compact latent representation space instead
of the high-dimensional observation space. In addition,
policy learning can be done efficiently via backpropagation
through the differentiable dynamics model.
In image-based RL, the key problem is to learn a lowdimensional state representation and, in the model-based
case, also its forward dynamics. While these can be learned
by directly maximizing the rewards (Schrittwieser et al.,
2020), due to reward sparsity, it is more practical to introduce auxiliary tasks that provide richer learning signal to
facilitate representation learning (Sutton et al., 2011; Jaderberg et al., 2016). Dreamer achieves this by shaping the
latent representation and dynamics in a way that reduces the
reconstruction error of the observation sequences.
However, reconstruction-based representation learning has
limitations. First, it wastes the representation capacity to
learn even the visual signals that are irrelevant to the task
such as noisy backgrounds (Zhang et al., 2021; Nguyen
et al., 2021). Second, reconstruction can be computationally
expensive for high-resolution observations, especially in
models like Dreamer that need to reconstruct long-range
videos. These limitations make it hard to scale Dreamer to
natural scenes. Therefore, it is of particular interest to develop a reconstruction-free version of Dreamer for MBRL.
The currently dominant approaches for reconstruction-free
MBRL optimize a contrastive loss over a batch of several
consecutive frames (Okada & Taniguchi, 2021; Nguyen
et al., 2021). Although they can greatly outperform Dreamer
under complex background distractions, for the standard
DeepMind Control (DMC) suite (Tassa et al., 2018), they
showed quite inconsistent results by performing much worse
than Dreamer on some tasks. Moreover, we find through
visualization that in the presence of background distractions,
the contrastively learned latent states can sometimes discard

