Popular decision tree algorithms are provably noise tolerant

Guy Blanc * 1 Jane Lange * 2 Ali Malik * 1 Li-Yang Tan * 1

Abstract
Using the framework of boosting, we prove that
all impurity-based decision tree learning algorithms, including the classic ID3, C4.5, and
CART, are highly noise tolerant. Our guarantees hold under the strongest noise model of nasty
noise, and we provide near-matching upper and
lower bounds on the allowable noise rate. We further show that these algorithms, which are simple
and have long been central to everyday machine
learning, enjoy provable guarantees in the noisy
setting that are unmatched by existing algorithms
in the theoretical literature on decision tree learning. Taken together, our results add to an ongoing
line of research that seeks to place the empirical
success of these practical decision tree algorithms
on firm theoretical footing.

1. Introduction
Decision trees have been central to machine learning since
its early days. They give a simple way to represent a dataset
in a hierarchical and logical manner, and they are perhaps
the most canonical example of an intepretable model. They
are also quick to evaluate, with evaluation time scaling with
the depth of the tree, a quantity that is typically exponentially smaller than the overall number of nodes. Classic decision tree learning algorithms such as ID3 (Quinlan, 1986),
C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993), and CART (Breiman et al., 1984),
as well as tree-based ensemble methods such as random
forests (Breiman, 2001) and XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin,
2016), are therefore standard techniques in the modern machine learning toolkit.
Impurity-based algorithms are a broad class that captures
ID3, C4.5, CART, and indeed essentially all decision tree
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University 2 Department of Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Guy Blanc
<gblanc@stanford.edu>, Jane Lange <jlange@mit.edu>,
Ali Malik <malikali@cs.stanford.edu>, Li-Yang Tan
<liyang@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

algorithms used in practice. These algorithms build a binary
decision tree for a labeled dataset S in a greedy top-down
fashion. Each algorithm AG is defined by an impurity function G : [0, 1] → [0, 1] and a class H of allowable splitting
functions. The root of the tree built by AG corresponds
to the split of S into S0 and S1 by a function h ∈ H that
maximizes the purity gain with respect to G. The left and
right subtrees are built by recursing on S0 and S1 respectively. We elaborate on this framework in the body of the
paper, mentioning for now that the standard algorithms ID3,
CART, and C4.5 can all be cast within this framework: ID3
and C4.5 use the binary entropy function G(p) = H2 (p)
and the associated purity gain is commonly called information gain, whereas CART uses the Gini impurity function
G(p) = 4p(1 − p).
Prior work on provable performance guarantees. Motivated by the empirical success of impurity-based decision
tree algorithms, a fruitful and ongoing line of work has
focused on establishing provable guarantees on their performance in a variety of models and settings (Kearns &
Mansour, 1996; Kearns, 1996; Dietterich et al., 1996; Fiat &
Pechyony, 2004; Lee, 2009; Blanc et al., 2020b;a; Brutzkus
et al., 2019; 2020; Blanc et al., 2021a).
However, these existing results either only hold in the noiseless setting or require strong and stylized assumptions that
limit their practical relevance. For example, the recent work
of Blanc et al. (2020a) provides guarantees under the assumptions that examples are distributed according to a product distribution, that noise only affects the labels and not the
features (i.e. agnostic noise (Haussler, 1992; Kearns et al.,
1994)), and that the corrupted labels are monotone in the
features.
1.1. Our contributions
Using the framework of boosting, we prove that all impuritybased decision tree algorithms are highly noise tolerant
in a fully general setting: our results apply to arbitrary
distributions over features and labels, and we consider the
strongest noise model, allowing for adversarial corruptions
of both features and labels (i.e. the nasty noise model of
Bshouty et al. (2002), also known as strong contamination).
Equivalently, we give the first formal guarantees on the
robustness of impurity-based decision tree algorithms to

