Online Active Regression

Cheng Chen * 1 Yi Li * 1 Yiming Sun * 1

Abstract
Active regression considers a linear regression
problem where the learner receives a large number of data points but can only observe a small
number of labels. Since online algorithms can
deal with incremental training data and take advantage of low computational cost, we consider
an online extension of the active regression problem: the learner receives data points one by one
and immediately decides whether it should collect the corresponding labels. The goal is to efficiently maintain the regression of received data
points with a small budget of label queries. We
propose novel algorithms for this problem under
ℓp loss where p ∈ [1, 2]. To achieve a (1 + ϵ)approximate solution, our proposed algorithms
only require Õ(d/ poly(ϵ) · log(nκ)) queries of
labels, where n is the number of data points and κ
is a quantity, called the condition number, of the
data points. The numerical results verify our theoretical results and show that our methods have
comparable performance with offline active regression algorithms.

1. Introduction
Linear regression is a simple method to model the relationship between the data points in an Euclidean space and their
scalar labels. A typical formulation is to solve the minimization problem minx ∥Ax − b∥p for A ∈ Rn×d and b ∈ Rn ,
where each row Ai is a data point in Rd and bi is its corresponding scalar label. When p = 2, the linear regression
is precisely the least-squares regression, which admits a
closed-form solution and is thus a classical choice due to
its computational simplicity. When p ∈ [1, 2), it is more
robust than least-squares as the solution is less sensitive to
outliers. A popular choice is p = 1 because the regression
can be cast as a linear programme though other values of p
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Physical and Mathematical
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yi Li <yili@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

are recommended depending on the distribution of the noise
in the labels. Interested readers may refer to Section 1.3
of (Gonin & Money, 1989) for some discussion.
One harder variant of linear regression is active regression (Sabato & Munos, 2014), in which the data points
are easy to obtain but the labels are costly. Here one can
query the label of any chosen data point and the task is to
minimize the number of queries while still being able to
solve the linear regression problem approximately. Specifically, one constructs an index set S ⊂ [n] as small as
possible, queries bS (the restriction of b on S) and computes
a solution x̃ based on A, S and bS such that
∥Ax̃ − b∥pp ≤ (1 + ϵ) min ∥Ax − b∥pp .
x

(1)

For p = 2, the classical approach is to sample the rows of
A according to the leverage scores. This can achieve (1)
with large constant probability using |S| = O(d log d+d/ϵ)
queries. Chen & Price (2019) reduced the query complexity
to the optimal O(d/ϵ), based on graph sparsifiers. When
p = 1, Chen & Derezinski (2021) and Parulekar et al. (2021)
showed that O((d log d)/ϵ2 ) queries suffices with large constant probability, based on sampling according to Lewis
weights. More recently, Musco et al. (2021b) solved the
problem for all values of p with query complexity Õ(d/ϵ)
for 1 ≤ p < 2 and Õ(dp/2 /ϵp ) for p > 2, where the dependence on d is optimal up to logarithmic factors.
Another common setting of linear regression is the online
setting, which considers memory restrictions that prohibit
storing the inputs A and b in their entirety. In such a case,
each pair of data points and their labels (i.e. each row of
[A b]) arrives one by one, and the goal is to use as little space
as possible to solve the linear regression problem. Again, the
case of p = 2 has the richest research history, with the stateof-the-art results due to Cohen et al. (2020) and Jiang et al.
(2022), which retain only O(ϵ−1 d log d log(ϵ∥A∥22 )) rows
of A (where ∥A∥2 denotes the operator norm of A). The
idea of the algorithms is to sample according to the online
leverage scores, which was first employed in (Kapralov
et al., 2017). The online leverage score of a row is simply the
leverage score of the row in the submatrix of A consisting
of all the revealed rows so far. The algorithm of Jiang
et al. (2022) is based on that of Cohen et al. (2020) with
further optimized runtime. The case of p = 1 was solved
by (Braverman et al., 2020), who generalized the notion of

