Training Your Sparse Neural Network Better with Any Mask

Ajay Jaiswal 1 Haoyu Ma 2 Tianlong Chen 1 Ying Ding 1 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract
Pruning large neural networks to create highquality, independently trainable sparse masks,
which can maintain similar performance to their
dense counterparts, is very desirable due to the reduced space and time complexity. As research
effort is focused on increasingly sophisticated
pruning methods that leads to sparse subnetworks
trainable from the scratch, we argue for an orthogonal, under-explored theme: improving training
techniques for pruned sub-networks, i.e. sparse
training. Apart from the popular belief that only
the quality of sparse masks matters for sparse
training, in this paper we demonstrate an alternative opportunity: one can carefully customize
the sparse training techniques to deviate from
the default dense network training protocols, consisting of introducing “ghost” neurons and skip
connections at the early stage of training, and
strategically modifying the initialization as well
as labels. Our new sparse training recipe is generally applicable to improving training from scratch
with various sparse masks. By adopting our
newly curated techniques, we demonstrate significant performance gains across various popular datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, TinyImageNet), architectures (ResNet-18/32/104, Vgg16,
MobileNet), and sparse mask options (lottery
ticket, SNIP/GRASP, SynFlow, or even randomly
pruning), compared to the default training protocols, especially at high sparsity levels. Code is at
https://github.com/VITA-Group/ToST.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (NN) have achieved significant
progress in many tasks such as classification, detection, and
segmentation. However, most existing models are computa1

The University of Texas at Austin 2 University of California, Irvine. Correspondence to: Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Source of sparse mask

SNIP

GraSP

LTH

Random

Sparse Mask

Our focus

Sparse
Training
"From
Scratch"
using ToST

SynFlow

Figure 1. We aim to improve training of ANY sparse mask from
scratch using our proposed sparse training toolkit (ToST).

tionally extensive and overparameterized, thus it is difficult
to deploy these models in real-world devices. To address
this issue, many efforts in direction of knowledge distillation
(Hinton et al., 2015b), quantization (Hubara et al., 2018),
and pruning (LeCun et al., 1989), have been devoted to
compressing the heavy model into a lightweight counterpart.
Among them, network pruning (LeCun et al., 1990; Han
et al., 2015a;b; Li et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2019; Frankle &
Carbin, 2018), which identifies sparse sub-networks (aka.
sparse mask) by removing unnecessary connections, stands
as one of the most effective methods.
Recently, a significant amount of research efforts have been
focused towards developing increasingly sophisticated and
efficient pruning algorithms (Lee et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2020; Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Frankle et al., 2019; Tanaka
et al., 2020), to identify the sparse mask of the original dense
model at the initialization, and then train only the sparse
subnetwork from scratch, such as lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) (Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Frankle et al., 2019),
SNIP (Lee et al., 2018), GraSP (Wang et al., 2020), SynFlow (Tanaka et al., 2020), and even random pruning (Su
et al., 2020; Frankle et al., 2020). In most (if not all) cases,
sparse masks obtained by various those pruning algorithms
are trained using the same training protocols optimized for
dense neural network training. However, till now it is still
under-explored and unclear if dense training protocols are
optimal for training a sparse mask from scratch too. We
hence ask: Should training a sparse neural network requires
atypical treatment and its own set of training toolkit or not?
Orthogonally to the popular belief that quality of sparse
masks matter the most for sparse training from scratch (good
sparse masks train better), this paper explores an underexplored and alternative opportunity: towards improving the

