The Teaching Dimension of Regularized Kernel Learners

Hong Qian * 1 2 Xu-Hui Liu * 3 4 Chen-Xi Su 1 Aimin Zhou 1 5 Yang Yu 3 4

Abstract
Teaching dimension (TD) is a fundamental theoretical property for understanding machine teaching algorithms. It measures the sample complexity of teaching a target hypothesis to a learner. The
TD of linear learners has been studied extensively,
whereas the results of teaching non-linear learners
are rare. A recent result investigates the TD of
polynomial and Gaussian kernel learners. Unfortunately, the theoretical bounds therein show that
the TD is high when teaching those non-linear
learners. Inspired by the fact that regularization
can reduce the learning complexity in machine
learning, a natural question is whether the similar
fact happens in machine teaching. To answer this
essential question, this paper proposes a unified
theoretical framework termed S TARKE to analyze
the TD of regularized kernel learners. On the basis
of S TARKE, we derive a generic result of any type
of kernels. Furthermore, we disclose that the TD
of regularized linear and regularized polynomial
kernel learners can be strictly reduced. For regularized Gaussian kernel learners, we reveal that,
although their TD is infinite, their ϵ-approximate
TD can be exponentially reduced compared with
that of the unregularized learners. The extensive
experimental results of teaching the optimizationbased learners verify the theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Machine teaching (Zhu et al., 2018) is aimed at designing
an optimal training set (aka teaching set) to steer a learner
(aka student) towards a target hypothesis. It can be re*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China. 2 Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing.
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing,
China. 4 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology.
5
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education.. Correspondence to: Hong
Qian <hqian@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

garded as an inverse problem of machine learning. Machine
teaching has various applications, such as reinforcement
learning (Kamalaruban et al., 2019), trustworthy AI (Zhang
et al., 2018), education (Patil et al., 2014) and cognitive psychology (Shafto et al., 2014). In those scenarios, although a
teacher knows the target hypothesis, she cannot telepathize
it into the learner’s mind. For instance, a botanist intends to
teach the students to categorize the flowers into peony, rose,
and azalea. The botanist has the correct decision boundary
in mind, but she could only teach via picking the representative and informative flower examples and showing them
to the students. The choice of training set can be optimized
if the teacher has a good understanding of how the students
learn from the examples.
Related Work. Teaching dimension (TD) (Goldman &
Kearns, 1991; Shinohara, 1991) is a fundamental theoretical
property for understanding machine teaching algorithms. It
measures the sample complexity of teaching, and is defined
as the minimal number of training examples required in the
worst case to teach a target hypothesis to a learner. Along the
theoretical research direction of TD, one of the most considered settings is teaching a version space learner (Goldman
& Kearns, 1991; Anthony et al., 1995; Chen et al., 2018;
Kirkpatrick et al., 2019). A version space learner maintains
a set of hypotheses, keeps removing those which are not
consistent with the receiving training examples, and outputs
a qualified hypothesis in the end. To reduce the teaching
dimension, i.e., the teaching complexity, a series of teaching
models are proposed, such as recursive teaching (Zilles et al.,
2011), preference-based teaching (Gao et al., 2017; Mansouri et al., 2019) and non-clashing teaching (Kirkpatrick
et al., 2019). However, the power of version space learners
is limited (Goldman & Mathias, 1996), and it can hardly
model the behavior of a wide range of modern learners.
To tackle the above issue, the notation of TD is extended to
the optimization-based learners, i.e, the empirical risk minimization (ERM) learners. The scenario of teaching ERM
learners is more realistic, and the version space learners are a
special case of it provided that we optimize the 0-1 loss. Liu
et al. (2016) extensively investigate the TD of ERM learners
under the linear hypothesis space. Since the linear ERM
learners may be restricted, recently, Kumar et al. (2021)
generalize the hypothesis space to the non-linear ones by
considering the kernel perceptrons in ERM. They disclose

