Benefits of Overparameterized Convolutional Residual Networks: Function
Approximation under Smoothness Constraint

Hao Liu 1 Minshuo Chen 2 Siawpeng Er 2 Wenjing Liao 3 Tong Zhang 4 5 Tuo Zhao 2

Abstract
Overparameterized neural networks enjoy great
representation power on complex data, and more
importantly yield sufficiently smooth output,
which is crucial to their generalization and robustness. Most existing function approximation
theories suggest that with sufficiently many parameters, neural networks can well approximate
certain classes of functions in terms of the function value. The neural network themselves, however, can be highly nonsmooth. To bridge this gap,
we take convolutional residual networks (ConvResNets) as an example, and prove that large
ConvResNets can not only approximate a target
function in terms of function value, but also exhibit sufficient first-order smoothness. Moreover,
we extend our theory to approximating functions
supported on a low-dimensional manifold. Our
theory partially justifies the benefits of using deep
and wide networks in practice. Numerical experiments on adversarial robust image classification
are provided to support our theory.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks of enormous sizes have achieved
remarkable success in various applications. Some wellknown examples include ViT-Huge of 632 million parameters (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), BERT-Large of 336 million
parameters (Devlin et al., 2018), and the gigantic GPT-3
1

Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong Baptist University,
Kowloon Tong, Kowloon, Hong Kong. 2 School of Industrial and
Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA 30332 USA. 3 School of Mathematics, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA. 4 Department of Mathematics and Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water
Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong. 5 Google Research. Correspondence
to: Tuo Zhao <tourzhao@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of 175 billion parameters (Brown et al., 2020). In addition
to outstanding testing accuracy, there has been evidence
that large neural networks favor smoothness and yield good
robustness (Madry et al., 2017; Bubeck & Sellke, 2021).
Among vast literature on explaining the success of neural
networks, universal approximation theories analyze how
well neural networks can represent complex data models
(see literature in related work section). These works focus
on approximating a target function in terms of its function
value (i.e., in function L∞ norm). However, other important properties, espcifically the smoothness of the neural
networks, are less investigated. A few early results provide asymptotic results on two-layer networks with smooth
activation for approximating both function value and derivatives (Hornik et al., 1990; Cardaliaguet & Euvrard, 1992).
Recently, Gühring et al. (2020); Hon & Yang (2021) established nonasymptotic approximation theory of feedforward
networks in terms of Sobolev norms.
In real-world applications, on the other hand, practitioners
empirically demonstrated a close tie between the smoothness of a trained neural network to its adversarial robustness
(Gu & Rigazio, 2014; Hein & Andriushchenko, 2017; Weng
et al., 2018; Miyato et al., 2018). The intuition behind is
relatively clear. Consider, for instance, adding some adversarial perturbation to an input. A network of small (local)
Lipschitz constant produces less deviation to the original
output, and therefore, is often resilient to adversarial attackes. On the contrary, a network that is vulnerable to
adversarial attacks usually has a large Lipschitz constant.
Over the years, many computational methods are proposed
and extensively tested in experiments for promoting network
smoothness (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2017;
Miyato et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). Apart from these
explicit training methodologies, the size of a network is
also recognized as a critical factor to its generalization and
robustness (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016; Madry et al.,
2017; Wu et al., 2020). Yet, theoretical understanding is
largely missing.
In this paper, we investigate universal approximation ability
of neural networks with smoothness guarantees. We consider the convolutional residual networks (ConvResNet, see
a description in Section 2.2) with ReLU activation as an

