Adaptive Accelerated (Extra-)Gradient Methods with Variance Reduction

Zijian Liu * 1 Ta Duy Nguyen * 1 Alina Ene 1 Huy L. Nguyen 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study the finite-sum convex optimization problem focusing on the general convex
case. Recently, the study of variance reduced
(VR) methods and their accelerated variants has
made exciting progress. However, the step size
used in the existing VR algorithms typically depends on the smoothness parameter, which is
often unknown and requires tuning in practice.
To address this problem, we propose two novel
adaptive VR algorithms: Adaptive Variance Reduced Accelerated Extra-Gradient (AdaVRAE)
and Adaptive Variance Reduced Accelerated Gradient (AdaVRAG). Our algorithms do not require knowledge of the smoothness
parameter.
q 
AdaVRAE uses O n log log n + nβ
and



q
β
AdaVRAG uses O n log log n + nβ log

gradient evaluations to attain an O()-suboptimal
solution, where n is the number of functions in
the finite sum and β is the smoothness parameter.
This result matches the best-known convergence
rate of non-adaptive VR methods and it improves
upon the convergence of the state of the art adaptive VR method, AdaSVRG. We demonstrate the
superior performance of our algorithms compared
with previous methods in experiments on realworld datasets.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the finite-sum optimization problem in the form of
( n
)
1X
min
fi (x) + h(x)
(1)
x∈X
n i=1
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Boston
University 2 Khoury College of Computer and Information Science,
Northeastern University. Correspondence to: Ta Duy Nguyen
<taduy@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

where each function fi is convex and β-smooth, h is convex and potentially nonsmooth but admitting an efficient
proximal operator, and X ⊆ Rd is a closed convex set. Additionally, we further assume that X is compact when β
is unknown. Problem (1) has found a wide range of applications in machine learning, typically in empirical risk
minimization problems, and has been extensively studied in
the past few years.
Among existing approaches to solve this problem, variance
reduced (VR) methods (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Defazio
et al., 2014; Schmidt et al., 2017; Roux et al., 2012) have
recently shown significant improvement over the classic
stochastic gradient methods such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants. For example, in strongly
convex problems, VR methods such as (Allen-Zhu, 2017;
Lan et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2015) can achieve√the optimal
number of gradient evaluations of O (n + nκ) log 1
to attain an O()-suboptimal solution, where κ is the condition number, which improves over full-batch gradient
descent (O nκ log 1 ) and Nesterov’s accelerated gradi√
ent descent (Nesterov, 1983; 2003) (O n κ log 1 ). For
general convex problems, the current state-of-the-art VR
methods, namely VRADA (Song etal., 2020) can find an
q 
O()-suboptimal solution using O n log log n + nβ

gradient
which nearly-matches the lower bound
 evaluations,
q 
nβ
of Ω n +
(Woodworth & Srebro, 2016).

However, most of existing VR gradient methods have the
same limitation as classic gradient methods; that is, they
require the prior knowledge of the smoothness parameter in
order to set the step size. Lacking this information, one may
have to carefully perform hyper-parameter tuning to avoid
the situation that the algorithm divergences or converges too
slowly due to too large or too small step size. This limitation
of gradient methods motivates the development of methods
that aim to adapt to unknown problem structures. A notable
line of work starting with the influential AdaGrad algorithm
has designed a family of gradient descent based methods that
set the step size based on the gradients or iterates observed in
previous iterations (McMahan & Streeter, 2010; Duchi et al.,
2011; Kingma & Ba, 2014; Levy, 2017; Levy et al., 2018;
Bach & Levy, 2019; Cutkosky, 2019; Kavis et al., 2019;
Joulani et al., 2020; Ene et al., 2021; Antonakopoulos et al.,

