The Multivariate Community Hawkes Model for Dependent Relational Events
in Continuous-time Networks
Hadeel Soliman 1 Lingfei Zhao 2 Zhipeng Huang 1 Subhadeep Paul 2 Kevin S. Xu 1

Abstract
The stochastic block model (SBM) is one of the
most widely used generative models for network
data. Many continuous-time dynamic network
models are built upon the same assumption as the
SBM: edges or events between all pairs of nodes
are conditionally independent given the block or
community memberships, which prevents them
from reproducing higher-order motifs such as triangles that are commonly observed in real networks. We propose the multivariate community
Hawkes (MULCH) model, an extremely flexible
community-based model for continuous-time networks that introduces dependence between node
pairs using structured multivariate Hawkes processes. We fit the model using a spectral clustering and likelihood-based local refinement procedure. We find that our proposed MULCH model
is far more accurate than existing models both for
predictive and generative tasks.

1. Introduction
Networks are often used to represent data in the form of
relations (edges) between a set of entities (nodes). In many
settings, the nodes and edges change over time, resulting
in dynamic or temporal networks. We consider networks
observed through timestamped relational events, where each
event is a triplet (i, j, t) denoting events from node i (sender)
to node j (receiver) at timestamp t. Application settings
involving timestamped relational events include interactions
(messages, likes, shares, etc.) between users on social media, financial transactions between buyers and sellers, and
military actions between countries in diplomatic conflicts.
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA 2 Department of Statistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Correspondence to: Subhadeep Paul <paul.963@osu.edu>, Kevin S. Xu
<kevin.xu@utoledo.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

There has been significant recent interest in generative models for timestamped relational event data. Such models typically combine a Temporal Point Process (TPP) model such
as a Hawkes process (Laub et al., 2021) for event times with
a latent variable network model such as a Stochastic Block
Model (SBM) (Nowicki & Snijders, 2001) for the sender
and receiver of the event (Blundell et al., 2012; DuBois
et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2017; Miscouridou et al., 2018;
Matias et al., 2018; Junuthula et al., 2019; Arastuie et al.,
2020; Huang et al., 2022). We call such models continuoustime network models because they provide probabilities of
observing events between nodes at arbitrary times.
Continuous-time network models typically assume that the
probability of an event occurring between a pair of nodes
(i, j) at some time t is conditionally independent of all other
node pairs given the latent variable representation of the
network. The conditional independence between node pairs
allows them to be modeled separately using univariate or
bivariate TPPs. Such an approach makes the model more
tractable but prevents it from replicating higher-order structures including triangles and other network motifs (Benson
et al., 2016). Of particular interest in the dynamic network
setting are temporal motifs, which require multiple events
to be formed between different nodes within a certain time
window (Paranjape et al., 2017).
We propose the multivariate community Hawkes (MULCH)
model, a highly flexible continuous-time network model that
introduces dependence between node pairs in a controlled
manner. We jointly model all node pairs using a multivariate
Hawkes process where an event between a node pair (x, y)
can increase the probability of an event between a different
node pair (i, j). To keep the model tractable, we impose an
SBM-inspired structure on the excitation matrix α of the
multivariate Hawkes process. We consider several different
types of excitation to encourage formation of temporal motifs, inspired by the notion of participation shifts (Gibson,
2003; 2005) from sociology.
Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We propose
the highly flexible MULCH model for continuous-time networks using multivariate Hawkes processes that incorporate many types of dependence between node pairs including reciprocity and participation shifts. (2) We develop an

