Synergy and Symmetry in Deep Learning:
Interactions between the Data, Model, and Inference Algorithm

Lechao Xiao 1 Jeffrey Pennington 1

Abstract
Although learning in high dimensions is commonly believed to suffer from the curse of dimensionality, modern machine learning methods often exhibit an astonishing power to tackle a wide
range of challenging real-world learning problems
without using abundant amounts of data. How exactly these methods break this curse remains a
fundamental open question in the theory of deep
learning. While previous efforts have investigated
this question by studying the data (D), model
(M), and inference algorithm (I) as independent
modules, in this paper we analyzes the triplet
(D, M, I) as an integrated system and identify
important synergies that help mitigate the curse of
dimensionality. We first study the basic symmetries associated with various learning algorithms
(M, I), focusing on four prototypical architectures in deep learning: fully-connected networks
(FCN), locally-connected networks (LCN), and
convolutional networks with and without pooling
(GAP/VEC). We find that learning is most efficient when these symmetries are compatible with
those of the data distribution and that performance
significantly deteriorates when any member of the
(D, M, I) triplet is inconsistent or suboptimal.

1. Introduction
Statistical problems with high-dimensional data are frequently plagued by the curse of dimensionality, in which
the number of samples required to solve the problem grows
rapidly with the dimensionality of the input. Classical theory
explains this phenomenon as the consequence of basic geometric and algebraic properties of high-dimensional spaces;
for example, the number of -cubes inside a unit cube in
1

Google Research, Brain Team.
Correspondence to:
Lechao Xiao <xlc@google.com>, Jeffrey Pennington <jpennin@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Rd grows exponentially like −d , and the number of degree
r polynomials in Rd grows like a power-law dr . Since for
real-world problems d is typically in the hundreds or thousands, classical wisdom suggests that learning is likely to
be infeasible. However, starting from the groundbreaking
work AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), practitioners in
deep learning have tackled a wide range of difficult realworld learning problems (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al.,
2018; Silver et al., 2016; Senior et al., 2020; Kaplan et al.,
2020) in high dimensions, once believed by many to be
out-of-scope of current techniques. The astonishing success
of modern machine learning methods clearly contradicts
the curse of dimensinonality and therefore poses the fundamental question: mathematically, how do modern machine
learning methods break the curse of dimensionality?
To answer this question, we examine the most fundamental
ingredients of machine learning methods. They are the data
(D), the model (M), and the inference algorithm (I).
Data (D) is of course central in machine learning. In the classical learning theory setting, the learning objective usually
has a power-law decay m−α as the function of the number
of training samples m. The theoretical bound on α is usually
small (e.g. α = d−1 (von Luxburg & Bousquet, 2004; Bach,
2017; Bahri et al., 2021)) and is of limited practical utility
for high-dimensional data. On the other hand, empirical
measurements of α in state-of-the-art deep learning models
typically reveal values of α that are significantly larger (e.g.
α = 0.43 for ResNets trained on ImageNet in Fig.5) even
though d is quite large (e.g. d ∼ 105 for ImageNet). This
example suggests that the learning curve must have important functional dependence on M and I. Indeed, as we will
observe later, many of the best performing methods exhibit
learning curves for which α = α(m) actually increases as
m becomes larger, i.e. data makes the usage of data more
efficient. We call this phenomenon DIDE, for data improves
data efficiency; see Fig.5.
Designing machine learning models (M) that maximize
data-efficiency is critical to the success of solving real-world
tasks. Indeed, breakthroughs in machine learning are often driven by novel architectures such as LeNet (LeCun
et al., 1998), AlexNet(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), Transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017), etc. While some of the inductive

