Marginal Tail-Adaptive Normalizing Flows

Mike Laszkiewicz 1 2 Johannes Lederer 1 Asja Fischer 2

Abstract
Learning the tail behavior of a distribution is a
notoriously difficult problem. By definition, the
number of samples from the tail is small, and deep
generative models, such as normalizing flows,
tend to concentrate on learning the body of the distribution. In this paper, we focus on improving the
ability of normalizing flows to correctly capture
the tail behavior and, thus, form more accurate
models. We prove that the marginal tailedness
of an autoregressive flow can be controlled via
the tailedness of the marginals of its base distribution. This theoretical insight leads us to a
novel type of flows based on flexible base distributions and data-driven linear layers. An empirical analysis shows that the proposed method
improves on the accuracy—especially on the tails
of the distribution—and is able to generate heavytailed data. We demonstrate its application on a
weather and climate example, in which capturing
the tail behavior is essential.

1. Introduction
Heavy-tailed distributions are known to occur in various
applications in biology, finance, climate, and many other
fields. Quantities with a heavy-tailed distribution are, for example, the length of protein sequences in genomes (Koonin
et al., 2006), returns of stocks (Gabaix et al., 2003), or the
occurence and impacts of weather and climate events (Katz,
2002). In these applications, heavy-tailed events are often
the most substantial samples and hence, ignoring them—
thinking of underestimating a maximum flood level or the
loss of a financial crisis—would yield to crucial model failures. From a theoretical point of view, heavy-tailed distributions emerge from several circumstances, including the
limiting distribution in the generalized central limit theorem,
*
Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Mathematics, Ruhr University, Bochum, Germany 2 Center of Computer Science,
Bochum, Germany. Correspondence to: Mike Laszkiewicz
<Mike.Laszkiewicz@rub.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of a multiplicative process, or as the limit of an extremal process (Nair et al., 2013). Further, many distributions that arise
from a functional relationship, such as the ratio of two standard normal distributed random variables, are heavy-tailed,
highlighting their importance for models that incorporate
known physical relationships among quantities. Given the
frequency of occurrence and their potential impact, developing generative models that allow to learn heavy-tailed distributions are an urgent task to solve. We approach this task
by providing important theoretical groundings regarding the
expressiveness of Normalizing Flows (NFs) for heavy-tailed
data.
Normalizing Flows (Rippel & Adams, 2013; Tabak &
Turner, 2013; Dinh et al., 2015; Rezende & Mohamed,
2015) are a popular class of deep generative models. Despite
their success in learning tractable distributions where both
sampling and density evaluation can be efficient and exact,
their ability to model heavy-tailed distributions is known
to be limited. Jaini et al. (2020) identified the problem that
autoregressive affine NFs are unable to map a light-tailed
distribution to a heavy-tailed distribution. They propose to
solve this issue by replacing the Gaussian base distribution
by a multivariate t-distribution with one learnable degree
of freedom, leading to a model referred to as Tail-Adaptive
Flows (TAF).
Contributions In this paper, we extend the work of Jaini
et al. (2020) in multiple ways: First, while TAF allows to
model distributions with a heavy-tailed Euclidean norm, we
show that modeling multivariate distributions, where some
of the marginals are heavy- and some are light-tailed, still
poses a problem. More precisely, we identify the problem
that an autoregressive affine NF using a base distribution
with solely heavy-tailed marginals (such as TAF) is only
able to provide a target distribution with just heavy-tailed
marginals as well. Consequently, such a NF is not capable
of learning distributions with mixed marginal tail behavior.
Second, to solve the problem, we derive a theoretical result
that states conditions under which the marginal tailedness
of the base distribution is preserved. Third, we turn these
theoretical insights into a novel modification of autoregressive NFs, which allows to model the marginal tail behavior.
Since the proposed model preserves marginal tailedness, we
call it marginal tail-adaptive flow (mTAF). The proposed

