BLIP: Bootstrapping Language-Image Pre-training for
Unified Vision-Language Understanding and Generation

Junnan Li 1 Dongxu Li 1 Caiming Xiong 1 Steven Hoi 1

Abstract
Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) has advanced the performance for many vision-language
tasks. However, most existing pre-trained models only excel in either understanding-based tasks
or generation-based tasks. Furthermore, performance improvement has been largely achieved
by scaling up the dataset with noisy image-text
pairs collected from the web, which is a suboptimal source of supervision. In this paper, we
propose BLIP, a new VLP framework which transfers flexibly to both vision-language understanding and generation tasks. BLIP effectively utilizes the noisy web data by bootstrapping the
captions, where a captioner generates synthetic
captions and a filter removes the noisy ones. We
achieve state-of-the-art results on a wide range
of vision-language tasks, such as image-text retrieval (+2.7% in average recall@1), image captioning (+2.8% in CIDEr), and VQA (+1.6% in
VQA score). BLIP also demonstrates strong generalization ability when directly transferred to
video-language tasks in a zero-shot manner. Code
and models are available at https://github.
com/salesforce/BLIP.

1. Introduction
Vision-language pre-training has recently received tremendous success on various multimodal downstream tasks.
However, existing methods have two major limitations:
(1) Model perspective: most methods either adopt an
encoder-based model (Radford et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021a),
or an encoder-decoder (Cho et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021)
model. However, encoder-based models are less straightforward to directly transfer to text generation tasks (e.g. image
1
Salesforce Research. Correspondence to: Junnan Li <junnan.li@salesforce.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

“blue sky bakery in
sunset park ”

Cap

“chocolate cake
with cream frosting
and chocolate
sprinkles on top”

Filt

Filt

Figure 1. We use a Captioner (Cap) to generate synthetic captions
for web images, and a Filter (Filt) to remove noisy captions.

captioning), whereas encoder-decoder models have not been
successfully adopted for image-text retrieval tasks.
(2) Data perspective: most state-of-the-art methods (e.g.,
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), ALBEF (Li et al., 2021a),
SimVLM (Wang et al., 2021)) pre-train on image-text pairs
collected from the web. Despite the performance gain obtained by scaling up the dataset, our paper shows that the
noisy web text is suboptimal for vision-language learning.
To this end, we propose BLIP: Bootstrapping LanguageImage Pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. BLIP is a new VLP framework which
enables a wider range of downstream tasks than existing
methods. It introduces two contributions from the model
and data perspective, respectively:
(a) Multimodal mixture of Encoder-Decoder (MED): a new
model architecture for effective multi-task pre-training and
flexible transfer learning. An MED can operate either as
a unimodal encoder, or an image-grounded text encoder,
or an image-grounded text decoder. The model is jointly
pre-trained with three vision-language objectives: imagetext contrastive learning, image-text matching, and imageconditioned language modeling.
(b) Captioning and Filtering (CapFilt): a new dataset boostrapping method for learning from noisy image-text pairs.
We finetune a pre-trained MED into two modules: a captioner to produce synthetic captions given web images, and
a filter to remove noisy captions from both the original web
texts and the synthetic texts.
We perform extensive experiments and analysis, and make
the following key observations.
• We show that the captioner and the filter work together to

