Universal and data-adaptive algorithms
for model selection in linear contextual bandits
Vidya Muthukumar 1 2 Akshay Krishnamurthy 3

Abstract
Model selection in contextual bandits is an important complementary problem to regret minimization with respect to a fixed model class. We consider the simplest non-trivial instance of modelselection: distinguishing a simple multi-armed
bandit problem from a linear contextual bandit
problem. Even in this instance, current stateof-the-art methods explore in a suboptimal manner and require strong “feature-diversity” conditions. In this paper, we introduce new algorithms
that a) explore in a data-adaptive manner, and b)
provide model selection guarantees of the form
O(dα T 1−α ) with no feature diversity conditions
whatsoever, where d denotes the dimension of the
linear model and T denotes the total number of
rounds. The first algorithm enjoys a “best-of-bothworlds” property, recovering two prior results that
hold under distinct distributional assumptions, simultaneously. The second removes distributional
assumptions altogether, expanding the scope for
tractable model selection. Our approach extends
to model selection among nested linear contextual
bandits under some additional assumptions.

1. Introduction
The contextual bandit (CB) problem (Woodroofe, 1979;
Langford & Zhang, 2008; Li et al., 2010) is a foundational
paradigm for online decision-making. In this problem, the
decision-maker takes one out of K actions as a function of
available contextual information, where this function is chosen from a fixed policy class and is typically learned from
past outcomes. Most work on CB has centered around designing algorithms that minimize regret with respect to the
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 2 H. Milton School of Industrial
and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
USA 3 Microsoft Research, New York City, USA. Correspondence
to: Vidya Muthukumar <vmuthukumar8@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

best policy in hindsight; a particular non-triviality involves
doing this in a computationally efficient manner (Agarwal
et al., 2014; Syrgkanis et al., 2016; Foster & Krishnamurthy,
2018). When the rewards are realizable under the chosen
policy class, this is now an essentially solved problem (Foster & Rakhlin, 2020; Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2020).
A complementary problem to regret minimization with respect to a fixed policy class is choosing the policy class that
is best for the problem at hand. This constitutes a model
selection problem, and its importance is paramount in CB,
as selecting a class that either underfits or overfits can lead
to highly suboptimal performance. To see why, consider the
simplest model selection instance, which involves deciding
whether to use the contexts (with, say, a policy class of ddimensional linear functions) or simply run a multi-armed
bandit (MAB) algorithm. Making this choice a priori is
suboptimal one way or another: if√we choose a MAB algorithm, we obtain the optimal O( KT ) regret to the best
fixed action, but the latter may be highly suboptimal if the
rewards depend on the context. On the other
√ if√we
√ hand,
choose a linear CB algorithm, we incur O(( K + d) T )
regret even when the rewards do not depend on the contexts
due to overfitting, which is highly suboptimal1 . To avoid
these two failure modes, we seek an algorithm that achieves
the best-of-both-worlds, by retaining the linear CB guarantee while adapting to hidden structure if it exists. Focusing
on the MAB-vs-linear setting, the strongest variant of the
model selection objective asks:
Objective 1. Can we design a single algorithm that
simultaneously
√ achieves the respective minimax-optimal
) under√simple
rates of O( KT√
√ MAB structure (when it
exists) and O(( K + d) T ) under d-dimensional
linear CB structure?
1

Throughout the paper, we consider K to be a small constant
and allow the feature dimension d to be quite large. This is in contrast to the typical case of a linear non-contextual bandit problem
where the number of arms K can be quite large, and the features
model structure across arms to ensure a much smaller regret (see,
e.g., Chapter 19 of Lattimore & Szepesvári (2019)). There, a rather
different model selection problem arises, where the linear bandit
class is actually the simpler one. For the CB model selection problem, the K ≥ d regime renders the problem uninteresting: it is
always better to use a linear CB algorithm as it will better model
structure and incur negligible regret overhead.

