Constants Matter: The Performance Gains of Active Learning

Stephen Mussmann 1 Sanjoy Dasgupta 2

Abstract
Within machine learning, active learning studies
the gains in performance made possible by adaptively selecting data points to label. In this work,
we show through upper and lower bounds, that for
a simple benign setting of well-specified logistic
regression on a uniform distribution over a sphere,
the expected excess error of both active learning
and random sampling have the same inverse proportional dependence on the number of samples.
Importantly, due to the nature of lower bounds,
any more general setting does not allow a better
dependence on the number of samples. Additionally, we show a variant of uncertainty sampling
can achieve a faster rate of convergence than random sampling by a factor of the Bayes error, a
recent empirical observation made by other work.
Qualitatively, this work is pessimistic with respect
to the asymptotic dependence on the number of
samples, but optimistic with respect to finding
performance gains in the constants.

1. Introduction
Given samples of input-label pairs, machine learning algorithms return decision rules that will predict future labels
given inputs. Active learning studies the possible reduction
in error if the samples are adaptively chosen by the machine
learning system rather than randomly sampled. Active learning algorithms have been demonstrated to reduce error in a
variety of both theoretical and empirical settings.
Theoretically, there are a variety of cases where the excess
error of active learning has a better dependence (polynomially or even exponentially) on the number of samples,
n, than the excess error of random sampling (Balcan et al.,
2007; Balcan & Long, 2013; Wang & Singh, 2016). In
1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, USA 2 Computer Science & Engineering, University of California, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Stephen Mussmann <mussmann@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Table 1. A table with our lower bounds (impossibility results) and
our upper bounds (algorithm analysis) for both random sampling
and adaptive sampling (active learning) in our setting. c and c′ are
universal constants and err∗ is the Bayes error.

Sampling

Result type

Exp. Excess Error

Adaptive

Impossibility

≥ c err∗ nd

Adaptive

Alg. Analysis

≤ c′ err∗ nd

Random

Impossibility

≥ c nd

Random

Alg. Analysis

d
≤ c′ d log
n

this work, we show that for a simple benign setting of wellspecified logistic regression on a uniform distribution over
a sphere, the expected excess error of both active learning
and random sampling have the same inverse proportional
dependence on n: the expected excess error decreases as
Θ(1/n).
On a more optimistic note, we show that active learning can
reduce the expected excess error by a distribution-dependent
factor, the Bayes error, which we denote err∗ . As our setting
employs well-specified logistic regression as the label distribution, this result matches existing empirical observations
for logistic regression (Mussmann & Liang, 2018a).
A list of the results is shown in Table 1. Note that all results
require the dimension to be larger than a constant and the
number of samples to be sufficiently large in terms of the
specification of the setting (the dimension d, the radius of
the input distribution sphere r, and the norm of the true
parameters M ). Finally, both upper bounds require the
Bayes error, err∗ , to be smaller than a constant. Importantly,
because of the simplicity of our setting, the lower bounds
are quite strong while the upper bounds are quite weak and
only show the (almost) tightness of the lower bounds.
The two lower bounds are proved using a variant of Fano’s
inequality (Duchi & Wainwright, 2013; Scarlett & Cevher,
2019) and a carefully designed set of possible logistic regression weights. The proofs use very similar arguments
that differ in the bound on the mutual information. The
random sampling upper bound is shown for the maximum
likelihood estimator (MLE). While the MLE has been analyzed many times (Van der Vaart, 2000; Lehmann & Casella,
2006; Frostig et al., 2015), our result differs in that we prove

