Modeling Adversarial Noise for Adversarial Training

Dawei Zhou * 1 2 Nannan Wang * 1 Bo Han 3 Tongliang Liu † 2

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been demonstrated
to be vulnerable to adversarial noise, promoting
the development of defense against adversarial
attacks. Motivated by the fact that adversarial
noise contains well-generalizing features and that
the relationship between adversarial data and natural data can help infer natural data and make
reliable predictions, in this paper, we study to
model adversarial noise by learning the transition
relationship between adversarial labels (i.e. the
flipped labels used to generate adversarial data)
and natural labels (i.e. the ground truth labels
of the natural data). Specifically, we introduce
an instance-dependent transition matrix to relate
adversarial labels and natural labels, which can
be seamlessly embedded with the target model
(enabling us to model stronger adaptive adversarial noise). Empirical evaluations demonstrate that
our method could effectively improve adversarial
accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to adversarial noise (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Szegedy
et al., 2014; Jin et al., 2019; Liao et al., 2018; Ma et al.,
2018; Wu et al., 2020a). The vulnerability of deep neural
networks seriously threatens many decision-critical deep
learning applications (LeCun et al., 1998; He et al., 2016;
Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016; Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015; Kaiming et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2021).
To alleviate the negative affects caused by adversarial noise,
many adversarial defense methods have been proposed. A
*
Equal contribution 1 ISN Lab, School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, dwzhou.xidian@gmail.com,
nnwang@xidian.edu.cn 2 TML Lab, Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney 3 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong
Baptist University, bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk. Correspondence
to: Tongliang Liu < tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

major class of adversarial defense methods focus on exploiting adversarial instances to help train the target model
(Madry et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2019), which achieve the state-of-the-art performance. However, these methods do not explicitly model the
adversarial noise. The relationship between the adversarial
data and natural data has not been well studied yet.
Studying (or modeling) the relationship between adversarial data and natural data is considered to be beneficial. If
we can model the relationship, we can infer natural data
information by exploiting the adversarial data and the relationship. Previous researches have made some explorations
on this idea. Some data pre-processing based methods (Jin
et al., 2019; Liao et al., 2018; Naseer et al., 2020; Zhou
et al., 2021a;b), which try to recover the natural data by
removing the adversarial noise, share the same philosophy.
However, those methods suffer from the high dimensionality
problem because both the adversarial data and natural data
are high dimensional. The recovered data is likely to have
human-observable loss (i.e., obvious inconsistency between
processed instances and natural instances) (Xu et al., 2017)
or contain residual adversarial noise (Liao et al., 2018).
To avoid the above problems, in this paper, we propose to
model adversarial noise in the low-dimensional label space.
Specifically, instead of directly modeling the relationship
between the adversarial data and the natural data, we model
the adversarial noise by learning the label transition from the
adversarial labels (i.e., the flipped labels used to generate
adversarial data) to the natural labels (i.e., the ground truth
labels of the natural data). Note that the adversarial labels
have not been well exploited in the community of adversarial
learning, which guide the generation of adversarial noise
and thus contain valuable information for modeling the wellgeneralizing features of the adversarial noise (Ilyas et al.,
2019).
It is well-known that the adversarial noise depends on many
factors, e.g., the data distribution, the adversarial attack
strategy, and the target model. The proposed adversarial
noise modeling method is capable to take into account of
the factors because that the label transition is dependent of
the adversarial instance (enabling us to model how the patterns of data distribution and adversarial noise affect label
flipping) and that the transition can be seamlessly embed-

