Forget-free Continual Learning with Winning Subnetworks

Haeyong Kang * 1 Rusty John Lloyd Mina * 1 Sultan Rizky Hikmawan Madjid 1 Jaehong Yoon 1
Mark Hasegawa-Johnson 2 Sung Ju Hwang 1 3 Chang D. Yoo 1

Abstract
Inspired by Lottery Ticket Hypothesis that competitive subnetworks exist within a dense network, we propose a continual learning method
referred to as Winning SubNetworks (WSN) which
sequentially learns and selects an optimal subnetwork for each task. Specifically, WSN jointly
learns the model weights and task-adaptive binary masks pertaining to subnetworks associated with each task whilst attempting to select
a small set of weights to be activated (winning
ticket) by reusing weights of the prior subnetworks. The proposed method is inherently immune to catastrophic forgetting as each selected
subnetwork model does not infringe upon other
subnetworks. Binary masks spawned per winning
ticket are encoded into one N-bit binary digit
mask, then compressed using Huffman coding
for a sub-linear increase in network capacity with
respect to the number of tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/ihaeyong/WSN.

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL), also known as Lifelong Learning (Thrun, 1995), is a paradigm for learning a series of
tasks in a sequential manner. One of the major goals in
continual learning is to mimic human cognition, exemplified by the ability to incremental learning new concepts
over his/her lifespan. An ideal continual learner encourages
positive forward/backward transfer, utilizing the learned
knowledge from previous tasks when solving for new ones,
and updating the previous task knowledge with the new
task knowledge. Nevertheless, this is nontrivial due to the
phenomenon referred to as catastrophic forgetting or catastrophic interference (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989), where
*
Equal contribution 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), South Korea 2 University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, USA 3 AITRICS, South Korea. Correspondence to: Chang D. Yoo <cd_yoo@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the model performance on previous tasks significantly decreases upon learning on new tasks. Various approaches
have been proposed to solve catastrophic forgetting during
continual learning, which can be broadly categorized as
follows: (1) Regularization-based methods (Kirkpatrick
et al., 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2020; Jung et al., 2020; Titsias et al., 2020; Mirzadeh et al., 2021) aim to keep the
learned information of past tasks during continual training
aided by sophisticatedly designed regularization terms, (2)
Rehearsal-based methods (Rebuffi et al., 2017; Chaudhry
et al., 2019a;b; Saha et al., 2021) utilize a set of real or
synthesized data from the previous tasks and revisit them,
and (3) Architecture-based methods (Mallya et al., 2018;
Serrà et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Wortsman et al., 2020)
propose to minimize the inter-task interference via newly
designed architectural components.
Despite the remarkable success of recent works on continual learning, existing methods suffer from a limitation
that the overall memory usage increases as new tasks arrive.
Rehearsal-based CL requires additional room to store the
replay buffer or generative models, and architecture-based
methods leverage additional model capacity to account for
new tasks. The methods lead to an essential question: how
can we build a memory-efficient CL model that does not
exceed the capacity of the backbone network or even requires a much smaller capacity? Several studies have shown
that deep neural networks are over-parameterized (Denil
et al., 2013; Han et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016) and thus removing redundant/unnecessary weights can achieve on-par
or even better performance than the original dense network.
More recently, Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) (Frankle &
Carbin, 2019) demonstrates the existence of sparse subnetworks, named winning tickets, that preserve the performance
of a dense network. However, searching for optimal winning tickets during continual learning with iterative pruning
methods requires repetitive pruning and retraining for each
arriving task, which is impractical.
To tackle the problem, we suggest a novel CL method
that finds the high-performing Winning SubNetwork (WSN)
given tasks without the need for retraining and rewinding,
as shown in Figure 1 (d). Unlike previous pruning-based CL
approaches (Mallya et al., 2018; Wortsman et al., 2020) (see
Figure 1 (a)), which obtain task-specific subnetworks given

