Do Differentiable Simulators Give Better Policy Gradients?

H.J. Terry Suh 1 Max Simchowitz 1 Kaiqing Zhang 1 Russ Tedrake 1

Abstract
Differentiable simulators promise faster computation time for reinforcement learning by replacing
zeroth-order gradient estimates of a stochastic
objective with an estimate based on first-order
gradients. However, it is yet unclear what factors decide the performance of the two estimators
on complex landscapes that involve long-horizon
planning and control on physical systems, despite
the crucial relevance of this question for the utility of differentiable simulators. We show that
characteristics of certain physical systems, such
as stiffness or discontinuities, may compromise
the efficacy of the first-order estimator, and analyze this phenomenon through the lens of bias and
variance. We additionally propose an α-order gradient estimator, with α ∈ [0, 1], which correctly
utilizes exact gradients to combine the efficiency
of first-order estimates with the robustness of zeroorder methods. We demonstrate the pitfalls of
traditional estimators and the advantages of the
α-order estimator on some numerical examples.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of minimizing a stochastic objective,
min F (θ) = min Ew f (θ, w).
θ

θ

At the heart of many algorithms for reinforcement learning
(RL) lies zeroth-order estimation of the gradient ∇F (Sutton et al., 2000; Schulman et al., 2017). Yet, in domains that
deal with structured systems, such as linear control, physical simulation, or robotics, it is possible to obtain exact
gradients of f , which can also be used to construct a firstorder estimate of ∇F . The availability of both options begs
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: H.J.Terry Suh <hjsuh@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Examples of simple optimization problems on physical
systems. Goal is to: A. maximize y position of the ball after
dropping. B. maximize distance thrown, with a wall that results
in inelastic impact. C. maximize transferred angular momentum
to the pivoting bar through collision. Second row: the original
objective and the stochastic objective after randomized smoothing.

the question: given access to exact gradients of f , which
estimator should we prefer?
In stochastic optimization, the theoretical benefits of using
first-order estimates of ∇F over zeroth-order ones have
mainly been understood through the lens of variance and
convergence rates (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Mahamed et al.,
2020): the first-order estimator often (not always) results
in much less variance compared to the zeroth-order one,
which leads to faster convergence rates to a local minima of
general nonconvex smooth objective functions.
However, the landscape of RL objectives that involve longhorizon sequential decision making (e.g. policy optimization) is challenging to analyze, and convergence properties in these landscapes are relatively poorly understood,
except for structured settings such as finite-state MDPs
(Agarwal et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020) or linear control
(Fazel et al., 2019; Bhandari & Russo, 2020). In particular, physical systems with contact, as we show in Figure 1,
can display complex characteristics including nonlinearities, non-smoothness, and discontinuities (van der Schaft &
Schumacher, 2000; Mason, 2001; Suh et al., 2021).
Nevertheless, lessons from convergence rate analysis tell
us that there may be benefits to using the exact gradients
even for these complex physical systems. Such ideas have
been championed through the term “differentiable simulation”, where forward simulation of physics is programmed

