Calibrated Learning to Defer with One-vs-All Classifiers

Rajeev Verma 1 Eric Nalisnick 1

Abstract
The learning to defer (L2D) framework has the
potential to make AI systems safer. For a given
input, the system can defer the decision to a human if the human is more likely than the model to
take the correct action. We study the calibration
of L2D systems, investigating if the probabilities
they output are sound. We find that Mozannar &
Sontag’s (2020) multiclass framework is not calibrated with respect to expert correctness. Moreover, it is not even guaranteed to produce valid
probabilities due to its parameterization being degenerate for this purpose. We propose an L2D
system based on one-vs-all classifiers that is able
to produce calibrated probabilities of expert correctness. Furthermore, our loss function is also
a consistent surrogate for multiclass L2D, like
Mozannar & Sontag’s (2020). Our experiments
verify that not only is our system calibrated, but
this benefit comes at no cost to accuracy. Our
model’s accuracy is always comparable (and often
superior) to Mozannar & Sontag’s (2020) model’s
in tasks ranging from hate speech detection to
galaxy classification to diagnosis of skin lesions.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is being deployed in ever more consequential and high-stakes tasks such as healthcare (Zoabi
et al., 2021; Kadampur & Al Riyaee, 2020), criminal justice
(Zhong et al., 2018; Chalkidis et al., 2019), and autonomous
driving (Grigorescu et al., 2020). Thus, the trust and safety
of these systems is paramount (Hendrycks & Dietterich,
2019; Nguyen et al., 2015). One near-term solution is to
ensure a human is involved in the decision making process.
For example, learning with a rejection option (Chow, 1957)
allows the model to abstain from making a decision, instead
passing the burden to a human. The decision to abstain or
1

Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Rajeev Verma <rajeev.ee15@gmail.com>, Eric Nalisnick <e.t.nalisnick@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

not is usually derived from the model’s confidence. For a
self-driving car, a winding stretch of road could make the
system unconfident in its abilities. The system would then
refuse to drive and forces the human to take control. When
the system becomes confident again (e.g. on a straight road),
it can then take back control from the human.
Learning to defer (L2D) (Madras et al., 2018) is another
framework that supports machine-human collaboration. In
L2D, the human’s confidence is modeled as well as the
machine’s. This allows the system to compare the human’s
and model’s expected performances. Thus, L2D systems
defer when the human is more likely than the model to
take the correct action. Returning to the example of a selfdriving car, an L2D system would pass control to the human
only when it expects the human to drive better than itself.
In addition to safety, such behavior allows for an efficient
division of labor between the human and machine. By
knowing what the human knows, the model is free to adapt
itself to complement the human. The model can concentrate
on performing easy tasks well if it knows a human can be
relied upon for harder tasks.
Most previous work has attempted to improve the overall
accuracy of L2D systems. However, if these systems are to
be used in safety-critical scenarios, then other factors such
as trust, transparency, and fairness are important as well
(Madras et al., 2018). Tschandl et al. (2020) found that AI
systems can mislead physicians into incorrect diagnoses,
even when the doctor is initially confident. To help prevent
such scenarios, we want our systems to be well calibrated.
The output probabilities should reflect the true uncertainties
of the model and human. In other words, the L2D system
should be a good forecaster. If the system says the expert
has a 70% chance of being correct, then the expert should
indeed be correct in about 70 out of 100 cases.
In this paper, we study the calibration of L2D systems. We
focus on Mozannar & Sontag’s (2020) formulation since it
is the only consistent surrogate loss for multiclass L2D. We
find that the Mozannar & Sontag (2020) loss results in models that are not well-calibrated with respect to expert correctness. The problem is intrinsic: the softmax parameterization
allows the estimator to be greater than one. We propose
an alternative loss based on one-vs-all classifiers that does
not have this issue. We use the method of error correcting

