Kernel Methods for Radial Transformed Compositional Data with Many Zeros

Junyoung Park 1 Changwon Yoon 2 Cheolwoo Park 1 Jeongyoun Ahn 2

Abstract
Compositional data analysis with a high proportion of zeros has gained increasing popularity,
especially in chemometrics and human gut microbiomes research. Statistical analyses of this type
of data are typically carried out via a log-ratio
transformation after replacing zeros with small
positive values. We should note, however, that
this procedure is geometrically improper, as it
causes anomalous distortions through the transformation. We propose a radial transformation that
does not require zero substitutions and more importantly results in essential equivalence between
domains before and after the transformation. We
show that a rich class of kernels on hyperspheres
can successfully define a kernel embedding for
compositional data based on this equivalence. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
that theoretically establishes the availability of the
extensive library of kernel-based machine learning methods for compositional data. The applicability of the proposed approach is demonstrated
with kernel principal component analysis.

1. Introduction
Compositional data are multivariate nonnegative data carrying only relative information of components. They are often
normalized to have a constant total sum, typically one, so
that the data with d + 1 variables reside in a compact subset
of the Euclidean space:
(
)
d+1
X
d
d+1
∆ = (x1 , · · · , xd+1 ) ∈ R
xi = 1, xi ≥ 0, ∀i ,
i=1

called a simplex. Here, the superscript d denotes the topological dimension of the simplex.
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 2 Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
Correspondence to:
Jeongyoun Ahn <jyahn@kaist.ac.kr>, Cheolwoo Park
<parkcw2021@kaist.ac.kr>.

Data comprised of compositions are ubiquitous in many
scientific fields: geochemical composition of rocks or soils
in earth science; proportions of various micro-organisms
at different sea depths in marine science; portfolio allocation in finance, just to name a few. Among them, our
primary motivating examples are microbiome data consisting of relative abundance of microbes, whose analyses have
recently been spotlighted in medical research (Gloor et al.,
2017), thanks to the emerging scientific and public interests
in human gut microbiomes that are associated with many
diseases and health-related attributes of humans and animals. Notable characteristics of microbiome data are that
the number of bacterial taxa is typically much higher than
the available sample size, i.e., high dimension, low sample
size, and that a significant portion, about 50 – 80%, of data
are zeros (Greenacre, 2021). Those zeros make microbiome
data locate mainly on the boundary of a high-dimensional
simplex.
The compositional aspect of the data poses challenges to
statistical data analysis. Due to the constant sum constraint,
each component of a composition is inevitably affected
by other components. To be specific, they have spurious
negative correlations (Pearson, 1897; Chayes, 1960). This
would yield uninterpretable results if classical multivariate
methods are applied blindly to the data. An overwhelmingly dominant approach to overcome this problem is to
take log-ratio transformations to compositional data, which
is proposed by Aitchison (1982). There are three types of
such transformations, additive, centered, and isometric logratio transformations, all of which send compositional data
to the Euclidean space. After applying one of these transformations, one may use traditional multivariate statistical
methods in the Euclidean space.
However, the log-ratio methods are not readily applicable
for data with many zeros because logarithm and ratio computations in the transforms do not allow zero values. Indeed,
the log-ratio transformations are forced to deal only with
data on the open simplex:
(
d

S =

(x1 , · · · , xd+1 ) ∈ R

d+1

d+1
X

)
xi = 1, xi > 0, ∀i ,

i=1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and they cannot manage the boundary points essentially. In
order to apply the log-ratio methods for data on the simplex

