Design-Bench: Benchmarks for Data-Driven Offline Model-Based Optimization

Brandon Trabucco * 1 Xinyang Geng * 2 Aviral Kumar 2 Sergey Levine 2

Abstract
Black-box model-based optimization (MBO)
problems, where the goal is to find a design input that maximizes an unknown objective function, are ubiquitous in a wide range of domains,
such as the design of proteins, DNA sequences,
aircraft, and robots. Solving model-based optimization problems typically requires actively
querying the unknown objective function on design proposals, which means physically building the candidate molecule, aircraft, or robot,
testing it, and storing the result. This process
can be expensive and time consuming, and one
might instead prefer to optimize for the best design using only the data one already has. This
setting—called offline MBO—poses substantial
and different algorithmic challenges than more
commonly studied online techniques. A number of recent works have demonstrated success
with offline MBO for high-dimensional optimization problems using high-capacity deep neural networks. However, the lack of standardized benchmarks in this emerging field is making progress
difficult to track. To address this, we present
Design-Bench, a benchmark for offline MBO
with a unified evaluation protocol and reference
implementations of recent methods. Our benchmark includes a suite of diverse and realistic tasks
derived from real-world optimization problems
in biology, materials science, and robotics that
present distinct challenges for offline MBO. Our
benchmark and reference implementations are released at github.com/rail-berkeley/design-bench
and github.com/rail-berkeley/design-baselines.

Equal contribution 1 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie
Mellon University 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Sciences, University of California Berkeley. Correspondence to: Brandon Trabucco <btrabucco@berkeley.edu>,
Xinyang Geng <young.geng@berkeley.edu>.

1. Introduction
Automatically synthesizing designs that maximize a desired
objective function is one of the most important challenges in
scientific and engineering disciplines. From protein design
in molecular biology (Shen et al., 2014) to superconducting
material discovery in physics (Hamidieh, 2018), researchers
have made significant progress in applying machine learning
to optimization problems over structured design spaces.
Commonly, the exact form of the objective function is unknown, and the objective value for a novel design can only
be found by either running computer simulations or real
world experiments. This process of optimizing an unknown
function by only observing samples from this function is
known as black-box optimization, and is typically solved in
an online iterative manner, where in each iteration the solver
proposes new designs and queries the objective function for
feedback in order to inform better design proposals at the
next iteration (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006). In many domains however, the objective function is prohibitively expensive to evaluate because it requires manually conducting experiments in the real world. In this setting, one cannot query
the true objective function, and cannot receive feedback on
design proposals. Instead, a collection of past records of designs and corresponding objective values might be available,
and the optimization method must instead leverage existing
data to synthesize the most optimal designs. This is called
offline model-based optimization (offline MBO).

*

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Offline model-based optimization (MBO) requires generating designs x that optimize a black-box objective function
f (x) using a given static dataset of designs, without any active
queries to the ground truth function.

Although online black-box optimization has been studied
extensively, offline MBO has received comparatively less

