Robin Hood and Matthew Effects: Differential Privacy Has
Disparate Impact on Synthetic Data

Georgi Ganev 1 2 Bristena Oprisanu 1 Emiliano De Cristofaro 1

Abstract
Generative models trained with Differential Privacy (DP) can be used to generate synthetic data
while minimizing privacy risks. We analyze the
impact of DP on these models vis-à-vis underrepresented classes/subgroups of data, specifically,
studying: 1) the size of classes/subgroups in the
synthetic data, and 2) the accuracy of classification tasks run on them. We also evaluate the
effect of various levels of imbalance and privacy
budgets. Our analysis uses three state-of-the-art
DP models (PrivBayes, DP-WGAN, and PATEGAN) and shows that DP yields opposite size
distributions in the generated synthetic data. It
affects the gap between the majority and minority
classes/subgroups; in some cases by reducing it (a
“Robin Hood” effect) and, in others, by increasing
it (a “Matthew” effect). Either way, this leads
to (similar) disparate impacts on the accuracy of
classification tasks on the synthetic data, affecting disproportionately more the underrepresented
subparts of the data. Consequently, when training models on synthetic data, one might incur the
risk of treating different subpopulations unevenly,
leading to unreliable or unfair conclusions.

1. Introduction
Releasing synthetic data is an increasingly advocated and
adopted approach to reduce privacy risks while sharing
data (Van Der Schaar & Maxfield, 2020). Synthetic data
initiatives have been promoted by, e.g., the US Census Bureau (Benedetto et al., 2018), England’s National Health
Service (NHS England, 2021), and NIST (NIST, 2018a;b).
The idea is to train generative machine learning models to
learn the probabilistic distribution of the (real) data and then
1

University College London, London, UK 2 Hazy, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Georgi Ganev <georgi.ganev.16@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

sample from the model to generate new (synthetic) data
records. However, real-world datasets often contain personal and sensitive information about individuals (Thompson & Warzel, 2019) that could leak into/through models
that are trained on them. Generative models can overfit
or memorize individual data points (Carlini et al., 2019;
Webster et al., 2019), which facilitates privacy attacks such
as membership or property inference attacks (Hayes et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2020a; Stadler et al., 2022).
The state-of-the-art method for training models that provably minimize inferences is to do while satisfying Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2014). DP provides a
mathematical guarantee on the privacy of all records in
the training dataset by bounding their individual contribution. This can be achieved by applying noise (e.g., using
the Laplace Mechanism (Dwork et al., 2006b)), relying on
techniques such as DP-Stochastic Gradient Descent (DPSGD) (Abadi et al., 2016), or Private Aggregation of Teacher
Ensembles (PATE) (Papernot et al., 2016; 2018).
Naturally, as they rely on perturbation, DP methods inherently reduce accuracy in the task the data is used for. Incidentally, this degradation is often disproportionate; for
instance, the accuracy of DP classifiers often drops more for
the underrepresented classes and subgroups of the dataset.
Prior work (Bagdasaryan et al., 2019; Farrand et al., 2020;
Uniyal et al., 2021) illustrates this effect when deep neural
networks are trained with DP-SGD or PATE on imbalanced
datasets. Moreover, DP statistics have also been shown to
lead to disproportionate biases (Kuppam et al., 2019).
Problem Statement. So far, this “disparate effect” caused
by DP and its applications have only been analyzed in the
context of discriminative models. This paper focuses on
DP generative models and tabular synthetic data. We look
at the problem from two angles: 1) counts comparisons
and 2) downstream tasks such as classification. We analyze
three widely used DP generative models: PrivBayes (Zhang
et al., 2017), DP-WGAN (Alzantot & Srivastava, 2019), and
PATE-GAN (Jordon et al., 2018), which rely, respectively,
on the Laplace Mechanism, DP-SGD, and PATE.
Our work aims to answer the following research questions:
– RQ1: Do DP generative models generate data in simi-

