No-Regret Learning in Time-Varying Zero-Sum Games

Mengxiao Zhang * 1 Peng Zhao * 2 Haipeng Luo 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 2

Abstract
Learning from repeated play in a fixed two-player
zero-sum game is a classic problem in game theory and online learning. We consider a variant
of this problem where the game payoff matrix
changes over time, possibly in an adversarial manner. We first present three performance measures
to guide the algorithmic design for this problem:
1) the well-studied individual regret, 2) an extension of duality gap, and 3) a new measure
called dynamic Nash Equilibrium regret, which
quantifies the cumulative difference between the
player’s payoff and the minimax game value.
Next, we develop a single parameter-free algorithm that simultaneously enjoys favorable guarantees under all these three performance measures.
These guarantees are adaptive to different nonstationarity measures of the payoff matrices and,
importantly, recover the best known results when
the payoff matrix is fixed. Our algorithm is based
on a two-layer structure with a meta-algorithm
learning over a group of black-box base-learners
satisfying a certain property, along with several
novel ingredients specifically designed for the
time-varying game setting. Empirical results further validate the effectiveness of our algorithm.

1. Introduction
Repeated play in a fixed two-player zero-sum game, a fundamental problem in the interaction between game theory
and online learning, has been extensively studied in recent
decades. In particular, many efforts have been devoted to
designing online algorithms such that both players achieve
small individual regret (that is, difference between one’s
cumulative payoff and that of the best fixed action) while at
*

Equal contribution, in alphabetical order. 1 University of
Southern California 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University. Correspondence to:
Mengxiao Zhang <mengxiao.zhang@usc.edu>, Peng Zhao
<zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the same time the dynamics of the players’ strategy leads to
a Nash equilibrium, a pair of strategies that neither player
has incentive to deviate from; see for example (Freund &
Schapire, 1999; Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013; Daskalakis
et al., 2015; Syrgkanis et al., 2015; Chen & Peng, 2020; Wei
et al., 2021; Hsieh et al., 2021; Daskalakis et al., 2021).
In contrast to this large body of studies for learning over
a fixed zero-sum game, repeated play over a sequence of
time-varying games, the focus of this paper and a ubiquitous
scenario in practice, is much less explored. While minimizing individual regret still makes perfect sense in this case, it
is not immediately clear what other desirable game-theoretic
guarantees are that generalize the concept of approaching a
Nash equilibrium when the game is fixed. As far as we know,
Cardoso et al. (2019) are the first to explicitly consider this
problem. They proposed the notion of Nash-Equilibrium
regret (NE-regret) as the performance measure, which quantifies the difference between the learners’ cumulative payoff
and the minimax value of the cumulative√payoff matrix.
e T ) NE-regret
The authors proposed an algorithm with O(
after T rounds of play and, importantly, proved that no algorithm can simultaneously achieve sublinear NE-regret and
sublinear individual regret for both players.
Our work starts by questioning whether the NE-regret
of Cardoso et al. (2019) is indeed a good performance measure for the problem of learning in time-varying games,
especially given its incompatibility with the arguably most
standard goal of having small individual regret. We then
discover that measuring performance with NE-regret can in
fact be highly unreasonable: we show an example (in Section 3) where even the two players perform perfectly (in the
sense that they play the corresponding Nash equilibrium in
every round), the resulting NE-regret is still linear in T !
Motivated by this observation, we revisit the basic problem
of how to measure the algorithm’s performance in such a
time-varying game setting. Concretely, we consider three
performance measures that we believe are appropriate and
natural: 1) the standard individual regret; 2) the direct generalization of cumulative duality gap from a fixed game to
a varying game; and 3) a new measure called dynamic NEregret, which quantifies the difference between the learner’s
cumulative payoff and the cumulative minimax game value
(instead of the minimax value of the cumulative payoff ma-

