Adversarial Robustness against Multiple and Single lp -Threat Models via
Quick Fine-Tuning of Robust Classifiers

Francesco Croce 1 Matthias Hein 1

Abstract
A major drawback of adversarially robust models, in particular for large scale datasets like ImageNet, is the extremely long training time compared to standard ones. Moreover, models should
be robust not only to one lp -threat model but ideally to all of them. In this paper we propose
Extreme norm Adversarial Training (E-AT) for
multiple-norm robustness which is based on geometric properties of lp -balls. E-AT costs up
to three times less than other adversarial training methods for multiple-norm robustness. Using E-AT we show that for ImageNet a single
epoch and for CIFAR-10 three epochs are sufficient to turn any lp -robust model into a multiplenorm robust model. In this way we get the first
multiple-norm robust model for ImageNet and
boost the state-of-the-art for multiple-norm robustness to more than 51% on CIFAR-10. Finally, we study the general transfer via finetuning of adversarial robustness between different individual lp -threat models and improve the
previous SOTA l1 -robustness on both CIFAR-10
and ImageNet. Extensive experiments show that
our scheme works across datasets and architectures including vision transformers.

1. Introduction
The problem of adversarial examples, that is small adversarial perturbations of the input (Szegedy et al., 2014;
Kurakin et al., 2017) changing the decision of a classifier, is a serious obstacle for the use of machine learning in safety-critical systems. Many adversarial defenses
have been proposed but most of them could be broken either by stronger attacks (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye
et al., 2018; Mosbach et al., 2018) or using adaptive attacks
1
University of Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to:
Francesco Croce <francesco.croce@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Tramèr et al., 2020). Apart from provable adversarial defenses which are however still restricted to rather simple
CNNs (Wong et al., 2018; Gowal et al., 2018), the only
successful technique so far is adversarial training (Madry
et al., 2018) and its improvements (Zhang et al., 2019; Carmon et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020; 2021). Current stateof-the-art results for l2 - and l∞ -adversarial robustness on
CIFAR-10 (Gowal et al., 2020; Rebuffi et al., 2021; Gowal
et al., 2021) exploit very large networks like WideResNet70-16. One can anticipate that this trend of using evergrowing architectures will continue, as we can currently see
for ImageNet (Dai et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2021). Therefore, especially considering that adversarial training is by
itself more expensive than standard training, it is increasingly important that robust models can be quickly adapted
to other tasks and threat models without the need for an excessively costly re-training from scratch. For this reason, in
this paper we focus on fine-tuning which we believe will be
an important topic in adversarial robustness in the future.
Moreover, while the community initially focused on adversarial examples for l∞ -perturbations, there has recently
been more interest in other lp -attacks, such as l1 and l2 ,
or perceptual threat models (Stutz et al., 2019; Wong &
Kolter, 2021; Laidlaw et al., 2021). It is well known that
robustness in one lp -ball does not necessarily generalize to
some other lq -ball for p 6= q (Kang et al., 2019a; Tramèr &
Boneh, 2019). However, in safety-critical systems we need
robustness against all lp -norms simultaneously which has
triggered recent extensions of adversarial training for multiple lp -norms (Tramèr & Boneh, 2019; Maini et al., 2020)
and provable defenses for all lp with p ≥ 1 (Croce & Hein,
2020b). In this paper we show that, using the geometry of
the lp -balls, the computationally expensive multiple norm
training procedures of Tramèr & Boneh (2019); Maini et al.
(2020), which costs up to three times as much as normal adversarial training, can be replaced by a very effective and
simple form of adaptively alternating between the two extreme norms, namely l1 and l∞ . This scheme achieves similar robustness for the union of the threat models to more
costly previous approaches. Additionally, we show that on
CIFAR-10 three epochs and on ImageNet even just a single
epoch of fine-tuning with our extreme norms adversarial
training (E-AT) are sufficient to turn any lp -robust model

