State Transition of Dendritic Spines Improves
Learning of Sparse Spiking Neural Networks

Yanqi Chen 1 2 Zhaofei Yu † 1 2 3 Wei Fang 1 2 Zhengyu Ma † 2 Tiejun Huang 1 2 3 Yonghong Tian † 1 2

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are considered
a promising alternative to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) for their event-driven computing
paradigm when deployed on energy-efficient neuromorphic hardware. Recently, deep SNNs have
shown breathtaking performance improvement
through cutting-edge training strategy and flexible structure, which also scales up the number of
parameters and computational burdens in a single
network. Inspired by the state transition of dendritic spines in the filopodial model of spinogenesis, we model different states of SNN weights,
facilitating weight optimization for pruning. Furthermore, the pruning speed can be regulated by
using different functions describing the growing
threshold of state transition. We organize these
techniques as a dynamic pruning algorithm based
on nonlinear reparameterization mapping from
spine size to SNN weights. Our approach yields
sparse deep networks on the large-scale dataset
(SEW ResNet18 on ImageNet) while maintaining state-of-the-art low performance loss (∼3%
at 88.8% sparsity) compared to existing pruning
methods on directly trained SNNs. Moreover, we
find out pruning speed regulation while learning is
crucial to avoiding disastrous performance degradation at the final stages of training, which may
shed light on future work on SNN pruning.

1. Introduction
Spiking neural networks (SNNs), acclaimed as the third
generation of neural network models (Maass, 1997), have
1

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology,
School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. Correspondence to: Zhaofei Yu <yuzf12@pku.edu.cn>, Zhengyu Ma
<mazhy@pcl.ac.cn>, Yonghong Tian <yhtian@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

drawn more and more attention from researchers in the past
few years. Compared to artificial neural networks (ANNs),
SNNs go a step further in mimicking the computing pattern of human brains. Neurons in SNNs release discrete
events, namely “spikes”, to communicate with each other
and thereby called spiking neurons. As human brains consume only around 20W (Mink et al., 1981) while processing
various complicated tasks, SNNs are also energy efficient
when deployed on neuromorphic hardwares (Merolla et al.,
2014; Furber et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2017; Davies et al.,
2018; Pei et al., 2019). Furthermore, the spiking neuron
models follow their biological counterparts and inherit complex temporal dynamics from them, endowing SNNs with a
strong ability to extract spatio-temporal features on multiple tasks such as recognition (Payeur et al., 2021; Stöckl &
Maass, 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2021a;b), detection (Kim et al., 2020), segmentation (Kirkland et al., 2020),
and tracking (Luo et al., 2019; 2021).
Larger and deeper SNNs are demanded to handle tasks with
growing scales of datasets. In the field of ANNs, large-scale
datasets like ImageNet require networks with an enormous
number of parameters, such as GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al.,
2015) or ResNet (He et al., 2016). The situation for SNNs
is similar, thereby large SNNs with the same structures like
Spiking ResNet (Zheng et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2021) and
SpikingGoogleNet (Zhou et al., 2021) are built. However,
the number of parameters in these architectures is far beyond
what neuromorphic chips can now support, especially for
those with one hundred or more layers. For example, a
48-node SpiNNaker board is able to simulate networks with
up to 250,000 neurons and 80 million synapses (Furber
et al., 2014), which is not enough for any single network
mentioned above. Therefore, pruning redundant weights in
SNNs is a promising approach to deploy large networks to
event-based hardware.
The sparsification of network weights, or pruning of networks has been a flourishing area (Han et al., 2015) since
deep ANNs show their power on real-life tasks. Compared
with ANNs, SNNs make better use of unstructured sparsity
for their event-driven nature. This is because the computation on event-driven hardware is triggered only when both
incoming spikes and network weights are nonzero (Merolla

