On Implicit Bias in Overparameterized Bilevel Optimization

Paul Vicol 1 2 Jonathan Lorraine 1 2 Fabian Pedregosa 3 David Duvenaud 1 2 Roger Grosse 1 2

Abstract

where S : U ⇒ W is a set-valued response mapping, from
each outer parameter u to a set of optimal inner parameters S(u). We use quotes around the outer “arg min” to
denote the ambiguity in the definition of the bilevel problem when the inner objective has multiple solutions, a point
we expand upon in Section 2. Examples of bilevel optimization in machine learning include hyperparameter optimization (Domke, 2012; Maclaurin et al., 2015; MacKay
et al., 2019; Lorraine et al., 2020; Shaban et al., 2019),
dataset distillation (Wang et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2021),
influence function estimation (Koh & Liang, 2017), metalearning (Finn et al., 2017; Franceschi et al., 2018; Rajeswaran et al., 2019), example reweighting (Bengio et al.,
2009; Ren et al., 2018), neural architecture search (Zoph &
Le, 2017; Liu et al., 2019) and adversarial learning (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Pfau & Vinyals, 2016) (see Table 1).

Many problems in machine learning involve
bilevel optimization (BLO), including hyperparameter optimization, meta-learning, and dataset
distillation. Bilevel problems involve inner and
outer parameters, each optimized for its own objective. Often, at least one of the two levels is underspecified and there are multiple ways to choose
among equivalent optima. Inspired by recent studies of the implicit bias induced by optimization
algorithms in single-level optimization, we investigate the implicit bias of different gradient-based
algorithms for jointly optimizing the inner and
outer parameters. We delineate two standard BLO
methods—cold-start and warm-start BLO—and
show that the converged solution or long-run behavior depends to a large degree on these and
other algorithmic choices, such as the hypergradient approximation. We also show that the solutions from warm-start BLO can encode a surprising amount of information about the outer
objective, even when the outer optimization variables are low-dimensional. We believe that implicit bias deserves as central a role in the study of
bilevel optimization as it has attained in the study
of single-level neural net optimization.

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimization (BLO) problems consist of two nested
sub-problems, called the outer and inner problems, where
the outer problem must be solved subject to the optimality
of the inner problem. Let u ∈ U, w ∈ W denote the outer
and inner parameters, and let F, f : U × W → R denote the
outer and inner objectives, respectively. The BLO problem
is defined as:
u⋆ ∈ “ arg min ”F (u, w⋆ )

(1)

w⋆ ∈ S(u ) = arg min f (u⋆ , w)

(2)

u∈U
⋆

w∈W

1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Paul Vicol <pvicol@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Most algorithmic contributions to BLO make the simplifying assumption that the inner problem has a unique solution
(that is, |S(u)| = 1, ∀u ∈ U), and give approximation methods that provably get close to the solution (Shaban et al.,
2019; Pedregosa, 2016; Yang et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2020;
Grazzi et al., 2020a). In practice, however, these algorithms
are often run in settings where either the inner or outer
problem is underspecified; i.e., the set of optima forms
a non-trivial manifold. Underspecification often occurs
due to overparameterization, e.g., given a learning problem
with more parameters than datapoints, there are typically
infinitely many solutions that achieve the optimal objective
value (Belkin, 2021). Analyses of the dynamics of overparameterized single-objective optimization have shown that
the nature of the converged solution, such as its pattern
of generalization, depends in subtle ways on the details of
the optimization dynamics (Lee et al., 2019; Arora et al.,
2019; Bartlett et al., 2020; Amari et al., 2020); this general
phenomenon is known as implicit bias. We extend this investigation to the bilevel setting: What are the implicit biases
of practical BLO algorithms? What types of solutions do
they favor, and what are the implications for how the trained
models generalize?
We identify two sources of implicit bias in underspecified
BLO: 1) implicit bias resulting from the optimization algorithm, either cold-start or warm-start BLO (described
below); and 2) implicit bias resulting from the hypergradient approximation. Classic literature on bilevel optimiza-

