Differentially Private Coordinate Descent
for Composite Empirical Risk Minimization

Paul Mangold 1 Aurélien Bellet 1 Joseph Salmon 2 3 Marc Tommasi 4

Abstract
Machine learning models can leak information
about the data used to train them. To mitigate
this issue, Differentially Private (DP) variants of
optimization algorithms like Stochastic Gradient
Descent (DP-SGD) have been designed to tradeoff utility for privacy in Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) problems. In this paper, we propose
Differentially Private proximal Coordinate Descent (DP-CD), a new method to solve composite
DP-ERM problems. We derive utility guarantees
through a novel theoretical analysis of inexact coordinate descent. Our results show that, thanks
to larger step sizes, DP-CD can exploit imbalance in gradient coordinates to outperform DPSGD. We also prove new lower bounds for composite DP-ERM under coordinate-wise regularity
assumptions, that are nearly matched by DP-CD.
For practical implementations, we propose to clip
gradients using coordinate-wise thresholds that
emerge from our theory, avoiding costly hyperparameter tuning. Experiments on real and synthetic
data support our results, and show that DP-CD
compares favorably with DP-SGD.

1

Introduction

Machine learning fundamentally relies on the availability
of data, which can be sensitive or confidential. It is now
well-known that preventing learned models from leaking
information about individual training points requires particular attention (Shokri et al., 2017). A standard approach for
training models while provably controlling the amount of
leakage is to solve an empirical risk minimization (ERM)
1
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189
- CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France 2 IMAG, Univ Montpellier,
CNRS, Montpellier, France 3 Institut Universitaire de France
(IUF) 4 Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France. Correspondence to: Paul Mangold <paul.mangold@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

problem under a differential privacy (DP) constraint (Chaudhuri et al., 2011). In this work, we aim to design a differentially private algorithm which approximates the solution to
a composite ERM problem of the form:
n

w∗ ∈ arg min
w∈Rp

1X
`(w; di ) + ψ(w) ,
n i=1

(1)

where D = (d1 , . . . , dn ) is a dataset of n samples drawn
from a universe X , ` : Rp ×X → R is a loss function which
is convex and smooth in w, and ψ : Rp →P
R is a convex
p
regularizer which is separable (i.e., ψ(w) = j=1 ψj (wj ))
and typically nonsmooth (e.g., `1 -norm).
Differential privacy constraints induce a trade-off between
the privacy and the utility (i.e., optimization error) of the
solution of (1). This trade-off was made explicit by Bassily
et al. (2014), who derived lower bounds on the achievable
error given a fixed privacy budget. To solve the DP-ERM
problem in practice, the most popular approaches are based
on Differentially Private variants of Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD) (Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2017), in which random perturbations are added
to the (stochastic) gradients. Bassily et al. (2014) analyzed
DP-SGD in the non-smooth DP-ERM setting, and Wang
et al. (2017) then proposed an efficient DP-SVRG algorithm
for composite DP-ERM. Both algorithms match known
lower bounds. SGD-style algorithms perform well in a wide
variety of settings, but also have some flaws: they either require small (or decreasing) step sizes or variance reduction
schemes to guarantee convergence, and they can be slow
when gradients’ coordinates are imbalanced. These flaws
propagate to the private counterparts of these algorithms.
Despite a few attempts at designing other differentially private solvers for ERM under different setups (Talwar et al.,
2015; Damaskinos et al., 2021), the differentially private
optimization toolbox remains limited, which undoubtedly
restricts the resolution of practical problems.
In this paper, we propose and analyze a Differentially Private
proximal Coordinate Descent algorithm (DP-CD), which
performs updates based on perturbed coordinate-wise gradients (i.e., partial derivatives). Coordinate Descent (CD)
methods have encountered a large success in non-private machine learning due to their simplicity and effectiveness (Liu

