Label-Descriptive Patterns and Their Application to
Characterizing Classification Errors

Michael A. Hedderich * 1 Jonas Fischer * 2 Dietrich Klakow 1 Jilles Vreeken 3

Abstract
State-of-the-art deep learning methods achieve
human-like performance on many tasks, but make
errors nevertheless. Characterizing these errors
in easily interpretable terms gives insight into
whether a classifier is prone to making systematic
errors, but also gives a way to act and improve the
classifier. We propose to discover those featurevalue combinations (i.e., patterns) that strongly
correlate with correct resp. erroneous predictions
to obtain a global and interpretable description for
arbitrary classifiers. We show this is an instance
of the more general label description problem,
which we formulate in terms of the Minimum Description Length principle. To discover a good
pattern set, we develop the efficient P REMISE algorithm. Through an extensive set of experiments
we show it performs very well in practice on both
synthetic and real-world data. Unlike existing
solutions, it ably recovers ground truth patterns,
even on highly imbalanced data over many features. Through two case studies on Visual Question Answering and Named Entity Recognition,
we confirm that P REMISE gives clear and actionable insight into the systematic errors made by
modern NLP classifiers.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art deep learning methods are known for their
ability to achieve human-like performance on challenging
tasks. As much as ‘to err is human,’ these classifiers make
errors too. Some of these errors are due to noise that is
inherent to the process we want to model, and therewith
*
Equal contribution 1 Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany. 2 Max Planck Institute for
Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany. 3 CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence
to: Michael A. Hedderich <mhedderich@lsv.uni-saarland.de>,
Jonas Fischer <fischer@mpi-inf.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Instances

Correct Prediction?

How many ducks are in the picture?
What are the ducks eating?
How many roosters are in the puddle?
Do you see ducks in the puddle?
Are there many ducks playing?

7
7
7
3
3

Figure 1. Toy example with input instances and the label specifying
if the classifier predicted correctly. The pattern ∧ (how, many)
correlates with misclassification. The word ducks is also a frequent
pattern but independent of the label and therefore not of relevance.

relatively benign. Systematic errors, on the other hand, e.g.
those due to bias or misspecification, are much more serious
as these lead to models that are inherently unreliable. If we
know under what conditions a model performs poorly, we
can actively intervene, e.g., by augmenting the training data,
and so improve overall reliability and performance. Before
we can do so, we first need to know whether a classifier
makes systematic errors, and if so, how to characterize them
in easily understandable terms.
Given a dataset with labels that specify which instances
were classified correctly or incorrectly, we are interested
in finding combinations of features that describe where the
classifier’s predictions are incorrect. For a Natural Language
Processing (NLP) task, the input features are words. If, for
example, the combination of words “how, many” is primarily
found in misclassified instances, this can indicate that our
classifier struggles with the concept of counting. A toy
example is visualized in Figure 1.
Local explanation methods such as LIME (Ribeiro et al.,
2016) describe the decision boundary of each instance. In
contrast, we are interested in an efficient way to obtain a
global and non-redundant description of our classifier’s issues on the given input data. To this end, we turn to pattern
mining. Here, a combination of features is a pattern, and we
look for the set of patterns that best characterizes on which
instances the classifier tends to perform poorly. This can be
phrased as the more general problem of label description.
For data with binary features, we are interested in the associations between the feature data and the labels. We formulate

