Neural Network Poisson Models
for Behavioural and Neural Spike Train Data
Moein Khajehnejad * 1 Forough Habibollahi * 2 Richard Nock 3 Ehsan Arabzadeh 4 Peter Dayan 5 6
Amir Dezfouli 7

Abstract
One of the most important and challenging application areas for complex machine learning methods is to predict, characterize and model rich,
multi-dimensional, neural data. Recent advances
in neural recording techniques have made it possible to monitor the activity of a large number of
neurons across different brain regions as animals
perform behavioural tasks. This poses the critical challenge of establishing links between neural
activity at a microscopic scale, which might for
instance represent sensory input, and at a macroscopic scale, which then generates behaviour. Predominant modeling methods apply rather disjoint
techniques to these scales; by contrast, we suggest an end-to-end model which exploits recent
developments of flexible, but tractable, neural network point-process models to characterize dependencies between stimuli, actions, and neural data.
We apply this model to a public dataset collected
using Neuropixel probes in mice performing a
visually-guided behavioural task as well as a synthetic dataset produced from a hierarchical network model with reciprocally connected sensory
and integration circuits intended to characterize
animal behaviour in a fixed-duration motion discrimination task. We show that our model outperforms previous approaches and contributes novel
insights into the relationships between neural activity and behaviour.
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Data Science and AI, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia 3 Google Research 4 Eccles Institute of Neuroscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian
National University, Canberra, Australia 5 MPI for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany 6 The University of Tübingen, Germany 7 Data61, CSIRO, Sydney, Australia. Correspondence to:
Amir Dezfouli <amir.dezfouli@data61.csiro.au>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recent developments in neural recording techniques such
as Neuropixel probes allow the activity of large numbers of
neurons across the brain to be monitored as animals perform
behavioural tasks (Jun et al., 2017). This allows us to study
how the brain represents past and present sensory inputs
across areas, how these representations evolve over time
and ultimately lead to behaviour.
Very coarsely, supervised, reinforcement learning and unsupervised methods have been applied to examine the relationships between neural activity and behaviour (Paninski
et al., 2007; Mante et al., 2013; Ganguli & Sompolinsky,
2012; Kass et al., 2014; Sussillo, 2014; Richards et al., 2019;
Schaeffer et al., 2020). Encoding and decoding models are
examples of supervised learning. Encoding models use
linear or non-linear methods to predict the activity of individual neurons based on task-related variables such as
stimuli, actions, rewards and the like. Decoding models
use linear or non-linear methods to predict the values of
these task-related variables from the conjoint activities of
multiple neurons within or between areas. Both types of
model have been hugely influential from the earliest days of
the application of computational methods to understand neural representation and processing (Dayan & Abbott, 2001;
Rieke et al., 1999; Kass et al., 2014; Meyer et al., 2017).
However, simple reflections of the computational constraints
of the task are often insufficient to capture complex neural
representations of the sensory inputs and actions that are
distributed across different brain regions (Steinmetz et al.,
2019) and can also evolve over time in ‘null’ neural modes
that have no behavioural consequence. Moreover, neural
responses are variable and a population’s response will often differ from trial to trial and over time, even under the
same experimental conditions (Shadlen & Newsome, 1998).
Most traditional approaches do not generalize to these more
naturalistic conditions where trials with identical stimuli
do not exhibit identical behavioural schemes (Goris et al.,
2014; Churchland et al., 2010). Hence, they can not account for the temporal irregularities in behaviour and neural
recordings between trials.
Reinforcement learning (or in some cases, supervised learn-

