Wide Bayesian neural networks have a simple weight posterior:
theory and accelerated sampling

Jiri Hron 1 2 Roman Novak 1 Jeffrey Pennington 1 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 1

Abstract
We introduce repriorisation, a data-dependent
reparameterisation which transforms a Bayesian
neural network (BNN) posterior to a distribution
whose KL divergence to the BNN prior vanishes
as layer widths grow. The repriorisation map acts
directly on parameters, and its analytic simplicity
complements the known neural network Gaussian
process (NNGP) behaviour of wide BNNs in
function space. Exploiting the repriorisation, we
develop a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
posterior sampling algorithm which mixes faster
the wider the BNN. This contrasts with the
typically poor performance of MCMC in high
dimensions. We observe up to 50x higher effective sample size relative to no reparametrisation
for both fully-connected and residual networks.
Improvements are achieved at all widths, with
the margin between reparametrised and standard
BNNs growing with layer width.

1. Introduction
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) have achieved significantly less success than their deterministic NN counterparts.
Despite recent progress (e.g., Khan et al., 2018; Maddox
et al., 2019; Osawa et al., 2019; Dusenberry et al., 2020;
Daxberger et al., 2021; Izmailov et al., 2021), (a) our theoretical understanding of BNNs remains limited, and (b) practical applicability is hindered by high computational demands. We make progress on both these fronts.
Our work revolves around a reparametrisation θ = T (φ) of
the (flattened) NN weights θ ∈ Rd . Its form comes from
a theorem in which we establish that the Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence between the standard normal distribution N (0, Id ) and the reparametrised posterior p(φ | D) =
1
Google Research, USA 2 University of Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Jiri Hron <jh2084@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

p(T (φ) | D) det ∂φ T (φ) converges to zero as the BNN
layers grow wide.1 This closes a gap in the theory of overparametrised NNs by providing a rigorous characterisation
of the BNN parameter space behaviour (Figure 1 and Section 2), and enables faster posterior sampling (Section 3).
In function space, wide BNN priors converge (weakly) to
a so-called neural network Gaussian process (NNGP) limit
(Matthews et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Garriga-Alonso
et al., 2019; Novak et al., 2019; Yang, 2019; Hron et al.,
2020b), and the posteriors converge (weakly) to that of the
corresponding NNGP (assuming the likelihood is a bounded
continuous function of the NN outputs; Hron et al., 2020a).
Parameter space behaviour is less understood (Hron et al.,
2020a). The main exception is the work of Matthews et al.
(2017) who showed that randomly initialising a NN, and
then optimising only the last layer with respect to a mean
squared error loss, is equivalent to drawing a sample from
the conditional last layer posterior. This result holds for a
Gaussian likelihood and zero observation noise. Our reparametrisation T can be seen as a non-zero noise generalisation
of the underlying map from the initial to the optimised
weights, and provides samples from the joint posterior over
all layers in the infinite width limit (Theorem 2.1).
Since sampling from the ‘KL-limit’ N (0, I) is trivial relative to the notoriously complex BNN posterior, our theory
motivates applying Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to
the reparametrised density. To apply MCMC, two concerns
must be addressed: (i) understanding if the KL-closeness
to N (0, Id ) actually simplifies sampling, and (ii) computational efficiency. In Section 3.1, we partially answer (i)
by proving that the gradient ∇φ log p(φ | D) concentrates
around the log density gradient of N (0, I) in wide BNNs.
For (ii), we propose a simple-to-implement and efficient way
of computing both T (φ) and the corresponding density at
the same time using Cholesky decomposition (Section 3.2).
Applying Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC), we empirically
demonstrate up to 50x improved mixing speed, as measured
by effective sample size (ESS). The phenomenon occurs
both for residual and fully-connected networks (FCNs), and
1

Case distinguishes distributions (P ) and their densities (p).
Densities are used in place of distributions where convenient.

