Learning Multiscale Transformer Models for Sequence Generation

Bei Li * 1 Tong Zheng * 1 Yi Jing * 1 Chengbo Jiao 2 Tong Xiao 1 2 Jingbo Zhu 1 2

Abstract
Multiscale feature hierarchies have been witnessed the success in the computer vision area.
This further motivates researchers to design multiscale Transformer for natural language processing, mostly based on the self-attention mechanism.
For example, restricting the receptive field across
heads or extracting local fine-grained features via
convolutions. However, most of existing works
directly modeled local features but ignored the
word-boundary information. This results in redundant and ambiguous attention distributions,
which lacks of interpretability. In this work, we
define those scales in different linguistic units, including sub-words, words and phrases. We built a
multiscale Transformer model by establishing relationships among scales based on word-boundary
information and phrase-level prior knowledge.
The proposed Universal MultiScale Transformer,
namely U MST, was evaluated on two sequence
generation tasks. Notably, it yielded consistent
performance gains over the strong baseline on
several test sets without sacrificing the efficiency.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have achieved remarkable success on a wide range of tasks in natural language
processing (NLP) (Devlin et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2019; Dehghani et al., 2019). Given an input sequence, it uses self-attention mechanisms to establish
global interactions over all positions without recurrences or
convolutions.
Despite great potential on most of NLP tasks, the Transformer backbones still have a major shortcoming that it
does not model local fine-grained features explicitly. For
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China 2 NiuTrans
Research, Shenyang, China. Correspondence to: Tong Xiao <xiaotong@mail.neu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

example, given a word in a sentence, the surrounding words
have more potential correlations with it than distant words.
Also, replacing the self-attention mechanism by dynamic
convolutions even shows competitive favorable results with
Transformer (Wu et al., 2019). This observation motivates
researchers to combine local and global features for a multiscale representation of features.
Along this thread of research, researchers attempt to incorporate local-patterns into the Transformer model. These works
could be broadly categorized into two aspects. One is to
enhance the self-attention mechanism via varying the receptive filed across heads, such as convolutional self-attention
(Yang et al., 2019), multiscale self-attention (Guo et al.,
2020), multi-granularity self-attention (Hao et al., 2019).
The other is placing the convolution networks in sequence
(Gulati et al., 2020) or parallelly (Zhao et al., 2019) in selfattention. The core idea is to endow the Transformer to learn
multiscale features rather than the single global interaction.
Multiscale feature hierarchy is one of the mainstream
paradigms to handle the high-resolution tasks in CV (Lin
et al., 2017). More recently, Transformer has been successfully applied to the computer vision area, such as image classification (V I T) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), object-detection
(DETR) (Carion et al., 2020). In particular, multiscale vision Transformers has received great attention due to its
superior performance and computation efficiency (Wang
et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2021b). The input
of ViT is a sequence of patches partitioned from an image,
which is similar to the sequential input in NLP systems.
But these systems follow a multi-stage paradigm where the
channel is increased as the resolution is decreased.
In this work, we revisit the design of multiscale Transformer
based for sequence generation. Although the aforementioned Transformer variants have made great efforts to boost
the models’ performance, most of existing works ignore the
word-boundaries when modeling the local features. This
is because the input sequence is segmented into a series
of sub-words (Sennrich et al., 2016; Kudo & Richardson,
2018) to prevent these systems from the out-of-vocabulary
problem. However, most of previous techniques, e.g. convolutional self-attention (Yang et al., 2019), multiscale selfattention (Guo et al., 2020) directly enhance the feature
extraction of neighboring elements but simply discard those

