Equivalence Analysis between Counterfactual Regret Minimization and Online
Mirror Descent
Weiming Liu 1 Huacong Jiang 2 Bin Li 2 Houqiang Li 2

Abstract
Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) and Online Mirror Descent (OMD) are regret minimization algorithms for Online Convex Optimization (OCO), they are mathematically elegant but
less practical in solving Extensive-Form Games
(EFGs). Counterfactual Regret Minimization
(CFR) is a technique for approximating Nash equilibria in EFGs. CFR and its variants have a fast
convergence rate in practice, but their theoretical results are not satisfactory. In recent years,
researchers have been trying to link CFRs with
OCO algorithms, which may provide new theoretical results and inspire new algorithms. However, existing analysis is restricted to local decision points. In this paper, we show that CFRs
with Regret Matching and Regret Matching+ are
equivalent to special cases of FTRL and OMD,
respectively. According to these equivalences, a
new FTRL and a new OMD algorithm, which
can be considered as extensions of vanilla CFR
and CFR+, are derived. The experimental results
show that the two variants converge faster than
conventional FTRL and OMD, even faster than
vanilla CFR and CFR+ in some EFGs.

1. Introduction
An Extensive-Form Game (EFG) involves multiple players
and sequential decisions. In this paper, we focus on twoplayer zero-sum EFGs with imperfect information, for example, heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em poker (HUNL). One
can approximate a Nash equilibrium in this kind of game
using iterative regret minimization algorithms, e.g., Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al., 2007).
1

School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology
of China, Hefei, China 2 Department of Electronic Engineering
and Information Science, University of Science and Technology
of China, Hefei, China. Correspondence to: Weiming Liu <weiming@mail.ustc.edu.cn>, Bin Li <binli@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

CFR minimizes the total regret of each player by minimizing the counterfactual regrets in local decision points. CFRs
usually use Regret Matching (RM) (Zinkevich et al., 2007)
and Regret Matching+ (RM+) (Tammelin et al., 2015) for
minimizing the counterfactual regrets, resulting in CFR-RM
and CFR-RM+ algorithms, respectively. In recent years,
many variants of CFR have been proposed (Tammelin et al.,
2015; Brown & Sandholm, 2019b; Farina et al., 2021). Although CFRs can only √
guarantee to converge to a Nash equilibrium at a rate of O(1/ T ), they usually converge much
faster in practice. Because of the superior performance and
the parameter-free property, CFR and its variants have been
applied in multiple super-human HUNL agents (Moravčı́k
et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018; 2019a). However,
the theoretical results for CFRs are not satisfactory. Fundamentally, CFR-RM and CFR-RM+ are specialized for
EFGs, which makes them difficult to analyze.
Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) (Abernethy et al.,
2008) and Online Mirror Descent (OMD) (Beck & Teboulle,
2003) are two prominent Online Convex Optimization
(OCO) algorithms (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012; Hazan, 2016).
OCO algorithms are mathematically elegant and the theoretical results are promising. In (Farina et al., 2019b), the
optimistic variants of FTRL and OMD have been applied to
EFGs, showing a theoretical convergence rate of O(1/T ).
However, they remain less competitive than the SOTA CFRs
(Brown & Sandholm, 2019b; Farina et al., 2021) in practice.
There are some other first-order methods (Hoda et al., 2010;
Kroer et al., 2020) for EFGs. However, they are also inferior
in performance to the SOTA CFRs.
Recently, researchers have been interested in linking CFRs
with OCO (and first-order) algorithms (Waugh & Bagnell,
2015; Farina et al., 2021), which may provide some insight on the superior performance of CFRs or may help to
design new regret minimization algorithms for EFGs. In
(Waugh & Bagnell, 2015), the authors have proven that RM
is equivalent to dual average (a form of FTRL) (Nesterov,
2009). In (Farina et al., 2021), it has been proven that the
results of RM and RM+ can be recovered by FTRL and
OMD, respectively. And based on these relationships, the
optimistic variants of CFR and CFR+ have been proposed.
However, these work only considers the connection between
RM (RM+) and FTRL (OMD), which can not be extended to

