Personalized Federated Learning through Local Memorization

Othmane Marfoq 1 2 Giovanni Neglia 1 Laetitia Kameni 2 Richard Vidal 2

Abstract
Federated learning allows clients to collaboratively learn statistical models while keeping their
data local. Federated learning was originally used
to train a unique global model to be served to all
clients, but this approach might be sub-optimal
when clients’ local data distributions are heterogeneous. In order to tackle this limitation, recent
personalized federated learning methods train a
separate model for each client while still leveraging the knowledge available at other clients. In
this work, we exploit the ability of deep neural
networks to extract high quality vectorial representations (embeddings) from non-tabular data,
e.g., images and text, to propose a personalization
mechanism based on local memorization. Personalization is obtained by interpolating a collectively trained global model with a local k-nearest
neighbors (kNN) model based on the shared representation provided by the global model. We
provide generalization bounds for the proposed
approach in the case of binary classification, and
we show on a suite of federated datasets that this
approach achieves significantly higher accuracy
and fairness than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Heterogeneity is a core and fundamental challenge in Federated Learning (FL) (Li et al., 2020; Kairouz et al., 2019).
Indeed, clients highly differ both in size and distribution of
their local datasets (statistical heterogeneity), and in their
storage and computational capabilities (system heterogeneity). Those two aspects challenge the assumption that clients
should train a common global model, as pursued in many
federated learning papers (McMahan et al., 2017; Konečny
et al., 2016; Sahu et al., 2018; Karimireddy et al., 2020;
Mohri et al., 2019). In fact, all clients should be content
1

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur, Sophia Antipolis, France
Accenture Labs, Sophia Antipolis, France. Correspondence to:
Othmane Marfoq <othmane.marfoq@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

with a model’s architecture constrained by the minimum
common capabilities. Even when clients have similar hardware (e.g., they are all smartphones), in presence of statistical heterogeneity, a global model may be arbitrarily bad for
some clients raising important fairness concerns (Li et al.,
2021).
Motivated by the recent success of memorization techniques
based on nearest neighbours for natural language processing, (Khandelwal et al., 2019; 2020), computer vision (Papernot and McDaniel, 2018; Orhan, 2018), and few-shot
classification (Snell et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019), we
propose kNN-Per, a personalized FL algorithm based on
local memorization. kNN-Per combines a global model
trained collectively (e.g., via FedAvg (McMahan et al.,
2017)) with a kNN model on a client’s local datastore. The
global model also provides the shared representation used
by the local kNN. Local memorization at each FL client can
capture the client’s local distribution shift with respect to the
global distribution. Indeed, our experiments show that memorization is more beneficial when the distribution shift is
larger. The generalization bound in Sec. 3 contributes to justify our empirical findings as well as those in (Khandelwal
et al., 2019; 2020; Orhan, 2018).
kNN-Per offers a simple and effective way to address statistical heterogeneity even in a dynamic environment where
client’s data distributions change after training. It is indeed
sufficient to update the local datastore with new data without
the need to retrain the global model. Moreover, each client
can independently tune the local kNN to its storage and
computing capabilities, partially relieving the most powerful clients from the need to align their model to the weakest
ones. Finally, kNN-Per has a limited leakage of private
information, as personalization only occurs once communication exchanges have ended, and, if needed, it can be easily
combined with differential privacy techniques.
Our contributions are threefold: 1) we propose kNN-Per, a
simple personalization mechanism based on local memorization; 2) we provide generalization bounds for the proposed
approach in the case of binary classification; 3) through
extensive experiments on FL benchmarks, we show that
kNN-Per achieves significantly higher accuracy and fairness than state-of-the-art methods.
The paper is organized as follows. After an overview of

