Generating Distributional Adversarial Examples to Evade Statistical Detectors

Yigitcan Kaya 1 † Muhammad Bilal Zafar 2 Sergul Aydore 2 Nathalie Rauschmayr 2 Krishnaram Kenthapadi 3 †

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be
highly vulnerable to adversarial examples (AEs)
that include malicious perturbations. Assumptions
about the statistical differences between natural
and adversarial inputs are commonplace in many
detection techniques. As a best practice, AE detectors are evaluated against adaptive attackers
who actively perturb their inputs to avoid detection. Due to the difficulties in designing adaptive
attacks, however, recent work suggests that most
detectors have incomplete evaluation. We aim to
fill this gap by designing a generic adaptive attack
against detectors: the statistical indistinguishability attack (SIA). SIA optimizes a novel objective to craft adversarial examples (AEs) that follow the same distribution as the natural inputs
with respect to DNN representations. Our objective targets all DNN layers simultaneously as we
show that AEs being indistinguishable at one layer
might fail to be so at other layers. SIA is formulated around evading distributional detectors that
inspect a set of AEs as a whole and is also effective against four individual AE detectors, two
dataset shift detectors, and an out-of-distribution
sample detector, curated from published works.
This suggests that SIA can be a reliable tool for
evaluating the security of a range of detectors.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have enabled breakthroughs
in many challenging machine learning (ML) problems, such
as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). However, it
is well-known that DNN classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial examples (AEs) that contain malicious perturbations
that subvert the predictions. Two defensive approaches have
emerged against AEs: eliminating them by making DNNs
†

Work done while at Amazon Web Services. 1 University of
Maryland College Park 2 Amazon Web Services 3 Fiddler AI. Correspondence to: Yigitcan Kaya <cankaya@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

robust (Madry et al., 2018); or detecting them before they
harm the rest of the system (Metzen et al., 2017; Feinman
et al., 2017). Detection techniques have gained traction as
both theory (Shafahi et al., 2018) and practice (Rice et al.,
2020) suggest that achieving robustness is challenging.
Prior work has shown that AE detectors can often be circumvented by adaptive adversaries (Carlini & Wagner, 2017).
These attackers have full knowledge of the detector and take
active steps to craft AEs that avoid detection. This arms
race has been influential in establishing adaptive attacks
as an evaluation standard for detectors (Roth et al., 2019;
Raghuram et al., 2021). However, research shows that many
detectors, despite following this standard, can still be defeated by more motivated adversaries (Tramer et al., 2020).
Such adversaries identify and target important defensive assumptions instead of attacking many components a typical
defense combines (Tramer et al., 2020). This methodology,
by tailoring attacks to specific detectors, has been effective
in exposing the vulnerabilities.
We aim to alleviate this arms race and the evaluation problems that stem from non-standardized attacks. We first observe that a common assumption behind many detectors
is that adversarial and natural inputs are statistically different with respect to the hidden layer representations of
DNNs (Feinman et al., 2017; Zheng & Hong, 2018). This
assumption has given rise to two detection themes: (i) inspecting multiple samples as a distribution and comparing it
with the distribution of natural samples (Grosse et al., 2017;
Gao et al., 2021); and (ii) combining the statistics derived
from multiple DNN layers (Raghuram et al., 2021).
Building on these observations, we propose a generic adaptive attack against AE detectors: the statistical indistinguishability attack (SIA). SIA targets the common assumption by crafting AEs that follow the natural data distribution
with respect to DNN representations. Against (i), SIA crafts
multiple AEs jointly and minimizes their statistical distance
to the distribution of natural samples. Against (ii), SIA targets all DNN layers at once as we show that targeting the
representations from a single layer fails to evade a detector
that operates on another layer. This makes SIA effective
against layerwise distributional detectors, which combine
the two themes; whereas prior standard and adaptive attacks
are easily detected. Unless the detectors have access to a

