Utility Theory for Sequential Decision Making

Mehran Shakerinava 1 2 Siamak Ravanbakhsh 1 2

Abstract
The von Neumann-Morgenstern (VNM) utility
theorem shows that under certain axioms of rationality, decision-making is reduced to maximizing
the expectation of some utility function. We extend these axioms to increasingly structured sequential decision making settings and identify the
structure of the corresponding utility functions. In
particular, we show that memoryless preferences
lead to a utility in the form of a per transition reward and multiplicative factor on the future return.
This result motivates a generalization of Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs) with this structure on
the agent’s returns, which we call Affine-Reward
MDPs. A stronger constraint on preferences is
needed to recover the commonly used cumulative
sum of scalar rewards in MDPs. A yet stronger
constraint simplifies the utility function for goalseeking agents in the form of a difference in some
function of states that we call potential functions.
Our necessary and sufficient conditions demystify
the reward hypothesis that underlies the design
of rational agents in reinforcement learning by
adding an axiom to the VNM rationality axioms
and motivates new directions for AI research involving sequential decision making.

1. Introduction
Utility theory is a proposal for rational behavior when faced
with risky outcomes. Maximization of expected utility
was originally hypothesized by Bernoulli (Bernoulli, 1738;
1954) as a solution to the St. Petersburg paradox, in which
diminishing marginal utility explains human risk aversion
in a game of chance. This hypothesis was later grounded by
von Neumann and Morgenstern (VNM), such that as long as
one’s preferences satisfied certain rationality axioms, one’s
behavior could be explained as maximization of some util1

School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute. Correspondence to: Mehran
Shakerinava <mehran.shakerinava@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Sequential Decision Making
Memoryless (AR-MDP)
Additive (MDP)
Path-Oblivious

Figure 1. We axiomatize preference relations in sequential decision making and identify the corresponding structure for the utility
function. The memorylessness, additivity, and path-obliviousness
axioms impose successively stronger constraints on preferences
over trajectories in sequential decision making. As a result, the corresponding utility functions become more structured. In particular,
the additivity axiom leads to the additive reward structure of the
MDP. Memoryless preferences lead to a more general AR-MDP,
while path-oblivious preferences that only consider start and end
states lead to a utility that is expressed as change in a potential
function of states.

ity function in expectation (von Neumann & Morgenstern,
1947). This paper aims to extend utility theory to sequential
decision making. Our primary motivation is to ground what
is known as the reward hypothesis in reinforcement learning
(RL): “That all of what we mean by goals and purposes can
be well thought of as maximization of the expected value
of the cumulative sum of a received scalar signal (called
reward).” (Sutton & Barto, 2018). While the connection
between the reward in RL and the concept of utility in game
theory has not gone unnoticed (e.g., Jaquette (1976)), the
adequacy of cumulative sum of scalar rewards still remains
a hypothesis (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
We identify necessary and sufficient conditions in sequential
decision making that guarantee the existence of scalar reward signals, whose cumulative sum can represent any set of
preferences over trajectories. This condition is presented as
a single additional axiom to those of VNM, which itself justifies maximization of expected utility. Moreover, we place
this particular structure of the utility function, i.e., cumulative sum of scalar rewards, among several other possibilities
that are based on more or less stringent assumptions. In particular, we show that applying a memorylessness property
to preference relations leads to a more general setup than

