Learning fair representation with a parametric integral probability metric

Dongha Kim 1 2 Kunwoong Kim 3 Insung Kong 3 Ilsang Ohn 4 Yongdai Kim 3

Abstract
As they have a vital effect on social decisionmaking, AI algorithms should be not only accurate but also fair. Among various algorithms for
fairness AI, learning fair representation (LFR),
whose goal is to find a fair representation with
respect to sensitive variables such as gender and
race, has received much attention. For LFR, the
adversarial training scheme is popularly employed
as is done in the generative adversarial network
type algorithms. The choice of a discriminator,
however, is done heuristically without justification. In this paper, we propose a new adversarial training scheme for LFR, where the integral
probability metric (IPM) with a specific parametric family of discriminators is used. The most
notable result of the proposed LFR algorithm is
its theoretical guarantee about the fairness of the
final prediction model, which has not been considered yet. That is, we derive theoretical relations
between the fairness of representation and the fairness of the prediction model built on the top of
the representation (i.e., using the representation
as the input). Moreover, by numerical experiments, we show that our proposed LFR algorithm
is computationally lighter and more stable, and
the final prediction model is competitive or superior to other LFR algorithms using more complex
discriminators.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) has accomplished tremendous
success in various real-world domains. The key of success
of AI is “learning from data”. However, in many cases,
data include historical bias against certain socially sensitive
1

Department of Statistics, Sungshin Women’s University
Data Science Center, Sungshin Women’s University 3 Department
of Statistics, Seoul National University 4 Department of Statistics, Inha University. Correspondence to: Yongdai Kim <ydkim0903@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

groups such as gender, race, religion, etc (Feldman et al.,
2015; Angwin et al., 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2018; Mehrabi
et al., 2019), and trained AI models from such biased data
could also impose bias or unfairness against sensitive groups.
As AI has a wide range of influences on human social life,
issues of transparency and ethics of AI are emerging. Therefore, designing an AI algorithm which is accurate and fair
simultaneously has become a crucial research topic (Calders
et al., 2009; Feldman et al., 2015; Barocas & Selbst, 2016;
Hardt et al., 2016; Zafar et al., 2017; Donini et al., 2018;
Agarwal et al., 2018; Quadrianto et al., 2019b).
Among various researches related to fair AI, learning fair
representation (LFR) has received much attention recently
(Zemel et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2018; Quadrianto et al., 2019a;
Ruoss et al., 2020; Gitiaux & Rangwala, 2021; Zeng et al.,
2021). Fair representation typically means a feature vector
obtained by transforming the data such that the distributions
of the feature vector for each sensitive group are similar.
Once the fair representation is learned, any prediction models constructed on the top of the fair representation (i.e.
using the representation as an input vector) are expected to
be fair (Zemel et al., 2013; Madras et al., 2018).
A popular approach for LFR is to use the adversarial training scheme (Edwards & Storkey, 2016; Madras et al., 2018).
As is done in the generative adversarial network (GAN,
Goodfellow et al. (2014)), the algorithm seeks a representation that fools the discriminator the best that tries to predict
which sensitive group a given representation belongs. Different algorithms to learn the discriminator result in different
algorithms for LFR.
Despite their considerable success, there are still theoretical and practical limitations in the existing learning algorithms for fair representation based on the adversarial
training scheme. First of all, it is not clear how the level of
fairness of the representation affects the level of fairness of
the final prediction model (built on the top of the representation). This problem is important since the final goal of LFR
is to construct fair prediction models.
In this paper, we consider the adversarial training scheme
based on the integral probability metric (IPM). The IPM,
which includes the Wasserstein distance (Kantorovich &
Rubinstein, 1958; Villani, 2008) as a special case, has been
widely used for learning generative models (e.g. Wasserstein

