ASAP.SGD: Instance-based Adaptiveness to Staleness in Asynchronous SGD

Karl Bäckström 1 Marina Papatriantafilou 1 Philippas Tsigas 1

Abstract
Concurrent algorithmic implementations of
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) give rise to
critical questions for compute-intensive Machine
Learning (ML). Asynchrony implies speedup
in some contexts, and challenges in others,
as stale updates may lead to slower, or nonconverging executions. While previous works
showed asynchrony-adaptiveness can improve stability and speedup by reducing the step size for
stale updates according to static rules, there is no
one-size-fits-all adaptation rule, since the optimal
strategy depends on several factors. We introduce
(i) ASAP.SGD, an analytical framework capturing necessary and desired properties of stalenessadaptive step size functions and (ii) TAIL-τ , a
method for utilizing key properties of the execution instance, generating a tailored strategy
that not only dampens the impact of stale updates, but also leverages fresh ones. We recover convergence bounds for adaptiveness functions satisfying the ASAP.SGD conditions, for general, convex and non-convex problems, and establish novel bounds for ones satisfying the PolyakLojasiewicz property. We evaluate TAIL-τ with
representative AsyncSGD concurrent algorithms,
for Deep Learning problems, showing TAIL-τ is a
vital complement to AsyncSGD, with (i) persistent
speedup in wall-clock convergence time in the parallelism spectrum, (ii) considerably lower risk of
non-convergence, as well as (iii) precision levels
for which original SGD implementations fail.

1. Introduction
The ascending interest in concurrent SGD is due to the
explosion of data volumes, requiring scalable systems to
process them in ML and Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers
University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. Correspondence
to: Karl Bäckström <bakarl@chalmers.se>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

applications. However, parallelization of the inherently
sequential SGD process is non-trivial since each iteration
requires the computation of the previous one. Besides
understanding the dynamics of such executions, achieving
resource-efficiency is a known significant target, since it can
imply significant improvements in energy efficiency.
Traditional synchronous SGD (SyncSGD) conforms to the
sequential SGD semantics by employing iteration-level parallelism, and lock-step-style synchronization. In practice,
SyncSGD accelerates updates by data-parallel concurrent
gradient computation, e.g. by GPU-acceleration, or aggregating gradient contributions in distributed settings. SyncSGD improves computational efficiency up to a point, but
suffers direct limitations, as each iteration is at least as slow
as the slowest contributing worker. However, from an optimization standpoint SyncSGD is analogous to sequential
SGD, with well-understood convergence properties.
In contrast, asynchronous concurrent SGD (AsyncSGD) introduces a higher-level parallelism by relaxing the sequential
SGD semantics, allowing asynchronous reads/updates on
the shared ML model θ. Consequently, AsyncSGD provides
computational benefits, however at the price of asynchronyinduced noise due to the staleness τ that arises when updates
are not applied to the same states based on which they were
computed, but instead on ones that have been updated τ
times in-between. It was within convex optimization, targeting primarily regression problems (Zinkevich et al., 2009;
2010), where it was shown that the asynchrony-induced
noise had small impact on the quality of the updates, and
that the computational benefits of reduced synchronization
provided speedup for certain problems. A relevant example
is H OGWILD ! which, with only component-wise atomic access to θ (i.e. relaxed consistency by not ensuring atomicity
for the complete vector) showed almost-linear speedup for
strongly convex and sparse problems (Recht et al., 2011; Alistarh et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2018). Asymptotic bounds
for AsyncSGD were similarly established under strong
convexity and smoothness assumptions, and for non-convex
problems, such as matrix completion (De Sa et al., 2015).
However, these analytical confinements make the concluding outcomes non-applicable for a wider class of applications, including Deep Learning (DL), characterized by inherent non-convexity. This is confirmed in recent works (Wei
et al., 2019; Bäckström et al., 2019; Lopez et al., 2020; Bäck-

