A Neural Tangent Kernel Perspective of GANs

Jean-Yves Franceschi * 1 2 Emmanuel de Bézenac * 3 2 Ibrahim Ayed * 2 4 Mickaël Chen 5 Sylvain Lamprier 2
Patrick Gallinari 2 1

Abstract
We propose a novel theoretical framework of analysis for Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs).
We reveal a fundamental flaw of previous analyses
which, by incorrectly modeling GANs’ training
scheme, are subject to ill-defined discriminator
gradients. We overcome this issue which impedes
a principled study of GAN training, solving it
within our framework by taking into account the
discriminator’s architecture. To this end, we leverage the theory of infinite-width neural networks
for the discriminator via its Neural Tangent Kernel. We characterize the trained discriminator
for a wide range of losses and establish general
differentiability properties of the network. From
this, we derive new insights about the convergence of the generated distribution, advancing our
understanding of GANs’ training dynamics. We
empirically corroborate these results via an analysis toolkit based on our framework, unveiling
intuitions that are consistent with GAN practice.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs; Goodfellow et al.,
2014) have become a canonical approach to generative modeling as they produce realistic samples for numerous data
types, with a plethora of variants (Wang et al., 2021). These
models are notoriously difficult to train and require extensive hyperparameter tuning (Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2021). To alleviate these shortcomings,
much effort has been put into better understanding their
training process, resulting in a vast literature of theoretical
*

Equal contribution, listed in a randomly chosen order. 1 Criteo
AI Lab, Paris, France 2 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR, F-75005
Paris, France 3 Seminar for Applied Mathematics, D-MATH, ETH
Zürich, Rämistrasse 101, Zürich-8092, Switzerland 4 ThereSIS Lab,
Thales, Palaiseau, France 5 Valeo.ai, Paris, France. Correspondence
to: Jean-Yves Franceschi <jycja.franceschi@criteo.com>, Emmanuel de Bézenac <emmanuel.debezenac@sam.math.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

analyses. Many study the various GAN models, found to
optimize different losses like the Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and the earth mover’s
distance W1 (Arjovsky et al., 2017), to conclude about their
comparative advantages. Yet, empirical evaluations (Lucic
et al., 2018; Kurach et al., 2019) showed that they can yield
approximately the same performance. This indicates that
such theoretical works with an exclusive focus on the GAN
formulation might not properly model practical settings.
Importantly, GANs are trained in practice with alternating
gradient descent-ascent of the generator and discriminator,
which the vast majority of analyses do not model. Yet, this
makes GAN training deviate from its formulation in prior
works as a min-max problem: the networks are fixed w.r.t. to
each other at each step in the former, while they depend on
each other in the latter. Therefore, ignoring this ubiquitous
procedure prevents those works from adequately explaining GANs’ empirical behavior, as it leads to two crucial
problems. Firstly, it alters the true implicitly optimized loss,
which consequently differs from the widely adopted JS and
W1 . Secondly, it compels accurate frameworks to take into
account the discriminator parameterization as a neural network with inductive biases influencing the generator’s loss
landscape, which most previous studies do not, or otherwise
be subject to ill-defined discriminator gradients.
To solve these issues, we introduce the first framework of
analysis for GANs modeling a wide range of discriminator
architectures and GAN formulations, while encompassing
alternating optimization. To this end, we leverage advances
in deep learning theory driven by Neural Tangent Kernels
(NTKs; Jacot et al., 2018) to model discriminator training.
We develop theoretical results showing the relevance of our
approach: we establish in our framework the differentiability
of the discriminator, hence having well-defined gradients,
by proving novel regularity results on its NTK.
This more accurate formalization enables us to derive new
knowledge about the generator. We formulate the dynamics
of the generated distribution via the generator’s NTK and
link it to gradient flows on probability spaces, thereby helping us to discover its implicitly optimized loss. We deduce
in particular that, for GANs under the Integral Probability
Metric (IPM), the generated distribution minimizes its Max-

