TACT i S : Transformer-Attentional Copulas for Time Series

Alexandre Drouin * 1 Étienne Marcotte * 1 Nicolas Chapados * 1

Abstract
The estimation of time-varying quantities is a
fundamental component of decision making in
fields such as healthcare and finance. However, the
practical utility of such estimates is limited by how
accurately they quantify predictive uncertainty. In
this work, we address the problem of estimating the
joint predictive distribution of high-dimensional
multivariate time series. We propose a versatile
method, based on the transformer architecture,
that estimates joint distributions using an attentionbased decoder that provably learns to mimic
the properties of non-parametric copulas. The
resulting model has several desirable properties:
it can scale to hundreds of time series, supports
both forecasting and interpolation, can handle
unaligned and non-uniformly sampled data, and
can seamlessly adapt to missing data during training. We demonstrate these properties empirically
and show that our model produces state-of-the-art
predictions on multiple real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
In numerous time series forecasting contexts, data presents
itself in a raw form that rarely matches the standard
assumptions of classical forecasting methods. For instance,
in healthcare settings and economic forecasting, groups of
related time series can have different sampling frequencies,
be sampled irregularly, and exhibit missing values (Shukla &
Marlin, 2021b; Sun et al., 2020). Covariates that are predictive of future behavior may not be available for all historical
data, or may be available in a different form, e.g., due to
changes in measurement methodology. Moreover, optimal
decision-making in downstream tasks generally requires the
full joint predictive distribution over arbitrary future time
horizons (Peterson, 2017), not just marginal quantiles thereof
at a fixed horizon. We seek to develop general forecasting
*
Equal contribution 1 ServiceNow Research. Correspondence
to: All authors <firstname.lastname@servicenow.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright
2022 by the author(s).

methods that are both suitable for a wide range of downstream
tasks and that can handle all stylized facts about real-world
time series—as they are, not as they ought to be—namely:
• Joint characterization of a multivariate stochastic process, forecasting trajectories at arbitrary time horizons;
• Presence of non-stochastic covariates, either static or
time-varying, used as conditioning variables;
• Variables within the process that are measured at
different sampling frequencies or irregularly sampled;
• Missing values for arbitrary time points and variables;
• Variables with different domains—R, R+ , N, N+ , Z—
with skewed and fat-tailed marginal behavior.
Classical times series models, such as ARIMA (Box et al.,
2015) and exponential smoothing methods (Hyndman et al.,
2008), are very restricted in their handling of the above
stylized facts. Although extensions have been proposed
that deal with individual issues, they cannot easily deal
with all and require considerable domain knowledge to be
effective. Machine learning models have recently gained
in popularity (Benidis et al., 2020). Nevertheless, methods
introduced in recent years all suffer from limitations when
dealing with one or more of the above listed stylized facts,
or neglect in their handling of the full predictive distribution.
Separately, multivariate forecasting models based on copulas
have been popular in econometrics for more than a decade
(Patton, 2012; Rémillard et al., 2012; Krupskii & Joe, 2020;
Mayer & Wied, 2021). These models enable the separate
characterization of the joint behavior of a group of random
variables from their marginal behavior. This has been
found to be especially valuable in areas such as finance and
insurance where marginals are known to exhibit particular
patterns of skewness and kurtosis. Recently in machine
learning, low-rank Gaussian copula processes with LSTMs
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) have been proposed for
high-dimensional forecasting (Salinas et al., 2019).
Building on the recent successes of transformers as
general-purpose sequence models (Vaswani et al., 2017) and
their success in time series forecasting (Rasul et al., 2021b;
Tashiro et al., 2021; Tang & Matteson, 2021), we propose a
transformer architecture that can tackle all the above stylized
facts about real-world time series. Notably, we show how
to represent an implicit copula when sampling from the
transformer decoder model. Moreover, by representing each

