Provably Efficient Offline Reinforcement Learning for
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes

Hongyi Guo 1 Qi Cai 1 Yufeng Zhang 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 1

Abstract
We study offline reinforcement learning (RL) for
partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) with possibly infinite state and observation spaces. Under the undercompleteness
assumption, the transition kernel can be estimated
via solving a series of confounded regression problems. To solve the confounding problem, we select a proper instrumental variable (IV) and solves
the IV regression problem to construct confidence
regions for the model parameters. We get the
final policy via pessimistic planning within the
confidence regions. We prove that the proposed
algorithm attains an ϵ-optimal policy using an
2
e
offline dataset containing O(1/ϵ
) episodes, provided that the behavior policy has good coverage
over the optimal trajectory. To our best knowledge, our algorithm is the first provably sample
efficient offline algorithm for POMDPs that is not
tabular.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has
shown its great potential to achieve human-level intelligence
(Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; 2017; Vinyals et al.,
2019; Ye et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2018; Pathak et al., 2019).
In most literature, the environment is modeled as a Markov
decision process (MDP) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), where the
agent can access a state that contains all the information
of the whole system for action selection. A bunch of algorithms are proposed and proved theoretically to have strong
performance guarantees on MDPs, in terms of regret or sample complexity (Fan et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019a; Wang et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2020b; Cai et al., 2020).
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial Engineering and
Management Sciences, Northwestern University 2 Department of
Statistics and Data Science, Yale University. Correspondence to:
Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

However, the assumption of full observability of the state is
often violated in practice, which restricts the application of
RL to scenarios with well-defined MDPs like video games
(Mnih et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020). In
most cases, the agent can only observe a partial state or a
noisy version of the true state. To model such situations,
the partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP)
(Sondik, 1971; Spaan, 2012) is introduced.
In order to compensate the information loss in the partial
observations, action selections in POMDPs should depend
on the whole history instead of the observation it alone.
Such a dependency leads to huge computing burden since
processing a series of observations and actions in a POMDP
needs more careful design and consumes much more time
than processing one state in an MDP, especially when the
episode is long. Also, since the model parameters of a
POMDP can not be estimated directly from the data due to
the latency of the states, we can either infer the latent state
or estimate the model parameters from history. Both leads
to great challenges compared with learning in an MDP.
Despite those challenges, many algorithms have been proposed to tackle the long dependency and are proved to have
a sound sample complexity or regret bound Azizzadenesheli
et al. (2016); Guo et al. (2016); Kwon et al. (2021); Jin
et al. (2020a); Xiong et al. (2021). Those algorithms focus on online learning settings, switching between sample
collection and strategy improvement during training. Online algorithms can acquire new data from interacting with
the environment, and the distribution of those data can be
altered towards a desirable direction by modulating the strategy of interaction. Thus, online algorithms are often sample
efficient. However, in scenarios like healthcare (Yu et al.,
2021; Tang & Wiens, 2021; Sonabend-W et al., 2020) and
autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2021b),
it’s impractical to collect new data because of the inconvenience or even potential danger caused by a bad interaction
strategy. Thus, in those settings, offline learning is a more
desirable way. Though sample efficient RL algorithms have
been proposed for offline setting (Jin et al., 2021; Zanette
et al., 2021; Kidambi et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020), there is
no theoretical guarantees of any offline RL algorithm on a
POMDP. In this work, we combine offline reinforcement

