Sharpened Quasi-Newton Methods: Faster Superlinear Rate
and Larger Local Convergence Neighborhood

Qiujiang Jin 1 Alec Koppel 2 Ketan Rajawat 3 Aryan Mokhtari 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
In this paper, we focus on the use of quasi-Newton methods
to solve the following unconstrained problem

Non-asymptotic analysis of quasi-Newton methods have gained traction recently. In particular,
several works have established
√ a non-asymptotic
superlinear rate of O((1/ t)t ) for the (classic)
BFGS method by exploiting the fact that its error
of Newton direction approximation approaches
zero. Moreover, a greedy variant of BFGS was
recently proposed which accelerates its convergence by directly approximating the Hessian, instead of the Newton direction, and achieves a fast
local quadratic convergence rate. Alas, the local
quadratic convergence of Greedy-BFGS requires
way more updates compared to the number of iterations that BFGS requires for a local superlinear
rate. This is due to the fact that in Greedy-BFGS
the Hessian is directly approximated and the Newton direction approximation may not be as accurate as the one for BFGS. In this paper, we close
this gap and present a novel BFGS method that
has the best of both worlds in that it leverages the
approximation ideas of both BFGS and GreedyBFGS to properly approximate the Newton direction and the Hessian matrix simultaneously.
Our theoretical results show that our method outperforms both BFGS and Greedy-BFGS in terms
of convergence rate, while it reaches its quadratic
convergence rate with fewer steps compared to
Greedy-BFGS. Numerical experiments on various
datasets also confirm our theoretical findings.

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 2 Amazon, Bellevue,
WA, USA. 3 Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute
of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, UP, INDIA. Correspondence to:
Qiujiang Jin <qiujiang@austin.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is strongly convex and its gradient is
Lipschitz continuous; see details in Section 3.2. We denote
the unique optimal solution of (1) by x∗ .
First-order algorithms, i.e., gradient-based methods, are
widely used for solving (1), and it is well-known that their
iterates converge to x∗ at a linear rate (i.e., the error decays exponentially fast). A major advantage of first-order
methods is their low computational cost of O(d), where d is
the problem dimension. However, the convergence rate of
these methods depends on the problem curvature and hence
they could be slow in ill-conditioned problems. Secondorder methods that leverage the objective function Hessian
to improve their curvature estimation often arise as a natural
alternative to accelerate convergence in ill-posed problems,
and they achieve fast local convergence rates (Bennett, 1916;
Ortega & Rheinboldt, 1970; Conn et al., 2000; Nesterov &
Polyak, 2006). Specifically, Newton’s method achieves a
local quadratic convergence rate when applied to solve (1)
with the additional assumption that the Hessian is Lipschitz
(Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004, Chapter 9). A major obstacle
in the implementation of Newton’s method though is its
requirement to solve a linear system at each iteration, which
makes its computational cost O(d3 ).
Quasi-Newton (QN) methods serve as a middle ground between first- and second-order methods, as they improve
the linear rate of first-order methods and converge superlineraly, and simultaneously their computation cost is O(d2 )
which improves the O(d3 ) cost of Newton-type methods.
Their main idea is to construct a positive definite matrix
that approximates the Hessian required in Newton’s method.
Since the update of Hessian approximation matrix in QN
methods only requires a set of matrix-vector multiplications,
their computational cost per iteration is O(d2 ). There are
several types of QN methods that differ in their Hessian approximation updates, including Symmetric Rank-One (SR1)
method (Conn et al., 1991), the Broyden method (Broy-

