Towards Understanding Sharpness-Aware Minimization

Maksym Andriushchenko 1 Nicolas Flammarion 1

Abstract
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) is a recent
training method that relies on worst-case weight
perturbations which significantly improves generalization in various settings. We argue that the existing justifications for the success of SAM which
are based on a PAC-Bayes generalization bound
and the idea of convergence to flat minima are incomplete. Moreover, there are no explanations for
the success of using m-sharpness in SAM which
has been shown as essential for generalization. To
better understand this aspect of SAM, we theoretically analyze its implicit bias for diagonal linear
networks. We prove that SAM always chooses a
solution that enjoys better generalization properties than standard gradient descent for a certain
class of problems, and this effect is amplified by
using m-sharpness. We further study the properties of the implicit bias on non-linear networks
empirically, where we show that fine-tuning a
standard model with SAM can lead to significant
generalization improvements. Finally, we provide convergence results of SAM for non-convex
objectives when used with stochastic gradients.
We illustrate these results empirically for deep
networks and discuss their relation to the generalization behavior of SAM. The code of our experiments is available at https://github.com/
tml-epfl/understanding-sam.

1. Introduction
Understanding generalization of overparametrized deep neural networks is a central topic of machine learning. Training
objective has many global optima where the training data
are perfectly fitted (Zhang et al., 2017), but different global
optima lead to dramatically different generalization performance (Liu et al., 2019). However, it has been observed
1
EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Maksym Andriushchenko <maksym.andriushchenko@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) tends to converge
to well-generalizing solutions, even without any explicit
regularization methods (Zhang et al., 2017). This suggests
that the leading role is played by the implicit bias of the optimization algorithms used (Neyshabur et al., 2015): when the
training objective is minimized using a particular algorithm
and initialization method, it converges to a specific solution
with favorable generalization properties. However, even
though SGD has a very beneficial implicit bias, significant
overfitting can still occur, particularly in the presence of
label noise (Nakkiran et al., 2020) and adversarial perturbations (Rice et al., 2020).
Recently it has been observed that the sharpness of the training loss, i.e., how quickly it changes in some neighborhood
around the parameters of the model, correlates well with the
generalization error (Keskar et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2019),
and generalization bounds related to the sharpness have
been derived (Dziugaite & Roy, 2018). The idea of minimizing the sharpness to improve generalization has motivated
recent works of Foret et al. (2021), Zheng et al. (2021),
and Wu et al. (2020) which propose to use worst-case perturbations of the weights on every iteration of training in
order to improve generalization. We refer to this method
as Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) and focus mainly
on the version proposed in Foret et al. (2021) that performs
only one step of gradient ascent to approximately solve the
weight perturbation problem before updating the weights.
Despite the fact that SAM significantly improves generalization in various settings, the existing justifications based
on the generalization bounds provided by Foret et al. (2021)
and Wu et al. (2020) do not seem conclusive. The main reason is that their generalization bounds do not distinguish the
robustness to worst-case weight perturbation from averagecase robustness to Gaussian noise. However the latter does
not sufficiently improve generalization as both Foret et al.
(2021) and Wu et al. (2020) report. Furthermore, their analysis does not distinguish whether the worst-case weight
perturbation is computed based on some or on all training
examples. As we will discuss, this feature has a crucial
impact on generalization.
In our paper, we aim to further investigate the reasons for
SAM’s success and make the following contributions:
• We discuss why the current understanding of the suc-

