Unsupervised Flow-Aligned
Sequence-to-Sequence Learning for Video Restoration

Jing Lin * 1 Xiaowan Hu * 1 Yuanhao Cai 1 Haoqian Wang† 1
Youliang Yan 2 Xueyi Zou† 2 Yulun Zhang 3 Luc Van Gool 3

Abstract
How to properly model the inter-frame relation
within the video sequence is an important but
unsolved challenge for video restoration (VR).
In this work, we propose an unsupervised flowaligned sequence-to-sequence model (S2SVR)
to address this problem. On the one hand, the
sequence-to-sequence model, which has proven
capable of sequence modeling in the field of natural language processing, is explored for the first
time in VR. Optimized serialization modeling
shows potential in capturing long-range dependencies among frames. On the other hand, we
equip the sequence-to-sequence model with an
unsupervised optical flow estimator to maximize
its potential. The flow estimator is trained with
our proposed unsupervised distillation loss, which
can alleviate the data discrepancy and inaccurate
degraded optical flow issues of previous flowbased methods. With reliable optical flow, we can
establish accurate correspondence among multiple frames, narrowing the domain difference between 1D language and 2D misaligned frames
and improving the potential of the sequence-tosequence model. S2SVR shows superior performance in multiple VR tasks, including video deblurring, video super-resolution, and compressed
video quality enhancement. https://github.
com/linjing7/VR-Baseline

1. Introduction
Video restoration (VR) aims to reconstruct high-quality
(HQ) video from its degraded low-quality (LQ) counterpart,
including video deblurring (Xiang et al., 2020), video super*
Equal contribution 1 Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Xueyi Zou <zouxueyi@huawei.com>, Haoqian
Wang <wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

LQ Flow

HQ Flow

LQ Flow

HQ Flow

LQ-Aligned

HQ-Aligned

LQ-Aligned

HQ-Aligned

Figure 1. Optical flow estimated from LQ and HQ videos respectively (top), and visual comparison of the aligned frames (bottom).

resolution (SR) (Sajjadi et al., 2018; Chan et al., 2021), and
compressed video enhancement (Guan et al., 2019).
Task-driven networks often have complex structures that
are elaborately designed for a specific task. These methods
may be inapplicable when transferred to a new scenario
or a different video restoration task (Yang et al., 2018b;
Deng et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2021). Therefore, it is of great
significance to explore a unified and versatile framework
that can be used for multiple video restoration tasks.
Early works simply extend single image restoration (Dai
et al., 2015; Shahar et al., 2011; Liao et al., 2015; Cai et al.,
2021) to video restoration. These image-based methods ignore inter-frame correlation, leading to limited performance.
Some CNN-based methods (Wang et al., 2019; Pan et al.,
2020; Deng et al., 2020) utilize information from the frames
within a short temporal window. The ignorance of distant
frames significantly limits the performance of these methods. Some researchers use the recurrent neural network
(RNN) (Isobe et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019; Zhong et al.,
2020; Chan et al., 2021) to propagate the hidden state in the
time domain to expand the temporal receptive field. However, as analyzed in (Jozefowicz et al., 2015), RNN suffers
from both exploding and vanishing gradients. As a result,
RNN is difficult to learn the long-term dependencies and
can not be stacked into very deep models, limiting the representation capacity of restoration network. The transformerbased model (Cao et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022a) can process
a video sequence in parallel with self-attention mechanism.
Nonetheless, the model complexity is quadratic to the number of tokens. For video restoration with an immense number of tokens, modeling long-range dependencies means
huge computational costs and memory occupation. Thus,

