Delay-adaptive Step-sizes for Asynchronous Learning

Xuyang Wu 1 Sindri Magnússon 2 Hamid Reza Feyzmahdavian 3 Mikael Johansson 1

Abstract

need to distribute the optimization process over multiple
compute nodes. In a distributed environment, synchronous
algorithms such as gradient descent or block coordinate
descent, are often inefficient. Since they need to wait for
the slowest worker node to complete its task, the system
tends to spend a significant time idle and becomes sensitive
to single node failures. This motivates the development of
asynchronous algorithms which allow all nodes to run at
their maximal capacity without synchronization overhead.

In scalable machine learning systems, model training is often parallelized over multiple nodes that
run without tight synchronization. Most analysis
results for the related asynchronous algorithms
use an upper bound on the information delays
in the system to determine learning rates. Not
only are such bounds hard to obtain in advance,
but they also result in unnecessarily slow convergence. In this paper, we show that it is possible
to use learning rates that depend on the actual
time-varying delays in the system. We develop
general convergence results for delay-adaptive
asynchronous iterations and specialize these to
proximal incremental gradient descent and blockcoordinate descent algorithms. For each of these
methods, we demonstrate how delays can be measured on-line, present delay-adaptive step-size
policies, and illustrate their theoretical and practical advantages over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
This paper considers step-sizes that adapt to the true delays in asynchronous algorithms for solving optimization
problems in the form
min P (x) = f (x) + R(x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a smooth but possibly non-convex loss
function and R : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} is a convex nonsmooth
function. Here, R is typically a regularizer, promoting desired solution properties such as sparsity, or the indicator
function of a closed convex set (the constraint set for x).
When either the data dimension (the number of samples
defining f ) or the variable dimension d is large, we may
1

Division of Decision and Control Systems, EECS, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2 Department of Computer and System Science, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden 3 ABB Corporate Research, Västerås, Sweden. Correspondence to: Xuyang Wu <xuyangw@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In the past decade, numerous asynchronous algorithms have
been proposed to solve large-scale problems on the form (1).
Notable examples include ARock (Peng et al., 2016), PIAG
(Aytekin et al., 2016; Vanli et al., 2018), Async-BCD (Liu
et al., 2014), AsyFLEXA (Cannelli et al., 2016), DAve-RPG
(Mishchenko et al., 2018), and the widely studied asynchronous SGD (Dean et al., 2012; Recht et al., 2011; Sra
et al., 2016), to mention a few. Algorithms that use fixed
step-sizes often assume bounded asynchrony and require
an upper bound of the worst-case information delay to determine the step-size. However, such an upper bound is
usually difficult to obtain in advance, and is a crude model
for actual system delays. Indeed, actual latencies may be
significantly smaller than the worst case for most nodes, and
for most of the time. This makes the algorithm hard to tune
and inefficient to run, since a large worst-case delay leads
to a small step-size and a slow iterate convergence.
1.1. Algorithms and related work
In this paper, we develop general principles and convergence
results for asynchronous optimization algorithms that adjust
the learning rate on-line to the actual information delays.
We then present concrete delay-tracking algorithms and
adaptive step-size policies for two specific asynchronous
optimization algorithms, PIAG and Async-BCD. These algorithms address two distinct variations of distributed model
training: distribution of data over samples (PIAG) and distribution of variable updates across features (Async-BCD).
To put our work in context, we review the related literature
below.
PIAG: PIAG
Pn solves problem (1) with aggregated loss
f (x) = n1 i=1 f (i) (x). Here, each f (i) could represent
the training loss on sample i, on mini-batch i or on the
complete data set held by some worker node. The PIAG

