Active Multi-Task Representation Learning

Yifang Chen 1 Simon S. Du 1 Kevin Jamieson 1

Abstract
To leverage the power of big data from source
tasks and overcome the scarcity of the target task
samples, representation learning based on multitask pretraining has become a standard approach
in many applications. However, up until now,
choosing which source tasks to include in the
multi-task learning has been more art than science.
In this paper, we give the first formal study on resource task sampling by leveraging the techniques
from active learning. We propose an algorithm
that iteratively estimates the relevance of each
source task to the target task and samples from
each source task based on the estimated relevance.
Theoretically, we show that for the linear representation class, to achieve the same error rate, our
algorithm can save up to a number of source tasks
factor in the source task sample complexity, compared with the naive uniform sampling from all
source tasks. We also provide experiments on
real-world computer vision datasets to illustrate
the effectiveness of our proposed method on both
linear and convolutional neural network representation classes. We believe our paper serves as
an important initial step to bring techniques from
active learning to representation learning.

1. Introduction
Much of the success of deep learning is due to its ability
to efficiently learn a map from high-dimensional, highlystructured input like natural images into a dense, relatively
low-dimensional representation that captures the semantic
information of the input. Multi-task learning leverages the
observation that similar tasks may share a common representation to train a single representation to overcome a scarcity
*

Equal contribution 1 Paul G. Allen School of Computer
Science & Engineering, University of Washington. Correspondence to: Yifang Chen <yifangc@cs.washington.edu>,
Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.washington.edu>, Kevin Jamieson
<jamieson@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of data for any one task. In particular, given only a small
amount of data for a target task, but copious amounts of data
from source tasks, the source tasks can be used to learn a
high-quality low-dimensional representation, and the target
task just needs to learn the map from this low-dimensional
representation to its target-specific output. This paradigm
has been used with great success in natural language processing domains GPT-2 (Radford et al.), GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020), Bert (Devlin et al., 2018), as well as vision
domains CLIP (Radford et al., 2021).
This paper makes the observation that not all tasks are
equally helpful for learning a representation, and a priori,
it can be unclear which tasks will be best suited to maximize performance on the target task. For example, modern
datasets like CIFAR-10, ImageNet, and the CLIP dataset
were created using a list of search terms and a variety of
different sources like search engines, news websites, and
Wikipedia. (Krizhevsky, 2009; Deng et al., 2009; Radford
et al., 2021) Even if more data always leads to better performance, practicalities demand some finite limit on the size
of the dataset that will be used for training. Up until now,
choosing which source tasks to include in multi-task learning has been an ad hoc process and more art than science.
In this paper, we aim to formalize the process of prioritizing
source tasks for representation learning by formulating it
as an active learning problem.
Specifically, we aim to achieve a target accuracy on a target task by requesting as little total data from source tasks
as possible. For example, if a target task was to generate
captions for images in a particular domain where few examples existed, each source task could be represented as
a search term into Wikipedia from which (image, caption)
pairs are returned. By sampling moderate numbers of (image, caption) pairs resulting from each search term (task),
we can determine which tasks result in the best performance
on the source task and increase the rate at which examples
from those terms are sampled. By quickly identifying which
source tasks are useful for the target task and sampling only
from those, we can reduce the overall number of examples
to train over, potentially saving time and money. Moreover, prioritizing relevant tasks in training, in contrast to
uniformly weighting them, even has the potential to improve
performance, as demonstrated in (Chen et al., 2021).

