Data Augmentation as Feature Manipulation

Ruoqi Shen 1 Sébastien Bubeck 2 Suriya Gunasekar 2

Abstract
Data augmentation is a cornerstone of the
machine learning pipeline, yet its theoretical
underpinnings remain unclear. Is it merely a
way to artificially augment the data set size?
Or is it about encouraging the model to satisfy
certain invariance? In this work we consider
another angle, and we study the effect of data
augmentation on the dynamic of the learning
process. We find that data augmentation can
alter the relative importance of various features,
effectively making certain informative but hard
to learn features more likely to be captured in
the learning process. Importantly, we show
that this effect is more pronounced for nonlinear models, such as neural networks. Our
main contribution is a detailed analysis of data
augmentation on the learning dynamic for a
two layer convolutional neural network in the
recently proposed multi-view data model by
Allen-Zhu & Li (2020b). We complement this
analysis with further experimental evidence that
data augmentation can be viewed as feature
manipulation.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation is a powerful technique for inexpensively
increasing the size and diversity of training data.
Empirically, even minimal data augmentation can
substantially increase the performance of neural networks.
It is commonly argued that data augmentation is useful to
impose domain specific symmetries on the model, which
would be difficult to enforce directly in the architecture
(Simard et al., 2000; 2003; Chapelle et al., 2001; Yaeger
et al., 1996; Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019). For example,
semantics of a natural image is invariant under translation
and scaling, so it is reasonable to augment an image data set
1

University of Washington. Part of this work was done
2
as a intern at Microsoft Research.
Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to: Ruoqi Shen <shenr3@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

with translated and scaled variations of its inputs. Simple
augmentation with random crop up to 4 pixels can lead to
gains in the range 5-10% (Ciregan et al., 2012; Krizhevsky
et al., 2017). Another explanation often proposed for the role
of data augmentation is merely that it increases the sample
size. As an alternative to symmetry inducing or sample size
increase, we consider in this work the possibility that data
augmentation should in fact be viewed as a more subtle
feature manipulation mechanism on the data.
Consider, for illustration, an image data set with the task of
learning to detect whether there is a cow in the image. A
simplified view would be that there are true cow features
that generate the cow images, and we hope to learn those
true features. At the same time, because most images of
cows contain grass, it would not be surprising if a neural
network would learn to detect the spurious grass feature for
the task, and perhaps simply overfit the rare images such
as desert cows that are not explained by the grass feature
(and similarly overfit the perhaps few images with grass
and no cows). Now consider a simple data augmentation
technique such as Gaussian smoothing (let us assume
black and white images or else use additional color space
augmentations). The grass feature, sans color, is essentially
a high frequency texture information, so we can expect
the smoothing operation to make this feature significantly
diminished. In this example, the feature manipulation that
data augmentation performs is effectively to render the
spurious feature harder to detect, or more precisely to make
it harder to learn, which in turn boosts the true cow features
to become the dominant features.
Continuing the illustration above, let us explore further
the idea of data augmentation as feature manipulation.
First note that the true cow feature need not be one
“single well-defined object”, but rather we may have many
different true cow features. For example, true cow features
could be different for left-facing and right-facing cows.
An imbalance in the training data with respect to those
different features could make the rarer features hard to
learn compared to the more common features, similarly
to how the spurious grass feature was occluding the true
cow features. In the example above, it could happen that
in most images in the training data, the cows are facing
right, which in turn could mean that the neural network
will learn a cow feature with an orientation (right-facing),

