Breaking the

√

T Barrier: Instance-Independent Logarithmic Regret in
Stochastic Contextual Linear Bandits
Avishek Ghosh 1 Abishek Sankararaman 2

Abstract
We prove an instance independent (poly) logarithmic regret for stochastic contextual bandits
with linear payoff. Previously,
√ in (Chu et al.,
2011), a lower bound of O( T ) is shown for
the contextual linear bandit problem with arbitrary (adversarily chosen) contexts. In this paper,
we show that stochastic
√ contexts indeed help to
reduce the regret from T to polylog(T ). We propose Low Regret Stochastic Contextual Bandits
(LR-SCB), which takes advantage of the stochastic contexts and performs parameter estimation (in
ℓ2 norm) and regret minimization simultaneously.
LR-SCB works in epochs, where the parameter
estimation of the previous epoch is used to reduce
the regret of the current epoch. The (poly) logarithmic regret of LR-SCB stems from two crucial
facts: (a) the application of a norm adaptive algorithm to exploit the parameter estimation and (b)
an analysis of the shifted linear contextual bandit
algorithm, showing that shifting results in increasing regret. We have also shown experimentally
that stochastic contexts indeed incurs a regret that
scales with polylog(T ).

1. INTRODUCTION
Contextual bandits are sequential decision making systems,
where a learner is typically equipped with K actions (also
called “arms”). At each round t ∈ [T ] the learner picks
an action in the presence of contextual side information.
Algorithms for these class of problems typically employ
a decision rule that maps the context information to the
action chosen. The goal of the learner is to maximize the
1

Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute (HDSI), UC San Diego, USA
Dept. of Electrical Engg. and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley,
USA (Abishek is currently with Amazon AWS AI, Palo Alto, USA
but work done outside the scope of Amazon). Correspondence to:
Avishek Ghosh <a2ghosh@ucsd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

reward (or in other words, minimize the regret with respect
to the best mapping in the hindsight). Contextual bandit
paradigm is typically used in advertisement placement (Li
et al., 2010), clinical trials (Tewari & Murphy, 2017) and
recommendation systems (Agarwal et al., 2016).
The problem of contextual bandits with linear payoffs has a
rich body of existing literature. This framework was introduced by (Abe et al., 2003; Auer, 2002) and further developed in (Li et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011). The framework
of linear payoff—although simple, is expressive enough to
capture several practical real world problems, as explained
in (Abe et al., 2003; Li et al., 2010). In particular, (Chu
et al., 2011) proposes a learning algorithm based on the
UCB based optimistic idea. The resulting algorithm, namely
SupLinUCB considers arbitrary contexts (i.e., contexts are
generated q
by an adversary) and obtains a high probability re-

gret of O( dT log3 (KT )), where d is the dimension of the
contexts. In the same paper, it is shown that if the contexts
are adversarially generated, any contextual
bandit algorithm
√
with linear payoff will incur Ω( dT ) regret. Moreover,
several variants of contextual bandits are also studied, for
example, in supervised learning (Beygelzimer et al., 2011),
balanced exploration (Dimakopoulou et al., 2019) and in
delayed systems (Zhou et al., 2019).

The contextual bandit paradigm has also been investigated
beyond linear rewards. As an instance, (Agarwal et al.,
2012) and (Agarwal et al., 2014) consider the K-armed
generic contextual bandit system and analyzes a regressor
elimination type and projection smoothing based learning
algorithms
respectively, which attains a regret guarantee of
√
Õ( KT ). These algorithms are computationally inefficient
and depend on an oracle. Furthermore, (Foster & Rakhlin,
2020) converts the generic contextual bandit problem to
an online regression problem, and obtains similar regret.
Recently, (Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2021) proposes
√ a learning
algorithm, namely FALCON, that obtains Õ( KT ) regret
in the presence of an offline regression oracle. Moreover,
(Zhou et al., 2020) proposes a neural net based learning for
contextual bandits.
In this paper, we stick to the framework of stochastic contextual bandits with linear payoff, and ask the following

