The Power of Exploiter: Provable Multi-Agent RL in Large State Spaces

Chi Jin 1 Qinghua Liu 1 Tiancheng Yu 2

Abstract
Modern reinforcement learning (RL) commonly
engages practical problems with large state spaces,
where function approximation must be deployed
to approximate either the value function or the policy. While recent progresses in RL theory address
a rich set of RL problems with general function approximation, such successes are mostly restricted
to the single-agent setting. It remains elusive how
to extend these results to multi-agent RL, especially in the face of new game-theoretical challenges. This paper considers two-player zero-sum
Markov Games (MGs). We propose a new algorithm that can provably find the Nash equilibrium
policy using a polynomial number of samples, for
any MG with low multi-agent Bellman-Eluder
dimension—a new complexity measure adapted
from its single-agent version (Jin et al., 2021). A
key component of our new algorithm is the exploiter, which facilitates the learning of the main
player by deliberately exploiting her weakness.
Our theoretical framework is generic, which applies to a wide range of models including but not
limited to tabular MGs, MGs with linear or kernel function approximation, and MGs with rich
observations.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) systems have
recently achieved significant success in many AI challenges including the game Go (Silver et al., 2016; 2017),
Poker (Brown & Sandholm, 2019), real-time strategy games
(Vinyals et al., 2019; OpenAI, 2018), decentralized controls
or multiagent robotics systems (Brambilla et al., 2013), autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016), as well as
complex social scenarios such as hide-and-seek (Baker et al.,
2020). Two crucial components that contribute to these suc*
Equal contribution 1 Princeton University 2 MIT. Correspondence to: Chi Jin <chij@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

cesses are function approximation and self-play. Function
approximation is frequently used in modern applications
with large state spaces, where either the value function or
the policy is approximated by parametric function classes,
which are typically deep neural networks. Meanwhile, selfplay enables the learner to improve by playing against itself
instead of traditional human experts.
Despite the empirical success of MARL, existing theoretical
guarantees in MARL only apply to the basic settings where
the value functions can be represented by either tables (in
cases where the states and actions are discrete) (Bai & Jin,
2020; Bai et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020) or linear maps (Xie
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). While a recent line of works
(Jiang et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020;
Jin et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021) significantly advance our
understanding of RL with general function approximation,
and provide sample-efficient guarantees for RL with kernels,
neural networks, rich observations, and several special cases
of partial observability, they are all restricted to the singleagent setting. Distinct from single-agent RL, each agent in
MARL are facing not only the unknown environment, but
also the opponents that can constantly adapt their strategies
in response to the behavior of the learning agent. This
additional game-theoretical feature makes it challenging
to extend the single-agent general function approximation
results to the multi-agent setting. This motivates us to ask
the following question:
Can we design sample-efficient MARL algorithms for
general function approximation?
By “sample-efficient”, we mean the algorithms provably
learn within a polynomial number of samples that is independent of the number of states. This paper provides the first
positive answer to this question in the context of two-player
zero-sum Markov Games (MGs) (Shapley, 1953; Littman,
1994). In particular, we make the following contributions:
• We design a new self-play algorithm for MARL—
G OLF WITH E XPLOITER. Our algorithm maintains
a main player and an exploiter, where the exploiter
facilitates the learning of the main player by deliberately exploiting her weakness. Our algorithm features
optimism, and can simultaneously address multi-agent,
general function approximation, as well as the trade-off

