A Joint Exponential Mechanism For Differentially Private Top-k

Jennifer Gillenwater 1 Matthew Joseph 1 Andrés Muñoz Medina 1 Mónica Ribero 1 2

Abstract
We present a differentially private algorithm for
releasing the sequence of k elements with the
highest counts from a data domain of d elements.
The algorithm is a “joint” instance of the exponential mechanism, and its output space consists of all
O(dk ) length-k sequences. Our main contribution
is a method to sample this exponential mechanism
in time O(dk log(k)+d log(d)) and space O(dk).
Experiments show that this approach outperforms
existing pure differential privacy methods and improves upon even approximate differential privacy
methods for moderate k.

1. Introduction
Top-k is the problem of identifying the ordered sequence
of k items with the highest counts from a data domain of d
items. This basic problem arises in machine learning tasks
such as recommender systems, basket market analysis, and
language learning. To solve these problems while guaranteeing privacy to the individuals contributing data, several
works have studied top-k under the additional constraint of
differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006). Differential
privacy guarantees that publishing the k identified elements
reveals only a controlled amount of information about the
users who contributed data to the item counts.
The best known DP algorithm for top-k is the “peeling”
mechanism (Bhaskar et al., 2010; Durfee & Rogers, 2019),
which applies a DP subroutine for selecting the highest
count item from a set, removes it, and repeats k times. One
possible such subroutine is the exponential mechanism, a
general DP algorithm for choosing high-utility (here, highcount) elements from a data universe given some utility
function (see Section 2). Another similar subroutine is the
permute-and-flip mechanism (McKenna & Sheldon, 2020).
1
Google Research NYC 2 UT Austin. Correspondence to:
Jennifer Gillenwater <jengi@google.com>, Matthew Joseph
<mtjoseph@google.com>, Andrés Muñoz Medina <ammedina@google.com>, Mónica Ribero <mribero@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

This leads to the baseline peeling mechanisms in our experiments, each using the best known composition methods:
the approximate DP baseline uses the exponential mechanism analyzed via concentrated differential privacy (CDP)
composition (Dwork & Rothblum, 2016; Bun & Steinke,
2016), and the pure DP basline uses the permute-and-flip
mechanism with basic composition. The approximate DP
variant takes time O(d+k log(k)) and the pure variant takes
time O(dk). Both require space O(d).
1.1. Our Contributions
We construct an instance of the exponential mechanism that
chooses directly from sequences of k items. Unlike the
peeling mechanism, this approach does not use composition.
Past work has used this style of “joint” exponential mechanism to privately and efficiently estimate: 1-way marginals
under `∞ error (Steinke & Ullman, 2015), password frequency lists (Blocki et al., 2016), and quantiles (Gillenwater
et al., 2021). However, it is not obvious how to extend any
of these to top-k selection.
Naive implementation of a joint exponential mechanism,
whose output space is all sequences of k items, requires
enumerating all O(dk ) such sequences. This is impractical
even for modest values of d and k. As with previous work
on joint exponential mechanisms, our main contribution is
an equivalent efficient sampling method.
Theorem 1.1 (Informal version of Theorem 3.9). There is a
joint exponential mechanism for ε-DP top-k that takes time
O(dk log(k) + d log(d)) and space O(dk).
While it is straightforward to prove a utility guarantee for
this mechanism (Theorem 3.3), our main argument for this
joint approach is empirical, as asymptotic guarantees often
obscure markedly different performance in practice. Experiments show that the joint exponential mechanism offers
the strongest performance among pure differential privacy
mechanisms and even outperforms approximate differential
privacy mechanisms when k is not large (Section 4).
1.2. Related Work
Private top-k was first studied in the context of frequent
itemset mining, where each user contributes a set of items,
and the goal is to find common subsets (Bhaskar et al.,

