Discovering Generalizable Spatial Goal Representations via Graph-based Active
Reward Learning

Aviv Netanyahu * 1 Tianmin Shu * 1 2 Joshua Tenenbaum 1 2 Pulkit Agrawal 1

Abstract

In this work, we consider one-shot imitation learning for object rearrangement tasks, where an AI
agent needs to watch a single expert demonstration and learn to perform the same task in different
environments. To achieve a strong generalization,
the AI agent must infer the spatial goal specification for the task. However, there can be multiple
goal specifications that fit the given demonstration.
To address this, we propose a reward learning
approach, Graph-based Equivalence Mappings
(GEM), that can discover spatial goal representations that are aligned with the intended goal
specification, enabling successful generalization
in unseen environments. Specifically, GEM represents a spatial goal specification by a reward
function conditioned on i) a graph indicating important spatial relationships between objects and
ii) state equivalence mappings for each edge in
the graph indicating invariant properties of the
corresponding relationship. GEM combines inverse reinforcement learning and active reward
learning to efficiently improve the reward function by utilizing the graph structure and domain
randomization enabled by the equivalence mappings. We conducted experiments with simulated
oracles and with human subjects. The results
show that GEM can drastically improve the generalizability of the learned goal representations
over strong baselines.1

*
Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA 2 Dept. of Brain and Cognitive Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to: Aviv
Netanyahu <avivn@mit.edu>, Tianmin Shu <tshu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Project website: https://www.tshu.io/GEM

A Expert Demonstration
Initial state

B Testing Environment
Final state

C Final states in the testing environment based on different interpretations

…

Figure 1. Illustration of our problem setup. We first (A) show a
single expert demonstration for an object rearrangement task to an
agent, and then (B) ask the agent to reach the same goal in unseen
testing environments. (C) Multiple spatial goals can interpret the
expert demonstration, each leading to a distinct task execution in
the testing environments. For instance, from left to right, the four
possible spatial goals shown here are i) triangle is to the right of
circle and to the left of square; ii) triangle is close to circle and
square; iii) triangle is to the left of circle; iv) triangle is close to
square.

1. Introduction
To build AI agents that can assist humans in real world
settings, we have to first enable them to learn to perform
any new tasks defined by a human user. To achieve this,
an AI agent has to acquire two types of key abilities: i)
the ability to develop a generalizable understanding of the
goal or task specification intended by the human user and
ii) the ability to plan or learn a policy for a given goal. In
this work, we aim at engineering the first key ability for an
AI agent. In particular, we focus on object rearrangement
tasks, where an agent must reason about the spatial goals
that define a set of desired spatial relationships between
objects. For instance, to set up a dinner table, one has to
know how to place the plates and the utensils appropriately.
These tasks are commonly studied in robots (Shah et al.,
2018; Yan et al., 2020; Rowe et al., 2019) and embodied
AI (Puig et al., 2021; Srivastava et al., 2022), serving as
as a foundation for a broader range of tasks such as house
keeping and manufacturing.

