Injecting Logical Constraints into Neural Networks
via Straight-Through Estimators

Zhun Yang 1 Joohyung Lee 1 2 Chiyoun Park 2

Abstract
Injecting discrete logical constraints into neural
network learning is one of the main challenges
in neuro-symbolic AI. We find that a straightthrough-estimator, a method introduced to train
binary neural networks, could effectively be applied to incorporate logical constraints into neural network learning. More specifically, we design a systematic way to represent discrete logical
constraints as a loss function; minimizing this
loss using gradient descent via a straight-throughestimator updates the neural network’s weights in
the direction that the binarized outputs satisfy the
logical constraints. The experimental results show
that by leveraging GPUs and batch training, this
method scales significantly better than existing
neuro-symbolic methods that require heavy symbolic computation for computing gradients. Also,
we demonstrate that our method applies to different types of neural networks, such as MLP, CNN,
and GNN, making them learn with no or fewer
labeled data by learning directly from known constraints.

1. Introduction
Neuro-symbolic AI (Besold et al., 2017; Mao et al., 2019;
De Raedt et al., 2019; Garcez et al., 2019) aims to combine
deep neural network learning and symbolic AI reasoning,
which look intrinsically different from each other on the
surface. It appears hard to incorporate discrete logical reasoning into the conventional gradient descent method that
deals with continuous values. Some recent works in neurosymbolic AI (Manhaeve et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2020;
Pogancic et al., 2020; Tsamoura et al., 2021) associate con1
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Fulton
Schools of Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ,
USA 2 Samsung Research, Samsung Electronics Co., Seoul, South
Korea. Correspondence to: Joohyung Lee <joolee@asu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tinuous parameters in neural networks (NNs) with logic
languages so that logical reasoning applied to NN outputs
produces “semantic loss” (Xu et al., 2018). Minimizing such
loss leads to updating NN parameters via backpropagation
through logic layers. Like human learning that leverages
known constraints, these methods have shown promising
results that allow NNs to learn effectively with fewer data
leveraging the semantic constraints. On the other hand, the
symbolic computation performed during backpropagation
is implemented by weighted model counting using circuits
(Darwiche, 2011; Manhaeve et al., 2018; Tsamoura et al.,
2021) or by calling symbolic solvers (Pogančić et al., 2019;
Yang et al., 2020), which are often computationally expensive; it takes too long to generate arithmetic circuits or
enumerate all models or proofs by calling symbolic solvers.
One main reason for the development of the different ideas
is that a naive representation of discrete constraints as a
loss function is not meaningfully differentiable. Even for
the intervals that it is differentiable, the gradient is zero,
so NNs won’t update their weights. To address this, we
turn to the idea of straight-through estimators (STE) (Courbariaux et al., 2015), which were originally introduced to
train binary neural networks (BNNs) — neural networks
with binary weights and activation at run-time. The main
idea of STE is to use a binarization function in forward propagation while its gradient, which is zero almost everywhere,
is replaced by the gradient of a different, meaningfully differentiable function in backward propagation. It turns out
that the method works well for NN quantization in practice.
However, adopting STE alone is not enough for learning
with constraints. We need a systematic method of encoding
logical constraints as a loss function and ensure that its
gradient enables NNs to learn logical constraints.
This paper makes the following contributions.
• We design a systematic way to encode logical constraints in propositional logic as a loss function in
neural network learning, which we call CL-STE. We
demonstrate that minimizing this loss function via STE
enforces the logical constraints in neural network learning so that neural networks learn from the explicit constraints.

