SQ-VAE: Variational Bayes on Discrete Representation with
Self-annealed Stochastic Quantization

Yuhta Takida 1 Takashi Shibuya 1 WeiHsiang Liao 1 Chieh-Hsin Lai 1 Junki Ohmura 1
Toshimitsu Uesaka 1 Naoki Murata 1 Shusuke Takahashi 1 Toshiyuki Kumakura 2 Yuki Mitsufuji 1

Abstract
One noted issue of vector-quantized variational
autoencoder (VQ-VAE) is that the learned
discrete representation uses only a fraction of
the full capacity of the codebook, also known
as codebook collapse. We hypothesize that the
training scheme of VQ-VAE, which involves
some carefully designed heuristics, underlies this
issue. In this paper, we propose a new training
scheme that extends the standard VAE via novel
stochastic dequantization and quantization, called
stochastically quantized variational autoencoder
(SQ-VAE). In SQ-VAE, we observe a trend
that the quantization is stochastic at the initial
stage of the training but gradually converges
toward a deterministic quantization, which we
call self-annealing. Our experiments show that
SQ-VAE improves codebook utilization without
using common heuristics. Furthermore, we
empirically show that SQ-VAE is superior to VAE
and VQ-VAE in vision- and speech-related tasks.

1. Introduction
The use of a variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Higgins et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2019) is
one of the popular approaches to generative modeling. VAE
consists of a pair of an encoder and a decoder, which are
jointly trained by maximizing the evidence lower bound
(ELBO) of the observed data (Jordan et al., 1999). The
encoder maps the input data to a variable in a latent space,
whereas the decoder converts the latent variable back into a
sample of data space. A new sample is generated by decoding
a latent variable that was sampled from a prior distribution.
Apart from VAE, a variant called Vector Quantized VAE
(VQ-VAE) (van den Oord et al., 2017), shows its superiority
1

Sony Group Corporation, Japan 2 Sony Corporation
of America, USA. Correspondence to:
Yuhta Takida
<yuta.takida@sony.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright
2022 by the author(s).

in several sample generation tasks (Dhariwal et al., 2020;
Ramesh et al., 2021; Esser et al., 2021). In VQ-VAE, the
encoded latent variables are quantized to their nearest
neighbors in a learnable codebook, and the data samples are
decoded from the quantized latent variables. Samples are
generated by first sampling the discrete latent variables from
an approximated prior, then the sampled latent variables are
decoded into synthetic samples. The approximated prior can
be, for example, a PixelCNN (van den Oord et al., 2016) that
is trained on the latent space of training samples. Although
VQ-VAE shares some similarities with VAE, its training does
not follow the standard variational Bayes framework (Ghosh
et al., 2020). Instead, it relies on carefully designed
heuristics such as the use of a stop-gradient operator and the
straight-through estimation of gradients. Even so, VQ-VAE
often suffers from codebook collapse, which means that
most of the codebook elements are not being used at all. This
results in the deterioration of reconstruction accuracy (Kaiser
et al., 2018). To address this problem, techniques such as
the exponential moving average (EMA) (Polyak & Juditsky,
1992) update scheme, codebook reset (Dhariwal et al., 2020;
Williams et al., 2020), and hyperparameter tuning are often
employed (Roy et al., 2018).
We suspect that deterministic quantization is the cause of
codebook collapse. Although the original approach with
straight-through estimation is intuitive and elegant, some
codebook elements can never be selected in cases of bad
initialization. Therefore, we propose a framework that
combines stochastic quantization and VAE, called stochastically quantized VAE (SQ-VAE)1 . It can address the low
codebook utilization issue of VQ-VAE and can be explained
within the scope of the usual variational Bayes framework.
Moreover, its training requires no exhaustive hyperparameter
tuning and does not rely on heuristic techniques such as
stop-gradient, codebook reset, or EMA update.
SQ-VAE introduces a pair of stochastic dequantization and
quantization processes in the latent space. These processes
are characterized by probability distributions with trainable
parameters. This setup allows us to train the model within
the usual variational Bayes framework without the need of
conventional heuristics. Training the model requires only
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/sony/
sqvae.

