Matching Learned Causal Effects of Neural Networks with Domain Priors

Sai Srinivas Kancheti * 1 Abbavaram Gowtham Reddy * 1 Vineeth N Balasubramainan 1 Amit Sharma 2

Abstract
A trained neural network can be interpreted as a
structural causal model (SCM) that provides the
effect of changing input variables on the model’s
output. However, if training data contains both
causal and correlational relationships, a model
that optimizes prediction accuracy may not necessarily learn the true causal relationships between
input and output variables. On the other hand,
expert users often have prior knowledge of the
causal relationship between certain input variables
and output from domain knowledge. Therefore,
we propose a regularization method that aligns the
learned causal effects of a neural network with domain priors, including both direct and total causal
effects. We show that this approach can generalize to different kinds of domain priors, including
monotonicity of causal effect of an input variable
on output or zero causal effect of a variable on
output for purposes of fairness. Our experiments
on twelve benchmark datasets show its utility in
regularizing a neural network model to maintain
desired causal effects, without compromising on
accuracy. Importantly, we also show that a model
thus trained is robust and gets improved accuracy
on noisy inputs.

1. Introduction
There has been a growing interest in integrating causal principles into machine learning models in recent years. Existing efforts have largely focused on post-hoc explanations of
a trained neural network (NN) model’s decisions in terms
of causal effect (Chattopadhyay et al., 2019; Goyal et al.,
2019a), using counterfactuals for explanations or augmentations (Goyal et al., 2019b; Zmigrod et al., 2019; Pitis
et al., 2020; Dash et al., 2022), causal discovery (Zhu et al.,
2020), or embedding causal structures in disentangled representation learning (Suter et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020).
* Equal contribution 1 Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad,

However, while there have been efforts of quantifying the
causal attributions learned by an NN (Chattopadhyay et al.,
2019; Goyal et al., 2019a), none of these efforts consider
the possibility that expert human users that interact with NN
models in practice may have prior knowledge of relationships between input and output variables, even causal ones,
from domain understanding. In this work, we explore a new
methodology – to the best of our knowledge, the first such
effort – to regularize NN models during training in order to
match the learned causal effects in NN models with such
causal domain priors that are known a priori.
As a simple motivating example, consider the task of predicting the body mass index (BMI) of a person based on
features such as miles run each week, calorie intake per
day, education, gender, number of dogs one owns, and so
on. From domain knowledge, an expert user may expect a
negative causal effect of miles run per week on BMI (higher
the miles, lower the BMI), and a positive causal effect of
calorie intake on BMI. Beyond these, the training data may
have unknown, complex correlations. For example, calorie
intake could have a complex correlation with miles run—
high calorie intake may be correlated both with people who
run less as well as with people who run a lot (to support their
exercise). An expert user would expect a trained NN model
to learn the causal relationships from input features to BMI
while ignoring the correlations in the training data. However, given only training data and an accuracy-based loss,
an NN may rely on correlations to learn a model, whose
predictions may not generalize to new data and would provide less meaningful feature attributions/explanations to the
user1 . E.g., on a training dataset with only high-activity
runners who are fit and have a high calorie intake, an NN
model may learn that high calorie intake is associated with
a lower BMI. While this may be a valid correlation in this
training set, it does not reflect the true causal effect between
input and output, and will lead to incorrect predictions on
test data that includes non-runners with high calorie intake.
Matching the learned causal effects of an NN during training
with known domain priors is hence an important goal.

India 2 Microsoft Research, Bangalore, India. Correspondence to:
Sai Srinivas Kancheti <cs21resch01004@iith.ac.in>.

Going beyond, a causal effect is understood to be direct
or indirect (Pearl, 2009), and it may be important to dis-

Proceedings of the 39 𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1 We use the terms ‘variables’ and ‘features’, as well as ’effects’

and ’attributions’ interchangeably in this work.

