Leveraging Approximate Symbolic Models for Reinforcement Learning via Skill
Diversity

Lin Guan * 1 Sarath Sreedharan * 1 Subbarao Kambhampati 1

Abstract
Creating reinforcement learning (RL) agents that
are capable of accepting and leveraging taskspecific knowledge from humans has been long
identified as a possible strategy for developing
scalable approaches for solving long-horizon
problems. While previous works have looked
at the possibility of using symbolic models along
with RL approaches, they tend to assume that the
high-level action models are executable at low
level and the fluents can exclusively characterize
all desirable MDP states. Symbolic models of real
world tasks are however often incomplete. To this
end, we introduce Approximate Symbolic-Model
Guided Reinforcement Learning, wherein we will
formalize the relationship between the symbolic
model and the underlying MDP that will allow us
to characterize the incompleteness of the symbolic
model. We will use these models to extract highlevel landmarks that will be used to decompose
the task. At the low level, we learn a set of diverse
policies for each possible task subgoal identified
by the landmark, which are then stitched together.
We evaluate our system by testing on three different benchmark domains and show how even
with incomplete symbolic model information, our
approach is able to discover the task structure and
efficiently guide the RL agent towards the goal.

1. Introduction
In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) methods have
demonstrated an impressive ability in tackling many hard
sequential-decision making problems. However, most practical reinforcement learning (RL) systems still struggle in
solving long-horizon tasks with sparse rewards. Part of the
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing & AI, Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ. Correspondence to: Lin Guan
<lguan9@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The Household environment. To reach the final destination (green block), the robot (red triangle) has to pick up the red
key, charge itself at the purple block, and open the red door.

challenge comes from the fact that traditionally RL methods
tend to focus on agents that start tabula rasa and acquire
task information purely from experience (i.e., experience
ironically sampled from expert specified simulators). While
theoretically, one could inject knowledge about the task
through careful reward engineering, such methods are generally non-intuitive and hard for non-AI experts to specify and
may result in unanticipated side effects (Hadfield-Menell
et al., 2017). This has resulted in interest in imbuing RL
systems the ability to accept advice from humans through
more intuitive means. Most of the earlier works in this direction focused primarily on accepting advice about agent
objectives (Icarte et al., 2018), though recent works have
looked at developing systems that accept task-level advice.
In particular, symbolic planning models (Geffner & Bonet,
2013) have been considered as a viable method for the
specification of task information (Lyu et al., 2019; Illanes
et al., 2020). Unfortunately, most of these works tend to
have strong requirements (sometimes implicit ones) on the
correctness of the symbolic models provided.
To illustrate the importance of accounting for possible incompleteness in symbolic models, consider a simple household robotics domain (henceforth referred to as the Household environment) where the task is for a robot to visit a
particular location represented by the green block (Fig. 1).
The robot can do that by picking up the red key, then recharging, then opening the door to visit the final location. A
human user could potentially help the robot in its learning
process by providing various pieces of information related
to the task. For example, providing information such as the
location of the destination and the fact that the door is locked
and would require a key to open. However, such informa-

