A General Recipe for Likelihood-free Bayesian Optimization

Jiaming Song * 1 Lantao Yu * 2 Willie Neiswanger 2 Stefano Ermon 2

Abstract
The acquisition function, a critical component in
Bayesian optimization (BO), can often be written
as the expectation of a utility function under a surrogate model. However, to ensure that acquisition
functions are tractable to optimize, restrictions
must be placed on the surrogate model and utility
function. To extend BO to a broader class of models and utilities, we propose likelihood-free BO
(LFBO), an approach based on likelihood-free inference. LFBO directly models the acquisition
function without having to separately perform inference with a probabilistic surrogate model. We
show that computing the acquisition function in
LFBO can be reduced to optimizing a weighted
classification problem, where the weights correspond to the utility being chosen. By choosing
the utility function for expected improvement (EI),
LFBO outperforms various state-of-the-art blackbox optimization methods on several real-world
optimization problems. LFBO can also effectively leverage composite structures of the objective function, which further improves its regret
by several orders of magnitude.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a framework for global optimization of black-box functions, whose evaluations are
expensive. Originated from applications on engineering design (Kushner, 1962; 1964; Močkus, 1975), BO has seen
successes in various domains, including automated machine learning (Bergstra et al., 2011; Snoek et al., 2012;
Swersky et al., 2013), simulation optimization (Pearce &
Branke, 2017; Wang et al., 2020), drug discovery (Griffiths
& Hernández-Lobato, 2020), graphics (Brochu et al., 2007;
Project website: https://lfbo-ml.github.io/
*

Equal contribution 1 NVIDIA (Work done while at Stanford). 2 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Jiaming Song
<jiamings@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Koyama et al., 2017), robotics (Calandra et al., 2016), and
battery charging protocols design (Attia et al., 2020).
A cornerstone of BO methods is the acquisition function that
determines which candidates to propose for function evaluations. Many acquisition functions can be written in the
form of the expectation of a utility function over a surrogate
model (Wilson et al., 2018; Garnett, 2022). To evaluate and
optimize these acquisition functions effectively, the surrogate model is often chosen to produce tractable probability
estimates (e.g., Gaussian processes (Rasmussen, 2003)), and
the utility functions are often chosen such that the expectations can be computed analytically, such as Probability of
Improvement (PI, (Kushner, 1964)).
However, the requirements of tractability and efficiency often exclude popular families of surrogate models and utility
functions relevant to the optimization problem. For instance,
implicit models defined via simulators (Diggle & Gratton,
1984) may fit the data-generating process better but do not
have tractable probability estimates. Meanwhile, objectives
that are defined over many correlated outcomes are often
partially known (i.e., in a grey-box BO setting (Astudillo &
Frazier, 2022; Maddox et al., 2021)), yet utilities defined for
these objective functions may not have tractable integrals
even for Gaussian process surrogate models. While Monte
Carlo methods can be employed here (Astudillo & Frazier,
2019; Kleinegesse & Gutmann, 2019), they scale poorly
when many samples are needed for low variance estimates.
Inspired by how likelihood-free density ratio estimation extends variational inference to implicit models (Sugiyama
et al., 2012; Tran et al., 2017), we describe a general approach to obtain “likelihood-free” acquisition functions that
extend BO to a broader class of models and utilities. We
develop a likelihood-free method that directly estimates the
ratio between any pair of non-negative measures; this includes any acquisition function with a non-negative utility
function, and allows us to directly model it without having
to separately perform inference with a probabilistic surrogate model. Our likelihood-free BO (LFBO) approach can
be reduced to a weighted classification problem, which is
easy to implement for general utility functions.
We evaluate our LFBO method empirically on a number
of synthetic and real optimization problems. On several
real-world benchmarks, LFBO outperforms various state-of-

