Differentially Private Community Detection for Stochastic Block Models

Mohamed Seif * 1 Dung Nguyen * 2 3 Anil Vullikanti 2 3 Ravi Tandon 1

Abstract
The goal of community detection over graphs is
to recover underlying labels/attributes of users
(e.g., political affiliation) given the connectivity
between users. There has been significant recent
progress on understanding the fundamental limits of community detection when the graph is
generated from a stochastic block model (SBM).
Specifically, sharp information theoretic limits
and efficient algorithms have been obtained for
SBMs as a function of p and q, which represent
the intra-community and inter-community connection probabilities. In this paper, we study the
community detection problem while preserving
the privacy of the individual connections between
the vertices. Focusing on the notion of (ϵ, δ)-edge
differential privacy (DP), we seek to understand
the fundamental tradeoffs between (p, q), DP budget (ϵ, δ), and computational efficiency for exact
recovery of community labels.
To this end, we present and analyze the associated
information-theoretic tradeoffs for three differentially private community recovery mechanisms:
a) stability based mechanism; b) sampling based
mechanisms; and c) graph perturbation mechanisms. Our main findings are that stability and
sampling based mechanisms lead to a superior
tradeoff between (p, q) and the privacy budget
(ϵ, δ); however this comes at the expense of higher
computational complexity. On the other hand,
albeit low complexity, graph perturbation mechanisms require the privacy budget ϵ to scale as
Ω(log(n)) for exact recovery.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona. 2 Biocomplexity
Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia. 3 Department
of Computer Science, University of Virginia.
Correspondence to: Mohamed Seif <mseif@email.arizona.edu>,
Dung Nguyen <dungn@virginia.edu>, Ravi Tandon <tandonr@email.arizona.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Community detection in networks is a fundamental problem in the area of graph mining and machine learning, with
many interesting applications such as social networks, image segmentation, and biological networks (see, e.g., the
survey by (Fortunato, 2010)). The main goal is to partition
the network into communities that are “well-connected”;
no standard definition for communities exists, and a large
number of methods have been proposed, e.g., (Blondel et al.,
2008; Girvan & Newman, 2002; Holland et al., 1983), but,
in general, there is a limited theoretical basis for the performance of these methods. One exception is the stochastic block model (SBM) (Holland et al., 1983), which is a
probabilistic generative model for generating networks with
underlying communities, providing a rigorous framework
for detection algorithms. In the simplest canonical form
of an SBM, the n vertices are partitioned into r communities, and a pair of vertices connect with probability p within
communities and with probability q across communities,
where p > q. “Recovering” communities in a graph generated from an SBM (defined formally in Section 2) has
been a very active area of research, e.g., (Condon & Karp,
2001; Arias-Castro & Verzelen, 2014; Abbe et al., 2015;
Hajek et al., 2016a). The exact conditions for recoverability are well understood in terms of the scaling of p and q
(more specifically the difference between p and q). In particular, in the dense regime (the focus of this paper), with
p = a log(n)/n and q = b log(n)/n, for some constants
a > b > 0, it√is known
√ that√exact recovery is possible
if and only if a − b > r (see (Abbe, 2017) for a
comprehensive survey). Efficient algorithms for recovering
communities have been developed using spectral methods
and semi-definite programming (SDP) (Boppana, 1987;
McSherry, 2001; Abbe et al., 2015; Massoulié, 2014; Gao
et al., 2017; Hajek et al., 2016a; Abbe et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2020).
In many applications, e.g., healthcare, social networks, and
finance, network data is often private and sensitive, and there
is a risk of revealing private information through adversarial
queries. Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2014) is
the de facto standard notion for providing rigorous privacy
guarantees. DP ensures that each user’s presence in the
dataset has minimal statistical influence (measured by the
privacy budget ϵ) on the output of queries. Within the con-

