Object Permanence Emerges in a Random Walk along Memory

Pavel Tokmakov 1 Allan Jabri 2 Jie Li 1 Adrien Gaidon 1

Abstract
This paper proposes a self-supervised objective
for learning representations that localize objects
under occlusion - a property known as object permanence. A central question is the choice of learning signal in cases of total occlusion. Rather than
directly supervising the locations of invisible objects, we propose a self-supervised objective that
requires neither human annotation, nor assumptions about object dynamics. We show that object
permanence can emerge by optimizing for temporal coherence of memory: we fit a Markov walk
along a space-time graph of memories, where the
states in each time step are non-Markovian features from a sequence encoder. This leads to a
memory representation that stores occluded objects and predicts their motion, to better localize
them. The resulting model outperforms existing
approaches on several datasets of increasing complexity and realism, despite requiring minimal
supervision, and hence being broadly applicable.

1. Introduction
Object permanence – the notion that objects, such as the
person in Figure 1, continue to exist even when occluded –
is a crucial component of perception. It is fundamental in
development (Baillargeon et al., 1985; Spelke, 1990), and
critical for perception and control in partially observable
environments like the physical world (Kaelbling et al., 1998;
Grabner et al., 2010; Schmidt et al., 2014; Garg et al., 2020;
Tokmakov et al., 2021). Yet, modern machine learning
models for object recognition are mostly limited by instantaneous observations and struggle with occlusions (He et al.,
2017; Zhou et al., 2019). Recent video-based methods (Xiao
& Jae Lee, 2018; Shamsian et al., 2020; Tokmakov et al.,
2021) have the capacity to localize fully invisible instances
by modeling sequential structure. For example, Tokmakov
1
Toyota Research Institute 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to:
Pavel Tokmakov <pavel.tokmakov@tri.global>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. An example from the KITTI dataset with outputs of our
method (object detection on the left and belief state on the right).
We demonstrate that by fitting a Markov walk along an evolving
spatial memory, a spatial belief state that codes object permanence
emerges without explicit supervision.

et al. (2021) use a spatial recurrent network (Ballas et al.,
2016) to accumulate a representation of a scene and localize
instances – both visible and invisible – using this representation. Nevertheless, a key question that remains is the choice
of learning signal in cases of total occlusion.
While Shamsian et al. (2020) propose to supervise the model
with the ground truth locations of invisible instances, such
labels are hard to obtain in the real world and often suboptimal (Tokmakov et al., 2021). For example, consider
the sequence in Figure 1, in which a person walks behind a
street sign. Without additional observations, it is impossible
to predict their exact location, even for a human, let alone
for a machine learning model, only that they are somewhere
behind that sign.
Rather than directly supervising the locations of invisible
objects, in this work we propose a self-supervised objective that encourages object permanence to naturally emerge
from data (see Figure 2). To this end, we leverage the recent
Contrastive Random Walk objective of Jabri et al. (2020),
which models space-time correspondence as a Markov walk
on a spatio-temporal graph of patches (i.e. from a video). Instead of supervising the walker at each step, which requires
temporally dense annotation, they supervise every k steps,
providing implicit supervision for the trajectory. Our key
insight is that object permanence emerges by fitting such a
Markov walker along an evolving spatial memory, provided
that the states in each time step are features produced by a
sequence encoder, so as to overcome partial observability.
We propose a self-supervised loss function that can be applied to any video object detection model that maintains

