Interpretable Neural Networks with Frank-Wolfe:
Sparse Relevance Maps and Relevance Orderings

We study the effects of constrained optimization
formulations and Frank-Wolfe algorithms for obtaining interpretable neural network predictions.
Reformulating the Rate-Distortion Explanations
(RDE) method for relevance attribution as a constrained optimization problem provides precise
control over the sparsity of relevance maps. This
enables a novel multi-rate as well as a relevanceordering variant of RDE that both empirically outperform standard RDE and other baseline methods in a well-established comparison test. We
showcase several deterministic and stochastic variants of the Frank-Wolfe algorithm and their effectiveness for RDE.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods achieve outstanding results for
tasks across various fields, ranging from image analysis
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2013), to natural
language processing (Cho et al., 2014; Vaswani et al., 2017),
to medical diagnosis (Shen et al., 2017; McBee et al., 2018).
However, they are mostly considered as black-box models.
The reasoning of parameter-rich and highly nonlinear neural
networks remains generally inaccessible. This is particularly undesirable in sensitive applications, such as medical
diagnosis or autonomous driving.
The ability to render these models less opaque by providing human-interpretable explanations of their predictions is
essential for a reliable use of neural networks. An important first step is the identification of the most relevant input
features for a prediction, as illustrated in Figure 1.
This has recently been formalized as an optimization prob1
Institut für Mathematik, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany 2 Department for AI in Society, Science, and Technology,
Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Jan Macdonald <macdonald@math.tu-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Φ

“monkey”

relevance attribution

interpretation

Abstract

classification

Jan Macdonald 1 Mathieu Besançon 2 Sebastian Pokutta 1 2

Figure 1. Relevance attribution methods aim at rendering blackbox classifiers more interpretable by providing heatmaps of the
input features that contribute most to an individual prediction.

lem in a rate-distortion framework (Macdonald et al., 2019),
cf. Figure 2. We give a brief informal introduction here. A
more detailed description is given in Section 2.1. The ratedistortion approach aims at balancing the expected change
in the model prediction when modifying the non-relevant
input features (distortion D) against the number of features
that are considered relevant (rate R). We propose to restate
the original Lagrangian formulation
min D(s) + λ · R(s),
s

(1)

with regularization parameter λ > 0 as a rate-constrained
formulation
min D(s),
(2)
s∈C

with a feasible region of the form C = {s : R(s) ≤ k}
for some k ∈ N. This has the advantage of providing finer
control over the trade-off between the rate and the distortion,
by precisely prescribing the number k of relevant features.
Variants of Gradient Descent (GD)1 are by far the most
popular optimization methods when working with neural
networks and have previously been used to solve the Lagrangian formulation (1).2 Incorporating the constraint
s ∈ C of (2) could also be achieved through Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD). This requires a projection step
st+1 = projC (st − ηt ∇D(st ))
1

A list of abbreviations can be found in Appendix A.
More generally, proximal methods can be considered for nonsmooth problems, e.g., including an ℓ1 -norm sparsity penalty as
the rate function, cf. Section 2.1.
2

