Communication-Efficient Adaptive Federated Learning

Yujia Wang 1 Lu Lin 2 Jinghui Chen 1

Abstract
Federated learning is a machine learning training paradigm that enables clients to jointly train
models without sharing their own localized data.
However, the implementation of federated learning in practice still faces numerous challenges,
such as the large communication overhead due
to the repetitive server-client synchronization and
the lack of adaptivity by SGD-based model updates. Despite that various methods have been
proposed for reducing the communication cost
by gradient compression or quantization, and the
federated versions of adaptive optimizers such
as FedAdam are proposed to add more adaptivity, the current federated learning framework
still cannot solve the aforementioned challenges
all at once. In this paper, we propose a novel
communication-efficient adaptive federated learning method (FedCAMS) with theoretical convergence guarantees. We show that in the nonconvex
stochastic optimization setting, our proposed FedCAMS achieves the same convergence rate of
O( √T1Km ) as its non-compressed counterparts.
Extensive experiments on various benchmarks
verify our theoretical analysis.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; McMahan
et al., 2017) has recently become a popular machine learning training paradigm where multiple clients cooperate to
jointly learn a machine learning model. In the federated
learning setting, training data is distributed across a large
number of clients, or edge devices, such as smartphones,
personal computers, or IoT devices. These clients own
valuable data for training a variety of machine learning
1

College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA, United States
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States. Correspondence to: Jinghui Chen
<jzc5917@psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

models, yet those raw client data is not allowed to share
with the server or other clients due to privacy and regulation concerns. Federated Learning (Konečnỳ et al., 2016;
McMahan et al., 2017) works by having each client train the
ML model locally based on its own data, while having the
clients iteratively exchanging and synchronizing their local
ML model parameters with each other through a central
server. McMahan et al. (2017) proposed FedAvg algorithm,
whose global model is updated by averaging multiple steps
of local stochastic gradient descent (SGD) updates, and it
has become one of the most popular FL methods.
Despite the ability to jointly train the model without directly
sharing the data, the implementation of FL in practice still
faces several major challenges such as (1) large communication overhead due to the repetitive synchronization between
the server and the clients; and (2) lack of adaptivity as SGDbased update may not be suitable for heavy-tail stochastic
gradient noise distributions, which often arise in training
large-scale models such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020), GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) or
ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).
Note that various attempts have been made to solve the
aforementioned challenges individually but not all of them
at once. In terms of reducing communication costs, one
can avoid transmitting the complete model updates when
synchronizing. Several works, including (Reisizadeh et al.,
2020; Jin et al., 2020; Jhunjhunwala et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2021b), have studied the compressed and quantized
federated learning optimization method based on FedAvg.
Another way is to reduce the number of participating clients
such that only part of the clients participate in the model
training at each round (Yang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2019b;
Nishio & Yonetani, 2019; Li & Wang, 2019). Besides, the
network resources allocation also plays an important role
in communication-efficient federated learning problems (Li
et al., 2019a; Yang et al., 2020). For adaptivity concerns,
recently, FedAdam (Reddi et al., 2020) and other variants,
such as FedYogi (Reddi et al., 2020) and FedAMSGrad
(Tong et al., 2020) were proposed to introduce adaptive
gradient methods (Kingma & Ba, 2014; Reddi et al., 2018)
into federated learning framework and provided provable
convergence guarantees. However, it is still an open problem how to achieve communication efficient adaptive federated optimization while still providing rigorous convergence

