An Analytical Update Rule for General Policy Optimization

Hepeng Li 1 Nicholas Clavette 1 Haibo He 1

Abstract
We present an analytical policy update rule that
is independent of parametric function approximators. The policy update rule is suitable for optimizing general stochastic policies and has a monotonic improvement guarantee. It is derived from
a closed-form solution to trust-region optimization using calculus of variation, following a new
theoretical result that tightens existing bounds for
policy improvement using trust-region methods.
The update rule builds a connection between policy search methods and value function methods.
Moreover, off-policy reinforcement learning algorithms can be derived from the update rule since
it does not need to compute integration over onpolicy states. In addition, the update rule extends
immediately to cooperative multi-agent systems
when policy updates are performed by one agent
at a time.

1. Introduction
Policy search methods have gained great popularity in reinforcement learning (RL) for the last decade. As opposed to
value function methods, in which the policy is represented
implicitly by a greedy action-selection strategy with respect
to an estimated value function, policy search methods search
directly in the space of policy representations for a good policy. The advantages of policy search methods include being
able to learn stochastic policies (Singh et al., 1994), better
convergence, and effectiveness in high-dimensional or continuous action spaces. Generally, policy search approaches
use function approximators, such as neural networks, to
construct a parametric policy. The parametric policy is then
optimized using policy gradient (Williams, 1992; Sutton
et al., 1999) or derivative-free algorithms (Szita & Lörincz,
2006) by searching in the parameter space.
1

Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, University of Rhode Island, South Kingstown, RI, USA.
Correspondence to: Haibo He <haibohe@uri.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this paper, we present an analytical policy update rule
that is independent of parametric function approximators.
We prove that the update rule has a monotonic improvement
guarantee and is suitable for optimizing general stochastic
policies with continuous or discrete actions. The update rule
provides a new theoretical foundation for policy-based RL,
which traditionally restricts the policy search to a family of
parametric functions, such as policy gradient (Sutton et al.,
1999), deterministic policy gradient (Silver et al., 2014;
Lillicrap et al., 2016), actor critic (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999;
Degris et al., 2012), soft actor-critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al.,
2018a;b), and so on.
Our update rule is derived from a closed-form solution to a
trust region method using calculus of variation. Trust-region
method is one of the most important tools in RL. The basic
idea is to search for an improved policy iteratively in a local
area around the current policy, in which the objective function is well-approximated by a manageable surrogate model.
A representative trust-region method for RL is trust region
policy optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015). TRPO
introduces a simple and functional surrogate model that can
be evaluated using the current best policy and provides an
upper bound of the approximation error of the surrogate
model. This is particularly useful because by subtracting
the bound from the surrogate model we obtain the worstcase performance degradation, or a lower bound, of the true
objective. It follows that maximizing the lower bound leads
to an improved policy with non-decreasing performance
(Schulman et al., 2015).
The theory of TRPO is of significance to policy-based RL
for it provides an approach that guarantees to improve the
policy monotonically. However, the bound derived in TRPO
depends on the maximum KL-Divergence of the current
policy π and a proposed policy π ′ on the entire state space,
i.e., maxs DKL [π ′ ∥π](s), which can be extremely large or
infinity even if π ′ and π are close at most states. To address
this issue, TRPO heuristically imposes a strict constraint to
bound the KL-Divergence at every state, but it is intractable
to implement this constraint when the state space is large
or continuous. To derive a practical algorithm, an empirical approximation using an expected KL-Divergence, e.g.
Es∼dπ [DKL [π ′ ∥π](s)], is usually adopted (Schulman et al.,
2015; Achiam et al., 2017). Nevertheless, the monotonic
improvement property is no longer guaranteed.

