Identification of Linear Non-Gaussian Latent Hierarchical Structure
Feng Xie 1 2 Biwei Huang 3 Zhengming Chen 4 Yangbo He 1 Zhi Geng 2 Kun Zhang 5 3

Abstract
Traditional causal discovery methods mainly focus on estimating causal relations among measured variables, but in many real-world problems,
such as questionnaire-based psychometric studies, measured variables are generated by latent
variables that are causally related. Accordingly,
this paper investigates the problem of discovering the hidden causal variables and estimating
the causal structure, including both the causal
relations among latent variables and those between latent and measured variables. We relax
the frequently-used measurement assumption and
allow the children of latent variables to be latent
as well, and hence deal with a specific type of
latent hierarchical causal structure. In particular,
we define a minimal latent hierarchical structure
and show that for linear non-Gaussian models
with the minimal latent hierarchical structure, the
whole structure is identifiable from only the measured variables. Moreover, we develop a principled method to identify the structure by testing for
Generalized Independent Noise (GIN) conditions
in specific ways. Experimental results on both
synthetic and real-world data show the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Inferring causal relationships from observational (nonexperimental) data is challenging when there exist unobserved confounders. One typical strategy for handling this
problem is by making use of conditional independence re1

Department of Probability and Statistics, Peking University,
Beijing, China 2 Department of Applied Statistics, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing, China 3 Department of
Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 4 School
of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology,
Guangzhou, China 5 Machine Learning Department, Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
Correspondence to: Feng Xie <xiefeng009@gmail.com>, Kun
Zhang <kunz1@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lations to learn the causal graph over the observed variables up to an equivalence class (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes
et al., 2000). Well-known algorithms along this line include FCI (Spirtes et al., 1995), RFCI (Colombo et al.,
2012), and FCI+ (Claassen et al., 2013). Another strategy is
to make use of functional causal model-based approaches in
the linear non-Gaussian setting (Hoyer et al., 2008; Entner
& Hoyer, 2010; Chen & Chan, 2013; Tashiro et al., 2014;
Wang & Drton, 2020; Salehkaleybar et al., 2020; Maeda
& Shimizu, 2020; Chen et al., 2021). These works focus
on estimating the causal relationships among observed variables rather than those among latent variables. However, in
some real-world scenarios, researchers are usually interested
in the causal relationships between latent variables—the
observed variables may not necessarily be the underlying
causal variables (Bartholomew et al., 2008).
A classical framework for inferring latent factors is Factor Analysis (Bartholomew et al., 2008). But with factor analysis-based approaches, the estimated factors may
not be the underlying causal variables and their relations
are usually not modeled (Silva et al., 2006). Silva et al.
(2006) proposed a two-step approach to learn the measurement model and the causal structure among latent variables,
by utilizing the vanishing Tetrad conditions (Spearman,
1928). Later, Kummerfeld & Ramsey (2016) developed the
FindOneFactorClusters (FOFC) algorithm, based on the extended t-separation theorem (Sullivant et al., 2010; Spirtes,
2013), to learn the pure measurement model. Beyond the
second-order statistics, Shimizu et al. (2009) leveraged nonGaussianity and showed that a linear acyclic model for latent
factors is identifiable. Cai et al. (2019) proposed a Triad condition and accordingly developed an LSTC algorithm to discover the structure over latent variables with non-Gaussian
distributions. Xie et al. (2020) designed a Generalized Independent Noise (GIN) condition to address more general
cases where there may be multiple latent variables behind
any pair of observed variables. Other interesting developments along this line have been established (Zeng et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2022). However, the above methods
assume that each latent variable set has a much larger number of observed variables as children and cannot handle
the situation with latent hierarchical structure (i.e., the children of latent variables may still be latent). For instance,
consider a hierarchical latent model illustrated in Figure 1,
where the variables Li , i = 1, ..., 9 are unobserved and Xj ,

