A Temporal-Difference Approach to Policy Gradient Estimation

Samuele Tosatto 1 Andrew Patterson 1 Martha White 1 2 A. Rupam Mahmood 1 2

Abstract
The policy gradient theorem (Sutton et al., 2000)
prescribes the usage of a cumulative discounted
state distribution under the target policy to approximate the gradient. Most algorithms based
on this theorem, in practice, break this assumption, introducing a distribution shift that can cause
the convergence to poor solutions. In this paper, we propose a new approach of reconstructing the policy gradient from the start state without requiring a particular sampling strategy. The
policy gradient calculation in this form can be
simplified in terms of a gradient critic, which
can be recursively estimated due to a new Bellman equation of gradients. By using temporaldifference updates of the gradient critic from an
off-policy data stream, we develop the first estimator that side-steps the distribution shift issue
in a model-free way. We prove that, under certain realizability conditions, our estimator is unbiased regardless of the sampling strategy. We
empirically show that our technique achieves
a superior bias-variance trade-off and performance in presence of off-policy samples. The
implementation of the experiments can be found
at https://github.com/SamuelePolimi/temporaldifference-gradient.

1. Introduction
Policy gradient methods provide an elegant approach to
learn a parameterized policy in reinforcement learning
(Deisenroth et al., 2013). The policy gradient theorem (Sutton et al., 2000) provides a form for the gradient of the
policy objective that can be sampled in a model-free way.
This early work laid the foundation for practical methods,
but as yet there is much more work to be done to provide
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 2 CIFAR AI Chair, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii). Correspondence to: Samuele
Tosatto <tosatto@ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

effective approximations for the gradient. This is specially
important in the off-policy setting, where we need the gradient under the current policy (the target policy) but the
agent’s experience is generated under a different policy (the
behavior policy). Addressing this gap is critical for building
sample-efficient methods that permit re-use of the agent’s
experience either from past policies as replay (Mnih et al.,
2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016), offline datasets (Levine et al.,
2020), or human demonstrations. The difficulty of constructing policy gradient approximators arises from the need
to sample states from the discounted state-distribution that
is induced by the target policy. Although such sampling
can be achieved in an on-policy manner, this approach is
rarely used in practice, as it requires samples to be used
only once, causing high variance and sample inefficiency.
Instead, most methods reuse data, introducing some bias but
compensating it with better sample efficiency.
An alternative approach consists in correcting the state distribution. The most straightforward choice is to use importance sampling to reweight states, as if they had been
sampled proportionally to the target policy (Shelton, 2001;
Peshkin & Shelton, 2002). These methods are usually unbiased but affected by prohibitively large variance (Owen,
2013). Many recent papers aim to lower the variance of pure
importance sampling correction. Liu et al. (2018) and Liu
et al. (2019) introduce the concept of state-wise importance
sampling. Imani et al. (2018) proposes to combine semigradient with an emphatic weighting. Notably, they come
across the gradient Bellman equation in their derivation. AlgaeDICE (Nachum et al., 2019) incorporates a correction of
the off-policy distribution by relying on the dual problem
of a modified objective that incorporates an f -divergence
regularization. But as yet more work is needed to make
state-reweighting a practical choice.
The most common choice has been to simply omit any correction to the state distribution such as is done in OffPAC
(Degris et al., 2012), DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016), A3C
(Mnih et al., 2016), TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) and SAC
(Haarnoja et al., 2018). These methods are referred to as
semi-gradient methods since the shift in the distribution
can be seen as a result of the omission of a term in the
gradient computation (Imani et al., 2018). Though most
state-of-the-art policy gradient algorithms use this semigradient approach, there are well known counterexamples

