Causal Inference Through the Structural Causal Marginal Problem

Luigi Gresele * 1 Julius von Kügelgen * 1 2 Jonas M. Kübler * 1 Elke Kirschbaum 3 Bernhard Schölkopf 1
Dominik Janzing 3

Abstract
We introduce an approach to counterfactual inference based on merging information from multiple
datasets. We consider a causal reformulation of
the statistical marginal problem: given a collection of marginal structural causal models (SCMs)
over distinct but overlapping sets of variables, determine the set of joint SCMs that are counterfactually consistent with the marginal ones. We
formalise this approach for categorical SCMs using the response function formulation and show
that it reduces the space of allowed marginal and
joint SCMs. Our work thus highlights a new mode
of falsifiability through additional variables, in
contrast to the statistical one via additional data.

1. Introduction
Counterfactual statements are ubiquitous in human judgement and reasoning. Consider the following example. A
patient, Alice, is recommended a treatment X against her
disease and agrees to take it. The effectiveness of the treatment has been rigorously established through a randomised
control trial, which found a positive average causal effect
(ACE). However, the ACE is an average of treatment efficacy over the whole population, including some individuals
who respond better and others who respond worse. Alice
might wonder what her own chances of recovery would
have been, had she not taken X—a query called the effect
of treatment on the treated (ETT) (Heckman, 1992; Shpitser
& Pearl, 2009). This requires envisioning consequences of
a hypothetical change (not taking the treatment), given that
the opposite happened (in reality, she took it).
In a proposed hierarchy of causal reasoning termed the ladder of causation (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018; Bareinboim
*
Equal contribution 1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom 3 Amazon Research, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Luigi Gresele <luigi.gresele@tue.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

X

Y
Z

Dataset 1

Dataset 2

Figure 1: Overview of the Causal Marginal Problem.
Given observations of subsets of variables in a causal graph,
consistently merging the available causal marginal information imposes non-trivial constraints on the set of admissible
joint and marginal causal models which can in turn be useful
for counterfactual inference.

et al., 2020), such counterfactual statements occupy the
highest, third rung, whereas the second rung corresponds to
interventions and experiments (“doing”) and the lowest, first
rung to passive observation (“seeing”). Counterfactual reasoning (e.g., answering personalised, individual-level questions such as Alice’s) thus requires the most fine-grained
causal modelling.1 In the graphical approach to causal inference (Pearl, 2009b), counterfactuals are expressed using
structural causal models (SCMs).
In practice, however, we typically do not have access to an
SCM but only to observational or experimental data (rungs
one and two) which may be insufficient to answer questions
such as Alice’s: we simply cannot perform an experiment
where the same person is both given and not given a treatment, an issue also referred to as the fundamental problem
of causal inference (Imbens & Rubin, 2015). Counterfactual queries thus need to be evaluated based on a partial
state of knowledge and may be subject to an unresolvable
degree of ambiguity, even in the absence of statistical uncertainty (Dawid, 2000). Pearl (2000) therefore postulates
restrictions on the types of inference we can make given our
data and modelling assumptions: counterfactual expressions
should be evaluated subject to an identifiability requirement,
specifying whether a given query can be estimated based
on empirical observations, under conditions which can be
phrased in the language of graphical models (Shpitser &
1
the example concerns an individual causal effect; populationlevel counterfactuals can also be considered (Pearl, 2009a, § 3.4).

