Restarted Nonconvex Accelerated Gradient Descent:
No More Polylogarithmic Factor in the O(ϵ−7/4 ) Complexity

Huan Li 1 Zhouchen Lin 2 3 4
of problem (1) (where ∥∇f (x)∥ ≤ ϵ) in O(ϵ−2 ) iterations
(Nesterov, 2004). This rate is optimal among the first-order
methods under the gradient Lipschitz condition (Cartis et al.,
2010; Carmon et al., 2020). When additional structure is
assumed, such as the Hessian Lipschitz condition, improvement is possible.

Abstract
This paper studies the accelerated gradient descent for general nonconvex problems under
the gradient Lipschitz and Hessian Lipschitz assumptions. We establish that a simple restarted
accelerated gradient descent (AGD) finds an
ϵ-approximate first-order stationary point in
O(ϵ−7/4 ) gradient computations with simple
proofs. Our complexity does not hide any polylogarithmic factors, and thus it improves over the
state-of-the-art one by the O(log 1ϵ ) factor. Our
simple algorithm only consists of Nesterov’s classical AGD and a restart mechanism, and it does
not need the negative curvature exploitation or the
optimization of regularized surrogate functions.
Technically, our simple proof does not invoke the
analysis for the strongly convex AGD, which is
crucial to remove the O(log 1ϵ ) factor.

For convex problems, gradient descent is known to be suboptimal. In a series of celebrated works (Nesterov, 1983;
1988; 2005), Nesterov proposed several accelerated gradient
descent
which find an ϵ-optimal solution in
q (AGD) methods,
q

1
O( Lϵ ) and O( L
µ log ϵ ) iterations for L-smooth general
convex problems and µ-strongly convex problems, respec1
tively, while gradient descent takes O( Lϵ ) and O( L
µ log ϵ )
steps. Motivated by the practical superiority and rich theory
of accelerated methods for convex optimization, nonconvex
AGD has attracted tremendous attentions in recent years. In
this paper, we aim to give a slightly faster convergence rate
than the state-of-the-art one by simple proofs for a simple
nonconvex AGD.

1. Introduction
1.1. Literature Review
Nonconvex optimization has emerged increasingly popular
in machine learning and a lot of machine learning tasks can
be formulated as nonconvex problems, such as deep learning
(LeCun et al., 2015). This paper considers the following
general nonconvex problem:
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f (x) is bounded from below and has Lipschitz continuous gradient and Hessian.
Gradient descent, a simple and fundamental algorithm, is
known to find an ϵ-approximate first-order stationary point
1

Institute of Robotics and Automatic Information Systems, College of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 4 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou,
China.
Correspondence to:
<lihuanss@nankai.edu.cn,
zlin@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Nonconvex AGD has been a hot topic in the last decade.
Ghadimi & Lan (2016); Li & Lin (2015); Li et al. (2017)
studied the nonconvex AGD under the gradient Lipschitz
condition. The efficiency is verified empirically and there is
no speed improvement in theory. Carmon et al. (2017) proposed a “convex until guilty” mechanism with nested-loop
under both the gradient Lipschitz and Hessian Lipschitz conditions, which finds an ϵ-approximate first-order stationary
point in O(ϵ−7/4 log 1ϵ ) gradient and function evaluations.
Their method alternates between the minimization of a regularized surrogate function and the negative curvature exploitation, where in the former subroutine, a proximal term
is added to reduce the nonconvex subproblem to a convex
one.
Most literatures focus on the second-order stationary point
when studying nonconvex AGD. Carmon et al. (2018) combined the regularized accelerated gradient descent and the
Lanczos method, where the latter is used to search the negative curvature. Agarwal et al. (2017) implemented the cubicregularized Newton steps carefully by using accelerated

