A Tree-based Model Averaging Approach for Personalized Treatment Effect
Estimation from Heterogeneous Data Sources

Xiaoqing Tan 1 Chung-Chou H. Chang 1 Ling Zhou 2 Lu Tang 1

Abstract
Accurately estimating personalized treatment effects within a study site (e.g., a hospital) has
been challenging due to limited sample size. Furthermore, privacy considerations and lack of resources prevent a site from leveraging subjectlevel data from other sites. We propose a treebased model averaging approach to improve the
estimation accuracy of conditional average treatment effects (CATE) at a target site by leveraging
models derived from other potentially heterogeneous sites, without them sharing subject-level
data. To our best knowledge, there is no established model averaging approach for distributed
data with a focus on improving the estimation of
treatment effects. Specifically, under distributed
data networks, our framework provides an interpretable tree-based ensemble of CATE estimators that joins models across study sites, while actively modeling the heterogeneity in data sources
through site partitioning. The performance of this
approach is demonstrated by a real-world study
of the causal effects of oxygen therapy on hospital survival rate and backed up by comprehensive
simulation results.

1. Introduction
Estimating individualized treatment effects has been a hot
topic because of its wide applications, ranging from personalized medicine, policy research, to customized marketing advertisement. Treatment effects of certain subgroups
within the population are often of interest. Recently, there
has been an explosion of research devoted to improving
estimation and inference of covariate-specific treatment effects, or conditional average treatment effects (CATE) at a
1

University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Southwestern
University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China. Correspondence to: Lu Tang <lutang@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

target research site (Athey & Imbens, 2016; Wager & Athey,
2018; Hahn et al., 2020; Künzel et al., 2019; Nie & Wager,
2021). However, due to the limited sample size in a single
study, improving the accuracy of the estimation of treatment
effects remains challenging.
Leveraging data and models from various research sites to
conduct statistical analyses is becoming increasingly popular (Reynolds et al., 2020; Cohen et al., 2020; Berger et al.,
2015). Distributed research networks have been established
in many large scale studies (Fleurence et al., 2014; Hripcsak
et al., 2015; Platt et al., 2018; Donohue et al., 2021). A question often being asked is whether additional data or models
from other research sites could bring improvement to a local
estimation task, especially when a single site does not have
enough data to achieve a desired statistical precision. This
concern is mostly noticeable in estimating treatment effects
where sample size requirement is high yet observations are
typically limited. Furthermore, information exchange between data sites is often highly restricted due to privacy,
feasibility, or other concerns, prohibiting centralized analyses that pool data from multiple sources (Maro et al., 2009;
Brown et al., 2010; Toh et al., 2011; Raghupathi & Raghupathi, 2014; DeShazo & Hoffman, 2015; Donahue et al.,
2018; Dayan et al., 2021). One way to tackle this challenge
is through model averaging (Raftery et al., 1997), where
multiple research sites collectively contribute to the tasks of
statistical modeling without sharing sensitive subject-level
data. Although this idea has existed in supervised learning
problems (Dai & Zhang, 2011; McMahan et al., 2017), to
our best knowledge, there are no established model averaging approach and theoretical results on estimating CATE
in a distributed environment. The extension is non-trivial
because CATE is unobserved in nature, as opposed to prediction problems where labels are given.
This paper focuses on improving the prediction accuracy
of CATE concerning a target site by leveraging models derived from other sites where transportability (to be formally
defined in Section 3.1, Pearl & Bareinboim, 2011; Stuart
et al., 2011; Pearl & Bareinboim, 2014; Bareinboim & Pearl,
2016; Buchanan et al., 2018; Dahabreh et al., 2019) may
not hold. Specifically, there may exist heterogeneity in treatment effects. In the context of our multi-hospital example,

