GLIDE: Towards Photorealistic Image Generation and Editing with
Text-Guided Diffusion Models
Alex Nichol * 1 Prafulla Dhariwal * 1 Aditya Ramesh * 1 Pranav Shyam 1 Pamela Mishkin 1 Bob McGrew 1
Ilya Sutskever 1 Mark Chen 1

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently been shown to
generate high-quality synthetic images, especially
when paired with a guidance technique to trade off
diversity for fidelity. We explore diffusion models
for the problem of text-conditional image synthesis and compare two different guidance strategies:
CLIP guidance and classifier-free guidance. We
find that the latter is preferred by human evaluators for both photorealism and caption similarity,
and often produces photorealistic samples. Samples from a 3.5 billion parameter text-conditional
diffusion model using classifier-free guidance are
favored by human evaluators to those from DALLE, even when the latter uses expensive CLIP
reranking. Additionally, we find that our models can be fine-tuned to perform image inpainting, enabling powerful text-driven image editing.
We train a smaller model on a filtered dataset
and release the code and weights at https://
github.com/openai/glide-text2im.

1. Introduction
Images, such as illustrations, paintings, and photographs,
can often be easily described using text, but can require
specialized skills and hours of labor to create. Therefore,
a tool capable of generating realistic images from natural
language can empower humans to create rich and diverse
visual content with unprecedented ease. The ability to edit
images using natural language further allows for iterative refinement and fine-grained control, both of which are critical
for real world applications.
Recent text-conditional image models are capable of syn*
Equal contribution 1 OpenAI, San Francisco, USA. Correspondence to: Alex Nichol <alex@openai.com>, Prafulla Dhariwal <prafulla@openai.com>, Aditya Ramesh
<aramesh@openai.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

thesizing images from free-form text prompts, and can compose unrelated objects in semantically plausible ways (Xu
et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2019; Tao et al., 2020; Ramesh et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2021). However, they are not yet able
to generate photorealistic images that capture all aspects of
their corresponding text prompts.
On the other hand, unconditional image models can synthesize photorealistic images (Brock et al., 2018; Karras
et al., 2019a;b; Razavi et al., 2019), sometimes with enough
fidelity that humans can’t distinguish them from real images
(Zhou et al., 2019). Within this line of research, diffusion
models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2020b)
have emerged as a promising family of generative models,
achieving state-of-the-art sample quality on a number of
image generation benchmarks (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2021).
To achieve photorealism in the class-conditional setting,
Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) augmented diffusion models
with classifier guidance, a technique which allows diffusion
models to condition on a classifier’s labels. The classifier
is first trained on noised images, and during the diffusion
sampling process, gradients from the classifier are used
to guide the sample towards the label. Ho & Salimans
(2021) achieved similar results without a separately trained
classifier through the use of classifier-free guidance, a form
of guidance that interpolates between predictions from a
diffusion model with and without labels.
Motivated by the ability of guided diffusion models to generate photorealistic samples and the ability of text-to-image
models to handle free-form prompts, we apply guided diffusion to the problem of text-conditional image synthesis.
First, we train a 3.5 billion parameter diffusion model that
uses a text encoder to condition on natural language descriptions. Next, we compare two techniques for guiding
diffusion models towards text prompts: CLIP guidance and
classifier-free guidance. Using human and automated evaluations, we find that classifier-free guidance yields higherquality images. We find that samples from our model generated with classifier-free guidance are both photorealistic and
reflect a wide breadth of world knowledge. When evaluated
by human judges, our samples are preferred to those from

