Exact Learning of Preference Structure:
Single-peaked Preferences and Beyond

Sonja Kraiczy 1 Edith Elkind 1

Abstract
We consider the setting where the members of
a society (voters) have preferences over candidates, and the candidates can be ordered on an
axis so that the voters’ preferences are singlepeaked on this axis. We ask whether this axis can
be identified by sampling the voters’ preferences.
For several natural distributions, we obtain tight
bounds on the number of samples required and
show that, surprisingly, the bounds are independent of the number of candidates. We extend our
results to the case where voters’ preferences are
sampled from two different axes over the same
candidate set (one of which may be known). We
also consider two alternative models of learning:
(1) sampling pairwise comparisons rather than
entire votes, and (2) learning from equivalence
queries.

1. Introduction
Professor X is visiting country Y, which is about to hold
hotly contested parliamentary elections. Professor X knows
that voters in Y primarily care about one issue: how aggressive should Y be in its covid-19 response. She is curious how
the political parties in country Y position themselves on this
issue, but she does not speak the language well enough to
decide that based on their electoral manifestos. So, instead,
she asks a few locals—a shopkeeper, a yoga instructor, her
colleague at the local university, and his teenage son—how
they rank the parties. She is hoping that, if the preferences
are truly one-dimensional, and she samples a diverse crosssection of the population, she may be able to identify the
party ordering from the responses she receives.1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Edith Elkind
<edith.elkind@ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
The reader may notice that even in the best-case scenario
Professor X can only identify the party order up to a reversal, but,

In social choice, one-dimensional preferences are usually
conceptualized as single-peaked preferences (Arrow, 1951;
Black, 1948), so Professor X’s question can be rephrased
as follows: given access to a distribution of preferences
single-peaked on an unknown axis, how many samples do
we need to correctly identify the axis?
There are several reasons why we may want to know the
axis. First, the distance along the axis offers a similarity
measure between candidates: if two candidates are adjacent
on the axis, they are probably quite similar. Hence, learning
the axis enables us to better understand the structure of the
space of candidates. Further, by comparing the candidates’
positions on the axis to their attributes (in political elections,
these can be positions on different issues, such as tax policy,
covid-19 response, or climate change), we may be able to
identify attributes that are important to the voters: e.g., if
the axis orders the candidates by their position on climate
change, but there is little correlation between the axis and
the candidates’ positions on the covid-19 response, we can
tentatively predict that the voters are more interested in
climate than in covid-19 measures.
1.1. Our Contribution
We start by asking the following question: given a δ > 0
and a distribution D over preferences single-peaked on an
axis C, suppose we draw n independent samples from D;
how large should n be so that, w.p. 1 − δ, there is no axis C0
that is distinct from C and its reverse such that the resulting
sample is single-peaked on C0 ?
Clearly, the required number of samples depends on the
distribution D. In our work, we primarily consider two
distributions: the uniform distribution, which assigns the
same probability to all votes single-peaked on C (a very
useful note by Walsh (2015) offers an efficient algorithm
for sampling from this distribution), and the random peak
distribution, considered by Conitzer (2009), in which each
candidate appears in the top position with the same probability. These two distributions are commonly used in experiments involving single-peaked preferences (Aziz et al.,
conveniently, one of the parties has ‘Covid0’ in its name, and
therefore can be used as an anchor.

