Unsupervised Detection of Contextualized Embedding
Bias with Application to Ideology

Valentin Hofmann 1 2 Janet B. Pierrehumbert 3 1 Hinrich Schütze 2

Abstract
We propose a fully unsupervised method to detect
bias in contextualized embeddings. The method
leverages the assortative information latently encoded by social networks and combines orthogonality regularization, structured sparsity learning,
and graph neural networks to find the embedding
subspace capturing this information. As a concrete example, we focus on the phenomenon of
ideological bias: we introduce the concept of an
ideological subspace, show how it can be found
by applying our method to online discussion forums, and present techniques to probe it. Our
experiments suggest that the ideological subspace
encodes abstract evaluative semantics and reflects
changes in the political left-right spectrum during
the presidency of Donald Trump.

1. Introduction
What kinds of biases are implicitly encoded by word embeddings? This question has attracted considerable attention
recently, with a focus on gender (Bolukbasi et al., 2016;
Caliskan et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2019) and race (Tan &
Celis, 2019; Jiang & Fellbaum, 2020; Guo & Caliskan,
2021). There has also been work on ideological bias, i.e.,
the association of word embeddings with political ideology
resulting from framing (Webson et al., 2020; Bianchi et al.,
2021; Rozado & al Gharbi, 2021).
Geometrically, bias can be represented as a linear subspace
in embedding space that captures most of the relevant semantic information (Vargas & Cotterell, 2020). Prior studies
have typically taken a supervised approach to detect this
subspace, drawing upon external resources (e.g., word lists
of gender-specific job titles). In the case of ideological bias,
1
Faculty of Linguistics, University of Oxford 2 Center for Information and Language Processing, LMU Munich 3 Department of
Engineering Science, University of Oxford. Correspondence to:
Valentin Hofmann <valentin.hofmann@ling-phil.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

a

X∗

b

e
c

g
f

d

h

a

e

f

b

c
d

g

X∗⊥

h
(a) G

(b) X(c)

Figure 1: Framework. The example graph G consists of two
components reflecting different ideologies as indicated by
node color. By projecting the corresponding embeddings
X(c) into the subspace capturing G’s polarization (X∗ ), we
obtain representations of lower dimensionality that still allow for perfect predictions of G’s edges.
additional supervision is required to distinguish texts stemming from different ideologies (e.g., manual labels). The
heavy need for supervision limits the scalability and wider
applicability of research on embedding bias.
In this paper, we propose a fully unsupervised method to detect bias in contextualized word embeddings. We draw upon
the fact that social networks (a ubiquitous data structure)
tend to be homophilous, i.e., neighboring nodes often have
similar characteristics (McPherson et al., 2001). As a result,
the structure of social networks latently encodes assortative information about variables relevant to bias, including
gender (Psylla et al., 2017), race (DiPrete et al., 2011), and
ideology (Conover et al., 2011). Our method exploits this to
detect bias by rotating and shrinking the embedding space
such that the resulting subspace is maximally informative
about the social network topology (Figure 1). Algorithmically, we combine graph neural networks with orthogonality
regularization and structured sparsity learning.
As a concrete application, we focus on online discussion
forums, specifically Reddit, which can be modeled as networks with subforums as nodes and edges based on user
overlap (Olson & Neal, 2015; Kumar et al., 2018). We lever-

