A Psychological Theory of Explainability

Scott Cheng-Hsin Yang * 1 Tomas Folke * 1 Patrick Shafto 1 2

Abstract
The goal of explainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI) is to generate human-interpretable explanations, but there are no computationally precise
theories of how humans interpret AI generated
explanations. The lack of theory means that validation of XAI must be done empirically, on a
case-by-case basis, which prevents systematic
theory-building in XAI. We propose a psychological theory of how humans draw conclusions from
saliency maps, the most common form of XAI explanation, which for the first time allows for precise prediction of explainee inference conditioned
on explanation. Our theory posits that absent explanation humans expect the AI to make similar
decisions to themselves, and that they interpret
an explanation by comparison to the explanations
they themselves would give. Comparison is formalized via Shepard’s universal law of generalization in a similarity space, a classic theory from
cognitive science. A pre-registered user study on
AI image classifications with saliency map explanations demonstrate that our theory quantitatively
matches participants’ predictions of the AI.

1. Introduction
Modern AI systems are applied to high-impact domains,
such as medicine (Pesapane et al., 2018) and finance (Gogas
& Papadimitriou, 2021). These systems, powered by deep
neural networks, are notoriously opaque (Adadi & Berrada,
2018), making supervision and safe deployment challenging
(Guidotti et al., 2018). The field of explainable AI has produced many techniques for improving the legibility of AI
decisions to human users and regulators (Gunning & Aha,
*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science, Rutgers University–Newark, New Jersey, USA 2 School of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced
Study, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Scott ChengHsin Yang <scott.cheng.hsin.yang@gmail.com>, Tomas Folke
<tomas.folke@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2019; Arrieta et al., 2020). XAI has focused on developing
new methods that show high performance on technical metrics related to faithfulness (Hooker et al., 2019; Yeh et al.,
2019; Sundararajan et al., 2017) and explanation complexity
(Blanc et al., 2021; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Qi et al., 2020), but
there is no way to assess which methods will do well for a
given use-case (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). In other words,
there is no theory of explainability.
The goal of XAI is for humans to understand a target AI
system (Gunning & Aha, 2019; Miller, 2019; Doshi-Velez
& Kim, 2017). This “understanding” can be formalized as
congruence between the AI’s input-output mapping, and the
human mental model of that mapping. Good explanations
shift the human mental model to achieve this congruence.
As a consequence, a theory of explainability can be naturally
formalized as Bayesian updating. The initial human (mis-)
conception of the AI serves as a prior, and the explanations
provided modify this prior via a likelihood function that captures human inferential processes. An alternative approach
to explainability would be to estimate the relationship between explanation and human inference as a ML problem,
for example, by training on saliency maps as input, and
human inference of AI classification as output. However,
such an approach does not model human inference explicitly, and as a result suffers from all the standard problems
with black box models, such as unknown generalization
properties, fragility to out-of-distribution observations, and
challenges relating to debugging and auditing.
To avoid building black-boxes to explain black-boxes, a
formal theory of explainability must be constrained by cognitive science. We propose that humans model AI systems
the same way they model any other agent, allowing us to
draw on psychological work on belief-formation, generalization, and theory-of-mind. Our theory states that people
project their own beliefs onto the AI and update their beliefs
based on how they generalize self-generated explanations
to XAI explanations in a similarity space (Yang et al., 2021;
Shepard, 1987; Sloman & Rips, 1998). We built a cognitive
model formalizing these ideas, and compared its predictions
to human inference in a user study. We asked users to infer
AI classification on images given saliency-map explanations,
and found that our image-level model predictions correlated
strongly with user responses (Spearman’s ρ = .86). Variations to the similarity space or the generalization law that

