Showing Your Offline Reinforcement Learning Work:
Online Evaluation Budget Matters

Vladislav Kurenkov 1 Sergey Kolesnikov 1

Abstract
In this work, we argue for the importance of an online evaluation budget for a reliable comparison
of deep offline RL algorithms. First, we delineate that the online evaluation budget is problemdependent, where some problems allow for less
but others for more. And second, we demonstrate
that the preference between algorithms is budgetdependent across a diverse range of decisionmaking domains such as Robotics, Finance, and
Energy Management. Following the points above,
we suggest reporting the performance of deep
offline RL algorithms under varying online evaluation budgets. To facilitate this, we propose to
use a reporting tool from the NLP field, Expected
Validation Performance. This technique makes it
possible to reliably estimate expected maximum
performance under different budgets while not
requiring any additional computation beyond hyperparameter search. By employing this tool, we
also show that Behavioral Cloning is often more
favorable to offline RL algorithms when working
within a limited budget.

1. Introduction
In recent years, significant success has been achieved in applying Reinforcement Learning (RL) to different real-world
scenarios (Chen et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2019; Gauci et al.,
2019). Offline Reinforcement Learning (ORL) (Levine
et al., 2020) is pioneering a real-world adaptation of RL,
focusing on algorithms that can learn a policy from a fixed,
previously recorded dataset, without having to interact with
the environment during training. Many recent community
efforts were focused on advanced benchmarks (Fu et al.,
2021a; Gulcehre et al., 2021) and nuanced algorithm comparisons (Brandfonbrener et al., 2021a; Qin et al., 2021).
1
Tinkoff, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Vladislav
Kurenkov <v.kurenkov@tinkoff.ai>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

However, it is widely recognized that even deep online RL is
plagued with evaluation issues, such as insufficient account
for statistical variability (Agarwal et al., 2022), or sensitivity
to the choice of hyperparameters (Henderson et al., 2018).
The latter problem is one of the reasons why the results of
many deep RL methods are usually reported for a narrow
range of values.
When it comes to deep ORL algorithms, the choice of hyperparameters also plays a major role in the final performance
(Wu et al., 2019). While many in the community note that
the whole training and evaluation pipeline needs improvement (Fu et al., 2021b), the comparisons of new deep ORL
algorithms are still mostly done through online performance
reports on the best set of hyperparameters (Kostrikov et al.,
2021; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021).
In this paper, we argue that the hyperparameter search
should not be ignored in the deep offline RL setting, demonstrating that the conclusions about the algorithms change
when we control for the number of trained policies deployed
online1 . To this end, we introduce the notion of an online
budget, i.e. the number of policies deployed online, and
suggest to use an entire pipeline similar to the one in (Paine
et al., 2020) for reporting results: training, offline selection, and online evaluation, but one where the selection is
done by uniform sampling. As we will demonstrate, this
decision allows us to re-use the Expected Validations Performance (EVP) (Dodge et al., 2019) technique from the
NLP field to get reliable estimates of expected maximum
performance under different online budgets from just one
round of hyperparameter search.
Our Contributions Here, we list the main contributions of
our work:
• We demonstrate that the preference between deep offline RL algorithms is budget-dependent. We stress
that this is more critical for offline settings than for
online ones, and that current evaluation methodology
does not account for such dependence.
• We propose to use Expected Validation Performance
(Dodge et al., 2019), a technique actively employed
1

Code is available at tinkoff-ai.github.io/eop

