Identity-Disentangled Adversarial Augmentation for Self-Supervised Learning

Kaiwen Yang 1 Tianyi Zhou 2 3 Xinmei Tian 1 4 Dacheng Tao 5

Abstract

Data augmentation is critical to contrastive selfsupervised learning, whose goal is to distinguish
a sample’s augmentations (positives) from other
samples (negatives). However, strong augmentations may change the sample-identity of the
positives, while weak augmentation produces
easy positives/negatives leading to nearly-zero
loss and ineffective learning. In this paper, we
study a simple adversarial augmentation method
that can modify training data to be hard positives/negatives without distorting the key information about their original identities. In particular,
we decompose a sample x to be its variational
auto-encoder (VAE) reconstruction G(x) plus the
residual R(x) = x − G(x), where R(x) retains
most identity-distinctive information due to an
information-theoretic interpretation of the VAE
objective. We then adversarially perturb G(x) in
the VAE’s bottleneck space and adds it back to the
original R(x) as an augmentation, which is therefore sufficiently challenging for contrastive learning and meanwhile preserves the sample identity
intact. We apply this “identity-disentangled adversarial augmentation (IDAA)” to different selfsupervised learning methods. On multiple benchmark datasets, IDAA consistently improves both
their efficiency and generalization performance.
We further show that IDAA learned on a dataset
can be transferred to other datasets. Code is available at https://github.com/kai-wen-yang/IDAA.

1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
University of Washington, Seattle, USA 3 University of Maryland, College Park, USA 4 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei
Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China 5 JD Explore
Academy, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Tianyi Zhou <tianyizh@uw.edu>, Xinmei Tian <xinmei@ustc.edu.cn>, Dacheng
Tao <dacheng.tao@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Empowered by deep neural networks and the computational capability of recent hardware, machine learning has
achieved breakthroughs on some challenging problems
when sufficient labeled data is available. However, deep
learning is known to be data-hungry and annotating data in
many domains, e.g., medical care or predictions of protein
structures, are either difficult or expensive. To overcome
this limitation, self-supervised learning (SSL) methods train
a model on unlabeled data in a supervised learning manner using self-generated labels by manipulating the data,
e.g., rotation degrees (Gidaris et al., 2018), Jigzaw puzzle solutions (Noroozi & Favaro, 2016), clustering (Caron
et al., 2018), back-translation (Zhu et al., 2017), etc. These
methods recently start to perform on par with supervised
learning and exhibit potential to even surpass it (Chen et al.,
2020a;b). Moreover, their learned representations can be
generally applied to different downstream tasks.
Many widely-used SSL methods are built upon sampleidentity preservation tasks, e.g., contrastive learning (Oord
et al., 2018; Tian et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2020a) and consistency regularization (Chen & He, 2021; Grill et al., 2020;
Caron et al., 2020), which aim at learning representations
that can preserve the identity of the original sample after
applying data augmentations and thus distinguish the augmentations of different samples. For example, contrastive
learning targets on an representation space in which a sample (anchor) is closer to its own augmentations (positives)
than other samples or their augmentations (negatives). The
effectiveness of contrastive learning therefore heavily depends on the quality of data augmentations.
Most SSL methods (Ye et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020a; He
et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021) utilize pre-defined data augmentations to generate positives and negatives. However, as
shown in the example (green point) of Fig. 1, they are not
adaptive to the data manifold in the embedding space during
training and the generated augmentations can be too easy
for the sample identification task. In practice, these SSL
methods need tens to hundreds times of epochs required by
supervised learning to reach comparable performance (Chen
et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021). For the
same reason, large batch-size is common and necessary for
contrastive learning in order to involve sufficient hard negatives. Therefore, how to modify the positives/negatives

