Batch Greenkhorn Algorithm for Entropic-Regularized Multimarginal
Optimal Transport: Linear Rate of Convergence and Iteration Complexity

Vladimir R. Kostić 1 2 Saverio Salzo 1 Massimiliano Pontil 1 3

Abstract
In this work we propose a batch multimarginal
version of the Greenkhorn algorithm for the
entropic-regularized optimal transport problem.
This framework is general enough to cover, as particular cases, existing Sinkhorn and Greenkhorn
algorithms for the bi-marginal setting, and greedy
MultiSinkhorn for the general multimarginal case.
We provide a comprehensive convergence analysis based on the properties of the iterative Bregman projections method with greedy control. Linear rate of convergence as well as explicit bounds
on the iteration complexity are obtained. When
specialized to the above mentioned algorithms,
our results give new convergence rates or provide
key improvements over the state-of-the-art rates.
We present numerical experiments showing that
the flexibility of the batch can be exploited to improve performance of Sinkhorn algorithm both in
bi-marginal and multimarginal settings.

1. Introduction
Over the recent years the field of optimal transport (OT) (Villani, 2008) has received significant attention in machine
learning and data science, as it provides natural and powerful tools to compare probability distributions. In this paper
we study a general class of OT problems known as multimarginal optimal transport (MOT), whereby several probability distributions are coupled together in order to compute
a measure of their association, see e.g. (Pass, 2015; Benamou et al., 2016). While bi-marginal OT is well established
in the scientific community, and machine learning in partic1

Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Melen 83, 16152 Genova, Italy 2 Department of Mathematics and Informatics, Faculty
of Science, University of Novi Sad, Trg Dositeja Obradovića
4, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia 3 Department of Computer Science,
University College London, Gower Street WC1E 6BT,London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Vladimir R. Kostić
<vladimir.kostic@iit.it>, Saverio Salzo <saverio.salzo@iit.it>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ular, only recently MOT is receiving increasing interest due
to its applications, ranging from density functional theory
in quantum chemistry, to fluid dynamics, to economics, to
image processing, among others, see (Peyré & Cuturi, 2019)
and references therein. Particularly in machine learning,
MOT is gaining relevance for generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Cao et al., 2019), domain adaptation (He
et al., 2019), Wasserstein barycenters (Agueh & Carlier,
2011), clustering (Bento & Mi, 2021), Bayesian inference
of joint distributions (Frogner & Poggio, 2019) and multidynamics reinforcement learning (Cohen et al., 2021).
In this paper, we focus on the discrete formulation of MOT,
which consists in minimizing a linear cost function over all
the joint distributions with m ≥ 2 prescribed finitely supported marginals. It is well known that addressing directly
the MOT problem is computationally expensive. Furthermore, unlike the bi-marginal case, MOT is NP-Hard for certain costs, even approximately (Altschuler & Boix-Adserà,
2021). To overcome this issue, regularization techniques
have been widely considered. The key insight is to add a
strongly convex regularizer to the MOT objective. In this
respect, a popular choice is entropic-regularization, which,
in the bi-marginal case, leads to the well-known Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi, 2013). While the convergence properties of
Sinkhorn have been studied in detail (Peyré & Cuturi, 2019),
computational solutions for regularized multimarginal optimal transport (RMOT) are less developed. The principal
objective of this work is to propose a new and flexible algorithmic framework with strong convergence guarantees
which can be effective for both ROT and RMOT problems.
Related work. Two popular frameworks for analyzing algorithmic solutions for entropic-regularized OT problems
are iterative Bregman projections (IBP) and alternating
dual minimization (ADM). The multimarginal version of
Sinkhorn algorithm was first proposed by (Benamou et al.,
2015) in finite dimension and its convergence was established by viewing it as a special case of cyclic IBP, whose
global convergence is well-known (Bregman, 1967). However, this approach does not ensure any rate of convergence.
More recently, using the alternating minimization framework, this result was extended to infinite dimension (DiMarino & Gerolin, 2020) and even a global linear rate of

