Entropic Causal Inference: Graph Identifiability

Spencer Compton 1 2 Kristjan Greenewald 2 3 Dmitriy Katz 2 3 Murat Kocaoglu 4

Abstract
Entropic causal inference is a recent framework
for learning the causal graph between two variables from observational data by finding the
information-theoretically simplest structural explanation of the data, i.e., the model with smallest
entropy. In our work, we first extend the causal
graph identifiability result in the two-variable setting under relaxed assumptions. We then show
the first identifiability result using the entropic approach for learning causal graphs with more than
two nodes. Our approach utilizes the property
that ancestrality between a source node and its
descendants can be determined using the bivariate entropic tests. We provide a sound sequential
peeling algorithm for general graphs that relies
on this property. We also propose a heuristic algorithm for small graphs that shows strong empirical performance. We rigorously evaluate the
performance of our algorithms on synthetic data
generated from a variety of models, observing improvement over prior work. Finally we test our
algorithms on real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Causal reasoning is essential for high-quality decisionmaking, as, for instance, it improves interpretability and
enables counterfactual reasoning (Athey, 2015; Morgan &
Winship, 2015; Moraffah et al., 2020). By learning the relationships between causes and effects, we can predict how
various interventions would affect a system. Advances in
causality enable us to better answer questions such as “Why
does this phenomenon occur in the system?” or “What
could happen if the system were perturbed in this particular
way?” Moreover, causal inference methods are being utilized to tackle key challenges for reliability of ML systems,
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, USA 3 IBM Research,
Cambridge, USA 4 Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA. Correspondence to: Spencer Compton <scompton@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

such as domain adaptation (Magliacane et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2020) and generalization (e.g. via causal transportability or imputation) (Bareinboim & Pearl, 2012; Pearl &
Bareinboim, 2014; Squires et al., 2020).
Structural causal models (SCMs) represent relationships
in a system of random variables (Pearl, 2009). In particular, each variable is modeled with a structural equation that
characterizes how the variable is realized. Causal graphs
are directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) that are used to represent such systems, where nodes and edges correspond to
variables and the causal relations between these variables,
respectively. A variable’s structural equation is a function
of the variable’s corresponding node’s parents in the graph.
Learning such causal graphs can be done through a series of
interventions. However, in many settings it is not possible
to perform such interventions. A large amount of literature
has focused on learning the causal graph from observational
data with additional “faithfulness assumptions” (Spirtes
et al., 2000), though in general it is impossible to fully
learn the causal graph without stronger assumptions on the
generative model. A variety of stronger assumptions and
corresponding methodologies exist in the literature (Shimizu
et al., 2006; Hoyer et al., 2008; Loh & Bühlmann, 2014;
Peters & Bühlmann, 2014). Most of these methods, however,
are limited to continuous variables and thus cannot handle
categorical data, especially in the multivariate setting.
A recent framework explicitly designed to handle categorical data is entropic causal inference (Kocaoglu et al.,
2017a;b; Compton et al., 2020). At a high level, the underlying assumption of this approach is that true causal
mechanisms in nature are often “simple,” taking inspiration
from the Occam’s razor principle. The authors adopt an
information-theoretic realization of this principle by using
“entropy” to measure the complexity of a causal model. As
we further explore in this work, entropic causal inference
provides a means to measure the amount of randomness
a generative model would require to produce an observed
distribution. As Occam’s razor prefers simpler explanations, entropic causal inference prefers generative models
with small randomness. We do not expect following this
preference to always lead to the discovery of true causal relationships (just as one does not expect a simpler explanation
to be always be the correct one), but view this as a guiding

