IGLUE: A Benchmark for Transfer Learning
across Modalities, Tasks, and Languages
Emanuele Bugliarello 1 2 Fangyu Liu 3 Jonas Pfeiffer 4 5 Siva Reddy 2 6 Desmond Elliott 1
Edoardo Maria Ponti 2 6 Ivan Vulić 3

Abstract
Reliable evaluation benchmarks designed for
replicability and comprehensiveness have driven
progress in machine learning. Due to the lack of
a multilingual benchmark, however, vision-andlanguage research has mostly focused on English
language tasks. To fill this gap, we introduce
the Image-Grounded Language Understanding
Evaluation benchmark. IGLUE brings together—
by both aggregating pre-existing datasets and
creating new ones—visual question answering,
cross-modal retrieval, grounded reasoning, and
grounded entailment tasks across 20 diverse languages. Our benchmark enables the evaluation
of multilingual multimodal models for transfer
learning, not only in a zero-shot setting, but also
in newly defined few-shot learning setups. Based
on the evaluation of the available state-of-the-art
models, we find that translate-test transfer is superior to zero-shot transfer and that few-shot learning is hard to harness for many tasks. Moreover,
downstream performance is partially explained by
the amount of available unlabelled textual data for
pretraining, and only weakly by the typological
distance of target–source languages. We hope to
encourage future research efforts in this area by
releasing the benchmark to the community.

1. Introduction
Until recently, advances in multimodal vision-and-language
(V&L) modelling have predominantly focused on English or
a few high-resource Indo-European languages (Elliott et al.,
2016), disregarding the enormous diversity of the world’s
1
University of Copenhagen 2 Mila – Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute 3 University of Cambridge 4 TU Darmstadt
5
New York University 6 McGill University. Correspondence to:
Emanuele Bugliarello <emanuele@di.ku.dk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

languages and cultures (Bender, 2011; Ponti et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2021), which exacerbated the Anglo-centric bias
(Jauhar et al., 2018; Ponti et al., 2020) of V&L models.
Nonetheless, this trend is reversing by virtue of a series of
independent efforts in the the V&L research community:
on top of expanding multilingual image–sentence retrieval
to lower-resource languages (Srinivasan et al., 2021) and
additional modalities (Armitage et al., 2020), we have recently witnessed pioneering work on multimodal machine
translation (Yao & Wan, 2020; Huang et al., 2020), multilingual visual question answering (Pfeiffer et al., 2022),
multilingual text-to-video search (Huang et al., 2021; Lei
et al., 2021), multilingual visual reasoning (Liu et al., 2021),
and cross-modal retrieval (Jain et al., 2021). Yet, multilingual multimodal models (Ni et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2021)
are typically tested only on the task of cross-modal retrieval.
In order to incentivise and guide future research in multilingual V&L research, we introduce the Image-Grounded
Language Understanding Evaluation (IGLUE) benchmark.
We create IGLUE by collating current research threads in
this area and extending them with two datasets for crosslingual visual entailment (XVNLI) and image–text retrieval
(xFlickr&CO), for an even more comprehensive coverage of
tasks. IGLUE is the first evaluation suite for multilingual
multitask V&L modelling, comprising five datasets across
four structurally different tasks that require different levels
of syntactic-semantic V&L understanding in cross-lingual
setups: cross-modal retrieval, visual question answering,
natural language inference, and visual reasoning (Figure 1).
Aiming at a representative selection of languages, IGLUE
covers 20 typologically diverse languages, spanning 11 language families, 9 scripts, and 3 WALS-defined (Dryer &
Haspelmath, 2013) geographical macro-areas.
Similar to previous text-based, cross-lingual transfer benchmarks, such as XGLUE (Liang et al., 2020) and XTREME
(Hu et al., 2020), our V&L benchmark is designed to evaluate zero-shot transfer scenarios, where annotated training data is provided in English, but none in the target
language. In addition, contrary to the above-mentioned
datasets, IGLUE also provides standardised data splits to
guide cross-lingual few-shot learning experiments, which

