Modeling Strong and Human-Like Gameplay with KL-Regularized Search

Athul Paul Jacob * 1 2 David J. Wu * 1 Gabriele Farina * 3 Adam Lerer 1 Hengyuan Hu 1 Anton Bakhtin 1
Jacob Andreas 2 Noam Brown 1

Abstract
We consider the task of accurately modeling
strong human policies in multi-agent decisionmaking problems, given examples of human behavior. Imitation learning is effective at predicting human actions but may not match the strength
of expert humans (e.g., by sometimes committing blunders), while self-play learning and search
techniques such as AlphaZero lead to strong performance but may produce policies that differ
markedly from human behavior. In chess and
Go, we show that regularized search algorithms
that penalize KL divergence from an imitationlearned policy yield higher prediction accuracy of
strong humans and better performance than imitation learning alone. We then introduce a novel
regret minimization algorithm that is regularized
based on the KL divergence from an imitationlearned policy, and show that using this algorithm
for search in no-press Diplomacy yields a policy
that matches the human prediction accuracy of imitation learning while being substantially stronger.

1. Introduction
Learning algorithms based on self-play have matched or exceeded expert human performance in many games, such as
chess (Campbell et al., 2002; Silver et al., 2018), Go (Silver
et al., 2016; 2017), and poker (Moravčík et al., 2017; Brown
& Sandholm, 2017; 2019). However, the resulting policies often differ markedly from how humans play (McIlroyYoung et al., 2020a). This is a serious problem for humancomputer interactions that involve cooperation rather than
purely competition. In such settings, modeling the other
*Equal Contribution. 1 Meta AI Research, New York, NY, USA
CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Athul Paul Jacob <apjacob@mit.edu>, David J. Wu
<dwu@fb.com>, Gabriele Farina <gfarina@cs.cmu.edu>, Noam
Brown <noambrown@fb.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

human participants accurately is important for success. For
example, it is important for a self-driving car at a four-way
stop sign to conform to existing human conventions rather
than an arbitrary convention derived from self-play (Lerer &
Peysakhovich, 2019). Moreover, even in purely adversarial
games, the alien nature of AI policies makes it difficult for
humans to understand and learn from superhuman bots.
A common approach to modeling human behavior is imitation learning (IL) on human data, and then using such
models as a proxy for human play, whether directly optimizing against them, using them as test opponents, or
integrating them into a learning method in any number of
ways. However IL on expert human data often produces
policies that are much weaker than actual expert human play
in domains requiring strategic planning. For example, in Go,
no IL policy has ever reached the level of average human
professional players, despite decades of professional human
game records freely available.
In this paper, we study the problem of producing policies
that are both strong and human-like in games with complex strategic planning like chess, Go, Hanabi, and Diplomacy. In all four, we find that conducting search with KLregularization towards an IL policy results in agents that
match or exceed the prior state of the art for prediction accuracy of expert humans, while also better modeling expert
play.
In Section 3, we show that Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS)
with a human imitation-learned policy prior and value function surpasses prior state-of-the-art results for human prediction accuracy in chess and Go. As explained by Grill
et al. (2020), standard MCTS with a policy prior can be
viewed as a form of KL-regularized search, optimizing a
value function subject to a KL-divergence term with that
prior. Although MCTS has been extensively studied for
developing strong agents, it has been explored much less in
the context of developing human-like agents.
Section 4 builds on these findings and shows how to generalize them to a class of imperfect-information games (in
which ordinary MCTS is unsound and cannot be applied)
via a new algorithm for KL-regularized regret minimization. We show that existing regret minimization algorithms
achieve low accuracy in predicting expert human actions

