An iterative clustering algorithm for the Contextual Stochastic Block Model
with optimality guarantees

Guillaume Braun 1 Hemant Tyagi 1 Christophe Biernacki 1

Abstract
Real-world networks often come with side information that can help to improve the performance
of network analysis tasks such as clustering. Despite a large number of empirical and theoretical
studies conducted on network clustering methods during the past decade, the added value of
side information and the methods used to incorporate it optimally in clustering algorithms are
relatively less understood. We propose a new iterative algorithm to cluster networks with side
information for nodes (in the form of covariates)
and show that our algorithm is optimal under the
Contextual Symmetric Stochastic Block Model.
Our algorithm can be applied to general Contextual Stochastic Block Models and avoids hyperparameter tuning in contrast to previously proposed methods. We confirm our theoretical results on synthetic data experiments where our algorithm significantly outperforms other methods,
and show that it can also be applied to signed
graphs. Finally, we demonstrate the practical interest of our method on real data.

1. Introduction
The Stochastic Block Model (SBM) is a popular generative model for random graphs – introduced by (Holland
et al., 1983) – which captures the community structures of
networks often observed in the real world. Here, edges are
independent Bernoulli random variables with the probability of connection between two nodes depending only on
the communities to which they belong. It is typically used
as a benchmark to measure the performance of clustering
algorithms.
However, real-world networks often come with side infor1

Inria, Université de Lille, CNRS, Laboratoire de
mathématiques Painlevé, 59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France. Correspondence to: Guillaume Braun <guillaume.braun@inria.fr>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

mation in the form of nodes covariates which can be used
to improve clustering performance. For example, when analyzing interactions among people on a social network, we
have access to additional features such as gender, age, or
ethnicity that can be relevant for the clustering task. Other
examples, including biological networks and predator-prey
interaction networks are discussed in (Newman & Clauset,
2015).
The Contextual Stochastic Block Model (CSBM) is a simple
extension of the SBM that incorporates such side information: each node is associated with a Gaussian vector of
parameters depending only on the community to which the
node belongs; see Section 2 for details.
Several variants of this model and clustering algorithms
have been proposed in the literature to incorporate side information. These methods include model-based approaches
(Yang et al., 2013; Weng & Feng, 2016; Hric et al., 2016;
Emmons & Mucha, 2019; Stanley et al., 2019; Contisciani
et al., 2020; Fajardo-Fontiveros et al., 2022), spectral methods (Binkiewicz et al., 2017; Mele et al., 2019; Abbe et al.,
2020), modularity based optimization methods (Zhang et al.,
2015), belief propagation (Deshpande et al., 2018) and
semidefinite programming (SDP) based approaches (Yan
& Sarkar, 2020). Even if some of these algorithms come
with certain theoretical guarantees, the added value of side
information is in general not well understood. The recent
works of (Abbe et al., 2020), (Lu & Sen, 2020) and (Ma &
Nandy, 2021) clarify the situation by establishing information theoretic thresholds for exact recovery and detection
in a special case with two communities. However, the algorithm presented in (Abbe et al., 2020) is not likely to be
extended to a general CSBM with more than two (possibly
unequal-sized) communities, while the latter two results
focus on detection rather than consistency.
Our contributions. We make the following contributions
in this paper.
• We propose a new iterative algorithm for clustering networks that is fast and is applicable to various settings
including the general CSBM and also signed weighted
graphs as shown in experiments.

