Near-Optimal Learning of Extensive-Form Games with Imperfect Information

Yu Bai * 1 Chi Jin * 2 Song Mei * 3 Tiancheng Yu * 4

Abstract
This paper resolves the open question of
designing near-optimal algorithms for learning imperfect-information extensive-form games
from bandit feedback. We present the first line of
e
algorithms that require only O((XA
+ Y B)/ε2 )
episodes of play to find an ε-approximate Nash
equilibrium in two-player zero-sum games, where
X, Y are the number of information sets and A, B
are the number of actions for the two players.
This improves upon the best known sample com2
e
plexity of O((X
A + Y 2 B)/ε2 ) by a factor of
e
O(max{X, Y }), and matches the informationtheoretic lower bound up to logarithmic factors.
We achieve this sample complexity by two new
algorithms: Balanced Online Mirror Descent, and
Balanced Counterfactual Regret Minimization.
Both algorithms rely on novel approaches of integrating balanced exploration policies into their
classical counterparts. We also extend our results
to learning Coarse Correlated Equilibria in multiplayer general-sum games.

1. Introduction
Imperfect Information Games—games where players can
only make decisions based on partial information about
the true underlying state of the game—constitute an important challenge for modern artificial intelligence. The celebrated notion of Imperfect-Information Extensive-Form
games (IIEFGs) (Kuhn, 1953) offers a formulation for
games with both imperfect information and sequential play.
IIEFGs have been widely used for modeling real-world imperfect information games such as Poker (Heinrich et al.,
2015; Moravčı́k et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018),
Bridge (Tian et al., 2020), Scotland Yard (Schmid et al.,
2021), etc, and achieving strong performances therein.
*

Equal contribution 1 Salesforce Research 2 Princeton University 3 UC Berkeley 4 MIT. Correspondence to: Yu Bai
<yu.bai@salesforce.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A central question in IIEFGs is the problem of finding a
Nash equilibrium (NE) (Nash, 1950) in a two-player zerosum IIEFG with perfect recall. There is an extensive line
of work for solving this problem with full knowledge of the
game (or full feedback), by either reformulating as a linear program (Koller & Megiddo, 1992; Von Stengel, 1996;
Koller et al., 1996), first-order optimization methods (Hoda
et al., 2010; Kroer et al., 2015; 2018; Munos et al., 2020; Lee
et al., 2021), or Counterfactual Regret Minimization (Zinkevich et al., 2007; Lanctot et al., 2009; Johanson et al., 2012;
Tammelin, 2014; Schmid et al., 2019; Burch et al., 2019).
However, in the more challenging bandit feedback setting
where the game is not known and can only be learned from
random observations by repeated playing, the optimal sample complexity (i.e., the number of episodes required to
play) for learning an NE in IIEFGs remains open. Various approaches have been proposed recently for solving
this, including model-based exploration (Zhou et al., 2019;
Zhang & Sandholm, 2021), Online Mirror Descent with
loss estimation (Farina et al., 2021c; Kozuno et al., 2021),
and Monte-Carlo Counterfactual Regret Minimization (MCCFR) (Lanctot et al., 2009; Farina et al., 2020b; Farina &
Sandholm, 2021). In a two-player zero-sum IIEFG with
X, Y information sets (infosets) and A, B actions for the
two players respectively, the current best sample complexity
2
e
for learning an ε-approximate NE is O((X
A + Y 2 B)/ε2 )
achieved by a sample-based variant of Online Mirror Descent with implicit exploration (Kozuno et al., 2021). However, this sample complexity scales quadratically in X, Y
and still has a gap from the information-theoretic lower
bound Ω((XA + Y B)/ε2 ) which only scales linearly. This
gap is especially concerning from a practical point of view
as the number of infosets is often the dominating measure of
the game size in large real-world IIEFGs (Johanson, 2013).
In this paper, we resolve this open question by presenting
the first line of algorithms that achieve e
O((XA + Y B)/ε2 )
sample complexity for learning ε-NE in an IIEFG.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows.
• We design a new algorithm Balanced √
Online Mirror Descent (Balanced OMD) that achieves e
O( XAT ) regret for
the max player against adversarial opponents, and learns
an ε-NE within e
O((XA + Y B)/ε2 ) episodes of play when
run by both players in a self-play fashion (Section 3). These

