ProGCL: Rethinking Hard Negative Mining in Graph Contrastive Learning

Jun Xia 1 2 Lirong Wu 1 2 Ge Wang 1 2 Jintao Chen 3 Stan Z. Li 1 2

Abstract
Contrastive Learning (CL) has emerged as a dominant technique for unsupervised representation
learning which embeds augmented versions of
the anchor close to each other (positive samples)
and pushes the embeddings of other samples (negatives) apart. As revealed in recent studies, CL
can benefit from hard negatives (negatives that
are most similar to the anchor). However, we
observe limited benefits when we adopt existing
hard negative mining techniques of other domains
in Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL). We perform both experimental and theoretical analysis
on this phenomenon and find it can be attributed
to the message passing of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs). Unlike CL in other domains, most hard
negatives are potentially false negatives (negatives that share the same class with the anchor)
if they are selected merely according to the similarities between anchor and themselves, which
will undesirably push away the samples of the
same class. To remedy this deficiency, we propose an effective method, dubbed ProGCL, to
estimate the probability of a negative being true
one, which constitutes a more suitable measure for
negatives’ hardness together with similarity. Additionally, we devise two schemes (i.e., ProGCLweight and ProGCL-mix) to boost the performance of GCL. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ProGCL brings notable and consistent improvements over base GCL methods and
yields multiple state-of-the-art results on several
unsupervised benchmarks or even exceeds the
performance of supervised ones. Also, ProGCL
is readily pluggable into various negatives-based
GCL methods for performance improvement. We
release the code at https://github.com/
junxia97/ProGCL.
1

Westlake University 2 Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
School of Computer Science, Zhejiang University. Correspondence to: Jun Xia <xiajun@westlake.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(a) CIFAR-10 (Image)

(b) Coauthor-CS (Graph)

Figure 1. Similarity (cosine similarity between normalized embeddings of anchor and negatives) histograms of negatives. We adopt
SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) and GCA (Zhu et al., 2021c) for
CIFAR-10 and Coauthor-CS respectively. False (or true) negatives
denote the samples that are (or not) from the same class with the
anchor. Unlike CL, most negatives with larger similarities to the
anchor are false ones in GCL. More examples are in the appendix.

1. Introduction
Recently, Contrastive Learning (CL) has demonstrated unprecedented unsupervised performance in computer vision
(He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020), natural language processing (Gao et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2022) and graph
representation learning (Velickovic et al., 2019; Xia et al.,
2022b; Zhu et al., 2021c). As with metric learning (Kaya &
Bilge, 2019), existing works both theoretically and practically validate that hard negatives contribute more to CL. For
example, HCL (Robinson et al., 2021) develops a family of
unsupervised sampling methods for selecting hard negatives
and MoCHi (Kalantidis et al., 2020) mixes the hard negatives to synthesize more hard negative ones. However, we
observe minor improvement or even significant performance
drop when we adopt these negative mining techniques in
GCL (the results can be seen in Table 5). Concurrent to
our work, Zhu et al. (2021b) also observe that existing hard
negative mining techniques that work well in other domains
bring limited benefits to GCL. Unfortunately, they didn’t
provide any solution to tackle this issue.
To explain these phenomena, we first plot the negatives’
distributions over similarity of various datasets in Figure 1.
Note that we do not observe significant changes of negatives’ distribution (keep unimodal as shown in Figure 1(a))
during the training process of SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020)
on CIFAR-10 and other image datasets. However, for the

