Online Learning with Knapsacks: the Best of Both Worlds

Matteo Castiglioni * 1 Andrea Celli * 2 Christian Kroer 3

Abstract
We study online learning problems in which a
decision maker wants to maximize their expected
reward without violating a finite set of m resource
constraints. By casting the learning process over
a suitably defined space of strategy mixtures, we
recover strong duality on a Lagrangian relaxation
of the underlying optimization problem, even
for general settings with non-convex reward and
resource-consumption functions. Then, we provide the first best-of-both-worlds type framework
for this setting, with no-regret guarantees both under stochastic and adversarial inputs. Our framework yields the same regret guarantees of prior
work in the stochastic case. On the other hand,
when budgets grow at least linearly in the time
horizon, it allows us to provide a constant competitive ratio in the adversarial case, which improves
over the O(m log T ) competitive ratio of (Immorlica et al., 2019). Moreover, our framework allows the decision maker to handle non-convex
reward and cost functions. We provide two gametheoretic applications of our framework to give
further evidence of its flexibility.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study online learning problems in which the
decision maker has to satisfy supply or budget constraints.
In particular, the decision maker is endowed with m ≥ 1
limited resources which are consumed over time. For each
round t up to the time horizon T , the decision maker chooses
a strategy ξt which defines a probability measure over the
set of actions. Then, they observe some feedback about
*

Equal contribution 1 DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy 2 Department of Computing Sciences, Bocconi
University, Milan, Italy 3 IEOR Department, Columbia
University, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Matteo
Castiglioni <matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it>, Andrea Celli
<andrea.celli2@unibocconi.it>, Christian Kroer <christian.kroer@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the reward and resource consumption incurred by playing
ξt . The process stops at time horizon T , or when the total
consumption of some resource exceeds its budget. The goal
is to maximize the total reward. Our framework can be
instantiated both in the full-information feedback as well
as in the bandit feedback setting. In the full information
feedback setting, the decision maker observes the reward
function ft and resource-consumption function ct at each
t. In the bandit feedback setting they only get to observe
(ft (xt ), ct (xt )), where xt is the realized action selected
according to ξt .
Our framework subsumes the well-known Bandits with
Knapsacks problem originally introduced by Badanidiyuru
et al. (2013; 2018), which has various motivating applications such as dynamic pricing (Besbes & Zeevi, 2009;
Babaioff et al., 2012; Besbes & Zeevi, 2012; Wang et al.,
2014), dynamic procurement (Badanidiyuru et al., 2012;
Singla & Krause, 2013), and online ad allocation (Slivkins,
2013; Combes et al., 2015). Moreover, our framework also
subsumes online packing problems, in which the decision
maker observes full feedback before choosing a strategy
(Mehta et al., 2013; Buchbinder & Naor, 2009).
Original contributions We focus on the regime in which
B = Ω(T ), that is the budget grows at least linearly in
the time horizon T . This is the case, for example, when
the decision maker has a fixed per-iteration budget as in
most motivating applications, such as online advertising
(see, e.g., Balseiro et al. (2020b)). In this setting, we resolve
the following two open questions posed by Immorlica et al.
(2019):
• Is it possible to solve both stochastic and adversarial
version of BwK with exactly the same algorithm?
• Is it possible to obtain a constant-factor competitive
ratio in the adversarial case for the regime B = Ω(T )?
We answer both questions positively. In doing so, by casting
the learning process over a suitably defined space of strategy
mixtures, we recover strong duality of the Lagrangian relaxation of the underlying optimization problem even when ft
and ct are non-convex functions, and the set of available actions X may be non-convex and non-compact. This strictly
generalizes the setting studied by Immorlica et al. (2019).
We show that our meta-algorithm (Algorithm 1) guarantees
a tight regret bound in the stochastic case, matching known

