Causal Transformer for Estimating Counterfactual Outcomes

Valentyn Melnychuk 1 Dennis Frauen 1 Stefan Feuerriegel 1

Abstract
Estimating counterfactual outcomes over time
from observational data is relevant for many applications (e.g., personalized medicine). Yet, stateof-the-art methods build upon simple long shortterm memory (LSTM) networks, thus rendering
inferences for complex, long-range dependencies
challenging. In this paper, we develop a novel
Causal Transformer for estimating counterfactual
outcomes over time. Our model is specifically
designed to capture complex, long-range dependencies among time-varying confounders. For
this, we combine three transformer subnetworks
with separate inputs for time-varying covariates,
previous treatments, and previous outcomes into
a joint network with in-between cross-attentions.
We further develop a custom, end-to-end training
procedure for our Causal Transformer. Specifically, we propose a novel counterfactual domain
confusion loss to address confounding bias: it
aims to learn adversarial balanced representations,
so that they are predictive of the next outcome
but non-predictive of the current treatment assignment. We evaluate our Causal Transformer based
on synthetic and real-world datasets, where it
achieves superior performance over current baselines. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work proposing transformer-based architecture for estimating counterfactual outcomes from
longitudinal data.

1. Introduction
Decision-making in medicine requires precise knowledge
of individualized health outcomes over time after applying
different treatments (Huang & Ning, 2012; Hill & Su, 2013).
This then informs the choice of treatment plans and thus
ensures effective care personalized to individual patients.
1
LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Valentyn Melnychuk <melnychuk@lmu.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Traditionally, the gold standard for estimating the effects of
treatments are randomized controlled trials (RCTs). However, RCTs are costly, often impractical, or even unethical.
To address this, there is a growing interest in estimating
health outcomes over time from observational data, such as,
e. g., electronic health records.
Numerous methods have been proposed for estimating
(counterfactual) outcomes from observational data in the
static setting (van der Laan & Rubin, 2006; Chipman et al.,
2010; Johansson et al., 2016; Curth & van der Schaar, 2021;
Kuzmanovic et al., 2022). Different from that, we focus on
longitudinal settings, that is, over time. In fact, longitudinal data are nowadays paramount in medical practice. For
example, almost all electronic health records (EHRs) nowadays store sequences of medical events over time (Allam
et al., 2021). However, estimating counterfactual outcomes
over time is challenging. One reason is that counterfactual
outcomes are generally never observed. On top of that, directly estimating counterfactual outcomes with traditional
machine learning methods in the presence of (time-varying)
confounding has a larger generalization error of estimation
(Alaa & van der Schaar, 2018a), or is even biased (in case
of multiple-step-ahead prediction) (Robins & Hernán, 2009;
Frauen et al., 2022). Instead, tailored methods are needed.
To estimate counterfactual outcomes over time, state-ofthe-art methods make nowadays use of machine learning.
Prominent examples are: recurrent marginal structural networks (RMSNs) (Lim et al., 2018), counterfactual recurrent
network (CRN) (Bica et al., 2020), and G-Net (Li et al.,
2021). However, these methods build upon simple long
short-term memory (LSTM) networks, because of which
their ability to model complex, long-range dependencies
in observational data is limited. Long-range dependencies
are omnipresent in medical data; e. g., long-term treatment
effects have been observed for obesity (Latner et al., 2000),
multiple sclerosis (Sormani & Bruzzi, 2015), or diabetes
(Jacobson et al., 2013). To address this, we develop a Causal
Transformer (CT) for estimating counterfactual outcomes
over time. It is carefully designed to capture complex, longrange dependencies in medical data that are nowadays common in EHRs.
In this paper, we aim at estimating counterfactual outcomes
over time, that is, for one- and multi-step-ahead predictions.

