Label Ranking through Nonparametric Regression

Dimitris Fotakis 1 Alkis Kalavasis 1 Eleni Psaroudaki 1

Abstract
Label Ranking (LR) corresponds to the problem
of learning a hypothesis that maps features to
rankings over a finite set of labels. We adopt a
nonparametric regression approach to LR and obtain theoretical performance guarantees for this
fundamental practical problem. We introduce a
generative model for Label Ranking, in noiseless
and noisy nonparametric regression settings, and
provide sample complexity bounds for learning
algorithms in both cases. In the noiseless setting, we study the LR problem with full rankings
and provide computationally efficient algorithms
using decision trees and random forests in the
high-dimensional regime. In the noisy setting,
we consider the more general cases of LR with
incomplete and partial rankings from a statistical
viewpoint and obtain sample complexity bounds
using the One-Versus-One approach of multiclass
classification. Finally, we complement our theoretical contributions with experiments, aiming to
understand how the input regression noise affects
the observed output.

1. Introduction
Label Ranking (LR) studies the problem of learning a mapping from features to rankings over a finite set of labels.
This task emerges in many domains. Common practical illustrations include pattern recognition (Geng & Luo, 2014),
web advertisement (Djuric et al., 2014), sentiment analysis (Wang et al., 2011), document categorization (Jindal &
Taneja, 2015) and bio-informatics (Balasubramaniyan et al.,
2005). The importance of LR has spurred the development
of several approaches for tackling this task from the perspective of the applied CS community (Vembu & Gärtner,
2010; Zhou et al., 2014b).
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National
Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece. Correspondence
to: Eleni Psaroudaki <epsaroudaki@mail.ntua.gr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The overwhelming majority of these solutions comes with
experimental evaluation and no theoretical guarantees; e.g.,
algorithms based on decision trees are a workhorse for practical LR and lack theoretical guarantees. Given state-ofthe-art experimental results, based on Random Forests (see
Zhou & Qiu, 2018), we are highly motivated not only to
work towards a theoretical understanding of this central
learning problem but also to theoretically analyze how efficient tree-based methods can be under specific assumptions.
LR comprises a supervised learning problem that extends
multiclass classification (Dekel et al., 2003). In the latter, with instance domain X ⊆ Rd and set of labels
[k] := {1, . . . , k}, the learner draws i.i.d. labeled examples (x, y) ∈ X × [k] and aims to learn a hypothesis from
instances to labels, following the standard PAC model. In
LR, the learner observes labeled examples (x, σ) ∈ X × Sk
and the goal is to learn a hypothesis h : X → Sk from
instances to rankings of labels, where Sk is the symmetric group of k elements. The ranking h(x) corresponds to
the preference list of the feature x and, as mentioned in
previous works (Hüllermeier et al., 2008), a natural way to
represent preferences is to evaluate individual alternatives
through a real-valued utility (or score) function. Note that if
the training data offer the utility scores directly, the problem
is reduced to a standard regression problem.
In our work, we assume that there exists such an underlying
nonparametric score function m : X → [0, 1]k , mapping
features to score values. The value mi (x) corresponds to
the score assigned to the label i ∈ [k] for input x and
can be considered proportional to the posterior probability
Pr(x,y) [y = i|x]. For each LR example (x, σ), the label
σ is generated by sorting the underlying regression-score
vector m(x), i.e., σ = argsort(m(x) + ξ) (with some
regression noise ξ). We are also interested in cases where
some of the alternatives of σ are missing, i.e., we observe
incomplete rankings σ ∈ S≤k ; the way that such rankings
occur will be clarified later. Formally, we have:
Definition 1.1 (Distribution-free Nonparametric LR). Let
X ⊆ Rd , [k] be a set of labels, C be a class of functions
from X to [0, 1]k and Dx be an arbitrary distribution over
X. Consider a noise distribution E over Rk . Let m be an
unknown target function in C.
• An example oracle Ex(m, E) with complete rankings,

