Bayesian Learning with Information Gain Provably Bounds Risk for a Robust
Adversarial Defense

Bao Gia Doan 1 Ehsan Abbasnejad 1 Javen Qinfeng Shi 1 Damith C. Ranasinghe 1

Abstract
We present a new algorithm to learn a deep neural
network model robust against adversarial attacks.
Previous algorithms demonstrate an adversarially
trained Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) provides
improved robustness. We recognize the adversarial learning approach for approximating the
multi-modal posterior distribution of a Bayesian
model can lead to mode collapse; consequently,
the model’s achievements in robustness and performance are sub-optimal. Instead, we first propose preventing mode collapse to better approximate the multi-modal posterior distribution. Second, based on the intuition that a robust model
should ignore perturbations and only consider the
informative content of the input, we conceptualize and formulate an information gain objective to
measure and force the information learned from
both benign and adversarial training instances to
be similar. Importantly. we prove and demonstrate that minimizing the information gain objective allows the adversarial risk to approach the
conventional empirical risk. We believe our efforts provide a step toward a basis for a principled method of adversarially training BNNs.
Our model demonstrate significantly improved
robustness–up to 20%–compared with adversarial
training (Madry et al., 2018) and Adv-BNN (Liu
et al., 2019) under PGD attacks with 0.035 distortion on both CIFAR-10 and STL-10 datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated impressive performance on challenging tasks, such as image
recognition (He et al., 2016) and natural language process1

School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide,
SA, Australia.
Correspondence to: Bao Gia Doan <giabao.doan@adelaide.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ing (Vaswani et al., 2017). Despite the impressive performance, DNNs are poor at quantifying the predictive uncertainty and tend to produce overconfident predictions. Consequently, DNNs are shown to be vulnerable to easily crafted
perturbations added to the inputs—so-called adversarial examples (AEs) (Szegedy et al., 2014)—to significantly hinder
their performance. In image classification tasks, these perturbations are imperceptible to human eyes (Goodfellow
et al., 2015) but can drastically degrade a DNN’s performance. There are various methods to find such perturbations in whitebox (Madry et al., 2018; Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Papernot et al., 2016a; Yuan
et al., 2021) and blackbox settings (Brendel et al., 2018;
Cheng et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Vo et al., 2022a;b).
Alarmingly, these threats are also shown to be effective
in the physical world (Kurakin et al., 2018; Eykholt et al.,
2018) and effective in transferring across models to perform
black-box attacks (Papernot et al., 2016a; 2017). Adversarial perturbations pose a realistic threat for DNN applications
and motivate the need to develop robust DNNs.
Adversarial Training. Despite the immense effort to overcome threats posed by adversarial examples, training a DNN
robust against these attacks is challenging. Athalye et al.
(2018a) have shown that one of the most robust defenses
against the threat is Adversarial Training (Madry et al.,
2018). Now, a network is trained with adversarial examples
to build robustness against input perturbations post model
deployment. But, as mentioned by Ye & Zhu (2018), the
adversarial training algorithm relies on the “point estimate"
approach of a deep neural network—a fixed set of network
parameters maps the input to the output. Essentially, a point
estimate with a choice of parameters only defines a single
decision boundary that could be easily manipulated with
a stronger adversarial input beyond the pre-defined adversarial constraints, e.g. maximum norm of perturbations.
Alternatively, we can use multiple decision boundaries from
a distribution of model parameters and integrate out the effects of parameter choice in the model. That is the premise
of Bayesian Deep Neural Network (BNN) learning methods (Welling & Teh, 2011) aiming to learn a distribution
over the model parameters. Now, the output predictive distribution is obtained by integrating out the model parameters
sampled from their distribution.

