A Tighter Analysis of Spectral Clustering, and Beyond

Peter Macgregor 1 He Sun 1

Abstract
This work studies the classical spectral clustering algorithm which embeds the vertices of some
graph G = (VG , EG ) into Rk using k eigenvectors of some matrix of G, and applies k-means
to partition VG into k clusters. Our first result
is a tighter analysis on the performance of spectral clustering, and explains why it works under
some much weaker condition than the ones studied in the literature. For the second result, we
show that, by applying fewer than k eigenvectors
to construct the embedding, spectral clustering
is able to produce better output for many practical instances; this result is the first of its kind
in spectral clustering. Besides its conceptual and
theoretical significance, the practical impact of
our work is demonstrated by the empirical analysis on both synthetic and real-world datasets, in
which spectral clustering produces comparable or
better results with fewer than k eigenvectors.

1. Introduction
Graph clustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervised
learning, and has comprehensive applications in computer
science and related scientific fields. Among various techniques to solve graph clustering problems, spectral clustering is probably the easiest one to implement, and has
been widely applied in practice. Spectral clustering can be
easily described as follows: for any graph G = (VG , EG )
and some k ∈ Z+ as input, spectral clustering embeds the
vertices of VG into Rk based on the bottom k eigenvectors
of the Laplacian matrix of G, and employs k-means on the
embedded points to partition VG into k clusters. Thanks to
its simplicity and excellent performance in practice, spectral clustering has been widely applied over the past three
decades (Spielman & Teng, 1996).
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Peter Macgregor <peter.macgregor@ed.ac.uk>, He Sun <h.sun@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this work we study spectral clustering, and present two
results. Our first result is a tighter analysis of spectral clustering for well-clustered graphs. Informally, we analyse
the performance guarantee of spectral clustering under a
simple assumption1 on the input graph. While all the previous work (e.g., (Lee et al., 2014; Kolev & Mehlhorn, 2016;
Mizutani, 2021; Peng et al., 2017)) on the same problem
suggests that the assumption on the input graph must depend
on k, our result demonstrates that the performance of spectral clustering can be rigorously analysed under a general
condition independent of k. To the best of our knowledge,
our work presents the first result of its kind, and hence we
believe that this result and the novel analysis used in its
proof are important, and might have further applications in
graph clustering.
Secondly, we study the clustering problem in which the
crossing edges between the optimal clusters {Si }ki=1 present
some noticeable pattern, which we call the meta-graph in
this work. Notice that, when viewing every cluster Si as a
“giant vertex”, our meta-graph captures the intrinsic connection between the optimal clusters, and could be significantly
different from a clique graph. We prove that, when this
is the case, one can simply apply classical spectral clustering while employing fewer than k eigenvectors to construct
the embedding and, surprisingly, this will produce a better
clustering result. The significance of this result is further
demonstrated by our extensive experimental analysis on the
well-known BSDS, MNIST, and USPS datasets (Arbelaez
et al., 2011; Hull, 1994; LeCun et al., 1998). While we
discuss the experimental details in Section 6, the performance of our algorithm is showcased in Figure 1: in order
to find 6 and 45 clusters, spectral clustering with 3 and 7
eigenvectors produce better results than the ones with 6 and
45 eigenvectors according to the default metric of the BSDS
dataset.
1.1. Related work
Our first result on the analysis of spectral clustering is tightly
related to a number of research that analyses spectral clustering algorithms under various conditions (e.g., (Gharan &
Trevisan, 2014; Lee et al., 2014; Kolev & Mehlhorn, 2016;
Mizutani, 2021; Ng et al., 2001; Peng et al., 2017)). While
1

This assumption will be formally defined in Section 3.

