Optimistic Linear Support and Successor Features
as a Basis for Optimal Policy Transfer

Lucas N. Alegre 1 Ana L. C. Bazzan 1 Bruno C. da Silva 2

Abstract
In many real-world applications, reinforcement
learning (RL) agents might have to solve multiple
tasks, each one typically modeled via a reward
function. If reward functions are expressed linearly, and the agent has previously learned a set
of policies for different tasks, successor features
(SFs) can be exploited to combine such policies
and identify reasonable solutions for new problems. However, the identified solutions are not
guaranteed to be optimal. We introduce a novel
algorithm that addresses this limitation. It allows
RL agents to combine existing policies and directly identify optimal policies for arbitrary new
problems, without requiring any further interactions with the environment. We first show (under
mild assumptions) that the transfer learning problem tackled by SFs is equivalent to the problem
of learning to optimize multiple objectives in RL.
We then introduce an SF-based extension of the
Optimistic Linear Support algorithm to learn a
set of policies whose SFs form a convex coverage set. We prove that policies in this set can be
combined via generalized policy improvement to
construct optimal behaviors for any new linearlyexpressible tasks, without requiring any additional
training samples. We empirically show that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art competing algorithms both in discrete and continuous domains
under value function approximation.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied
to solve many complex problems in a wide range of domains
1
Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande
do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil 2 University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA. Correspondence to: Lucas N. Alegre <lnalegre@inf.ufrgs.br>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Bellemare et al.,
2020). However, real-world problems often require optimizing multiple tasks or identifying solutions that optimize
possibly conflicting objectives, such as efficiency, energy,
and safety. Typically, these tasks or objectives are encoded
via separate reward functions. A simple solution to solve
problems in this setting is to combine the different objectives
of the agent according to some weighting scheme, thereby
producing a single scalar reward. This allows for standard
RL algorithms to be used, but introduces the question of
how to balance the relative importance of each objective
(Vamplew et al., 2021). As an alternative, one can identify
multiple decision-making policies—each one specialized
in solving a particular objective or a particular weighted
combination of objectives. This is useful because it allows
the user of the algorithm to select a policy based on the
particular task they are tackling, or based on their current
relative preferences over objectives.
Consider an agent that needs to solve multiple tasks whose
reward functions can be linearly-expressed (i.e., represented
as the weighted sum of reward features and reward weights).
In this setting, successor features (SFs) (Barreto et al., 2017)
have been shown to be a promising approach capable of
composing previously-learned policies to solve novel tasks
(Barreto et al., 2018; Borsa et al., 2019; Gimelfarb et al.,
2021; Nemecek & Parr, 2021). SFs, in particular, allow for
the policy evaluation and policy improvement steps (which
underlie most RL algorithms) to be extended to the case
where the agent needs (i) to evaluate a policy on multiple
tasks; or (ii) to construct a policy (appropriate for solving
a novel task) by improving upon an existing set of policies.
These processes are known, respectively, as generalized policy evaluation (GPE) and generalized policy improvement
(GPI) (Barreto et al., 2020). This is relevant because, given
the weights describing a new reward function (or task), GPI
can be used to construct a policy that performs better than
the existing, previously-learned ones known to the agent.
However, the solutions identified by GPI are not guaranteed
to be optimal policies. This leads to an important open
problem: how to construct a set of policies, such that
combining them directly leads to the optimal policy for
any novel linearly-expressible tasks?

