Streaming Inference for Infinite Feature Models

Rylan Schaeffer 1 2 Yilun Du 3 Gabrielle Kaili-May Liu 2 Ila Rani Fiete 2 4

Abstract
Unsupervised learning from a continuous stream
of data is arguably one of the most common
and most challenging problems facing intelligent
agents. One class of unsupervised models, collectively termed feature models, attempts unsupervised discovery of latent features underlying the
data and includes common models such as PCA,
ICA, and NMF. However, if the data arrives in
a continuous stream, determining the number of
features is a significant challenge, and the number may grow with time. In this work, we make
feature models significantly more applicable to
streaming data by imbuing them with the ability
to create new features, online, in a probabilistic
and principled manner. To achieve this, we derive
a novel recursive form of the Indian Buffet Process, which we term the Recursive IBP (R-IBP).
We demonstrate that R-IBP can be be used as a
prior for feature models to efficiently infer a posterior over an unbounded number of latent features,
with quasilinear average time complexity and logarithmic average space complexity. We compare
R-IBP to existing sampling and variational baselines in two feature models (Linear Gaussian and
Factor Analysis) and demonstrate on synthetic
and real data that R-IBP achieves comparable or
better performance in significantly less time.

1. Introduction
Feature models are a broad class of unsupervised probabilistic models that aim to decompose data into an unknown
number of unknown features under certain assumptions,
a class which includes principal component analysis, factor analysis, independent component analysis, non-negative
*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science, Stanford University 2 Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT 3 Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT 4 McGovern Institute for
Brain Research, MIT. Correspondence to: Rylan Schaeffer
<rschaef@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Motivation for Infinite Feature Models. As more data
are observed, a feature model (here: PCA) requires increasingly
more features to explain the data (Omniglot handwritten characters)
(left) or else becomes increasingly unable to do so (right).

matrix factorization, matching pursuit, and more.
A fundamental problem in feature modeling – analogous to
the problem in mixture modeling of choosing the number
of clusters – is choosing the number of features. Users
typically employ one of two approaches: Either (1) prespecifying a fixed number of features or (2) retroactively
choosing a number of features after seeing all the data based
on some criterion (e.g., selecting the number of principal
components necessary to explain 95% of the variance). In
a streaming setting, however, where data are received over
time, neither approach suffices. For instance, representing
handwritten characters with a fixed number of principal
components becomes inadequate as more characters are
encountered (Fig. 1). Thus the number of features should
flexibly adapt to the data in the streaming context.
Such flexibility is a goal not only because the streaming
setting for feature models is important in its own right, but
also because feature models are a pervasive approach taken
in neuroscience and cognitive science to explain how intelligent agents model the world as they move through it
(Olshausen & Field, 1997; Hyvärinen, 2010; Pehlevan et al.,
2015). Intelligent agents, from mice to humans to mobile
devices, must deal with streaming data since these agents
operate with limited memory that renders storage of and
computation on all previously seen data prohibitive.
This raises the question of how to perform efficient streaming inference for “infinite” feature models, a question we
answer here. Following the approach of Schaeffer et al.
(2021) to efficient streaming inference for “infinite” mixture models, we first show that the Indian Buffet Process

