Efficient Test-Time Model Adaptation without Forgetting

Shuaicheng Niu * 1 2 Jiaxiang Wu * 3 Yifan Zhang * 4 Yaofo Chen 1
Shijian Zheng 1 Peilin Zhao 3 Mingkui Tan 1 5

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) seeks to tackle potential distribution shifts between training and
testing data by adapting a given model w.r.t. any
testing sample. This task is particularly important for deep models when the test environment
changes frequently. Although some recent attempts have been made to handle this task, we
still face two practical challenges: 1) existing
methods have to perform backward computation
for each test sample, resulting in unbearable prediction cost to many applications; 2) while existing TTA solutions can significantly improve
the test performance on out-of-distribution data,
they often suffer from severe performance degradation on in-distribution data after TTA (known
as catastrophic forgetting). In this paper, we
point out that not all the test samples contribute
equally to model adaptation, and high-entropy
ones may lead to noisy gradients that could disrupt the model. Motivated by this, we propose
an active sample selection criterion to identify reliable and non-redundant samples, on which the
model is updated to minimize the entropy loss
for test-time adaptation. Furthermore, to alleviate
the forgetting issue, we introduce a Fisher regularizer to constrain important model parameters from
drastic changes, where the Fisher importance is estimated from test samples with generated pseudo
labels. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10-C,
ImageNet-C, and ImageNet-R verify the effectiveness of our proposed method. Code is available
at https://github.com/mr-eggplant/EATA.
*

Equal contribution. This work is done when Shuaicheng Niu
works as an intern in Tencent AI Lab. 1 School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China 2 Pazhou
Laboratory, China 3 Tencent AI Lab, China 4 National University of
Singapore, Singapore 5 Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent
Robot, Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Mingkui
Tan <mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved excellent performance in many challenging tasks, including image classification (He et al., 2016), video recognition (Wang et al.,
2018; Zeng et al., 2020; 2021; Chen et al., 2021), and many
other areas (Choi et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
2021). One prerequisite behind the success of DNNs is that
the test samples are drawn from the same distribution as the
training data, which, however, is often violated in many realworld applications. In practice, test samples may encounter
natural variations or corruptions (also called distribution
shift), such as changes in lighting resulting from weather
change and unexpected noises resulting from sensor degradation (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019; Koh et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, models are often very sensitive to such distribution shifts and suffer severe performance degradation.
Recently, several attempts (Sun et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021b;c; Wang et al.,
2022) have been proposed to handle the distribution shifts
by online adapting a model at test time (called test-time
adaptation). Test-time training (TTT) (Sun et al., 2020) first
proposes this pipeline. Given a test sample, TTT first finetunes the model via rotation classification (Gidaris et al.,
2018) and then makes a prediction using the updated model.
However, TTT still relies on additional training modifications (adding rotation head into the model), and thus the
access to original training data is also compulsory. These
requirements may be infeasible if, e.g., the training data is
unavailable due to privacy/storage concerns or the training
involves unexpected heavy computation. To avoid these,
Tent (Wang et al., 2021) and MEMO (Zhang et al., 2021b)
propose methods for fully test-time adaptation, in which the
adaptation only involves test samples and a trained model.
Although recent test-time adaptation methods are effective
at handling test shifts, they still suffer the following limitations. First, since we adapt models at test time, the adaptation efficiency is quite important in many latency-sensitive
scenarios. However, prior methods rely on performing backward computation for each test sample (even multiple backward passes for a single sample, such as TTT (Sun et al.,
2020) and MEMO (Zhang et al., 2021b)). As performing
back-propagation too much is time-consuming, these ap-

