Universality of Winning Tickets: A Renormalization Group Perspective

William T. Redman 1 Tianlong Chen 2 Zhangyang Wang 2 Akshunna S. Dogra 3 4

Abstract
Foundational work on the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis has suggested an exciting corollary: winning
tickets found in the context of one task can be
transferred to similar tasks, possibly even across
different architectures. This has generated broad
interest, but methods to study this universality are
lacking. We make use of renormalization group
theory, a powerful tool from theoretical physics,
to address this need. We find that iterative magnitude pruning, the principal algorithm used for
discovering winning tickets, is a renormalization
group scheme, and can be viewed as inducing a
flow in parameter space. We demonstrate that
ResNet-50 models with transferable winning tickets have flows with common properties, as would
be expected from the theory. Similar observations
are made for BERT models, with evidence that
their flows are near fixed points. Additionally, we
leverage our framework to study winning tickets
transferred across ResNet architectures, observing that smaller models have flows with more uniform properties than larger models, complicating
transfer between them.

1. Introduction
The lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) for deep neural networks
(DNNs) proposes that DNNs contain sparse subnetworks
that can be trained in isolation and reach performance that
is equal to, or better than, that of the full DNN in the same
number of training iterations (Frankle & Carbin, 2019; Frankle et al., 2020a). These subnetworks are called winning
lottery tickets. The LTH has provided paradigm shifting
1

Interdepartmental Graduate Program in Dynamical Neuroscience, University of California, Santa Barbara. 2 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at
Austin. 3 Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London.
4
EPSRC CDT in Mathematics of Random Systems: Analysis,
Modelling and Simulation. Correspondence to: William T. Redman <wredman@ucsb.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

insight into the success of dense DNNs, suggesting that
the emergence of winning tickets, with increasing DNN
size, plays a key role, reminiscent of the maxim “more is
different” (Anderson, 1972).
In recent years, researchers have found an intriguing corollary: winning tickets found in the context of one task can
be transferred to related tasks (Desai et al., 2019; Mehta,
2019; Morcos et al., 2019; Soelen & Sheppard, 2019; Chen
et al., 2020; Gohil et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021a; Sabatelli
et al., 2021), possibly even across architectures (Chen et al.,
2021c). Their existence has recently been proven (Burkholz
et al., 2022), further supporting the idea that they are a
general phenomenon. In addition to having applications of
practical interest, these results imply that winning tickets
can be used to study how tasks and architectures are “similar”. However, there currently exist few tools with which
to study this universality, and there exists no way to know,
without directly performing transfer experiments, which
previously studied tasks a given winning ticket can be transferred to. These are, in part, due to the fact that there is a
general lack of theoretical work on iterative magnitude pruning (IMP) [although see Tanaka et al. (2020) and Elesedy
et al. (2021)], the most commonly used method for finding
winning tickets.
This is in striking analogy to the state of statistical physics
in the early-to-mid–20th century. Empirical evidence suggested that disparate systems, governed by seemingly different underlying physics, exhibited the same, universal
properties near their phase transitions. While heuristic methods provided insight (Kadanoff, 1966), a full theory from
first principles was not realized until the development of the
renormalization group (RG) (Wilson, 1971a;b; 1975).
RG theory has not only provided a framework for explaining
universal behavior near phase transitions, but also a scheme
for grouping systems by that behavior. This classification,
introduced via the notion of universality classes, has allowed
for a detailed understanding of materials (Tougaard, 1997;
Winter & Mours, 1997; Durin & Zapperi, 2000; Bonilla
et al., 2010). In addition, it provides knowledge as to what
previously classified materials a newly studied substance
behaves like (see Appendix A for additional background on
RG theory in physics).
The analogy between universality in RG and LTH theories

