Generalizing to New Physical Systems via Context-Informed Dynamics Model

Jérémie Donà

1

Matthieu Kirchmeyer 1 2 * Yuan Yin 1 *
Nicolas Baskiotis 1 Alain Rakotomamonjy 2 3 Patrick Gallinari 1 2

Abstract
Data-driven approaches to modeling physical
systems fail to generalize to unseen systems that
share the same general dynamics with the learning domain, but correspond to different physical
contexts. We propose a new framework for this
key problem, context-informed dynamics adaptation (CoDA), which takes into account the distributional shift across systems for fast and efficient adaptation to new dynamics. CoDA leverages multiple environments, each associated to a
different dynamic, and learns to condition the dynamics model on contextual parameters, specific
to each environment. The conditioning is performed via a hypernetwork, learned jointly with
a context vector from observed data. The proposed formulation constrains the search hypothesis space for fast adaptation and better generalization across environments with few samples.
We theoretically motivate our approach and show
state-of-the-art generalization results on a set of
nonlinear dynamics, representative of a variety of
application domains. We also show, on these systems, that new system parameters can be inferred
from context vectors with minimal supervision.

1. Introduction
Neural Network (NN) approaches to modeling dynamical
systems have recently raised the interest of several communities leading to an increasing number of contributions.
This topic was explored in several domains, ranging from
simple dynamics e.g. Hamiltonian systems (Greydanus
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020b) to more complex settings
e.g. fluid dynamics (Kochkov et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021;
*

1
Equal contribution
CNRS-ISIR, Sorbonne University,
2
Paris, France Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France 3 Université de
Rouen, LITIS, France. Correspondence to: Matthieu Kirchmeyer <matthieu.kirchmeyer@sorbonne-universite.fr>, Yuan
Yin <yuan.yin@sorbonne-universite.fr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Wandel et al., 2021), earth system science and climate (Reichstein et al., 2019), or health (Fresca et al., 2020). NN
emulators are attractive as they may for example provide
fast and low cost approximations to complex numerical
simulations (Duraisamy et al., 2019; Kochkov et al., 2021),
complement existing simulation models when the physical
law is partially known (Yin et al., 2021b) or even offer solutions when classical solvers fail e.g. with very high number of variables (Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2018).
A model of a real-world dynamical system should account
for a wide range of contexts resulting from different external forces, spatio-temporal conditions, boundary conditions, sensors characteristics or system parameters. These
contexts characterize the dynamics phenomenon. For instance, in cardiac electrophysiology (Neic et al., 2017;
Fresca et al., 2020), each patient has its own specificities
and represents a particular context. In the study of epidemics’ diffusion (Shaier et al., 2021), computational models should handle a variety of spatial, temporal or even sociological contexts. The same holds for most physical problems, e.g. forecasting of spatial-location-dependent dynamics in climate (de Bézenac et al., 2018), fluid dynamics prediction under distinct external forces (Li et al., 2021), etc.
The physics approach for modeling dynamical systems relies on a strong prior knowledge about the underlying phenomenon. This provides a causal mechanism which is embedded in a physical dynamics model, usually a system
of differential equations, and allows the physical model to
handle a whole set of contexts. Moreover, it is often possible to adapt the model to new or evolving situations, e.g.
via data assimilation (Kalman, 1960; Courtier et al., 1994).
In contrast, Expected Risk Minimization (ERM) based machine learning (ML) fails to generalize to unseen dynamics. Indeed, it requires i.i.d. data for training and inference
while dynamical observations are non-i.i.d. as the distributions change with initial conditions or physical contexts.
Thus any ML framework that handles this question should
consider other assumptions. A common one used e.g. in
domain generalization (Wang et al., 2021b), states that data
come from several environments a.k.a. domains, each with
a different distribution. Training is performed on a sample
of the environments and test corresponds to new ones. Do-

