EDEN: Communication-Efficient and Robust Distributed
Mean Estimation for Federated Learning

Shay Vargaftik * 1 Ran Ben Basat * 2 Amit Portnoy * 3
Gal Mendelson 4 Yaniv Ben-Itzhak 1 Michael Mitzenmacher 5

Abstract
Distributed Mean Estimation (DME) is a central
building block in federated learning, where clients
send local gradients to a parameter server for averaging and updating the model. Due to communication constraints, clients often use lossy compression techniques to compress the gradients,
resulting in estimation inaccuracies.
DME is more challenging when clients have diverse network conditions, such as constrained
communication budgets and packet losses. In
such settings, DME techniques often incur a significant increase in the estimation error leading to
degraded learning performance.
In this work, we propose a robust DME technique named EDEN that naturally handles heterogeneous communication budgets and packet
losses. We derive appealing theoretical guarantees for EDEN and evaluate it empirically. Our
results demonstrate that EDEN consistently improves over state-of-the-art DME techniques.

1. Introduction
In the Distributed Mean Estimation (DME) problem, each
of n senders has a d-dimensional vector of real numbers.
Each sender sends information over the network to a central
receiver, who uses this information to estimate the mean
of these vectors. This problem is a central building block
in many federated learning scenarios, where at each training round, a parameter server averages clients’ parameter updates (i.e., neural network gradients) and updates its
model (McMahan et al., 2017). As neural network gradients
are often large (e.g., can exceed a billion dimensions (Dean
*

Equal contribution
VMware Research 2 University College London 3 Ben-Gurion
University 4 Stanford University 5 Harvard University.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2012; Shoeybi et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019)), transmission over the network is often a bottleneck, and thus
applying lossy compression to the gradients can be essential
to adhere to client communication constraints, reduce the
training time, and allow better inclusion and scalability.
Typically, the desired design property is that the receiver’s
resulting estimate will be unbiased. That is, the receiver’s
derived estimate x̂ for a sender’s vector x ∈ Rd should
satisfy E[x̂] = x. Unbiasedness is attractive because, under
natural conditions (including independence of estimates), as
it yields a Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the mean of
the received estimates and the mean of the true vectors that
decays linearly with respect to the number of clients (e.g.,
see Vargaftik et al. (2021)). Besides being a useful property
for DME in isolation, in federated learning contexts this can
remove the need for error feedback mechanisms that are
commonly used to deal with biased estimates (Seide et al.,
2014; Karimireddy et al., 2019), but are often not practical
due to client participation patterns (Kairouz et al., 2021).
For unbiasedness, modern DME techniques employ randomized rounding techniques, commonly known as stochastic
quantization (SQ), to map each vector coordinate to one of a
limited number of possibilities, yielding a compressed form.
Some SQ-based techniques have known issues when used
in DME. In particular, the resulting error is sensitive to the
vector’s distribution and the difference between the largest
and smallest coordinates. This is specifically problematic in
federated learning, where neural network gradients’ coordinates can differ by orders of magnitude, rendering vanilla
SQ inapplicable for accurate DME in many settings.
To address this limitation, recent works suggest the vector
be randomly rotated prior to stochastic quantization (Suresh
et al., 2017). That is, the clients and the parameter server
draw rotation matrices according to some known distribution
(e.g., uniform); the clients then send the quantization of the
rotated vectors while the parameter server applies the inverse
rotation on the estimated rotated vector. Intuitively, the
coordinates of a vector rotated by uniform random rotation
are identically distributed (albeit weakly dependent) and are
closely concentrated around their mean, leading to a small

