Attentional Meta-learners for Few-shot Polythetic Classification

Ben Day * 1 Ramon Viñas * 1 Nikola Simidjievski 1 Pietro Liò 1

Abstract
Polythetic classifications, based on shared patterns of features that need neither be universal
nor constant among members of a class, are common in the natural world and greatly outnumber
monothetic classifications over a set of features.
We show that threshold meta-learners, such as
Prototypical Networks, require an embedding dimension that is exponential in the number of taskrelevant features to emulate these functions. In
contrast, attentional classifiers, such as Matching
Networks, are polythetic by default and able to
solve these problems with a linear embedding dimension. However, we find that in the presence of
task-irrelevant features, inherent to meta-learning
problems, attentional models are susceptible to
misclassification. To address this challenge, we
propose a self-attention feature-selection mechanism that adaptively dilutes non-discriminative
features. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach in meta-learning Boolean functions, and
synthetic and real-world few-shot learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Classification meta-learning is typically approached from
the perspective of few-shot learning: Can we train a model
that generalises to unseen ‘natural’ classes at test time? For
example, in the Omniglot task (Lake et al., 2011) we have
access to a labelled set of handwritten characters during
training and we are tasked with distinguishing new characters, from unseen writing systems, at test time. From this
perspective each example is associated with a consistent
class and members of that class share a common set of properties (e.g. all handwritten characters have the shape of the
underlying character class). Alternatively, we may consider
meta-learning over unseen ways of categorising: Can we
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Ben Day <bjd39@cam.ac.uk.edu>, Ramon Viñas
<rv340@cam.ac.uk.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Section of Methodus Plantarum Sexualis,
Georg Ehret, illustrating Systema Naturae (Linnaeus,
1735). The defining attributes of a class do not need
to be exclusive or universal, and useful classifications
are often contextual.

train a model on character recognition that generalises to
alphabet recognition? or to distinguishing upper from lower
case letters? In this setting, features need to be understood in
relation to a given classification: For instance, when tasked
with distinguishing equids (horses, zebras, donkeys) from
big cats, the presence of stripes on both zebra and tigers is
irrelevant, and potentially misleading. On the other hand,
stripes are the key to distinguishing horses from zebra.
Understanding features in the context of a classification is
central to the concepts of monothetic and polythetic classes
recognised in the fields of taxonomy and knowledge organisation. Monothetic classifications are based on universal
attributes: there is at least one necessary and sufficient attribute for class membership. Polythetic classifications are
instead based on combinations of attributes, none of which
are sufficient in isolation to indicate membership and, potentially, none of which are necessary. Carl Linneaus, inventor
of the binomial nomenclature for species and “father of
taxonomy,” recognised that natural orders could not be defined monothetically, lacking features that were unique and
constant over families and that, until such features could
be found, such classifications were necessarily polythetic
(Stevens, 1998; Hjørland, 2017).

