Universal Hopfield Networks: A General Framework for
Single-Shot Associative Memory Models

Beren Millidge 1 Tommaso Salvatori 2 Yuhang Song 1 2 Thomas Lukasiewicz 3 2 Rafal Bogacz 1

Abstract
A large number of neural network models of
associative memory have been proposed in the
literature. These include the classical Hopfield
networks (HNs), sparse distributed memories
(SDMs), and more recently the modern continuous Hopfield networks (MCHNs), which possess
close links with self-attention in machine learning.
In this paper, we propose a general framework for
understanding the operation of such memory networks as a sequence of three operations: similarity, separation, and projection. We derive all these
memory models as instances of our general framework with differing similarity and separation functions. We extend the mathematical framework of
Krotov & Hopfield (2020) to express general associative memory models using neural network
dynamics with local computation, and derive a
general energy function that is a Lyapunov function of the dynamics. Finally, using our framework, we empirically investigate the capacity of
using different similarity functions for these associative memory models, beyond the dot product
similarity measure, and demonstrate empirically
that Euclidean or Manhattan distance similarity
metrics perform substantially better in practice on
many tasks, enabling a more robust retrieval and
higher memory capacity than existing models.

1. Introduction
Associative, or ‘semantic‘, memories are memory systems
where data points are retrieved not by an explicit address,
but by making a query to the system of approximately the
same type as the data points that it stores. The system then
1
MRC Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of Oxford,
UK. 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK.
3
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria. Corresponding author: Yuhang Song <yuhang.song@some.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

returns the closest data point to the query according to some
metric. For instance, an associative memory system, when
given an image, can be used to return other ‘similar’ images.
It is often argued that the brain similarly stores and retrieves
its own memories (Hinton & Anderson, 2014; Rolls, 2013;
Tsodyks & Sejnowski, 1995), as it is a common experience
to be able to recall a memory given a partial cue, e.g., recalling a song given just a few notes (Bonetti et al., 2021). A
large literature of neuroscience and computational theories
has developed models of how such associative memory systems could be implemented in relatively biologically plausible neural network architectures (Kanerva, 1988; 1992;
Hopfield, 1982; Hinton & Anderson, 2014).
Two classical and influential models are the Hopfield network (HN) (Hopfield, 1982; 1984) and the sparse distributed
memory (SDM) (Kanerva, 1988; 1992; Jaeckel, 1989).
More recently, they have been generalized to the moderncontinuous Hopfield network (MCHN) (Ramsauer et al.,
2020) and the modern-continuous sparse distributed memory (MCSDM) (Bricken & Pehlevan, 2021), which have substantially improved performance, close relationships with
transformer attention, and can handle continuous inputs.
Here, we propose a unified framework that encompasses
all these models as simple instantiations of a more general framework, which we call universal Hopfield networks
(UHNs). Mathematically, the UHN can be described as a
function UHN : RI → RO mapping a vector in an input
space of dimension I to a vector in an output space of dimension O, with two additional inputs of a memory matrix
M of size N × I, consisting of a set of N stored patterns,
and a projection matrix P of size O × N , consisting of a
potentially different set of stored patterns with dimension O
for heteroassociation. The dimensionality of the input and
output patterns are allowed to differ to enable heteroassociative memories to be described in the same framework. For
autoassociative memories I = O. The UHN function can
be factorized into a sequence of three operations: similarity,
separation, and projection, illustrated in Figure 1. First,
similarity matching between the query and a stored set of
memory vectors to produce a vector of similarity scores.
Second, separation to numerically magnify small differences in original similarity scores into large differences in

