The Fundamental Price of Secure Aggregation in Differentially Private
Federated Learning

Wei-Ning Chen * 1 2 Christopher A. Choquette-Choo * 2 Peter Kairouz * 2 Ananda Theertha Suresh * 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of training a d dimensional model with distributed differential privacy
(DP) where secure aggregation (SecAgg) is used
to ensure that the server only sees the noisy sum of
n model updates in every training round. Taking
into account the constraints imposed by SecAgg,
we characterize the fundamental communication
cost required to obtain the best accuracy achievable under ε central DP (i.e. under a fully trusted
server and no communication constraints).
Our

results show that Õ min(n2 ε2 , d) bits per client
are both sufficient and necessary, and this fundamental limit can be achieved by a linear scheme
based on sparse random projections. This provides a significant improvement relative to stateof-the-art SecAgg distributed DP schemes which
use Õ(d log(d/ε2 )) bits per client.
Empirically, we evaluate our proposed scheme
on real-world federated learning tasks. We find
that our theoretical analysis is well matched in
practice. In particular, we show that we can reduce the communication cost to under 1.78 bits
per parameter in realistic privacy settings without decreasing test-time performance. Our work
hence theoretically and empirically specifies the
fundamental price of using SecAgg.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a widely used machine learning
framework where multiple clients collaborate in learning a
model under the coordination of a central server (McMahan
et al., 2017a; Kairouz et al., 2021b). One of the primary
attractions of FL is that it provides data confidentiality and
can provide a level of privacy to participating clients through
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Wei-Ning Chen <wnchen@stanford.edu>,
Christopher A. Choquette-Choo <cchoquette@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

data minimization: the raw client data never leaves the device, and only updates to models (e.g., gradient updates)
are sent back to the central server. This provides practical
privacy improvements over centralized settings because updates typically contain less information about the clients,
because they are more focused on the learning task, and also
only need to be held ephemerally by the server
However, this vanilla federated learning does not provide
any formal or provable privacy guarantees. To do so, FL is
often combined with differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al.,
2006b). This can be done in one of two ways1 : 1) perturbing
the aggregated (local) model updates at the server before
updating the global model, or 2) perturbing each client’s
model update locally and using a cryptographic multi-party
computation protocol to ensure that the server only sees
the noisy aggregate. The former is referred to as central
DP, and it relies on the clients’ trust in the server because
any sensitive information contained in the model updates
is revealed to and temporally stored on the server. The
latter is referred to as distributed DP (Dwork et al., 2006a;
Kairouz et al., 2021a; Agarwal et al., 2021; 2018), and
it offers privacy guarantees with respect to an honest-butcurious server. Thus, a key technology for formalizing
and strengthening FL’s privacy guarantees is a secure vector
sum protocol called secure aggregation (SecAgg) (Bonawitz
et al., 2016b; Bell et al., 2020), which lets the server see the
aggregate client updates but not the individual ones.
Despite enhancing the clients’ privacy, aggregating model
updates via SecAgg drastically increases the computation
and communication overheads (Bonawitz et al., 2016b;
2019). This is even worse in federated settings where communication occurs over bandwidth-limited wireless links,
and the extra communication costs may become a bottleneck
that hampers efficient training of large-scale machine learning models. In fact, high computation can cause failures
of SecAgg and prevent FL training of large models or with
many clients (see Section 7 for a discussion on the how the
communication cost limits the cohort size of FL in practice).
For example, Kairouz et al. (2021a) reports that when train1

Local DP is yet another alternative, but it incurs higher utility
loss and is therefore not typically used in practice.

