A Langevin-like Sampler for Discrete Distributions

Ruqi Zhang 1 Xingchao Liu 1 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract
We propose discrete Langevin proposal (DLP), a
simple and scalable gradient-based proposal for
sampling complex high-dimensional discrete distributions. In contrast to Gibbs sampling-based
methods, DLP is able to update all coordinates
in parallel in a single step and the magnitude
of changes is controlled by a stepsize. This allows a cheap and efficient exploration in the space
of high-dimensional and strongly correlated variables. We prove the efficiency of DLP by showing that the asymptotic bias of its stationary distribution is zero for log-quadratic distributions,
and is small for distributions that are close to
being log-quadratic. With DLP, we develop several variants of sampling algorithms, including
unadjusted, Metropolis-adjusted, stochastic and
preconditioned versions. DLP outperforms many
popular alternatives on a wide variety of tasks,
including Ising models, restricted Boltzmann machines, deep energy-based models, binary neural
networks and language generation.

1. Introduction
Discrete variables are ubiquitous in machine learning problems ranging from discrete data such as text (Wang &
Cho, 2019; Gu et al., 2018) and genome (Wang et al.,
2010), to discrete models such as low-precision neural networks (Courbariaux et al., 2016; Peters & Welling, 2018).
As data and models become large-scale and complicated,
there is an urgent need for efficient sampling algorithms on
complex high-dimensional discrete distributions.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are typically used to perform sampling, of which the efficiency is
largely affected by the proposal distribution (Brooks et al.,
2011). For general discrete distributions, Gibbs sampling
is broadly applied, which resamples a variable from its
1
The University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Ruqi
Zhang <ruqiz@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

conditional distribution with the remaining variables fixed.
Recently, gradient information has been incorporated in the
proposal of Gibbs sampling, leading to a substantial boost to
the convergence speed in discrete spaces (Grathwohl et al.,
2021). However, Gibbs-like proposals often suffer from
high-dimensional and highly correlated distributions due to
conducting a small update per step. In contrast, proposals in
continuous spaces that leverage gradients can usually make
large effective moves. One of the most popular methods is
the Langevin algorithm (Grenander & Miller, 1994; Roberts
& Tweedie, 1996; Roberts & Stramer, 2002), which drives
the sampler towards high probability regions following a
Langevin diffusion. Due to its simplicity and efficiency, the
Langevin algorithm has been widely used for sampling from
complicated high-dimensional continuous distributions in
machine learning and deep learning tasks (Welling & Teh,
2011; Li et al., 2016; Grathwohl et al., 2019; Song & Ermon,
2019). Its great success makes us ask: what is the simplest
and most natural analogue of the Langevin algorithm in
discrete domains?
In this paper, we develop such a Langevin-like proposal for
discrete distributions, which can update many coordinates
of the variable based on one gradient computation. By reforming the proposal from the standard Langevin algorithm,
we find that it can be easily adapted to discrete spaces and
can be cheaply computed in parallel due to coordinatewise
factorization. We call this proposal discrete Langevin proposal (DLP). Inheriting from the Langevin algorithm, DLP
is able to update all coordinates in a single step in parallel
and the magnitude of changes is controlled by a stepsize.
Using this proposal, we are able to obtain high-quality samples conveniently on a variety of tasks. We summarize our
contributions as the following:
• We propose discrete Langevin proposal (DLP), a
gradient-based proposal for sampling discrete distributions. DLP is able to update many coordinates in a
single step with only one gradient computation.
• We theoretically prove the efficiency of DLP by showing that without a Metropolis-Hastings correction, the
asymptotic bias of DLP is zero for log-quadratic distributions, and is small for distributions that are close to
being log-quadratic.

