Class-Imbalanced Semi-Supervised Learning with Adaptive Thresholding

Lan-Zhe Guo 1 Yu-Feng Li 1

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has proven to be
successful in overcoming labeling difficulties by
leveraging unlabeled data. Previous SSL algorithms typically assume a balanced class distribution. However, real-world datasets are usually
class-imbalanced, causing the performance of existing SSL algorithms to be seriously decreased.
One essential reason is that pseudo-labels for unlabeled data are selected based on a fixed confidence threshold, resulting in low performance on
minority classes. In this paper, we develop a simple yet effective framework, which only involves
adaptive thresholding for different classes in SSL
algorithms, and achieves remarkable performance
improvement on more than twenty imbalance ratios. Specifically, we explicitly optimize the number of pseudo-labels for each class in the SSL
objective, so as to simultaneously obtain adaptive
thresholds and minimize empirical risk. Moreover, the determination of the adaptive threshold
can be efficiently obtained by a closed-form solution. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms.

1. Introduction
Machine learning, especially deep learning, has been repeatedly reported that can achieve competitive or even better performance than human beings on certain supervised learning
tasks (LeCun et al., 2015). These tasks, however, crucially
rely on the availability of a large number of labeled training data. In many practical tasks, large-scale well-labeled
datasets are difficult to obtain, as the acquisition of labeled
data requires huge human labor and financial costs (Zhou,
2017; Li et al., 2019). On the other hand, there are usually abundant unlabeled data. Therefore, it is desirable for
machine learning models to work with unlabeled data.
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. Correspondence to:
Yu-Feng Li <liyf@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is one of the most promising learning paradigms to bypass the labeling cost by leveraging an abundance of unlabeled data (Chapelle et al., 2006).
In much recent work, SSL can be categorized into several
main classes in terms of the use of unlabeled data, such as
entropy minimization (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2005), consistency regularization (Laine & Aila, 2017; Tarvainen &
Valpola, 2017; Miyato et al., 2018), pseudo-labeling (Lee,
2013), and their combinations (Berthelot et al., 2019; Sohn
et al., 2020; Berthelot et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021). Due to
its capability to handle both labeled and unlabeled data, SSL
has been successfully applied into various tasks such as image classification (Sohn et al., 2020), object detection (Jeong
et al., 2019), semantic segmentation (Souly et al., 2017),
text classification (Miyato et al., 2017), etc. It has been
reported in certain cases, such as image classification (Sohn
et al., 2020), SSL methods can achieve the performance of
purely supervised learning even when a substantial portion
of the labels in a given dataset has been discarded.
All of the positive results of SSL, however, are based on a
basic assumption that the class distribution is balanced in
both labeled and unlabeled data, i.e., the number of examples in each class is nearly the same. Such an assumption is
difficult to hold in practical applications. For example, in
computer vision tasks, the frequency distribution of visual
categories in our daily life is inherently imbalanced (Wang
et al., 2017); in medical diagnosis tasks, a malignant lesion
is rare compared to benign ones (Johnson & Khoshgoftaar,
2019), to name but a few.
It is well-known that machine learning models suffer severe
performance degradation with such an imbalanced class
distribution (Dong et al., 2019). Unfortunately, the class imbalance issue can be more problematic for SSL algorithms
since they generate pseudo-labels for unlabeled data from
the model’s biased predictions. Take the state-of-the-art
SSL algorithm FixMatch (Sohn et al., 2020) for an example, FixMatch uses the unlabeled examples with a fixed
high-confidence prediction (e.g., 0.95) in classification tasks.
However, the prediction confidence is biased towards the
majority classes under class-imbalanced distribution, adopting a fixed threshold for all classes results in the minority
classes losing too many unlabeled examples with correct
pseudo-labels, resulting in low performance (see Figure 1).
That is to say, it may not be good enough for SSL algorithms

