Framework for Evaluating Faithfulness of Local Explanations

Sanjoy Dasgupta 1 Nave Frost 2 Michal Moshkovitz 2

Abstract
We study the faithfulness of an explanation system to the underlying prediction model. We show
that this can be captured by two properties, consistency and sufficiency, and introduce quantitative
measures of the extent to which these hold. Interestingly, these measures depend on the test-time
data distribution. For a variety of existing explanation systems, such as anchors, we analytically
study these quantities. We also provide estimators
and sample complexity bounds for empirically determining the faithfulness of black-box explanation systems. Finally, we experimentally validate
the new properties and estimators.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is an integral part of many human-facing
computer systems and is increasingly a key component of
decisions that have profound effects on people’s lives. There
are many dangers that come with this. For instance, statistical models can easily be error-prone in regions of the input
space that are not well-reflected in training data but that end
up arising in practice. Or they can be excessively complicated in ways that impact their generalization ability. Or
they might implicitly make their decisions based on criteria
that would not considered acceptable by society. For all
these reasons, and many others, it is crucial to have models
that are understandable or can explain their predictions to
humans (Kim & Doshi-Velez, 2021).
Explanations of a classification system can take many forms,
but should accurately reflect the classifier’s inner workings.
Perhaps the best scenario is where the model itself is inherently understandable by humans. This is arguably true of
decision trees, for instance. If the tree is small, then it can
be fathomed in its entirety: a global explanation of every
1
University of California San Diego. 2 Tel-Aviv University.
Correspondence to: Sanjoy Dasgupta <dasgupta@eng.ucsd.edu>,
Nave Frost <navefrost@mail.tau.ac.il>, Michal Moshkovitz
<moshkovitz5@mail.tau.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

prediction the model makes. If the tree is large, it can be
hard to understand as a whole, but as long as it has modest
depth, any individual prediction can be locally explained
using the features on the corresponding root-to-leaf path.
A common situation is where the predictive model is not
inherently understandable, either at a global or local level,
and so a separate post-hoc explanation is needed. These
are typically local, in the sense that they explain a specific
prediction and perhaps also explain what the model does
on other nearby instances. Over the past few years, many
strategies for post-hoc explanation have emerged, such as
LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), Anchors (Ribeiro et al., 2018),
and SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017).
Explanation systems need to satisfy two broad criteria: the
explanations should (i) make sense to a human user and (ii)
be an accurate reflection of the actual predictive model. The
first of these is hard to pin down because it is inextricably
linked to vagaries of human cognition: is a linear model
“understandable”, for instance? Further research is needed to
better characterize what (i) might mean. This paper focuses
on criterion (ii): gauging the faithfulness of explanations
to the underlying predictive model, or put differently, the
internal coherence of the overall explanation system.
1.1. Contributions
We focus on classification problems and on explanation
systems that consist of two components:
• A prediction function (the classifier) f : X → Y,
where X is the instance space and Y is the label space.
• An explanation function e : X → E, where E is the
space of explanations, or properties.
The explanation function explains the prediction f (x) by
pointing out some relevant property of the input. These
properties can be quite general. Consider, for instance,
a decision tree. Its prediction f (x) on a point x can be
explained by the features on the root-to-leaf path for x; the
explanation e(x) is the conjunction of these features, e.g.
“(x2 > 0.5) ∧ (x4 = true) ∧ (x10 < −1)”. Thus the set E
has a conjunction for each leaf of the tree.
Or consider a classifier that takes an image x of a landscape

