SPDY: Accurate Pruning with Speedup Guarantees

Elias Frantar 1 Dan Alistarh 1 2

Abstract
The recent focus on the efficiency of deep neural
networks (DNNs) has led to significant work on
model compression approaches, of which weight
pruning is one of the most popular. At the same
time, there is rapidly-growing computational support for efficiently executing the unstructuredsparse models obtained via pruning. Yet, most existing pruning methods minimize just the number
of remaining weights, i.e. the size of the model,
rather than optimizing for inference time. We
address this gap by introducing SPDY, a new compression method which automatically determines
layer-wise sparsity targets achieving a desired inference speedup on a given system, while minimizing accuracy loss. SPDY is the composition of
two new techniques. The first is an efficient and
general dynamic programming algorithm for solving constrained layer-wise compression problems,
given a set of layer-wise error scores. The second
technique is a local search procedure for automatically determining such scores in an accurate and
robust manner. Experiments across popular vision
and language models show that SPDY guarantees
speedups while recovering higher accuracy relative to existing strategies, both for one-shot and
gradual pruning scenarios, and is compatible with
most existing pruning approaches. We also extend our approach to the recently-proposed task
of pruning with very little data, where we achieve
the best known accuracy recovery when pruning
to the GPU-supported 2:4 sparsity pattern.

1. Introduction
Increasing the efficiency of deep neural networks (DNNs)
has the potential to not just reduce the cost of computeand energy-hungry models, but also to make them more
readily available and privacy-conscious, by allowing model
execution on end-devices. There are many approaches for
1
IST Austria 2 Neural Magic. Correspondence to: Elias Frantar
<elias.frantar@ist.ac.at>, Dan Alistarh <dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

compressing DNNs for increased efficiency (Hoefler et al.,
2021; Gholami et al., 2021). The one we focus on in this
paper is sparsity, i.e. setting to zero a large fraction of the
values in the big parameter matrices of a neural network.
Sparsification of neural networks has a long history (LeCun
et al., 1990), and current pruning techniques can shrink
models by more than an order of magnitude, while largely
preserving accuracy (Hoefler et al., 2021).
Pruning methods are usually categorized by the granularity
at which they are applied: Structured pruning aims to drop
groups of related weights, e.g. filters in a convolutional layer,
which directly leads to improved inference speeds, but is
usually limited in the compression amount before significant
accuracy loss occurs. Unstructured pruning methods have
traditionally been focused on reducing model size, as they
drop individual weights in often random patterns, which is
harder to translate into faster execution. More recent semistructured methods (Mishra et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021;
Lagunas et al., 2021) trade off additional structure in the
zeroed weights, e.g. small rectangular blocks, with higher
accuracy loss relative to unstructured pruning.
On the runtime side, increasingly advanced algorithms have
been introduced to provide computational speedup also for
unstructured sparse models, whether executed on CPUs
(Kurtz et al., 2020; NeuralMagic, 2021; Elsen et al., 2020),
GPUs (Gale et al., 2020), or specialized hardware (Han et al.,
2015; Dave et al., 2021). Currently, unstructured pruning
provides some of the best compression-to-accuracy tradeoffs among existing approaches (Hoefler et al., 2021), and
efficient sparse inference on CPUs, which is our main focus,
is particularly interesting in terms of accessibility and cost.
Further, several commodity CPUs, e.g. current AMD models, do not support efficient quantized arithmetic, making
sparsity their primary means of accelerating inference.
One key practical issue is that state-of-the-art unstructured
pruning methods, e.g. (Evci et al., 2020; Singh & Alistarh, 2020; Schwarz et al., 2021; Peste et al., 2021), do
not directly take the behavior of acceleration methods into
account, while existing speedup-aware structured pruning
methods are not straightforward to adapt to the unstructured
case. This means that sparsifying a model to reach a certain
speed, rather than a certain size, with minimal accuracy loss,
is still an extremely laborious process.
Contribution. We provide a general solution to this prob-

