Accelerated Gradient Methods for Geodesically Convex Optimization:
Tractable Algorithms and Convergence Analysis

Jungbin Kim 1 Insoon Yang 1

Abstract

Riemannian manifolds (Vishnoi, 2018, Section 1). Geodesically convex optimization has a wide range of applications,
including covariance estimation (Wiesel, 2012), Gaussian
mixture models (Hosseini & Sra, 2015; 2020), matrix square
root computation (Sra, 2015), metric learning (Zadeh et al.,
2016), and optimistic likelihood calculation (Nguyen et al.,
2019). See (Zhang & Sra, 2016, Section 1.1) for more
examples.

We propose computationally tractable accelerated first-order methods for Riemannian optimization, extending the Nesterov accelerated gradient
(NAG) method. For both geodesically convex and
geodesically strongly convex objective functions,
our algorithms are shown to have the same iteration complexities as those for the NAG method on
Euclidean spaces, under only standard assumptions. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed scheme is the first fully accelerated method
for geodesically convex optimization problems.
Our convergence analysis makes use of novel
metric distortion lemmas as well as carefully designed potential functions. A connection with the
continuous-time dynamics for modeling Riemannian acceleration in (Alimisis et al., 2020) is also
identified by letting the stepsize tend to zero. We
validate our theoretical results through numerical
experiments.

The iteration complexity theory for first-order algorithms
is well known when M = Rn . Given an initial point x0 ,
gradient descent (GD) updates the iterates as
xk+1 = xk − γk grad f (xk ) .

For a convex and L-smooth objective function f , GD with
γk = L1 finds an -approximate solution, i.e., f (xk ) −

f (x∗ ) ≤ , in O L iterations. For a µ-strongly convex
1
and L-smooth objective function 
f , GD with
 γk = L finds

L
an -approximate solution in O L
iterations. A
µ log 
major breakthrough in first-order algorithms is the Nesterov
accelerated gradient (NAG) method that achieves a faster
convergence rate than GD (Nesterov, 1983). Given an initial
point x0 = z0 , the NAG scheme updates the iterates as

1. Introduction
We consider Riemannian optimization problems of the form
min

x∈N ⊆M

f (x),

(GD)

(1)

where M is a Riemannian manifold, N is an open geodesically uniquely convex subset of M , and f : N → R is
a continuously differentiable geodesically convex function.
Geodesically convex optimization is the Riemannian version of convex optimization and has salient features such
as every local minimum being a global minimum. More
interestingly, some (constrained) nonconvex optimization
problems defined in the Euclidean space can be considered
geodesically convex optimization problems on appropriate
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Insoon Yang <insoonyang@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

yk = xk + τk (zk − xk )

xk+1 = yk − αk grad f (yk )

(NAG)

zk+1 = yk + βk (zk − yk ) − γk grad f (yk ) .

For a convex and L-smooth function f , NAG with τk =
2
1
k+2
k = 2L (NAG-C) finds an k+2 , αk = L , βk = 1, γ
q 
L
approximate solution in O
iterations (Tseng, 2008).

For a µ-strongly convex
f,
√ and L-smooth objective function
pµ
µ/L
1
√
NAG with τk =
, αk = L , βk = 1 − L ,
1+ µ/L
pµ 1
γk =
(NAG-SC) finds an -approximate solution
q L µ

L
L
in O
log
iterations (Nesterov, 2018).
µ

Considering the problem (1) for any Riemannian manifold M , (Zhang & Sra, 2016) successfully generalizes the
complexity analysis of GD to Riemannian gradient descent
(RGD),
xk+1 = expxk (−γk grad f (xk )) ,

(RGD)

