Accelerating Bayesian Optimization for Biological
Sequence Design with Denoising Autoencoders

Samuel Stanton 1 Wesley J. Maddox 1 Nate Gruver 2 Phillip Maffettone 3 Emily Delaney 3
Peyton Greenside 3 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modern drug development is a very costly endeavor, with
estimates ranging from $310M to $2.8B for each new drug
(Wouters et al., 2020). There are three major phases of drug
development: 1) target discovery, the proposal of a biological mechanism hypothesized to treat a specific medical
condition, 2) drug design, the specification of a molecular
payload which will interact with the proposed mechanism,
and 3) clinical trials, the evaluation of the efficacy and safety
1

Center for Data Science, New York University, New York,
USA 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, USA 3 BigHat Biosciences, San Mateo, CA,
USA. Correspondence to: Samuel Stanton <ss13641@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

80

DsRed.M1
mScarlet
DsRed.T4
AdRed
40
mRouge
60

Stability

Bayesian optimization (BayesOpt) is a gold standard for query-efficient continuous optimization.
However, its adoption for drug design has been
hindered by the discrete, high-dimensional nature of the decision variables. We develop a new
approach (LaMBO) which jointly trains a denoising autoencoder with a discriminative multi-task
Gaussian process head, allowing gradient-based
optimization of multi-objective acquisition functions in the latent space of the autoencoder. These
acquisition functions allow LaMBO to balance
the explore-exploit tradeoff over multiple design
rounds, and to balance objective tradeoffs by optimizing sequences at many different points on
the Pareto frontier. We evaluate LaMBO on two
small-molecule design tasks, and introduce new
tasks optimizing in silico and in vitro properties of
large-molecule fluorescent proteins. In our experiments LaMBO outperforms genetic optimizers
and does not require a large pretraining corpus,
demonstrating that BayesOpt is practical and effective for biological sequence design.

20

0
20
40

Old Frontier
New Frontier RFP630
1.00 1.05 1.10 1.15

SASA

1.20

1.25
1e4

Figure 1. BayesOpt can be used to maximize the simulated folding
stability (i.e. -dG, or the negative change in Gibbs free energy)
and solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) of red-spectrum fluorescent proteins (RFPs). Higher is better for both objectives. The
ancestor proteins are shown as colored circles, with corresponding
optimized offspring shown as crosses. Stability correlates with
protein function (e.g. how long the protein can fluoresce) while
SASA is a proxy for fluorescent intensity.

of the payload in vivo. Though each phase contributes to the
total cost of development, in this work we focus on the drug
design phase. In particular we will optimize real-valued
target properties (such as neurotransmitter receptor affinity
or protein folding stability) for payloads represented as discrete sequences (e.g. SMILES strings). Since the mappings
from sequence to target are often unknown, expensive to
observe in vitro, and difficult to simulate, we pose biological
sequence design as a costly black-box optimization (BBO)
problem over a large discrete search space.
Recent work applying deep learning to biological tasks has
primarily focused on learning from a static, offline dataset
(Rao et al., 2019; Jumper et al., 2021; Baek et al., 2021;
Meier et al., 2021; Rives et al., 2021). When these models
are used to select new sequences to label, they are applied
in a one-shot fashion, without accounting for future design
rounds (Gligorijevic et al., 2021; Biswas et al., 2021). Because labels are scarce for many important targets, it is

