UAST: Uncertainty-Aware Siamese Tracking

Dawei Zhang 1 Yanwei Fu 2 Zhonglong Zheng 1 3

Abstract
Visual object tracking is basically formulated as
target classification and bounding box estimation. Recent anchor-free Siamese trackers rely
on predicting the distances to four sides for efficient regression but fail to estimate accurate
bounding box in complex scenes. We argue that
these approaches lack a clear probabilistic explanation, so it is desirable to model the uncertainty
and ambiguity representation of target estimation. To address this issue, this paper presents an
Uncertainty-Aware Siamese Tracker (UAST) by
developing a novel distribution-based regression
formulation with localization uncertainty. We exploit regression vectors to directly represent the
discretized probability distribution for four offsets
of boxes, which is general, flexible and informative. Based on the resulting distributed representation, our method is able to provide a probabilistic
value of uncertainty. Furthermore, considering the
high correlation between the uncertainty and regression accuracy, we propose to learn a joint representation head of classification and localization
quality for reliable tracking, which also avoids the
inconsistency of classification and quality estimation between training and inference. Extensive experiments on several challenging tracking benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of UAST and
its superiority over other Siamese trackers.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is a fundamental yet challenging research
topic in computer vision. It has a wide range of applications,
such as surveillance system, UAV-based monitoring, human1
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China 2 School of Data Science, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China 3 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang
Normal University, Jinhua, China. Correspondence to: Zhonglong
Zheng <zhonglong@zjnu.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

anchor-based

anchor-free

distribution-based (ours)

(a) Different approaches for target box estimation
# 68
L_C: 96%

T_C: 94%

Certain
& Sharp

jcr score: 89%
certainty: 86%

R_C: 61%

B_C: 93%

Ambiguous
& Flatten

(b) A qualitative case of uncertainty-aware tracking

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of different regression methods in visual
tracking: anchor-based (such as SiamRPN, SiamRPN++), anchorfree (such as SiamFC++, Ocean), and our distribution-based UAST.
(b) A representative example of the proposed uncertainty-aware
tracking. Due to occlusion and similar objects, the ground-truth
(green) may be not explainable enough, and many trackers are limited by such issues. Instead, distribution-based regression (yellow)
can reflect the uncertainty information of localization prediction,
where a flatten distribution depicts an uncertain and ambiguous
boundary, and vice versa. Notably, UAST further provides the
estimated certainty with respect to 4-directions (L C, T C, R C
and B C), and the whole certainty value of the predicted box, while
jcr score denotes our joint confidence representation score.

computer interaction, and so on. Given only an arbitrary
target annotation in the initial frame, object trackers aim
at predicting its location and scale in subsequent frames of
the video sequence. In the most general form, there is no
prior knowledge of the object category and its surrounding
environment (Huang et al., 2019). Although much progress
has been achieved in recent years, accurate tracking is still
a challenging task due to occlusion, motion blur, geometric
deformation, scale and appearance variations.
In general, visual tracking can be formulated as a combination of classification and localization sub-tasks. The former
aims to robustly predict the coarse location of the target,
while the latter is designed to estimate precise bounding

