Learning Mixtures of Linear Dynamical Systems

Yanxi Chen 1 H. Vincent Poor 1

Abstract
We study the problem of learning a mixture of
multiple linear dynamical systems (LDSs) from
unlabeled short sample trajectories, each generated by one of the LDS models. Despite the
wide applicability of mixture models for timeseries data, learning algorithms that come with
end-to-end performance guarantees are largely
absent from existing literature. There are multiple sources of technical challenges, including but
not limited to (1) the presence of latent variables
(i.e. the unknown labels of trajectories); (2) the
possibility that the sample trajectories might have
lengths much smaller than the dimension d of
the LDS models; and (3) the complicated temporal dependence inherent to time-series data. To
tackle these challenges, we develop a two-stage
meta-algorithm, which is guaranteed to efficiently
recoverpeach ground-truth LDS model up to ere d/T ), where T is the total sample size.
ror O(
We validate our theoretical studies with numerical experiments, confirming the efficacy of the
proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
Imagine that we are asked to learn multiple linear dynamical systems (LDSs) from a mixture of unlabeled sample
trajectories — namely, each sample trajectory is generated by one of the LDSs of interest, but we have no idea
which system it is. To set the stage and facilitate discussion, recall that in a classical LDS, one might observe a
sample trajectory {xt }0≤t≤T generated by an LDS obeying xt+1 = Axt + wt , where A ∈ Rd×d determines the
system dynamics in the noiseless case, and {wt }t≥0 denote independent zero-mean noise vectors with covariance
cov(wt ) = W  0. The mixed LDSs setting considered herein extends classical LDSs by allowing for mixed
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. Correspondence to:
Yanxi Chen <yanxic@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

measurements as described below; see Figure 1 for a visualization of the scenario.
• Multiple linear systems. Suppose that there are K different LDSs as represented by {(A(k) , W (k) )}1≤k≤K ,
where A(k) ∈ Rd×d and W (k) ∈ Rd×d represent the
state transition matrix and noise covariance matrix of
the k-th LDS, respectively. Here and throughout, we
shall refer to (A(k) , W (k) ) as the system matrix for
the k-th LDS. We only assume that (A(k) , W (k) ) 6=
(A(`) , W (`) ) for any k 6= `, whereas A(k) = A(`) or
W (k) = W (`) is allowed.
• Mixed sample trajectories. We collect a total number
of M unlabeled trajectories from these LDSs. More
specifically, the m-th sample trajectory is drawn from
one of the LDSs in the following manner: set (A, W )
to be (A(k) , W (k) ) for some 1 ≤ k ≤ K, and generate
a trajectory of length Tm obeying
xt+1 = Axt + wt ,

where the wt ’s are i.i.d.,

E[wt ] = 0, cov(wt ) = W  0.
Note, however, that the label k associated with each
sample trajectory is a latent variable not revealed to us,
resulting in a mixture of unlabeled trajectories. The
current paper focuses on the case where the length of
each trajectory is somewhat short, making it infeasible
to estimate the system matrix from a single trajectory.
• Goal. The aim is to jointly learn the system matrices
{(A(k) , W (k) )}1≤k≤K from the mixture of sample
trajectories. In particular, we seek to accomplish this
task in a sample-efficient manner, where the total sample
PMsize is defined to be the aggregate trajectory length
m=1 Tm .
Motivations. The mixed LDSs setting described above
is motivated by many real-world scenarios where a single
time-series model is insufficient to capture the complex and
heterogeneous patterns in temporal data. For instance, in
psychology (Bulteel et al., 2016), researchers collect multiple time-series trajectories (e.g. depression-related symptoms over a period of time) from different patients. Fitting
this data with multi-modal LDSs (instead of a single model)
not only achieves better fitting performance, but also helps

