YourTTS: Towards Zero-Shot Multi-Speaker TTS and
Zero-Shot Voice Conversion for Everyone

Edresson Casanova 1 2 Julian Weber 3 2 Christopher Shulby 4 Arnaldo Candido Junior 5 Eren Gölge 2
Moacir Antonelli Ponti 1 6

Abstract
YourTTS brings the power of a multilingual approach to the task of zero-shot multi-speaker TTS.
Our method builds upon the VITS model and adds
several novel modifications for zero-shot multispeaker and multilingual training. We achieved
state-of-the-art (SOTA) results in zero-shot multispeaker TTS and results comparable to SOTA in
zero-shot voice conversion on the VCTK dataset.
Additionally, our approach achieves promising
results in a target language with a single-speaker
dataset, opening possibilities for zero-shot multispeaker TTS and zero-shot voice conversion systems in low-resource languages. Finally, it is possible to fine-tune the YourTTS model with less
than 1 minute of speech and achieve state-of-theart results in voice similarity and with reasonable
quality. This is important to allow synthesis for
speakers with a very different voice or recording
characteristics from those seen during training.

Index Terms: cross-lingual zero-shot multi-speaker TTS,
text-to-speech, cross-lingual zero-shot voice conversion,
speaker adaptation.

1. Introduction
Text-to-Speech (TTS) systems have significantly advanced
in recent years with deep learning approaches, allowing successful applications such as speech-based virtual assistants.
Most TTS systems were tailored from a single speaker’s
voice, but there is current interest in synthesizing voices for
new speakers (not seen during training), employing only a
1

Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas e de Computação, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil 2 Coqui, Germany 3 Sopra Banking
Software, France 4 Defined.ai, United States of America 5 Federal
University of Technology – Paraná, Brazil 6 Mercado Livre, Brazil.
Correspondence to: Edresson Casanova <edresson@usp.br>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

few seconds of speech. This approach is called zero-shot
multi-speaker TTS (ZS-TTS) as in Jia et al. (2018); Cooper
et al. (2020); Choi et al. (2020); Casanova et al. (2021).
ZS-TTS using deep learning was first proposed by Arik
et al. (2018) which extended the DeepVoice 3 method (Ping
et al., 2017). Meanwhile, Tacotron 2 (Shen et al., 2018) was
adapted using external speaker embeddings extracted from a
trained speaker encoder using a generalized end-to-end loss
(GE2E) (Wan et al., 2018), allowing for speech generation
that resembles the target speaker (Jia et al., 2018). Similarly,
Tacotron 2 was used with a different speaker embeddings
methods (Cooper et al., 2020), with LDE embeddings (Cai
et al., 2018) to improve similarity and naturalness of speech
for unseen speakers (Snyder et al., 2018). The authors
also showed that a gender-dependent model improves the
similarity for unseen speakers (Cooper et al., 2020). In
this context, Attentron (Choi et al., 2020) proposed a finegrained encoder with an attention mechanism for extracting
detailed styles from various reference samples and a coarsegrained encoder. As a result of using several reference
samples, they achieved better voice similarity for unseen
speakers. ZSM-SS (Kumar et al., 2021) is a Transformerbased architecture with a normalization architecture and an
external speaker encoder based on Wav2vec 2.0 (Baevski
et al., 2020). The authors conditioned the normalization
architecture with speaker embeddings, pitch, and energy.
Despite promising results, the authors did not compare the
proposed model with any of the related works mentioned
above. SC-GlowTTS (Casanova et al., 2021) was the first
application of flow-based models in ZS-TTS. It improved
voice similarity for unseen speakers in training with respect
to previous studies while maintaining comparable quality.
Despite these advances, the similarity gap between observed
and unobserved speakers during training is still an open research question. ZS-TTS models still require a considerable
amount of speakers for training, making it difficult to obtain
high-quality models in low-resource languages. Furthermore, according to Tan et al. (2021), the quality of current
ZS-TTS models is not sufficiently good, especially for target speakers with speech characteristics that differ from
those seen in training. Although SC-GlowTTS (Casanova

