Efficient Reinforcement Learning in Block MDPs: A Model-free Representation
Learning Approach

Xuezhou Zhang 1 Yuda Song 2 Masatoshi Uehara 3 Mengdi Wang 1 Alekh Agarwal 4 Wen Sun 3

Abstract
We present B RIEE (Block-structured Representation learning with Interleaved Explore Exploit),
an algorithm for efficient reinforcement learning
in Markov Decision Processes with block structured dynamics (i.e., Block MDPs), where rich
observations are generated from a set of unknown
latent states. B RIEE interleaves latent states discovery, exploration, and exploitation together, and
can provably learn a near-optimal policy with
sample complexity scaling polynomially in the
number of latent states, actions, and the time horizon, with no dependence on the size of the potentially infinite observation space. Empirically,
we show that B RIEE is more sample efficient than
the state-of-art Block MDP algorithm H OMER
and other empirical RL baselines on challenging rich-observation combination lock problems
which require deep exploration.

1. Introduction
Representation learning in Reinforcement Learning (RL)
has gained increasing attention in recent years from both
theoretical and empirical research communities (Schwarzer
et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020) due to its potential in enabling sample-efficient non-linear function approximation,
the benefits in multitask settings (Zhang et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2022; Sodhani et al., 2021), and the potential to leverage advances on representation learning in related areas
such as computer vision and natural language processing.
Despite this interest, there remains a gap between the theoretical and empirical literature, where the theoretically
sound methods are seldom evaluated or even implemented
and often rely on strong assumptions, while the empirical
techniques are not backed with any theoretical guarantees
1

Princeton University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Cornell University 4 Google Research. Correspondence to: Xuezhou Zhang
<zhangxz1123@gmail.com>, Wen Sun <ws455@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

even under stylistic assumptions. This leaves open the key
challenge of designing representation learning methods that
are both theoretically sound and empirically effective.
In this work, we tackle this challenge for a special class of
problems called Block MDPs, where the high dimensional
and rich observations of the agent are generated from certain
latent states and there exists some fixed, but unknown mapping from observations to the latent states (each observation
is generated only by one latent state). Prior works (Dann
et al., 2018; Du et al., 2019; Misra et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2020; Sodhani et al., 2021) have motivated the Block MDP
model through scenarios such as navigation tasks and image
based robotics tasks where the observations can often be
reasonably mapped to the latent physical location and states.
We develop a new algorithm B RIEE, which finds a provably
good policy for any Block MDP. It performs model-free representation learning with a form of adversarial training to
learn the features, interleaved with deep exploration and exploitation. Unlike prior theoretical works, our new approach
does not require uniform reachability, i.e., every latent state
is reachable with sufficient probability, which is a strong
assumption that cannot be guaranteed or verified. We also
demonstrate the empirical effectiveness of our algorithm in
Block MDPs that are challenging to explore. Importantly,
our technique is model-free which means there is no need
to model the observation generation process that can be
complex for high dimensional sensory data.
Contributions

Our key contributions are three folds:

1. We design a new algorithm B RIEE that solves any Block
MDP with polynomial sample complexity, with no explicit dependence on the number of states which could
be infinite;
2. B RIEE does not require reachability assumption, and
can directly optimize a given reward function;
3. B RIEE’s computation oracles can be easily implemented
using standard gradient based optimization. Our
experiments show that B RIEE is more sample efficient
than H OMER (Misra et al., 2020), can be extended to
richer MDPs where the block structure does not hold,
and can leverage dense reward structure to achieve

