How to Leverage Unlabeled Data in Offline Reinforcement Learning

Tianhe Yu * 1 2 Aviral Kumar * 3 2 Yevgen Chebotar 2 Karol Hausman 2 Chelsea Finn 1 2 Sergey Levine 3 2

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) can learn control policies from static datasets but, like standard
RL methods, it requires reward annotations for
every transition. In many cases, labeling large
datasets with rewards may be costly, especially
if those rewards must be provided by human labelers, while collecting diverse unlabeled data
might be comparatively inexpensive. How can we
best leverage such unlabeled data in offline RL?
One natural solution is to learn a reward function
from the labeled data and use it to label the unlabeled data. In this paper, we find that, perhaps
surprisingly, a much simpler method that simply
applies zero rewards to unlabeled data leads to effective data sharing both in theory and in practice,
without learning any reward model at all. While
this approach might seem strange (and incorrect)
at first, we provide extensive theoretical and empirical analysis that illustrates how it trades off
reward bias, sample complexity and distributional
shift, often leading to good results. We characterize conditions under which this simple strategy
is effective, and further show that extending it
with a simple reweighting approach can further
alleviate the bias introduced by using incorrect
reward labels. Our empirical evaluation confirms
these findings in simulated robotic locomotion,
navigation, and manipulation settings.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) provides the promise of
a fully data-driven framework for learning performant policies. To avoid costly active data collection and exploration,
offline RL methods utilize a previously collected dataset to
extract the best possible behavior, making it feasible to use
RL to solve real-world problems where active exploration is
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 Google Research 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Tianhe Yu <tianheyu@cs.stanford.edu>, Aviral Kumar <aviralk@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

expensive, dangerous, or otherwise infeasible (Zhan et al.,
2021; de Lima & Krohling, 2021; Wang et al., 2018; Kalashnikov et al., 2018). However, this concept is only viable
when a significant amount of data for the target task is available in advance. A more realistic scenario might allow for a
much smaller amount of task-specific data, combined with
a large amount of task-agnostic data, that is not labeled
with task rewards and some of which may not be relevant.
For example, if our goal is to train a robot to perform a
new manipulation task (e.g., cutting an onion), we might
have some data of the robot (suboptimally) attempting that
task, perhaps collected under human teleoperation and manually labeled with rewards, combined with background data,
some of which might be structurally related (e.g., picking
up an onion, or cutting a carrot). This scenario presents several questions: How do we decide which prior data should
be included when learning the new task? And how do we
determine reward labels to use for this prior data?
Prior methods have attempted to answer these two questions,
typically in isolation. For the first question, it has been noted
that a naı̈ve strategy of sharing all of the prior data can be
highly suboptimal (Kalashnikov et al., 2021), even when
it is annotated with reward labels, and some works have
proposed both manual (Kalashnikov et al., 2021) and automated (Yu et al., 2021a; Eysenbach et al., 2020) data sharing
strategies that prioritize the most structurally similar prior
data. However, these methods assume that shared data can
automatically be relabeled with the reward function for the
task, but the assumption that we have access to the functional form of this reward is a strong one: for example, in
many real-world settings, computing the reward might require human labeling (Cabi et al., 2019; Finn et al., 2016b).
Prior works use learned classifiers for reward labeling (Fu
et al., 2018b; Xie et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2019), or other automated mechanisms (Konyushkova et al., 2020). But these
mechanisms themselves add complexity and potential brittleness to the pipeline. Thus, we aim to study the possibility
of tackling this problem with a simple method that determines which rewards to use for shared data, with minimal
supervision and no additional modeling and learning.
In this paper, we make the potentially surprising observation
that prior data such as data from other tasks can be utilized
with naı̈ve constant reward labels in offline RL, which corresponds to zero reward or whatever is the minimum reward

