DAV INZ: Data Valuation using Deep Neural Networks at Initialization

Zhaoxuan Wu 1 2 Yao Shu 3 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 3

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a surge of interest
in developing trustworthy methods to evaluate
the value of data in many real-world applications
(e.g., collaborative machine learning, data marketplaces). Existing data valuation methods typically valuate data using the generalization performance of converged machine learning models
after their long-term model training, hence making data valuation on large complex deep neural
networks (DNNs) unaffordable. To this end, we
theoretically derive a domain-aware generalization bound to estimate the generalization performance of DNNs without model training. We then
exploit this theoretically derived generalization
bound to develop a novel training-free data valuation method named data valuation at initialization
(DAV INZ) on DNNs, which consistently achieves
remarkable effectiveness and efficiency in practice. Moreover, our training-free DAV INZ, surprisingly, can even theoretically and empirically
enjoy the desirable properties that training-based
data valuation methods usually attain, thus making it more trustworthy in practice.

1. Introduction
Data has been widely recognized as one of the most vital ingredients of learning high-performing machine learning (ML) models. Meanwhile, data with different qualities
typically lead to diverse model performances in practice.
Developing trustworthy data valuation methods that are explainable, fair, and robust is therefore extensively required
to measure the value of data and also decide how to use
1

Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore,
2
Republic of Singapore Integrative Sciences and Engineering
3
Programme, NUSGS, Republic of Singapore Department of
Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore. Correspondence to: Bryan Kian Hsiang Low
<lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

them in real-world applications. For example, data valuation is essential to compensating the participants in data
collection (Lo & DeMets, 2016), designing fair rewards
in collaborative ML (Sim et al., 2020), developing a trustworthy data market for buyers and sellers (Agarwal et al.,
2019; Han et al., 2021), among others. To meet these demands, a number of data valuation methods have been proposed (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Koh & Liang, 2017).
Unfortunately, it is prohibitively costly to deploy these
conventional data valuation methods in real-world applications using large complex models. For example, both data
Shapley value (SV) (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) and leave-oneout (LOO) (Cook, 1977; Koh & Liang, 2017) are calculated
using the validation performances of converged models.
However, obtaining fully converged models is computationally costly for large complex models (e.g., deep neural
networks (DNNs)) due to their inevitable long-term model
training. As a result, developing efficient techniques to estimate the fully converged performances of large complex
models is essential to making data valuation more applicable in practice. To the best of our knowledge, only a few
efforts have been devoted to this direction (Jia et al., 2019a;
Xu et al., 2021b). Nevertheless, these works impose strict
restrictions on the choice of ML models or may introduce
bias into data valuation when evaluating the value of learned
data embedding rather than the value of original data.
While statistical learning theory (SLT) makes it possible to
estimate the fully converged performances of DNNs without
model training (Arora et al., 2019b; Cao & Gu, 2019), these
works typically assume that the training and the validation
datasets follow the same underlying distribution. Nonetheless, this assumption does not necessarily hold in the realm
of data valuation. For instance, in the case of collaborative
disease diagnosis among hospitals, data contributors (e.g.,
children’s hospitals) usually collect data without any knowledge about the validation dataset (e.g., a dataset including
the disease data across all age groups). In data markets, it
is also difficult for data consumers to purchase datasets that
can perfectly align with their validation tasks. As a result,
the discrepancy between the training and validation datasets
(i.e., domain discrepancy) also needs to be considered when
applying SLT to estimate the performances of DNNs.
To this end, we theoretically derive a domain-aware gener-

