Improving Robustness against Real-World and Worst-Case Distribution Shifts
through Decision Region Quantification

Leo Schwinn* 1 2 Leon Bungert 3 An Nguyen 1 René Raab 1 Falk Pulsmeyer 1 Doina Precup 2 4 5
Björn Eskofier 1 Dario Zanca 1

Abstract
The reliability of neural networks is essential for
their use in safety-critical applications. Existing
approaches generally aim at improving the robustness of neural networks to either real-world
distribution shifts (e.g., common corruptions and
perturbations, spatial transformations, and natural adversarial examples) or worst-case distribution shifts (e.g., optimized adversarial examples).
In this work, we propose the Decision Region
Quantification (DRQ) algorithm to improve the
robustness of any differentiable pre-trained model
against both real-world and worst-case distribution shifts in the data. DRQ analyzes the robustness of local decision regions in the vicinity of
a given data point to make more reliable predictions. We theoretically motivate the DRQ algorithm by showing that it effectively smooths spurious local extrema in the decision surface. Furthermore, we propose an implementation using
targeted and untargeted adversarial attacks. An
extensive empirical evaluation shows that DRQ
increases the robustness of adversarially and nonadversarially trained models against real-world
and worst-case distribution shifts on several computer vision benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve remarkable results
on a wide range of machine learning problems, including
image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), speech processing (van den Oord et al., 2016), and more. However,
previous work has shown that distribution shifts of the data
1
University of Erlangen-Nürnberg 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute
Hausdorff Center for Mathematics, University of Bonn 4 McGill
University 5 Google Deepmind. Correspondence to: Leo Schwinn
<leo.schwinn@fau.de>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

can severely impact the classification accuracy of such models. Distribution shifts of the data can be separated into multiple categories, such as out-of-distribution data (Hendrycks
& Gimpel, 2017), common corruptions (Hendrycks et al.,
2021a), and adversarial examples (Madry et al., 2018).
Making deep learning models robust against distribution
shifts in the data is a long-standing problem (QuiñoneroCandela et al., 2008). One area of research focuses on
improving the robustness of models at training-time. Here,
models are trained with specific procedures (e.g., data augmentations or adversarial training), which cannot be applied
to pre-trained models (Madry et al., 2018; Yin et al., 2019;
Geirhos et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2020). These methods usually entail vast computational overhead and require
access to the training data (Madry et al., 2018; Rebuffi et al.,
2021). Another set of methods aims to improve the robustness at test-time. However, these approaches are usually
semi-supervised, rely on assumptions on the distribution of
the test data, and often require additional model training at
test-time (Li et al., 2017; Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019;
Zhang et al., 2021). Moreover, most prior work focuses either on the robustness against real-world distribution shifts
(e.g., common corruptions and perturbations, spatial transformations, and natural adversarial examples) or worst-case
distribution shifts (e.g., optimized adversarial examples).
In this work, we propose the Decision Region Quantification (DRQ) algorithm that analyses the decision surface
of a given model to improve its predictions. Unlike previous work, which mainly specialized in one threat model
at a time, DRQ simultaneously improves the robustness of
models to both real-world and worst-case distribution shifts.
The algorithm is illustrated in Figure 1. Remarkably, the
proposed approach does not require any further training
data and can be directly combined with pre-trained models
during test-time. Additionally, no batch statistics are used
during test-time and a single test sample is sufficient for
DRQ-based inference.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: First,
we theoretically motivate the proposed DRQ algorithm by
demonstrating its ability to smooth small spurious local extrema in the decision surface. Additionally, we provide an

