Monarch: Expressive Structured Matrices for Efficient and Accurate Training

Arjun Desai

1

Michael Poli

1

Tri Dao 1 Beidi Chen 1 2 Nimit Sohoni 1
Jessica Grogan 3 Alexander Liu 4 Aniruddh Rao 4 Atri Rudra 3 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
Large neural networks excel in many domains, but
they are expensive to train and fine-tune. A popular approach to reduce their compute/memory
requirements is to replace dense weight matrices with structured ones (e.g., sparse, low-rank,
Fourier transform). These methods have not seen
widespread adoption (1) in end-to-end training due
to unfavorable efficiency–quality tradeoffs, and
(2) in dense-to-sparse fine-tuning due to lack of
tractable algorithms to approximate a given dense
weight matrix. To address these issues, we propose
a class of matrices (Monarch) that is hardwareefficient (they are parameterized as products of two
block-diagonal matrices for better hardware utilization) and expressive (they can represent many
commonly used transforms). Surprisingly, the
problem of approximating a dense weight matrix
with a Monarch matrix, though nonconvex, has an
analytical optimal solution. These properties of
Monarch matrices unlock new ways to train and
fine-tune sparse and dense models. We empirically validate that Monarch can achieve favorable
accuracy–efficiency tradeoffs in several end-toend sparse training applications: speeding up ViT
and GPT-2 training on ImageNet classification and
Wikitext-103 language modeling by 2× with comparable model quality, and reducing the error on
PDE solving and MRI reconstruction tasks by 40%.
In sparse-to-dense training, with a simple technique called “reverse sparsification,” Monarch matrices serve as a useful intermediate representation
to speed up GPT-2 pretraining on OpenWebText
by 2× without quality drop. The same technique
brings 23% faster BERT pretraining than even the
very optimized implementation from Nvidia that
set the MLPerf 1.1 record. In dense-to-sparse fine1

Stanford University, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, USA
University at Buffalo, SUNY, USA 4 University of Michigan, USA.
Correspondence to: Tri Dao <trid@cs.stanford.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright
2022 by the author(s).

tuning, as a proof-of-concept, our Monarch approximation algorithm speeds up BERT fine-tuning on
GLUE by 1.7× with comparable accuracy.

1

Introduction

Large neural networks excel in many domains, but their
training and fine-tuning demand extensive computation
and memory (Kaplan et al., 2020). A natural approach to
mitigate this cost is to replace dense weight matrices with
structured ones, such as sparse & low-rank matrices and
the Fourier transform. However, structured matrices (which
can be viewed as a general form of sparsity) have not yet
seen wide adoption to date, due to two main challenges.
(1) In the end-to-end (E2E) training setting, they have
shown unfavorable efficiency–quality tradeoffs. Model
efficiency refers how efficient these structured matrices
are on modern hardware (e.g., GPUs). Model quality
(performance on tasks) is determined by how expressive
they are (e.g., can they represent commonly used transforms
such as convolution or Fourier/cosine transforms that encode
domain-specific knowledge). Existing structured matrices
are either not hardware-efficient, or not expressive enough.
(2) In the setting of dense-to-sparse (D2S) fine-tuning of
pretrained models, a long-standing problem for most classes
of structured matrices is the lack of tractable algorithms to
approximate dense pretrained weight matrices (Pan, 2012).
Sparse matrices have seen advances in training deep learning
models (e.g., pruning (Han et al., 2015a), lottery tickets (Frankle & Carbin, 2018)), but most work on (entrywise) sparsification focuses on reducing training or inference FLOPs,
which do not necessarily map to E2E training time on modern hardware (e.g., GPUs). In fact, most sparse training
methods slow down training in wall-clock time (Gale et al.,
2019; Hooker, 2020). Moreover, sparse matrices are not able
to represent commonly used transforms such as convolution
and the Fourier transform. Another class of structured matrices, such as Fourier, sine/cosine, Chebyshev, are used in
specialized domains such as PDE solving (Trefethen, 2000)
and medical imaging (Hsieh, 2003). However, they are difficult to use in E2E training since only specific instances of
these structured matrices have fast GPU implementations
(e.g., FFT). Moreover, their applications requires domain expertise to hand-pick the right transforms. Generalizations of

