Fluctuations, Bias, Variance & Ensemble of Learners:
Exact Asymptotics for Convex Losses in High-Dimension

Bruno Loureiro 1 * Cédric Gerbelot 2 * Maria Refinetti 2 Gabriele Sicuro 3 * Florent Krzakala 1

Abstract
From the sampling of data to the initialisation of
parameters, randomness is ubiquitous in modern
Machine Learning practice. Understanding the
statistical fluctuations engendered by the different
sources of randomness in prediction is therefore
key to understanding robust generalisation. In this
manuscript we develop a quantitative and rigorous
theory for the study of fluctuations in an ensemble
of generalised linear models trained on different,
but correlated, features in high-dimensions. In
particular, we provide a complete description of
the asymptotic joint distribution of the empirical
risk minimiser for generic convex loss and regularisation in the high-dimensional limit. Our
result encompasses a rich set of classification and
regression tasks, such as the lazy regime of overparametrised neural networks, or equivalently the
random features approximation of kernels. While
allowing to study directly the mitigating effect
of ensembling (or bagging) on the bias-variance
decomposition of the test error, our analysis also
helps disentangle the contribution of statistical
fluctuations, and the singular role played by the
interpolation threshold that are at the roots of the
“double-descent” phenomenon.

1. Introduction
Randomness is ubiquitous in Machine Learning. It is present
in the data (e.g., noise in acquisition and annotation), in
commonly used statistical models (e.g., random features
*
Equal contribution 1 IdePHICS lab, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, Rte Cantonale 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Laboratoire de Physique de l’ENS, Université PSL, CNRS,
Sorbonne Université, 24 Rue Lhomond, 75005 Paris, France
3
Department of Mathematics, King’s College London, Strand
WC2R 2LS, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Bruno Loureiro <bruno.loureiro@epfl.ch>, Gabriele Sicuro
<gabriele.sicuro@kcl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Rahimi & Recht, 2007)), or in the algorithms used to train
them (e.g., in the choice of initialisation of weights of neural networks (Narkhede et al., 2021), or when sampling a
mini-batch in Stochastic Gradient Descent (Bottou, 2012)).
Strikingly, fluctuations associated to different sources of
randomness can have a major impact in the generalisation
performance of a model. For instance, this is the case in
least-squares regression with random features, where it has
been shown (Geiger et al., 2020; D’Ascoli et al., 2020; Jacot
et al., 2020) that the variance associated with the random
projections matrix is responsible for poor generalisation
near the interpolation peak (Advani & Saxe, 2017; Spigler
et al., 2019; Belkin et al., 2020). As a consequence, this
double-descent behaviour can be mitigated by averaging
over a large ensemble of learners, effectively suppressing
this variance. Indeed, considering an ensemble (sometimes
also refereed to as a committee (Drucker et al., 1994)) of
independent learners provide a natural framework to study
the contribution of the variance of prediction in the estimation accuracy. In this manuscript we leverage this idea to
provide an exact asymptotic characterisation of the statistics
of fluctuations in empirical risk minimisation with generic
convex losses and penalties in high-dimensional models.
We focus on the case of synthetic datasets, and we apply our
results to random feature learning in particular.

Setting Let (xµ , y µ ) ∈ Rd × Y, µ ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n},
denote a labelled data set composed of n independent samples from a joint density p(x, y) (e.g., Y = {−1, 1} for a
binary classification problem). In this manuscript we are
interested in studying an ensemble of K parametric predictors, each of them depending on a vector of parameters
wk ∈ Rp , k ∈ [K], and independently trained on the
dataset {(xµ , y µ )}µ∈[n] . Note that even if the vectors of
parameters {wk }k∈[K] are trained independently, they correlate through the training data. Statistical fluctuations in the
learnt parameters can then arise for different reasons. For
instance, a common practice is to initialise the parameters
randomly during optimisation, which will induce statistical
variability between the different predictors. Alternatively,
each predictor could be trained on a subsample of the data,
as it is commonly done in bagging (Breiman, 1996). The
statistical model can also be inherently stochastic, e.g., the

