Robustness Verification for Contrastive Learning

Zekai Wang 1 Weiwei Liu 1

Abstract
Contrastive adversarial training has successfully
improved the robustness of contrastive learning
(CL). However, the robustness metric used in
these methods is linked to attack algorithms, image labels and downstream tasks, all of which
may affect the consistency and reliability of robustness metric for CL. To address these problems, this paper proposes a novel Robustness
Verification framework for Contrastive Learning
(RVCL). Furthermore, we use extreme value theory to reveal the relationship between the robust radius of the CL encoder and that of the
supervised downstream task. Extensive experimental results on various benchmark models
and datasets verify our theoretical findings, and
further demonstrate that our proposed RVCL is
able to evaluate the robustness of both models
and images. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/wzekai99/RVCL.

1. Introduction
While neural networks (NNs) have achieved remarkable performance in various applications, many studies (Goodfellow
et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2018) have demonstrated that NNs
are vulnerable when dealing with imperceptibly perturbed
images. A rapidly growing body of work therefore aims to
investigate how a robust NN model might be obtained.
One successful method in this field is based on adversarial training (AT) (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Carlini
& Wagner, 2017), which improves the robustness of NN
by augmenting the training set with adversarial samples
(Szegedy et al., 2014). Schmidt et al. (2018) show that AT
requires a large amount of data, while the labels of this
data are expensive to obtain. Thus, several existing works
have attempted to improve the robustness of adversarially
trained models through the use of additional unlabeled data
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China. Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Alayrac et al., 2019; Carmon et al., 2019; Zhai et al., 2019).
Recently, attempts have been made to combine AT with contrastive learning (CL) (Kim et al., 2020; Fan et al., 2021).
CL (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020) has demonstrated
superior abilities in unsupervised learning: specifically, it
can surpass the standard accuracy of supervised learning on
downstream image classification tasks by utilizing a largescale unlabeled dataset. It is therefore of primary interest
to study the robust performance achieved by contrastive AT
(Gowal et al., 2021).
However, existing contrastive AT methods use the empirical
robustness metric (e.g. robust accuracy) to evaluate the
robustness of encoders, an approach that relies on attack
algorithms, image labels and downstream tasks. Three key
questions naturally arise from this kind of measurement:
1. Attack algorithm: Robust accuracy is related to a specific attack algorithm (e.g. PGD attack (Madry et al.,
2018)); thus, the results may not be consistent with
powerful adversaries.
2. Image label: It is farfetched to train with unlabeled images while evaluating the encoder with labeled images.
3. Downstream task: We do not know whether the robustness benefits from the encoder or the linear classifier.
In fact, the first question has already been considered in
supervised learning. To explore the first question in more
detail, the robustness analysis of NN is entangled with the
specific attack algorithms used for evaluation (Weng et al.,
2018). Most defense heuristics have subsequently been
shown to fail against suitably powerful attack algorithms
(Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Uesato et al., 2018). Even if the
model is made robust to the attack algorithm used by evaluation, there is no guarantee that will remain robust to other
unseen attacks. This has encouraged researchers to develop
robustness verification (Katz et al., 2017; Wong et al., 2018):
i.e., classifiers whose prediction at point x is verified to be
constant within a neighborhood of x, regardless of what
attack algorithm is applied. The key concept is to find the
largest radius of this neighborhood, referred to as the robust
radius, which is an important metric for use in studying the
robustness of NN.
Unfortunately, previous works on robustness verification
have used only supervised learning; i.e., true labels of data
are required for both the supervised classifier and verifier.

