Modeling Structure with Undirected Neural Networks

Tsvetomila Mihaylova 1 Vlad Niculae 2 André F.T. Martins 1 3 4

Abstract
Neural networks are powerful function estimators,
leading to their status as a paradigm of choice
for modeling structured data. However, unlike
other structured representations that emphasize
the modularity of the problem – e.g., factor graphs
– neural networks are usually monolithic mappings
from inputs to outputs, with a fixed computation
order. This limitation prevents them from capturing different directions of computation and interaction between the modeled variables. In this
paper, we combine the representational strengths
of factor graphs and of neural networks, proposing undirected neural networks (UNNs): a flexible framework for specifying computations that
can be performed in any order. For particular
choices, our proposed models subsume and extend many existing architectures: feed-forward,
recurrent, self-attention networks, auto-encoders,
and networks with implicit layers. We demonstrate the effectiveness of undirected neural architectures, both unstructured and structured, on a
range of tasks: tree-constrained dependency parsing, convolutional image classification, and sequence completion with attention. By varying the
computation order, we show how a single UNN
can be used both as a classifier and a prototype
generator, and how it can fill in missing parts of
an input sequence, making them a promising field
for further research.

1. Introduction
Factor graphs have historically been a very appealing
toolbox for representing structured prediction problems
(Bakır et al., 2007; Smith, 2011; Nowozin et al., 2014),
1

Instituto de Telecomunicações, Instituto Superior Técnico,
Lisbon, Portugal 2 Language Technology Lab, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 3 LUMLIS, Lisbon ELLIS Unit, Portugal
4
Unbabel, Lisbon, Portugal. Correspondence to: Tsvetomila Mihaylova <tsvetomila.mihaylova@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

with wide applications to vision and natural language
processing applications. In recent years, neural networks
have taken over as the model of choice for tackling many
such applications. Unlike factor graphs – which emphasize
the modularity of the problem – neural networks typically
work end-to-end, relying on rich representations captured
at the encoder level (often pre-trained), which are then
propagated to a task-specific decoder.
In this paper, we combine the representational strengths of
factor graphs and neural networks by proposing undirected
neural networks (UNNs) – a framework in which outputs
are not computed by evaluating a composition of functions
in a given order, but are rather obtained implicitly by minimizing an energy function which factors over a graph. For
particular choices of factor potentials, UNNs subsume many
existing architectures, including feedforward, recurrent, and
self-attention neural networks, auto-encoders, and networks
with implicit layers. When coupled with a coordinate descent algorithm to minimize the energy, the computation
performed by an UNN is similar (but not equivalent) to a
neural network sharing parameters across multiple identical
layers. Since UNNs have no prescribed computation order,
the exact same network can be used to predict any group of
variables (outputs) given another group of variables (inputs),
or vice-versa (i.e., inputs from outputs) enabling new kinds
of joint models. In sum, our contributions are:
• We present UNNs and show how they extend many existing neural architectures.
• We provide a coordinate descent inference algorithm,
which, by an “unrolling lemma” (Lemma 1), can reuse
current building blocks from feed-forward networks in a
modular way.
• We develop and experiment with multiple factor graph
architectures, tackling both structured and unstructured
tasks, such as natural language parsing, image classification, and image prototype generation. We develop a
new undirected attention mechanism and demonstrate its
suitability for sequence completion.1
Notation. We denote vector values as a, matrix and
tensor values as A, and abstract factor graph variables
1

The source code is on https://github.com/deep-spin/unn.

