Adversarially trained neural representations may already be as robust as
corresponding biological neural representations

Chong Guo 1 Michael J. Lee 1 2 3 Guillaume Leclerc 4 Joel Dapello 1 2 5 Yug Rao 6 Aleksander Madry 4 7
James J. DiCarlo 1 2 3

Abstract
Visual systems of primates are the gold standard
of robust perception. There is thus a general belief that mimicking the neural representations that
underlie those systems will yield artificial visual
systems that are adversarially robust. In this work,
we develop a method for performing adversarial visual attacks directly on primate brain activity. We then leverage this method to demonstrate
that the above-mentioned belief might not be well
founded. Specifically, we report that the biological neurons that make up visual systems of primates exhibit susceptibility to adversarial perturbations that is comparable in magnitude to existing (robustly trained) artificial neural networks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNN) for computer vision are brittle
in that their decisions are sensitive to small image perturbations which are targeted to modifying their outputs (adversarial attacks; (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015;
Carlini & Wagner, 2017)). This is commonly regarded as an
area for system improvement since similar brittleness has
not been demonstrated in biological vision at comparable
image perturbation strengths. Researchers have produced
significant progress towards defense algorithms which improved the adversarial robustness of vanilla DNNs in standard computer vision tasks (Qin et al., 2019; Madry et al.,
2018). Adversarial training in particular has been shown
to both increase robustness on the original task (Croce &
Hein, 2020) and to produce internal representations that
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT 2 Department
of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT 3 Center for Brains, Minds
and Machines, MIT 4 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory, MIT 5 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University 6 Purdue University 7 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT. Correspondence to:
Chong Guo <chongguo@mit.edu>.

better support transfer learning (Salman et al., 2020; Utrera
et al., 2020) and image synthesis/manipulations (Engstrom
et al., 2019b; Santurkar et al., 2019; Ledig et al., 2017). Yet,
despite this progress, it is still widely believed that even
the best of these networks are less robust than the ’gold
standard’ – the primate visual system. Is this assumption
correct? In this study, we checked this assumption using
primate neural recordings and ask: are the high level biological neural representations underlying primate object
recognition truly more robust than existing artificial neural
representations underlying current AI object recognition?
It is has not previously been possible to make robustness
tests of primate visual neural networks comparable to those
in artificial networks because the strongest adversarial attacks approximate the worse-case image perturbations by
relying on detailed knowledge on each artificial network –
knowledge that is still being developed for the biological
system. Thus when that knowledge is limited, neuroscience
experiments must rely on random sampling of image perturbation directions, which – given the high dimensionality
of images – is unlikely to yield good estimates of adversarial (i.e. worst case) sensitivity within the time constraints
of typical primate neuroscience experiments. Indeed, prior
neuroscience work measuring the sensitivity of high-level visual representations in primates has focused on a restrictive
set of image corruptions (i.e. scrambling) (Rust & DiCarlo,
2010) and quantifying invariance to transformations (position, size, context etc.)(DiCarlo et al., 2012; Logothetis
et al., 1995; Ito et al., 1995; Tovee et al., 1994; Schwartz
et al., 1983; Sáry et al., 1993; Ratan Murty & Arun, 2017).
While informative, that work has not directly investigated
the adversarial sensitivity of those neurons to small changes
in pixel space.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Here we improved upon recent advances in mechanistic
models of primate visual processing (Bashivan et al., 2019;
Yamins et al., 2014; Dapello et al., 2020) to develop an experimental method to efficiently and iteratively measure the
lower bound adversarial sensitivity of individual neural sites
at the last stage of primate ventral visual processing pathway, the inferior temporal cortex (IT). Primate IT neurons
are known to individually encode high-level features and to

