A Random Matrix Analysis of Data Stream Clustering:
Coping With Limited Memory Resources

Hugo Lebeau 1 Romain Couillet 1 Florent Chatelain 2

Abstract
This article introduces a random matrix framework for the analysis of clustering on highdimensional data streams, a particularly relevant setting for a more sober processing of large
amounts of data with limited memory and energy
resources. Assuming data x1 , x2 , . . . arrives as a
continuous flow and a small number L of them
can be kept in the learning pipeline, one has only
access to the diagonal elements of the Gram kernel matrix: [KL ]i,j = p1 x⊤
i xj 1|i−j|<L . Under
a large-dimensional data regime, we derive the
limiting spectral distribution of the banded kernel matrix KL and study its isolated eigenvalues
and eigenvectors, which behave in an unfamiliar
way. We detail how these results can be used to
perform efficient online kernel spectral clustering
and provide theoretical performance guarantees.
Our findings are empirically confirmed on image
clustering tasks. Leveraging on optimality results
of spectral methods for clustering, this work offers
insights on efficient online clustering techniques
for high-dimensional data.

1. Introduction
The ever-increasing amount of data coupled with the need
for a more sober use of computational power puts online
learning in the spotlight, as a way to deal with numerous and
very large data with low memory resources. Be it because
the volume of data is too high to be stored or because one is
restricted to the sole use of a regular laptop, online learning
appears as a handy and frugal way to process information.
As data arrives in the learning pipeline, it is processed at a
low computational cost before being discarded altogether,
1
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG,
38000 Grenoble, France 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble
INP, GIPSA-lab, 38000 Grenoble, France. Correspondence to:
Hugo Lebeau <hugo.lebeau@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

thus inducing a limited memory footprint.
Numerous works have proposed various algorithms to cluster data streams in an unsupervised manner (see, e.g., Ghesmoune et al. (2016); Zubaroğlu & Atalay (2021) and
references therein). Among standard methods are the construction of a graph (Fritzke, 1995) or a tree of clusters
(Zhang et al., 1996) which is updated as new data arrives,
or else, the formation of clusters using a distance function,
as in k-means, (Aggarwal et al., 2003) or a density-based
method (Ester et al., 1996). Such algorithms are often adaptations of existing offline algorithms, like OpticsStream
(Tasoulis et al., 2007), StreamKM++ (Ackermann et al.,
2012), online k-means (Liberty et al., 2015; Cohen-Addad
et al., 2021), etc. These techniques operate on the entire
feature space and their performance deteriorate as the dimension of the data increases. Therefore, Aggarwal et al.
(2004) proposed to cluster data streams after a projection
on a lower-dimensional space. Sketching methods (Keriven
et al., 2017; Gribonval et al., 2021) are also convenient to
perform large-scale learning on data streams with a limited
memory budget; the idea being to summarize the dataset
into a single vector computed in one pass over the data.
Adapted from the standard spectral clustering algorithm
(von Luxburg, 2007), techniques like incremental spectral
clustering (Ning et al., 2010; Dhanjal et al., 2014) have been
proposed to handle evolving data. Yet, they become quite
memory-demanding when the number of samples grows
large. Better suited to streaming applications, the spectral
clustering algorithm of Yoo et al. (2016) constructs a spectral embedding of the stream in one pass by adapting ideas
from matrix sketching (Liberty, 2012).
Spectral clustering has indeed remarkably good performances on high-dimensional data as it manages to greatly
reduce the dimensionality by keeping just a few leading
spectral components. It is therefore computationally less
demanding than many other classical clustering algorithms.
Moreover, it reaches the optimal phase transition threshold
(i.e., it performs better than random guess as soon as theoretically possible) (Onatski et al., 2013) and achieves the
optimal clustering error rate in the Gaussian mixture model
(Löffler et al., 2020).

