On Improving Model-Free Algorithms for Decentralized
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Weichao Mao 1 Lin F. Yang 2 Kaiqing Zhang 3 Tamer Başar 1

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms often suffer from an exponential sample
complexity dependence on the number of agents,
a phenomenon known as the curse of multiagents.
We address this challenge by investigating sampleefficient model-free algorithms in decentralized
MARL, and aim to improve existing algorithms
along this line. For learning (coarse) correlated
equilibria in general-sum Markov games, we propose stage-based V-learning algorithms that significantly simplify the algorithmic design and
analysis of recent works, and circumvent a rather
complicated no-weighted-regret bandit subroutine.
For learning Nash equilibria in Markov potential
games, we propose an independent policy gradient algorithm with a decentralized momentumbased variance reduction technique. All our algorithms are decentralized in that each agent can
make decisions based on only its local information. Neither communication nor centralized coordination is required during learning, leading
to a natural generalization to a large number of
agents. Finally, we provide numerical simulations
to corroborate our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Many real-world sequential decision-making problems involve the strategic interactions of multiple agents in a shared
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering & Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign. 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California, Los Angeles. Part of this work done
while the author was visiting DeepMind. 3 Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Part of this work done while the author was visiting Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing. Correspondence to: W. Mao
<weichao2@illinois.edu>, L. F. Yang <linyang@ee.ucla.edu>,
K. Zhang <kaiqing@mit.edu>, T. Başar <basar1@illinois.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

environment, which are commonly addressed with multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL). Successful applications of MARL include playing the game of Go (Silver et al.,
2016), Poker (Brown & Sandholm, 2018), real-time strategy
games (Vinyals et al., 2019), autonomous driving (ShalevShwartz et al., 2016), and robotics (Kober et al., 2013).
Despite the empirical successes, sample-efficient solutions
are still relatively lacking for MARL with a large number
of agents, mostly due to the well-known challenge named
the curse of multiagents (Jin et al., 2021): The joint action space in a MARL problem is equal to the Cartesian
product of the individual action spaces of all agents, which
scales exponentially in the number of agents. A typical
kind of algorithms that easily fail at this challenge are those
using centralized/joint learning (Boutilier, 1996; Claus &
Boutilier, 1998). Specifically, centralized learning assumes
the existence of a single coordinator who can access the local information of all the agents, and learns policies jointly
for all of them. This centralized training (though possibly
decentralized execution) approach has become a common
practice in empirical MARL (Oliehoek et al., 2008; Foerster
et al., 2016; Lowe et al., 2017; Rashid et al., 2018; Son et al.,
2019; Mao et al., 2020a). Centralized learning essentially
reduces the multi-agent problem to a single-agent one, but
unfortunately suffers from the exponential dependence as it
usually needs to exhaustively search the joint action space.
Such a computation bottleneck can be partially resolved
by allowing communications among the agents and hence
distributing the workload to each of them (Kar et al., 2013;
Zhang et al., 2018; Dubey & Pentland, 2021). However,
communication-based methods instead suffer from the additional communication overheads, which can be unrealistic
in some real-world scenarios where communication may
be expensive and/or unreliable, such as in unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV) field coverage (Pham et al., 2018).
Given the aforementioned limitations, in this paper, we are
interested in a more practical setting: decentralized learning1 . We focus on solutions where each agent can make
1

This setting has been studied under various names in the literature, including individual learning (Leslie & Collins, 2005), decentralized learning (Arslan & Yüksel, 2016), agnostic learning (Tian
et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021), and independent learning (Claus &

