VLMixer: Unpaired Vision-Language Pre-training via Cross-Modal CutMix

Teng Wang 1 2 Wenhao Jiang 3 Zhichao Lu 1 Feng Zheng 1 Ran Cheng 1 Chengguo Yin 3 Ping Luo 2

Abstract
Existing vision-language pre-training (VLP)
methods primarily rely on paired image-text
datasets, which are either annotated by enormous
human labors, or crawled from the internet followed by elaborate data cleaning techniques. To
reduce the dependency on well-aligned imagetext pairs, it is promising to directly leverage
the large-scale text-only and image-only corpora.
This paper proposes a data augmentation method,
namely cross-modal CutMix (CMC), for implicit
cross-modal alignment learning in unpaired VLP.
Specifically, CMC transforms natural sentences
from the textual view into a multi-modal view,
where visually-grounded words in a sentence
are randomly replaced by diverse image patches
with similar semantics. There are several appealing proprieties of the proposed CMC. First, it
enhances the data diversity while keeping the
semantic meaning intact for tackling problems
where the aligned data are scarce; Second, by attaching cross-modal noise on uni-modal data, it
guides models to learn token-level interactions
across modalities for better denoising. Furthermore, we present a new unpaired VLP method,
dubbed as VLMixer, that integrates CMC with
contrastive learning to pull together the uni-modal
and multi-modal views for better instance-level
alignments among different modalities. Extensive
experiments on five downstream tasks show that
VLMixer could surpass previous state-of-the-art
unpaired VLP methods. Project page: https:
//github.com/ttengwang/VLMixer

1. Introduction
Vision-language pre-training (VLP) has received increasing attention and brought real benefits to a large variety of
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern
University of Science and Technology 2 Department of Computer
Science, The University of Hong Kong 3 Data Platform, Tencent.
Correspondence to: Feng Zheng <f.zheng@ieee.org>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Self-supervised
objectives

patch
Image

gallery

Multimodal Transformer

CutMixing
a girl holding a tennis racket
is sitting on a chair with a dog.

a girl holding a tennis ra
is sitting on a chair with a dog.

Input Sentence
Multi-modal Sentence

Figure 1. Illustration of the cross-modal CutMix (CMC). By randomly replacing the grounded words in a sentence with visual
tokens, we obtain diverse “multi-modal sentences” without changing the semantics but injecting cross-modal noises.

downstream tasks in the recent past (Tan & Bansal, 2019;
Li et al., 2019b; Lu et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2020b; Cao et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020a;
Zhang et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2021a; Jia et al., 2021). The success of existing
VLP models mainly comes from manually-labeled and wellaligned image captioning datasets, such as COCO (Lin et al.,
2014) and Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017b), and highcapacity transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) with
effective pre-training objectives for discovering the crossmodal alignments. In mainstream VLP methods, the modeling of cross-modal alignment has been proved to be effective
in achieving promising performance for several downstream
tasks (Cao et al., 2020). At a global level, image-text matching losses (Li et al., 2020b; Chen et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2021) are designed to guide the model to judge whether the
input image and sentence are aligned. With the warranty of
the instance-level alignment, the self-attention layers could
further excavate the fine-grained interactions between input
tokens across two modalities in an implicit manner.
Although promising performance has been reported, the
improvements of these methods that pre-trained on wellaligned datasets have gradually reached saturation due to
the cost of annotating large-scale datasets. The following
works alleviate this issue by introducing weakly-aligned
image-caption pairs, which contain noisy annotations but
are easy to access and scale-up. Unpaired vision-language
pre-training (Li et al., 2021b) further relieves the reliance
on paired image-caption data, aiming to learn multi-modal

