A Minimax Learning Approach to Off-Policy Evaluation in Confounded
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes

Chengchun Shi * 1 Masatoshi Uehara * 2 Jiawei Huang 3 Nan Jiang 3

Abstract
We consider off-policy evaluation (OPE) in
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs), where the evaluation policy depends
only on observable variables and the behavior
policy depends on unobservable latent variables.
Existing works either assume no unmeasured
confounders, or focus on settings where both the
observation and the state spaces are tabular. In
this work, we first propose novel identification
methods for OPE in POMDPs with latent
confounders, by introducing bridge functions that
link the target policy’s value and the observed
data distribution. We next propose minimax
estimation methods for learning these bridge
functions, and construct three estimators based
on these estimated bridge functions, corresponding to a value function-based estimator, a
marginalized importance sampling estimator, and
a doubly-robust estimator. Our proposal permits
general function approximation and is thus
applicable to settings with continuous or large
observation/state spaces. The nonasymptotic
and asymptotic properties of the proposed
estimators are investigated in detail. A Python
implementation of our proposal is available at
https://github.com/jiaweihhuang/
Confounded-POMDP-Exp.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied
in online settings (e.g., video games) where interaction with
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, London School
of Economics and Political Science, London, UK 2 Department
of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York,
USA 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, USA. Correspondence
to: Chengchun Shi <c.shi7@lse.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

environments is easy and the data can be adaptively generated. However, online interaction is often costly and dangerous for a number of high-stake domains ranging from health
science to social science and economics. Offline (batch) reinforcement learning is concerned with policy learning and
evaluation with limited and pre-collected data in a sample
efficient manner (Levine et al., 2020). The focus of this
paper is the off-policy evaluation (OPE) problem, which
refers to the task of estimating the value of an evaluation
policy offline using data collected under a different behavior
policy. It is critical in sequential decision-making problems
from healthcare, robotics, and education where new policies
need to be evaluated offline before online validation.
There is a growing literature on OPE (see e.g., Precup, 2000;
Jiang & Li, 2016; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Liu et al.,
2018; Xie et al., 2019; Yin & Wang, 2020; Liao et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2020; Pananjady & Wainwright, 2021;
Kuzborskij et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2021).
A common assumption made in the aforementioned works
is that of no unmeasured confounders. Specifically, they assume the time-varying state variables are fully observed and
no unmeasured variables exist that confound the observed
actions. However, this assumption is not testable from the
data. It is often violated in observational datasets generated
from healthcare applications.
To allow unmeasured confounders to exist, we model the
observed data by a Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP). Under this framework, the behavior policy is allowed to depend on some unobserved state variables
that confound the action-reward association. The goal of
OPE in POMDPs is to estimate the value of an evaluation
policy, which is a function of observed variables, using the
data generated by such a behavior policy. This is a highly
challenging problem. Directly applying the importance sampling methods (Precup, 2000; Liu et al., 2018) or the value
function-based method (Munos & Szepesvári, 2008) would
yield a biased estimator, as we do not have access to the
unobserved state variables. Tennenholtz et al. (2020); Nair
& Jiang (2021) have made important progresses on this
problem by outlining a consistent OPE estimator in tabular
settings. However, they are not applicable to settings with
continuous observation/state spaces.

