Dialog Inpainting: Turning Documents into Dialogs

Zhuyun Dai * 1 Arun Tejasvi Chaganty * 1 Vincent Zhao * 1 Aida Amini 1 Qazi Mamunur Rashid 1
Mike Green 1 Kelvin Guu * 1

Abstract
Many important questions (e.g. “How to eat
healthier?”) require conversation to establish
context and explore in depth. However, conversational question answering (ConvQA) systems
have long been stymied by scarce training data
that is expensive to collect. To address this problem, we propose a new technique for synthetically
generating diverse and high-quality dialog data:
dialog inpainting. Our approach takes the text
of any document and transforms it into a twoperson dialog between the writer and an imagined
reader: we treat sentences from the article as utterances spoken by the writer, and then use a dialog inpainter to predict what the imagined reader
asked or said in between each of the writer’s utterances. By applying this approach to passages
from Wikipedia and the web, we produce WikiDialog and WebDialog, two datasets totalling 19 million diverse information-seeking dialogs—1,000x
larger than the largest existing ConvQA dataset.
Furthermore, human raters judge the answer adequacy and conversationality of WikiDialog to be
as good or better than existing manually-collected
datasets. Remarkably, our approach shows strong
zero-shot capability, generating high quality synthetic data without using any in-domain ConvQA
data. Using our inpainted data to pre-train ConvQA retrieval systems, we significantly advance
state-of-the-art across three benchmarks (QReCC,
OR-QuAC, TREC CAsT) yielding up to 40% relative gains on standard evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Modern information-seeking tools such as web search and
question answering (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Zhu et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Inc., Mountain View, USA.
Correspondence to: Dialog Inpainting Core <dialog-inpaintingcore@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A real example of a dialog inferred from a Wikipedia
passage using dialog inpainting. Highlighted utterances are original sentences from the article. All other utterances are generated
by the dialog inpainter.

2021) excel at questions that have well-defined answers
(e.g., “Where was Barack Obama born?”). But many important questions are more open-ended—e.g., “How to eat
healthier?”—and require conversation to elicit context and
explore in depth: “How do I eat more protein?”, “What
about vegetarians?”. Conversational question answering
systems (ConvQA) (Stede & Schlangen, 2004; Radlinski &
Craswell, 2017; Culpepper et al., 2018), would empower
users to answer these questions as if they could discuss with
an expert at any time.
Despite this promising vision, progress has been stymied
by scarce training data. While conversational data is abundant in online forums, much of it focuses on personal anecdotes and subjective opinions, and is thus unsuitable for
an information-seeking system: we desire responses that
minimize personal biases and cite reliable sources. Directly
crowdsourcing dialogs is also hard: crowdworkers are rarely
experts in the domain of interest and tend to overlook impor-

