Faster Algorithms for Learning Convex Functions

Ali Siahkamari * 1 Durmus Alp Emre Acar * 1 Christopher Liao 1 Kelly Geyer 1 Venkatesh Saligrama 1
Brian Kulis 1

Abstract
The task of approximating an arbitrary convex
function arises in several learning problems such
as convex regression, learning with a difference
of convex (DC) functions, and learning Bregman
or f -divergences. In this paper, we develop and
analyze an approach for solving a broad range of
convex function learning problems that is faster
than state-of-the-art approaches. Our approach is
based on a 2-block ADMM method where each
block can be computed in closed form. For the
task of convex Lipschitz regression, we establish
that our proposed algorithm
√ converges with iteration complexity of O(n d/) for a dataset X ∈
Rn×d and  > 0. Combined with per-iteration
computation complexity, our method converges
with the rate O(n3 d1.5 / + n2 d2.5 / + nd3 /).
This new rate improves the state of the art rate
of O(n5 d2 /) if d = o(n4 ). Further we provide
similar solvers for DC regression and Bregman
divergence learning. Unlike previous approaches,
our method is amenable to the use of GPUs. We
demonstrate on regression and metric learning
experiments that our approach is over 100 times
faster than existing approaches on some data sets,
and produces results that are comparable to state
of the art.

1. Introduction
The importance of convex functions in machine learning
is undisputed. However, while most applications of convexity in machine learning involve fixed convex functions,
an emerging trend in the field has focused on the problem of learning convex functions for a particular task. In
this setting, data or supervision is used to tailor a convex
function for some end goal. Recent machine learning examples include learning with a difference of convex (DC)
*
Equal contribution 1 Boston University, Boston, MA. Correspondence to: Ali Siahkamari <siaa@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

functions (Siahkamari et al., 2020), learning input convex
neural networks for tasks in reinforcement learning or vision (Amos et al., 2017), and learning divergences between
points or distributions via learning the underlying convex
function in a Bregman divergence (Siahkamari et al., 2019)
or f -divergence (Zhang et al., 2020) for problems such as
data generation, metric learning, and others.
In fact, work in convex function learning at least dates back
to methods developed for the problem of convex regression,
an important learning problem that is used commonly in
econometrics and engineering for modeling demand, utility
and production curves (Afriat, 1967; Varian, 1982). Convex
regression is the problem of estimating a convex function
when receiving a dataset {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , where xi ∈ Rd are
predictors and yi are continuous responses. Consider
F , {f : Rd → R | f is convex},

(1)

as the class of all convex functions over Rd . Then an estimator is proposed by minimizing the squared error between
observations xi and responses yi ,
n
1X
(yi − f (xi ))2 + λkf k,
fˆ , arg min
f ∈F n
i=1

(2)

where kf k is some penalty term. A key insight about this
problem is that although Eq. (2) is an infinite dimensional
minimization problem, Boyd et al. (2004) shows it can be
solved as a convex optimization problem since the optimal
solution can be shown to be piece-wise linear. Furthermore,
generalization bounds for this problem have recently been
developed in (Balázs, 2016; Siahkamari et al., 2020) using
certain classes for kf k.
Many other convex function learning problems have a similar structure to them, and also yield resulting optimization
problems that can be tractably solved. However, a key
downside is that the computational complexity is often prohibitive for real-world applications, particularly due to the
non-parametric nature of the resulting optimization problems. For instance, the state-of-the-art solver for convex
regression is based on interior point methods and has a
complexity of O(n5 d2 /) for a given accuracy .
Thus, our goal in this paper is to study a class of methods
that yields provably faster convergence for a number of dif-

