Probabilistically Robust Learning:
Balancing Average- and Worst-case Performance

Alexander Robey 1 Luiz F. O. Chamon 2 George J. Pappas 1 Hamed Hassani 1

Abstract
Many of the successes of machine learning are
based on minimizing an averaged loss function.
However, it is well-known that this paradigm suffers from robustness issues that hinder its applicability in safety-critical domains. These issues
are often addressed by training against worst-case
perturbations of data, a technique known as adversarial training. Although empirically effective, adversarial training can be overly conservative, leading to unfavorable trade-offs between nominal
performance and robustness. To this end, in this
paper we propose a framework called probabilistic robustness that bridges the gap between the
accurate, yet brittle average case and the robust,
yet conservative worst case by enforcing robustness to most rather than to all perturbations. From
a theoretical point of view, this framework overcomes the trade-offs between the performance and
the sample-complexity of worst-case and averagecase learning. From a practical point of view, we
propose a novel algorithm based on risk-aware optimization that effectively balances average- and
worst-case performance at a considerably lower
computational cost relative to adversarial training.
Our results on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and SVHN
illustrate the advantages of this framework on the
spectrum from average- to worst-case robustness.

1. Introduction
Underlying many of the modern successes of learning is the
statistical paradigm of empirical risk minimization (ERM),
in which the goal is to minimize a loss function averaged
over data (Vapnik, 1999). Although ubiquitous in practice,
1
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 2 University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Alexander
Robey <arobey1@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

it is now well-known that prediction rules learned by ERM
suffer from a severe lack of robustness, which in turn greatly
limits their applicability in safety-critical domains (Biggio
et al., 2013; Shen et al., 2021). Indeed, this vulnerability
has led to a pronounced interest in improving the robustness
of modern learning tools (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019).
To this end, a growing body of work has motivated a learning paradigm known as adversarial training, wherein rather
than training on the raw data, predictors are trained against
worst-case perturbations of data (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Madry et al., 2017). Yet, despite ample empirical evidence
showing that adversarial training improves the robustness
of learned predictors (Su et al., 2018; Croce et al., 2020;
Tang et al., 2021), this framework is not without drawbacks.
Indeed, adversarial training is known to be overly conservative (Tsipras et al., 2018; Raghunathan et al., 2019), a
property often exhibited by other worst-case approaches
ranging from complexity theory (Spielman & Teng, 2004)
to robust control (Zhou & Doyle, 1998). Furthermore, there
are broad classes of problems for which the sample complexity of learning a robust predictor is arbitrarily large (Cullina
et al., 2018; Montasser et al., 2019). Finally, the problem
of computing worst-case perturbations of data is nonconvex
and underparameterized for most modern learning models
including deep neural networks (DNNs).
The fundamental drawbacks of these learning paradigms
motivate the need for a new robust learning framework
that (i) avoids the conservatism of adversarial robustness
without incurring the brittleness of ERM, (ii) provides an
interpretable way to balance nominal performance and robustness, and (iii) admits an efficient and effective algorithm.
To this end, in this paper we propose a framework called
probabilistic robustness that bridges the gap between the
accurate, yet brittle average-case approach of ERM and the
robust, yet conservative worst-case approach of adversarial
training. By enforcing robustness to most rather than to all
perturbations, we show theoretically and empirically that
probabilistic robustness meets the desiderata in (i)–(iii). Indeed, our approach parallels a litany of past work in a variety
of fields, including smoothed analysis (Spielman & Teng,
2004) and control theory (Campi & Garatti, 2008), wherein

