A Modern Self-Referential Weight Matrix That Learns to Modify Itself

Kazuki Irie 1 Imanol Schlag 1 Róbert Csordás 1 Jürgen Schmidhuber 1 2

Abstract
The weight matrix (WM) of a neural network
(NN) is its program. The programs of many traditional NNs are learned through gradient descent
in some error function, then remain fixed. The
WM of a self-referential NN, however, can keep
rapidly modifying all of itself during runtime. In
principle, such NNs can meta-learn to learn, and
meta-meta-learn to meta-learn to learn, and so
on, in the sense of recursive self-improvement.
While NN architectures potentially capable of implementing such behaviour have been proposed
since the ’90s, there have been few if any practical studies. Here we revisit such NNs, building
upon recent successes of fast weight programmers
and closely related linear Transformers. We propose a scalable self-referential WM (SRWM) that
learns to use outer products and the delta update
rule to modify itself. We evaluate our SRWM
in supervised few-shot learning and in multi-task
reinforcement learning with procedurally generated game environments. Our experiments demonstrate both practical applicability and competitive
performance of the proposed SRWM. Our code is
public† .

1. Introduction
The program of a neural network (NN) is its weight matrix (WM) (Schmidhuber, 1990). With prediction tasks, for
example, starting from random values, an NN training procedure based on gradient descent might update the WM to
minimize an error function that favors compression of given
input-output observations (Solomonoff, 1964). The WM
becomes permanent once training ends, and its usefulness
1
The Swiss AI Lab, IDSIA, USI & SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland 2 AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to:
<{kazuki, imanol, robert, juergen}@idsia.ch>. An earlier version was presented at NeurIPS 2021 Deep RL Workshop.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
†
https://github.com/IDSIA/modern-srwm

is evaluated with respect to its generalisation capability on
yet unseen data.
Many environments, however, continue to evolve after training has halted (e.g., Lazaridou et al. (2021); Lin et al.
(2021)), and the test setting may deviate from training in
ways that exceed the NN’s generalisation capability. Then
human intervention might be required to re-train or fine-tune
the model. Instead, more general and autonomous systems
should learn to update their own programs in the light of
new experience without such intervention. Especially in
multi-task learning and meta-learning (learning to learn;
Schmidhuber (1987)), it may be useful to learn how to keep
changing and fine-tuning the model in a way that quickly
adapts to various situations and new challenges (Hochreiter
et al., 2001; Finn et al., 2017).
In principle, a WM could learn by itself a way of executing rapid WM adaptations in task-dependent and contextdependent fashion through a generic mechanism for recursive self-modification. Various self-modifying NNs have
been proposed previously (see Sec. 6). Here we revisit the
self-referential WM (Schmidhuber, 1992a; 1993a;b;c) from
the ’90s in the light of modern techniques for updating and
generating weights. In particular, we leverage mechanisms
which are now well established in the context of Fast Weight
Programmers (FWPs, Schmidhuber (1991; 1992b; 1993d);
reviewed in Sec. 2). FWPs have recently seen advancements
in terms of performance and scalability, inspired by their
formal equivalence (Schlag et al., 2021) to linear variants
(Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2021; Peng
et al., 2021) of the popular Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017).
Here we derive a new type of self-referential WM (SRWM)
which naturally emerges as an extension to recent works on
FWPs. We evaluate the proposed SRWM in three settings.
We start by demonstrating that the proposed model is effectively capable of generating useful self-modifications
by showing that the model achieves competitive performance on standard few-shot learning benchmarks. Second,
by extending the few-shot learning setting to a sequential
multi-task learning setting, we test the SRWM’s ability to
sequentially adapt itself to changes of the task at runtime.
Finally, by using ProcGen (Cobbe et al., 2020), we evaluate it in a multi-task reinforcement learning (RL) setting

