A Natural Actor-Critic Framework for Zero-Sum Markov Games
Ahmet Alacaoglu 1 Luca Viano 2 Niao He 3 Volkan Cevher 2

Abstract
We introduce algorithms based on natural actorcritic and analyze their sample complexity for
solving two player zero-sum Markov games in the
tabular case. Our results improve the best-known
sample complexities of policy gradient/actorcritic methods for convergence to Nash equilibrium in the multi-agent setting. We use the error propagation scheme in approximate dynamic
programming, recent advances for global convergence of policy gradient methods, temporal difference learning, and techniques from stochastic
primal-dual optimization. Our algorithms feature
two stages, requiring agents to agree on an etiquette before starting their interactions, which is
feasible for instance in self-play. However, the
agents only access to joint reward and joint next
state and not to each other’s actions or policies.
Our complexity results match the best-known results for global convergence of policy gradient algorithms for single agent RL. We provide numerical verification of our methods for a two player
bandit environment and a two player game, Alesia.
We observe improved empirical performance as
compared to the recently proposed optimistic gradient descent-ascent variant for Markov games.

1. Introduction
We study two-player zero-sum Markov game framework
which is a fundamental formulation of competitive reinforcement learning (RL). Competitive RL has important applications in self-play (Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019;
Brown & Sandholm, 2018), robust RL (Zhang et al., 2021b;
Tessler et al., 2019), and many other contexts (Zhang et al.,
2021a). This framework is introduced by (Shapley, 1953)
as stochastic games and popularized in RL with (Littman,
1994). In its basic form, two agents with competing interests play simultaneously in an environment where the
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 EPFL 3 ETH-Zürich. Correspondence to: Ahmet Alacaoglu <alacaoglu@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

reward and the state transition depend on the actions of both
players.
Optimistic value based methods have received increasing
attention. In particular, they have been shown to achieve
complexity of Õ(ϵ−2 ) in the episodic setting (Bai et al.,
2020; Bai & Jin, 2020; Xie et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020)
and in the infinite horizon case with a generative model (Sidford et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020) matching the respective
lower bounds (Jin et al., 2018; Bai & Jin, 2020; Azar et al.,
2012). On the contrary policy gradient (PG) methods, including actor-critic (AC) and their natural counterparts natural PG (NPG) (Kakade, 2001) and natural AC (NAC) (Peters
& Schaal, 2008) have still not been shown to achieve the
optimal dependence on ϵ in the game setting.
The existing results on PG methods for tabular two-player
zero-sum Markov games mostly focus on decentralized algorithms with sample complexities Õ(ϵ−12.5 ) (Daskalakis
et al., 2020) in the episodic setting, Õ(ϵ−8 ), and even
Õ(ϵ−4 ) in the infinite horizon case, yet with some limitations (Wei et al., 2021); see Section 1.1 for the details.
With function approximation, (Zhao et al., 2022) obtains
Õ(ϵ−6 ) sample complexity when given access to unbiased
sampling oracles of the value functions. In terms of ϵ dependence, these complexity results are far from Õ(ϵ−2 )
achieved by optimistic value-based methods. However, PG
methods enjoy a model-free and easy-to-implement structure (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Wang et al., 2016) that is
often desirable for practical applications.
Therefore, closing the gap with value-based methods is an
important open research question. Interestingly, the gap
has been recently closed in the single agent tabular setting.
Indeed, (Lan, 2021) have shown Õ(ϵ−2 ) sample complexity for global optimality for policy mirror descent without
requiring the exact gradient knowledge. Our work bridges
the same gap for the two-player Markov Games designing a natural actor-critic algorithm achieving Õ(ϵ−2 ) sample complexity to attain a one sided ϵ-Nash Equilibrium.
This dependence on ϵ also matches the best-known sample
complexity for single agent tabular setting, under similar
assumptions.
Contributions. We propose algorithms based on natural
actor-critic (NAC) framework for solving two-player zerosum Markov games in the tabular case, without requiring

