Independent Policy Gradient for Large-Scale Markov Potential Games:
Sharper Rates, Function Approximation, and Game-Agnostic Convergence

Dongsheng Ding * 1 Chen-Yu Wei * 1 Kaiqing Zhang * 2 Mihailo R. Jovanović 1

Abstract
We examine global non-asymptotic convergence
properties of policy gradient methods for multiagent reinforcement learning (RL) problems in
Markov potential games (MPGs). To learn a Nash
equilibrium of an MPG in which the size of state
space and/or the number of players can be very
large, we propose new independent policy gradient algorithms that are run by all players in tandem. When there is no uncertainty in the gradient
evaluation, we show that our algorithm finds an
-Nash equilibrium with O(1/2 ) iteration complexity which does not explicitly depend on the
state space size. When the exact gradient is not
available, we establish O(1/5 ) sample complexity bound in a potentially infinitely large state
space for a sample-based algorithm that utilizes
function approximation. Moreover, we identify a
class of independent policy gradient algorithms
that enjoy convergence for both zero-sum Markov
games and Markov cooperative games with the
players that are oblivious to the types of games
being played. Finally, we provide computational
experiments to corroborate the merits and the effectiveness of our theoretical developments.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (RL) studies how multiple players learn to maximize their long-term returns in
a setup where players’ actions influence the environment
and other agents’ returns (Busoniu et al., 2008; Zhang et al.,
2021a). Recently, multi-agent RL has achieved significant
success in various multi-agent learning scenarios, e.g., comAlphabetical order 1 University of Southern California
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Correspondence
to: Dongsheng Ding <dongshed@usc.edu>, Chen-Yu Wei
<chenyu.wei@usc.edu>, Kaiqing Zhang <kaiqing@mit.edu>,
Mihailo R. Jovanović <mihailo@usc.edu>.

petitive game-playing (Silver et al., 2016; 2018; Vinyals
et al., 2019), autonomous robotics (Shalev-Shwartz et al.,
2016; Levine et al., 2016), and economic policy-making
(Zheng et al., 2020; Trott et al., 2021). In the framework
of stochastic games (Shapley, 1953; Fink, 1964), most results are established for fully-competitive (i.e., two-player
zero-sum) games; e.g., see Daskalakis et al. (2020); Wei
et al. (2021b); Cen et al. (2021). However, to achieve social welfare for AI (Dafoe et al., 2020; 2021; Stastny et al.,
2021), it is imperative to establish theoretical guarantees for
multi-agent RL in Markov games with cooperation.
Policy gradient methods (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al.,
2000) have received significant attention for both singleagent (Bhandari & Russo, 2019; Agarwal et al., 2021) and
multi-agent RL problems (Zhang et al., 2019; Daskalakis
et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021b). Independent policy gradient (Zhang et al., 2021a; Ozdaglar et al., 2021) is probably
the most practical protocol in multi-agent RL, where each
player behaves myopically by only observing her own rewards and actions (as well as the system states), while individually optimizing its own policy. More importantly, independent learning dynamics do not scale exponentially with
the number of players in the game. Recently, Daskalakis
et al. (2020); Leonardos et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2021b)
have in fact shown that multi-agent RL players could perform policy gradient updates independently, while enjoying
global non-asymptotic convergence. However, these results
are only focused on the basic tabular setting in which the
value functions are represented by tables; they do not carry
over to large-scale multi-agent RL problems in which the
state space size is potentially infinite and the number of
players is large. This motivates the following question:
Can we design independent policy gradient methods for
large-scale Markov games, with non-asymptotic global
convergence guarantees?

*

2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this paper, we provide the first affirmative answer to
this question for a class of mixed cooperative/competitive
Markov games: Markov potential games (MPGs) (Macua
et al., 2018; Leonardos et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021b). In
particular, we make the following contributions:
• We propose an independent policy gradient algorithm

