On the Impossibility of Learning to Cooperate with Adaptive Partner
Strategies in Repeated Games

Robert Loftin 1 Frans A. Oliehoek 1

Abstract
Learning to cooperate with other agents is challenging when those agents also possess the ability to adapt to our own behavior. Practical and
theoretical approaches to learning in cooperative
settings typically assume that other agents’ behaviors are stationary, or else make very specific assumptions about other agents’ learning processes.
The goal of this work is to understand whether we
can reliably learn to cooperate with other agents
without such restrictive assumptions, which are
unlikely to hold in real-world applications. Our
main contribution is a set of impossibility results,
which show that no learning algorithm can reliably learn to cooperate with all possible adaptive partners in a repeated matrix game, even if
that partner is guaranteed to cooperate with some
stationary strategy. Motivated by these results,
we then discuss potential alternative assumptions
which capture the idea that an adaptive partner
will only adapt rationally to our behavior.

1. Introduction
Artificial agents deployed in real-world settings must be
able to reliably interact and cooperate with humans (as well
as other artificial agents). While machine learning can allow
such agents to adapt to others’ behavior, learning may fail
when other agents are equally capable of adapting to our
agent’s own behavior. In this work, we consider whether
an agent can reliably learn to cooperate with other adaptive
agents when the strategies of those agents are unknown, and
the minimal assumptions about others’ strategies needed to
ensure such cooperation. We show that, even when another
agent’s strategy is known be “cooperative” in a reasonable
sense, there is no algorithm which is guaranteed to learn
1

Department of Intelligent Systems, Delft University of Technology, Delft, South-Holland, The Netherlands. Correspondence
to: Robert Loftin <R.T.Loftin@tudelft.nl>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

to cooperate without additional assumptions. At the same
time, we argue that the assumptions under which existing
approaches can reliably learn to cooperate (de Farias &
Megiddo, 2003; Even-Dar et al., 2005) are too restrictive for
many realistic settings, and suggest alternative constraints
that may be more easily satisfied in practice.
We focus on the case where two agents, who we will refer
to as Alice and Bob, must work together to achieve some
common goal. Our challenge is to choose a “good” strategy
for Alice, without knowledge of Bob’s strategy. A common
way to approach such problems is to assume that Bob will
play his half of some optimal joint strategy, and so have
Alice play her half of this strategy as well. This objective
approach may fail, however, when the task admits multiple,
incompatible solutions, and Alice has no way to know in
advance which solution Bob has chosen. For this reason,
some works (Mescheder et al., 2011; Poland & Hutter, 2006)
have advocated framing the problem as one of single-agent
learning, where Alice’s strategy adapts to Bob’s observed
behavior. This subjective approach becomes problematic,
however, when Bob’s strategy can also adapt to Alice’s
behavior. The key theoretical result of this work in Theorem 4.7, which shows that if Bob’s strategy is allowed to be
adaptive, then there is no strategy Alice can choose that will
reliably cooperate with every strategy Bob could follow.
More specifically, we show that for some infinitely repeated
matrix games, there is no adaptive strategy Alice can follow
that will always achieve the same average payoff as the best
strategy she could have followed given knowledge of Bob’s
strategy. The key idea is that as the game progresses, Bob
may continuously increase the time over which Alice must
commit to a single strategy before his behavior converges,
such that Alice is never able to gain information about the
long-term payoffs of potential strategies. This stands in contrast to existing results, which guarantee near-optimal payoff
under the assumption that there exists some bounded time
horizon over which Alice can evaluate possible strategies
against Bob’s behavior. We will see that this assumption is
violated even by seemingly reasonable learning strategies,
such as fictitious play (Robinson, 1951) (see Section 4.2),
that Bob could be expected to follow.
In Section 4.2, we introduce the concept of an open-ended

