Constrained Variational Policy Optimization for Safe Reinforcement Learning

Zuxin Liu 1 Zhepeng Cen 1 Vladislav Isenbaev 2 Wei Liu 2 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1 Bo Li 3 Ding Zhao 1

Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn
policies that satisfy certain constraints before deploying them to safety-critical applications. Previous primal-dual style approaches suffer from
instability issues and lack optimality guarantees.
This paper overcomes the issues from the perspective of probabilistic inference. We introduce a
novel Expectation-Maximization approach to naturally incorporate constraints during the policy
learning: 1) a provable optimal non-parametric
variational distribution could be computed in
closed form after a convex optimization (E-step);
2) the policy parameter is improved within the
trust region based on the optimal variational distribution (M-step). The proposed algorithm decomposes the safe RL problem into a convex optimization phase and a supervised learning phase, which
yields a more stable training performance. A wide
range of experiments on continuous robotic tasks
shows that the proposed method achieves significantly better constraint satisfaction performance
and better sample efficiency than baselines. The
code is available at https://github.com/
liuzuxin/cvpo-safe-rl.

1. Introduction
The past few years have witnessed great success of reinforcement learning (RL) (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al.,
2017). However, deploying a trained RL policy to the real
world is challenging. One of the major obstacles is to ensure the learned policy satisfies safety constraints. Safe RL
studies the RL problem subject to certain constraints, where
the agent aims to not only maximize the task reward return,
but also limit the constraint violation rate to a certain level.
However, learning a parametrized policy that satisfies constraints is not a trivial task, especially when the policy is
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Nuro Inc. 3 University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Zuxin Liu
<zuxinl@cmu.edu>, Ding Zhao <dingzhao@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

represented by black-box neural networks (Liu et al., 2020;
As et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021).
Many researchers have pointed out that prior knowledge
of the environment (Dalal et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2019;
Thananjeyan et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021) and expert
interventions (Saunders et al., 2017; Alshiekh et al., 2018;
Wagener et al., 2021) are helpful to improve safety, but the
required domain knowledge on the dynamics, constraints, or
the existence of an expert oracle may not always be available.
This paper studies the safe RL problem in a more general
setting: learning a safe policy purely from interacting with
the environment and receiving constraint violation signals.
We aim to unveil and resolve the fundamental issues for safe
RL from the constrained optimization perspective.
Most constrained optimization approaches for safe RL are
under the primal-dual framework, which transforms the
original constrained problem into an unconstrained one by
introducing the dual variables (i.e., Lagrange multipliers)
to penalize constraint violations (Chow et al., 2017; Liang
et al., 2018; Tessler et al., 2018; Bohez et al., 2019; Ray
et al., 2019). However, the primal-dual iterative optimization may run into numerical instability issues and lacks optimality guarantee for each policy iteration (Chow et al., 2018;
Stooke et al., 2020). The instability usually comes from imbalanced learning rates of the primal and dual problem, and
the optimality term means both feasibility (constraint satisfaction) and reward maximization. Another line of work
approximate the constrained optimization problem with loworder Taylor expansions such that the dual variables could
be solved efficiently (Achiam et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2020) , but the induced approximations errors
may yield poor constraint satisfaction performance in practice (Ray et al., 2019). In addition, these policy-gradient
algorithms are on-policy by design, and extending them to a
more sample efficient off-policy setting is non-trivial. Note
that in safe RL context, sample efficiency means using both
minimum constraint violation costs and minimum interaction samples to achieve the same level of rewards. As a
result, a constrained RL optimization method that is 1) sample efficient, 2) stable and has 3) performance guarantees is
absent in the literature.
To bridge the gap, this paper proposes the Constrained Variational Policy Optimization (CVPO) algorithm from the

