Simultaneously Learning Stochastic and Adversarial Bandits with
General Graph Feedback

Fang Kong 1 Yichi Zhou 2 Shuai Li 1

Abstract
The problem of online learning with graph feedback has been extensively studied in the literature due to its generality and potential to model
various learning tasks. Existing works mainly
study the adversarial and stochastic feedback separately. If the prior knowledge of the feedback
mechanism is unavailable or wrong, such specially designed algorithms could suffer great loss.
To avoid this problem, Erez & Koren (2021) try
to optimize for both environments. However, they
assume the feedback graphs are undirected and
each vertex has a self-loop, which compromises
the generality of the framework and may not be
satisfied in applications. With a general feedback
graph, the observation of an arm may not be available when this arm is pulled, which makes the
exploration more expensive and the algorithms
more challenging to perform optimally in both
environments. In this work, we overcome this
difficulty by a new trade-off mechanism with a
carefully-designed proportion for exploration and
exploitation. We prove the proposed algorithm
simultaneously achieves poly log T regret in the
stochastic setting and minimax-optimal regret of
Õ(T 2/3 ) in the adversarial setting where T is the
horizon and Õ hides parameters independent of
T as well as logarithmic terms. To our knowledge, this is the first best-of-both-worlds result
for general feedback graphs.

1. Introduction
The online learning problem can be formulated by a repeated
game between the learner and an unknown environment
1
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Shuai Li
<shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Lattimore & Szepesvári,
2020). The environment contains K arms. In each round,
the learner selects one among these arms and observes some
feedback. At the end of the round, it obtains the reward of
the selected arm. The objective of the learner is to minimize
the cumulative regret over a specified horizon, defined as
the difference between the cumulative reward of the optimal
arm and that of the arms selected.
To achieve this goal, the learner should adjust its strategy
according to the feedback it observes. One of the most
widely-studied feedback models is bandit feedback, where
the learner only observes the reward of the selected arm
in each round (Auer et al., 2002a; Lattimore & Szepesvári,
2020). The other extreme is called full feedback, where
the learner is able to observe the reward of all arms no
matter which arm it selects (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006;
Eban et al., 2012). Both these two extremes are special
cases of a general feedback model, where the feedback is
characterized by a directed graph G = ([K], E) (Mannor
& Shamir, 2011). An edge (i, j) ∈ E implies that the
learner can observe arm j when selecting arm i. Under this
framework, the graph of bandit feedback is composed of
K disjoint self-loops and that of full feedback is a clique
with self-loops. Benefiting from its generality and potential
to model various learning tasks, graph feedback has been
widely studied in the literature (Wu et al., 2015; Alon et al.,
2015; Li et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021).
Previous works on graph feedback mainly study two standard environments: stochastic (Buccapatnam et al., 2014;
Wu et al., 2015; Tossou et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020) and adversarial (Mannor & Shamir, 2011; Alon et al., 2015; Chen
et al., 2021). In the stochastic setting, the rewards of an arm
are drawn independently from a fixed distribution. While in
the adversarial setting, the rewards can be chosen arbitrarily.
All of these works consider observable feedback graphs, i.e.,
each arm can be observed by selecting some arms. It is not
hard to see that observability is necessary to guarantee sublinear regret (Alon et al., 2015). With a general observable
graph, the optimal regret in both settings has been well understood. In the stochastic setting, Wu et al. (2015) develop
the instance-optimal regret of order Θ(log T ). And in the
adversarial setting, Alon et al. (2015); Chen et al. (2021)

