Towards Evaluating Adaptivity of
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Methods

Yi Wan * 1 2 Ali Rahimi-Kalahroudi * 2 3 Janarthanan Rajendran 2 3 Ida Momennejad 4 Sarath Chandar 2 5 6
Harm van Seijen 4

Abstract

In recent years, a growing number of deep modelbased reinforcement learning (RL) methods have
been introduced. The interest in deep modelbased RL is not surprising, given its many potential benefits, such as higher sample efficiency
and the potential for fast adaption to changes
in the environment. However, we demonstrate,
using an improved version of the recently introduced Local Change Adaptation (LoCA) setup,
that well-known model-based methods such as
PlaNet and DreamerV2 perform poorly in their
ability to adapt to local environmental changes.
Combined with prior work that made a similar
observation about the other popular model-based
method, MuZero, a trend appears to emerge, suggesting that current deep model-based methods
have serious limitations. We dive deeper into the
causes of this poor performance, by identifying
elements that hurt adaptive behavior and linking
these to underlying techniques frequently used
in deep model-based RL. We empirically validate these insights in the case of linear function
approximation by demonstrating that a modified
version of linear Dyna achieves effective adaptation to local changes. Furthermore, we provide
detailed insights into the challenges of building
an adaptive nonlinear model-based method, by
experimenting with a nonlinear version of Dyna.

Equal contribution 1 University of Alberta 2 Mila - Quebec
AI Institute 3 Universite de Montreal 4 Microsoft 5 Ecole Polytechnique de Montreal 6 Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence
to: Yi Wan <wan6@ualberta.ca>, Ali Rahimi-Kalahroudi <alirahimi.kalahroudi@mila.quebec>.

1. Introduction
While model-free reinforcement learning (RL) is still the
dominant approach in deep RL, more and more research on
deep model-based RL appears (Wang et al., 2019; Moerland
et al., 2020). This is hardly surprising, as model-based RL
(MBRL), which leverages estimates of the reward and transition model, could hold the key to some persistent challenges
in deep RL, such as sample efficiency and effective adaptation to environment changes. Although deep model-based
RL has gained momentum, there are questions to be raised
about the proper way to evaluate its progress. A common
performance metric is sample-efficiency in a single task
(Wang et al., 2019), which has several disadvantages. First,
it conflates progress due to model-based RL with other factors such as representation learning. More importantly, it
is unclear whether in an single-task setting, model-based
RL is always more sample-efficient than model-free RL because learning a policy directly is not necessarily slower
than learning a model and planning with the model. By
contrast, when it comes to solving multiple tasks that share
(most of) the dynamics, it is arguable that model-based RL
has a clear advantage.
Instead of measuring the sample-efficiency of an algorithm
in a single task, Van Seijen et al. (2020) developed the Local
Change Adaptation (LoCA) setup to measure the agent’s
ability to adapt when the task changes. This approach,
inspired by approaches used in neuroscience for measuring
model-based behavior in humans and rodents, is designed to
measure how quickly an RL algorithm can adapt to a local
change in the reward using its learned environment model.
They used this to show that the deep model-based method
MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2019), which achieves great
sample-efficiency on Atari, was not able to effectively adapt
to a local change in the reward, even on simple tasks.

*

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

This paper builds out this direction further. First, we improve the original LoCA setup, such that it is simpler, less
sensitive to its hyperparameters and can be more easily applied to stochastic environments. Our improved setup is
designed to make a binary classification of model-based
methods: those that can effectively adapt to local changes
in the environment and those that cannot.

