Dynamic Regret of Online Markov Decision Processes

Peng Zhao 1 Long-Fei Li 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
We investigate online Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with adversarially changing loss
functions and known transitions. We choose
dynamic regret as the performance measure, defined as the performance difference between the
learner and any sequence of feasible changing
policies. The measure is strictly stronger than
the standard static regret that benchmarks the
learner’s performance with a fixed compared policy. We consider three foundational models of online MDPs, including episodic loop-free Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP), episodic SSP, and infinitehorizon MDPs. For the three models, we propose
novel online ensemble algorithms and establish
their dynamic regret guarantees respectively, in
which the results for episodic (loop-free) SSP are
provably minimax optimal in terms of time horizon and certain non-stationarity measure.

1. Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are widely used to
model decision-making problems, where a learner interacts
with the environments sequentially and aims to improve
the learned strategy over time. The MDPs model is very
general and encompasses a variety of applications, including
games (Silver et al., 2016), robotic control (Schulman et al.,
2015), autonomous driving (Kendall et al., 2019), etc.
In this paper, we focus on the online MDPs framework with
adversarially changing loss functions and known transitions,
which has attracted increasing attention in recent years due
to its generality (Even-Dar et al., 2009; Zimin & Neu, 2013;
Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019a; Jin et al., 2020a; Chen et al.,
2021a). Let T be the total time horizon. The general procedures of the online MDPs are as follows: at each round
t ∈ [T ], the learner observes the current state xt and decides
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University. Correspondence to: Zhi-Hua Zhou
<zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

a policy πt : X × A → [0, 1], where πt (a|x) is the probability of taking action a ∈ A at state x ∈ X. Then, the
learner draws and executes an action at from πt (·|xt ) and
suffers a loss ℓt (xt , at ). The environments subsequently
transit to the next state xt+1 according to the transition kernel P (·|xt , at ). We focus on the full-information setting
where the entire loss function is revealed to the learner. The
standard measure for online MDPs is the regret defined as
the performance difference between learner’s policy and
that of the best fixed policy in hindsight, namely,
R EGT =

T
X

ℓt (xt , πt (xt )) − min
π∈Π

t=1

T
X

ℓt (xt , π(xt )) , (1)

t=1

where Π is a certain policy class. There are many efforts
devoted to optimizing the measure, yielding fruitful results (Even-Dar et al., 2009; Neu et al., 2012; Zimin &
Neu, 2013; Neu et al., 2014; Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019a;
2021; Chen et al., 2021a). However, one caveat in the performance measure in Eq. (1) is that the measure only benchmarks the learner’s performance with a fixed strategy, so it
is usually called the static regret in the literature. The fact
makes the static regret metric not suitable to guide the algorithm design for online decision making in non-stationary
environments, which is often the case in many real-world
decision-making applications such as online recommendations and autonomous driving. In particular, in online MDPs
model the loss functions encountered by the learner can be
adversarially changing, it is thus unrealistic to assume the
existence of a single fixed strategy that can perform well
over the horizon. To this end, in this paper we introduce the
dynamic regret as the metric to guide the algorithm design
for online MDPs, which competes the learner’s performance
against a sequence of changing policies, defined as
c
D-R EGT (π1:T
)=

T
X
t=1

ℓt (xt , πt (xt )) −

T
X

ℓt (xt , πtc (xt )),

t=1

(2)
where π1c , . . . , πTc is any sequence of compared policies in
the policy class Π, which can be chosen with the complete
c
foreknowledge of the online loss functions. We use π1:T
as
a shorthand of the compared policies. An upper bound of
dynamic regret usually scales with a certain variation quantity of the compared policies denoted by PT (π1c , . . . , πTc )
that can reflect the non-stationarity of environments.

