Efficient Model-based Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
via Optimistic Equilibrium Computation

Pier Giuseppe Sessa 1 Maryam Kamgarpour * 2 Andreas Krause * 1

Abstract
We consider model-based multi-agent reinforcement learning, where the environment transition
model is unknown and can only be learned via
expensive interactions with the environment. We
propose H-MARL (Hallucinated Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning), a novel sampleefficient algorithm that can efficiently balance
exploration, i.e., learning about the environment,
and exploitation, i.e., achieve good equilibrium
performance in the underlying general-sum
Markov game. H-MARL builds high-probability
confidence intervals around the unknown
transition model and sequentially updates them
based on newly observed data. Using these, it
constructs an optimistic hallucinated game for
the agents for which equilibrium policies are
computed at each round. We consider general
statistical models (e.g., Gaussian processes, deep
ensembles, etc.) and policy classes (e.g., deep
neural networks), and theoretically analyze our
approach by bounding the agents’ dynamic regret.
Moreover, we provide a convergence rate to the
equilibria of the underlying Markov game. We
demonstrate our approach experimentally on
an autonomous driving simulation benchmark.
H-MARL learns successful equilibrium policies
after a few interactions with the environment
and can significantly improve the performance
compared to non-optimistic exploration methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MA-RL) has shown
promising successes in solving complex sequential decisionmaking tasks faced by multiple interacting agents, such as in
*

Equal contribution 1 ETH Zürich, Rämistrasse 101, 8092
Zürich. 2 EPFL Lausanne, Rte Cantonale, 1015 Lausanne. Correspondence to: Pier Giuseppe Sessa <sessap@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

robotics (Levine et al., 2016) and game playing (Mnih et al.,
2015). However, its applicability to several real-world problems is still limited by the required large amount of training data. MA-RL methods can be classified as model-free,
where agents are trained directly on the obtained rewards,
and model-based where agents are trained based on an estimated model of the environment. For comprehensive surveys, see (Busoniu et al., 2008; Gronauer & Diepold, 2021).
A central challenge for MA-RL, which is crucial for its
scalability to the real world, is the problem of trading
off exploration with exploitation (Busoniu et al., 2008).
Exploration is the ability to learn about the environment
and generalize over unseen states and actions, hence being
important to avoid suboptimal policies and enable task
generalization. Exploitation of the data observed so far,
on the other hand, is necessary to ensure that the agents’
policies achieve high performance throughout the learning.
While there has been an extensive set of techniques addressing this challenge in single-agent RL (see, e.g., Jaksch et al.
(2010); Luo et al. (2019); Curi et al. (2020) and references
therein), it remains fairly unexplored in the MA-RL domain.
In MA-RL, this is particularly difficult since the joint action
space grows exponentially with the number of agents and,
as a result, effective single-agent RL techniques (such as
ϵ-greedy) can provably fail Mahajan et al. (2019). Recently,
new methods have been proposed to circumvent these
challenges and encourage exploration in different game
settings, as discussed in Section 1.1. However, they are
typically concerned with agents’ asymptotic performance
(i.e., neglecting agents’ performance during learning),
specific game settings (cooperative or two-player zero-sum),
and tabular domains (i.e., finite state and action spaces).
In this work, we propose a novel sample-efficient algorithm
for MA-RL which can efficiently balance exploration and
exploitation. We consider general-sum Markov games (also
known as mixed cooperative-competitive setting in the MARL literature) with continuous action and state spaces, and
quantify agents’ performance with the notion of dynamic regret. The dynamic regret measures the cumulative distance
(throughout the learning rounds) of the played games from
being at equilibrium. We provide a regret bound for our
method, together with sample-efficient convergence rates

