The Infinite Contextual Graph Markov Model

Daniele Castellana * 1 Federico Errica * 1 2 3 Davide Bacciu 1 Alessio Micheli 1

Abstract
The Contextual Graph Markov Model (CGMM)
is a deep, unsupervised, and probabilistic model
for graphs that is trained incrementally on a layerby-layer basis. As with most Deep Graph Networks, an inherent limitation is the need to perform an extensive model selection to choose the
proper size of each layer’s latent representation.
In this paper, we address this problem by introducing the Infinite Contextual Graph Markov
Model (I CGMM), the first deep Bayesian nonparametric model for graph learning. During training, I CGMM can adapt the complexity of each
layer to better fit the underlying data distribution.
On 8 graph classification tasks, we show that
I CGMM: i) successfully recovers or improves
CGMM’s performances while reducing the hyperparameters’ search space; ii) performs comparably to most end-to-end supervised methods. The
results include studies on the importance of depth,
hyper-parameters, and compression of the graph
embeddings. We also introduce a novel approximated inference procedure that better deals with
larger graph topologies.

1. Introduction
It can be argued that one of the most daunting processes
in machine learning is the selection of appropriate hyperparameters for the task at hand. Indeed, due to the datadependent nature of the learning problem, there usually
exists no single model configuration that works well in all
contexts. The most straightforward approach to mitigate this
issue has typically been to rely on standard model selection
techniques such as grid and random searches (Bergstra &
*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa, Italy 2 NEC Laboratories Europe, Heidelberg, Germany 3 Work primarily done as a
PhD student at the University of Pisa.
Correspondence
to:
Daniele Castellana
<daniele.castellana@di.unipi.it>,
Federico Errica <federico.errica@neclab.eu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Bengio, 2012), where the range of values to try are fixed
a priori by the user. Nonetheless, there has always been
an interest in alternative methods that can estimate the
“right” values for some hyper-parameters (Gershman & Blei,
2012; He et al., 2021), thus intrinsically reducing the hyperparameters’ search space. In the Bayesian nonparametric
(BNP) literature, which is of particular interest for this work,
the complexity of Bayesian models can grow with the data
(Teh et al., 2006), e.g., a BNP mixture model can adjust the
number of its mixtures to better fit the empirical data distribution, thus freeing the user from the burden of choosing
the most important (if not all) hyper-parameters.
In recent years, much research effort has been devoted to
the theoretical and practical development of Deep Graph
Networks (DGNs), which originated from Micheli (2009);
Scarselli et al. (2009) and were later re-discovered from a
spectral graph theory perspective (Defferrard et al., 2016;
Kipf & Welling, 2017). DGNs can deal with graphs of
varying topology without the need for human intervention,
and they rely on local and iterative processing of information commonly known as message passing; for a thorough
description of some of the most popular DGNs in the literature (and of the more general graph representation learning
field), we refer the reader to recent surveys on the topic
(Bronstein et al., 2017; Battaglia et al., 2018; Bacciu et al.,
2020b; Wu et al., 2020). Despite most of these methods belonging to the neural world, the Contextual Graph Markov
Model (CGMM) stands out as a deep, unsupervised, constructive and fully probabilistic model that has shown competitive performances on downstream graph classification
tasks (Bacciu et al., 2018; 2020a). CGMM trains a stack
of Bayesian networks, where each layer is conditioned on
the frozen posteriors of the nodes of the graph computed at
previous layers. Each layer optimizes the likelihood of the
data using the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm
(Moon, 1996) with closed-form solutions.
Like its neural counterparts, for which the number of hidden
units in each layer has typically been selected as a hyperparameter, CGMM relies on model selection to choose the
“reasonable” number of hidden states associated with the
categorical latent variables. Differently from the neural
methods though, CGMM is amenable to a BNP extension,
as each layer is essentially a conditional mixture model.

