RUMs from Head-to-Head Contests
Matteo Almanza 1 2 Flavio Chierichetti 3 Ravi Kumar 4 Alessandro Panconesi 3 Andrew Tomkins 4

Abstract
Random utility models (RUMs) encode the likelihood that a particular item will be selected from
a slate of competing items. RUMs are wellstudied objects in both discrete choice theory
and, more recently, in the machine learning community, as they encode a fairly broad notion of
rational user behavior. In this paper, we focus on
slates of size two representing head-to-head contests. Given a tournament matrix M such that
Mi,j is the probability that item j will be selected
from {i, j}, we consider the problem of finding
the RUM that most closely reproduces M . For
this problem we obtain a polynomial-time algorithm returning a RUM that approximately minimizes the average error over the pairs. Our experiments show that RUMs can perfectly represent
many of the tournament matrices that have been
considered in the literature; in fact, the maximum
average error induced by RUMs on the matrices
we considered is negligible (≈ 0.001). We also
show that RUMs are competitive, on prediction
tasks, with previous approaches.

1. Introduction
Random utility models (RUMs) are perhaps the most important model in discrete choice (Train, 2003). In full generality, they posit that a user selecting an item from some
slate of choices has a personal vector encoding the value
of all items in the universe. The user behaves rationally by
selecting the available item in the slate of the highest value.
As each user may have a different value vector, the RUM
model allows a wide range of effects. There are no known
efficient learning algorithms for RUMs.
In pairwise choice, the setting is the same, but the user must
choose between only two alternatives, rather than from an
1
Algorand Labs 2 This work was carried out while the author
was at Sapienza University of Rome. 3 Sapienza University of
Rome 4 Google Mountain View. Correspondence to: Matteo Almanza <almanza@di.uniroma1.it>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

arbitrary slate of alternatives as in the full model. Pairwise
choice arises whenever head-to-head competitions occur,
as in two-player games, two-alternative forced-choice testing (Bogacz et al., 2006), or online experiences that compare an item with an alternative. The pairwise choice model
is well studied, with a number of approaches that learn over
either subsets of the class of RUMs, or incomparable models (Chen & Joachims, 2016; Adams et al., 2010; Makhijani
& Ugander, 2019; Veerathu & Rajkumar, 2021).
Our main technical findings are general RUM learning algorithms for pairwise choice. First, we introduce R IPPLE,
for Randomized Interior Point Permutation LEarner. We
show that for pairwise choice, R IPPLE is guaranteed to return a RUM that attains almost the best possible average
error over all RUMs, in polynomial time. The polynomialtime guarantee requires solving an exponential-size dual
linear program using the ellipsoid method, which is unlikely to be efficient in practice. Hence, we also introduce RUMRUNNER, a practical variant which is also guaranteed to return a near-optimal RUM. RUMRUNNER uses
a separating hyperplane heuristic that performs efficiently
in our experimental evaluation, but unlike R IPPLE it does
not have a guarantee of polynomial running time. While
previous results in this area require heuristics to optimize
non-concave likelihoods, often requiring multiple runs to
escape possible poor local optima, RUMRUNNER guarantees convergence to a solution whose value is -close to the
optimum, and contains no hyper-parameters to tune. In empirical evaluations we observe that RUMRUNNER is neither
subject to poor local optima nor has stability issues.
Our approach. A RUM may be characterized as a distribution over users, each of whom is represented by a vector
giving the value of each item in the universe. Given a pair
of alternatives, the likelihood that the first element is selected is the likelihood that a value vector drawn from the
distribution assigns a higher score to the first item than the
second. Since the decision depends only on which score is
higher, we may represent these value vectors as permutations of {1, . . . , n} for a universe of n items, which simplifies the RUM to a distribution over permutations.
Our approach begins by writing a large linear program (LP)
in which a variable encodes the weight of each permutation in the RUM. The LP contains constraints for each pair
{i, j} of elements asking that the total probability assigned

