Last Iterate Risk Bounds of SGD with Decaying Stepsize for
Overparameterized Linear Regression

Jingfeng Wu * 1 Difan Zou * 2 Vladimir Braverman 1 Quanquan Gu 2 Sham M. Kakade 3

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has been
shown to generalize well in many deep learning
applications. In practice, one often runs SGD with
a geometrically decaying stepsize, i.e., a constant
initial stepsize followed by multiple geometric
stepsize decay, and uses the last iterate as the
output. This kind of SGD is known to be nearly
minimax optimal for classical finite-dimensional
linear regression problems (Ge et al., 2019). However, a sharp analysis for the last iterate of SGD
in the overparameterized setting is still open. In
this paper, we provide a problem-dependent analysis on the last iterate risk bounds of SGD with
decaying stepsize, for (overparameterized) linear
regression problems. In particular, for last iterate
SGD with (tail) geometrically decaying stepsize,
we prove nearly matching upper and lower bounds
on the excess risk. Moreover, we provide an excess risk lower bound for last iterate SGD with
polynomially decaying stepsize and demonstrate
the advantage of geometrically decaying stepsize
in an instance-wise manner, which complements
the minimax rate comparison made in prior works.

1. Introduction
It is widely observed in practice that modern neural networks trained by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) often
generalize well (Zhang et al., 2021). In all the successful
applications, two ingredients are crucial: (1) an overparameterized model, where the number of parameter excesses
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 3 Department of Computer Science
and Department of Statistics, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA. Correspondence to: Vladimir Braverman
<vova@cs.jhu.edu>, Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>, Sham
M. Kakade <sham@seas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the number of training examples (Belkin et al., 2020); and
(2) SGD with the last iterate as output and with a decaying stepsize, e.g., an initially large stepsize, followed by
geometrically decaying stepsizes after every certain number
of iterations (He et al., 2015). Theoretically, however, it
remains largely open to understand the generalization of the
last iterate of SGD (with a decaying stepsize) for learning
overparamerized models, even for the arguably simplest
setting such as overparamerized linear regression.
For linear regression in the classical regime, Ge et al. (2019)
showed that last iterate SGD (with geometrically decaying
stepsize) can achieve nearly minimax optimal excess risk
up to logarithmic factors. However, the results by Ge et al.
(2019) cannot be carried over to the overparameterized setting since their excess risk bounds are dimension-dependent,
which become vacuous when the problem dimension excesses the sample size. There is a fundamental barrier to
extend the statistical minimax rate to the overparameterized
setting, as the minimax result concerns the worst instance
in the problem class, while apparently SGD cannot generalize for certain overparameterized linear regression problem
(e.g., when the data distribution has an identity covariance
and the model parameter is uniformly distributed).
For SGD with iterate averaging, a recent work by Zou et al.
(2021b) proved a tight problem-dependent excess risk bound
for overparameterized linear regression, which can diminish
in the overparameterized setting, provided a sufficiently fast
decaying spectrum of the data covaraiance matrix. While
Zou et al. (2021b) sharply characterized the generalization
of SGD with iterate averaging in the overparameterized
setting, their analysis is tailored to the averaged iterate of
SGD and is not directly applicable to the last iterate of SGD.
In this paper, in order to explain its success in learning
overparameterized models, we provide a tight analysis for
the last iterate of SGD that adapts to both of the least-square
problem instance and the algorithm configuration.
Contributions. Our first main result is a sharp problemdependent excess risk bound for the last iterate SGD with
tail geometrically decaying stepsize (see (3), also Algorithm
1) for linear regression. The derived bound does not depend
on the ambient dimension and, instead, depends on the spec-

