Approximate Bayesian Computation with Domain Expert in the Loop

Ayush Bharti 1 Louis Filstroff 1 Samuel Kaski 1 2

Abstract
Approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) is
a popular likelihood-free inference method for
models with intractable likelihood functions. As
ABC methods usually rely on comparing summary statistics of observed and simulated data, the
choice of the statistics is crucial. This choice involves a trade-off between loss of information and
dimensionality reduction, and is often determined
based on domain knowledge. However, handcrafting and selecting suitable statistics is a laborious
task involving multiple trial-and-error steps. In
this work, we introduce an active learning method
for ABC statistics selection which reduces the domain expert’s work considerably. By involving
the experts, we are able to handle misspecified
models, unlike the existing dimension reduction
methods. Moreover, empirical results show better
posterior estimates than with existing methods,
when the simulation budget is limited.

1. Introduction
Likelihood-free inference has considerably extended the
applicability domain of probabilistic inference, to the set
of problems where a simulator is available even though the
likelihood function is not known or feasibly computable.
Approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) (Marin et al.,
2011; Lintusaari et al., 2017; Sisson, 2018; Beaumont, 2019)
has emerged as a popular method for likelihood-free inference in a number of fields such as population genetics (Pritchard et al., 1999; Beaumont, 2010), cosmology
(Akeret et al., 2015), and radio propagation (Bharti et al.,
2021), among others. ABC permits sampling from an approximate posterior distribution of a generative model by
comparing summary statistics of simulated and observed
(high-dimensional) data. However, the success of ABC may
1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo,
Finland 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Ayush
Bharti <ayush.bharti@aalto.fi>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

hide from view the fact that major problems are still only
partially solved. In this paper, we discuss the problem of
choosing summary statistics, a key part of ABC which is
often missed in clean theoretical works and only treated
case-specifically in concrete inference studies.
Recent works have proposed to circumvent choosing statistics by learning a suitable representation from data with
neural networks (Papamakarios & Murray, 2016; Lueckmann et al., 2017; 2019; Izbicki et al., 2019). However,
training neural networks requires a large amount of data,
which means extensive simulator runs in the ABC context.
Thus, in a low-simulation regime, where the number of available simulations is limited, choosing the summary statistics
is unavoidable – and useful in any case. This choice involves
navigating a difficult trade-off between: 1) information loss
due to data summarization and hence lower-quality posterior
approximations, and 2) curse of dimensionality, requiring
exponentially increasing numbers of simulator runs. A lowdimensional set of statistics which is highly informative
about the model parameters would be ideal, but obtaining
such a set is non-trivial. The only way out of this conundrum
is to bring in additional domain knowledge, and hence practitioners end up spending a large proportion of the time of
their likelihood-free inference projects in choosing suitable
statistics.
Several methods have been proposed to automatically reduce the dimension of a given set (or pool) of available
summary statistics to use in an ABC method, see Blum et al.
(2013); Prangle (2015) for exhaustive surveys. These include methods based on subset selection (Joyce & Marjoram,
2008; Nunes & Balding, 2010; Blum, 2010; Barnes et al.,
2012; Blum et al., 2013), projection (Wegmann et al., 2009;
Fearnhead & Prangle, 2012; Aeschbacher et al., 2012; Jiang
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020), and regression adjustment
(Beaumont et al., 2002; Blum & François, 2010; Bi et al.,
2021). However, none of these methods are able to handle
low-simulation regimes and model misspecification, which
occurs when there is a mismatch between the simulator and
the true data-generating mechanism. Under model misspecification, dimension-reducing ABC methods may produce
summary statistics which will never replicate the observed
value irrespective of the parameter setting, which in turn
causes problems in the ABC (Frazier et al., 2020). We call
those statistics misspecified. In low-simulation regimes, on

