Gradient Descent on Neurons
and its Link to Approximate Second-Order Optimization

Frederik Benzing 1

Abstract
Second-order optimizers are thought to hold the
potential to speed up neural network training, but
due to the enormous size of the curvature matrix, they typically require approximations to be
computationally tractable. The most successful
family of approximations are Kronecker-Factored,
block-diagonal curvature estimates (KFAC). Here,
we combine tools from prior work to evaluate exact second-order updates with careful ablations
to establish a surprising result: Due to its approximations, KFAC is not closely related to
second-order updates, and in particular, it significantly outperforms true second-order updates.
This challenges widely held believes and immediately raises the question why KFAC performs so
well. Towards answering this question we present
evidence strongly suggesting that KFAC approximates a first-order algorithm, which performs
gradient descent on neurons rather than weights.
Finally, we show that this optimizer often improves over KFAC in terms of computational cost
and data-efficiency.

1. Introduction
Second-order information of neural networks is of fundamental theoretical interest and has important applications
in a number of contexts like optimization, Bayesian machine learning, meta-learning, sparsification and continual
learning (LeCun et al., 1990; Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997; MacKay, 1992; Bengio, 2000; Martens et al., 2010;
Grant et al., 2018; Sutskever et al., 2013; Dauphin et al.,
2014; Blundell et al., 2015; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Graves,
2011). However, due to the enormous parameter count of
modern neural networks working with the full curvature
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. Correspondence to: Frederik Benzing <benzingf@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

matrix is infeasible and this has inspired many approximations. Understanding how accurate known approximations
are and developing better ones is an important topic at the
intersection of theory and practice.
A family of approximations that has been particularly successful are Kronecker-factored, block diagonal approximations of the curvature. Originally proposed in the context of
optimization (Martens and Grosse, 2015), where they have
lead to many further developments (Grosse and Martens,
2016; Ba et al., 2016; Desjardins et al., 2015; Botev et al.,
2017; George et al., 2018; Martens et al., 2018; Osawa et al.,
2019; Bernacchia et al., 2019; Goldfarb et al., 2020), they
have also proven influential in various other contexts like
Bayesian inference, meta learning and continual learning
(Ritter et al., 2018a;b; Dangel et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2018a; Wu et al., 2017; Grant et al., 2018).
Here, we describe a surprising discovery: Despite its motivation, the KFAC optimizer does not rely on second-order
information; in particular it significantly outperforms exact
second-order optimizers. We establish these claims through
a series of careful ablations and control experiments and
build on prior work, which shows that exact second-order updates can be computed efficiently and exactly, if the dataset
is small or when the curvature matrix is subsampled (Ren
and Goldfarb, 2019; Agarwal et al., 2019).
Our finding that KFAC does not rely on second-order information immediately raises the question why it is nevertheless so effective. To answer this question, we present
evidence that KFAC approximates a different, first-order optimizer, which performs gradient descent in neuron- rather
than weight space. We also show that this optimizer itself
often improves upon KFAC, both in terms of computational
cost as well as progress per parameter update.
Structure of the Paper. In Section 2 we provide background and define terminology. The remainder of the paper
is split into two parts. In Section 3 we carefully establish
that KFAC is not closely related to second-order information. In Section 4 we introduce gradient descent on neurons
(“FOOF”) and present evidence that KFAC’s performance
relies on similarity to FOOF and that FOOF offers further
performance improvements.

