Interventional Contrastive Learning with Meta Semantic Regularizer

Wenwen Qiang * 1 2 3 Jiangmeng Li * 1 2 3 Changwen Zheng 1 3 Bing Su 4 5 Hui Xiong 6 7

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL)-based self-supervised
learning models learn visual representations in a
pairwise manner. Although the prevailing CL
model has achieved great progress, in this paper, we uncover an ever-overlooked phenomenon:
When the CL model is trained with full images,
the performance tested in full images is better
than that in foreground areas; when the CL model
is trained with foreground areas, the performance
tested in full images is worse than that in foreground areas. This observation reveals that backgrounds in images may interfere with the model
learning semantic information and their influence
has not been fully eliminated. To tackle this issue, we build a Structural Causal Model (SCM)
to model the background as a confounder. We
propose a backdoor adjustment-based regularization method, namely Interventional Contrastive
Learning with Meta Semantic Regularizer (ICLMSR), to perform causal intervention towards the
proposed SCM. ICL-MSR can be incorporated
into any existing CL methods to alleviate background distractions from representation learning.
Theoretically, we prove that ICL-MSR achieves a
tighter error bound. Empirically, our experiments
on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate that
ICL-MSR is able to improve the performances of
different state-of-the-art CL methods.
*

Equal contribution 1 Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory, Institute of Software Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), Guangdong, China.
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of
China, Beijing, China 5 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China 6 Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China 7 Department of Computer Science Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China. Correspondence to:
Bing Su <subingats@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Learning robust and generic representations without human
annotation is a long-standing and important topic in machine
learning. Contrastive learning (CL)-based self-supervised
learning, an innovative unsupervised representation learning (SSL) method, has recently demonstrated superiority
in computer vision tasks such as classification (Chen et al.,
2020a), object identification (Grill et al., 2020), and transfer learning (Zbontar et al., 2021). The success of CL is
partly due to its instance-based learning paradigm, e.g., CL
assumes that each sample in the training dataset as a distinct class. This paradigm can be applied to any type of
data to capture common semantic information applicable to
different tasks.
In general, for a sample X in a mini-batch of training data,
two augmented samples X 1 and X 2 are generated by performing
 1 2random augmentation transformations T to X, i.e.,
X , X = T (X). Then, using one of two augmented
samples as the anchor, most existing CL frameworks treat
the remaining augmented sample as a positive sample and
the augmented samples generated by the other samples in
the mini-batch as negative samples. The contrastive loss
(Chen et al., 2020a) is used to train the feature extractor.
According to the instance-based learning paradigm, minimizing contrastive loss entails pulling the positive sample
closer to the anchor and pushing the negative samples further away from the anchor in the learnt feature space (Wang
& Isola, 2020). Also, the contrastive loss can be considered
as a way to assess the mutual information between the positive sample and the anchor from an information theoretic
standpoint (Oord et al., 2018). The high similarity or mutual
information between the positive sample and the anchor
should be due to shared semantic or foreground-related information. Observations from several toy experiments, on
the other hand, contradict this.
To be more specific, we run the toy experiments on the
COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014) with four different experimental settings: 1) training and testing the CL model on full
images; 2) training and testing the CL model on full images
and foreground images, respectively; 3) training and testing
the CL model on foreground images; and 4) training and
testing the CL model on foreground images and full images,
respectively. SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a) and BYOL (Grill

