Adapting the Linearised Laplace Model Evidence for Modern Deep Learning

Javier Antorán 1 David Janz * 2 James Urquhart Allingham * 1 Erik Daxberger 1 3 Riccardo Barbano 4
Eric Nalisnick 5 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1

Abstract
The linearised Laplace method for estimating
model uncertainty has received renewed attention
in the Bayesian deep learning community. The
method provides reliable error bars and admits a
closed form expression for the model evidence,
allowing for scalable selection of model hyperparameters. In this work, we examine the assumptions behind this method, particularly in conjunction with model selection. We show that these
interact poorly with some now-standard tools of
deep learning—stochastic approximation methods and normalisation layers—and make recommendations for how to better adapt this classic
method to the modern setting. We provide theoretical support for our recommendations and validate them empirically on MLPs, classic CNNs,
residual networks with and without normalisation
layers, generative autoencoders and transformers.

1. Introduction
Model selection and uncertainty estimation are two important open problems in deep learning. The former aims to
select network hyperparameters and architectures without
costly cross-validation (Mackay, 1992; Immer et al., 2021a).
The latter provides a measure of fidelity of network predictions that can be used in downstream tasks such as experimental design (Barbano et al., 2022b), sequential decision
making (Janz et al., 2019) and in safety-critical settings
(Fridman et al., 2019). In this paper, we consider a classical approach to these two problems: the linearised Laplace
method (Mackay, 1992), which has recently been shown
to be one of the best performing methods for inference in
neural networks (Khan et al., 2019; Kristiadi et al., 2020;
Immer et al., 2021b; Daxberger et al., 2021b;a).
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge 2 University of
Alberta 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 4
University College London 5 University of Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Javier Antorán <ja666@cam.ac.uk>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Linearised Laplace approximates the output of a neural
network (NN) with a first order Taylor expansion (a linearisation) around optimal NN parameters. It then uses
standard linear-model-type error bars to approximate the
uncertainty in the output of the NN, while retaining the NN
point-estimate as the predictive mean. The latter feature
means that, unlike other Bayesian deep learning procedures,
the linearised Laplace uncertainty estimates do not come
at the cost of the accuracy of the predictive mean (Snoek
et al., 2019; Ashukha et al., 2020; Antoran et al., 2020).
A downside of the method is that its uncertainty estimates
are very sensitive to the choice of certain (prior) hyperparameters (Daxberger et al., 2021b). Our work looks at the
model evidence maximisation method for choosing these
hyperparameters, as used in the seminal work of Mackay
(1992) and later by Immer et al. (2021a). In contrast with
often used cross-validation, evidence maximisation reduces
model selection to an (often convex) optimisation problem,
and can scale to a large number of hyperparameters.
Our contributions are the identification of certain incompatibilities between the assumptions underlying the classical
linearised Laplace model evidence and modern deep learning methodology, and a number of recommendations on
how to adapt the method in light of these. In particular:
• A core assumption of linearised Laplace is that the
point of linearisation is a minimum of the training loss.
When the neural network is not trained to convergence
(and this is almost never done), this does not hold and
results in severe deterioration of the model evidence
estimate. We show that this can be corrected by instead
considering the optima of the linearised model’s loss,
that is solving a convex optimisation problem.
• We show that for networks with normalisation layers
(such as batch norm (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)), the
linearised Laplace predictive distribution can fail to
be well-defined. However, this can be resolved by
separately parametrising the prior corresponding to
normalised and non-normalised network parameters.
We provide both theoretical and empirical justification for
both points above. The resulting recommended procedure
significantly outperforms a naı̈ve implementation on a series
of standard tasks and a wide range of neural architectures.

