BAMDT: Bayesian Additive Semi-Multivariate Decision Trees for
Nonparametric Regression

Zhao Tang Luo 1 Huiyan Sang 1 Bani Mallick 1

Abstract
Bayesian additive regression trees (BART; Chipman et al., 2010) have gained great popularity
as a flexible nonparametric function estimation
and modeling tool. Nearly all existing BART
models rely on decision tree weak learners with
axis-parallel univariate split rules to partition the
Euclidean feature space into rectangular regions.
In practice, however, many regression problems
involve features with multivariate structures (e.g.,
spatial locations) possibly lying in a manifold,
where rectangular partitions may fail to respect
irregular intrinsic geometry and boundary constraints of the structured feature space. In this paper, we develop a new class of Bayesian additive
multivariate decision tree models that combine
univariate split rules for handling possibly high
dimensional features without known multivariate
structures and novel multivariate split rules for
features with multivariate structures in each weak
learner. The proposed multivariate split rules are
built upon stochastic predictive spanning tree bipartition models on reference knots, which are capable of achieving highly flexible nonlinear decision boundaries on manifold feature spaces while
enabling efficient dimension reduction computations. We demonstrate the superior performance
of the proposed method using simulation data and
a Sacramento housing price data set.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we focus on a nonparametric regression problem with response Y ∈ R (e.g., housing price) and a number
of features. We consider features s ∈ M with known multivariate structures, where M may be a known d-dimensional
1

Department of Statistics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Zhao Tang Luo <luozht1015@gmail.com>, Huiyan Sang <huiyan@stat.tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

connected compact Riemannian manifold embedded in a Euclidean space. For instance, s may represent the coordinates
of a location in a spatial domain with a boundary constraint.
In addition to s, we also consider features x ∈ X ⊆ Rp
either without multivariate structures or with unknown multivariate structures (e.g., square footage and housing age).
To be more precise, we model Y as
Y = f (s, x) + ,

iid

 ∼ N(0, σ 2 ),

(1)

where f : D → R is an unknown function defined on the
joint input feature space D ⊆ M×X , and σ 2 is an unknown
noise variance. Throughout the paper, we will refer to s
as structured features, x as unstructured features, and the
regression setting in (1) as semi-structured regression.
Semi-structured regression problems are increasingly common in many applications. Examples include spatial regressions and image analysis on complex constrained domains
with non-trivial geometries, such as cities with irregular
boundaries or interior holes (e.g., lakes and parks), road
networks, and brain cortical surfaces, as well as prediction problems on graphs/networks using both graph/network
topology and node attributes as predictors. The general
model formulation in (1) encompasses many classes of models as special specifications of f (s, x). Below, we focus
on reviewing semi-parametric or nonparametric methods
due to their flexibility in function estimation compared to
parametric methods.
Related work. Spline smoothings and Gaussian process
(GP) regressions are popular choices for nonparametric
semi-structured regression problems, and there have been
some recent extensions of these methods for data on complex domains (Wood et al., 2008; Scott-Hayward et al.,
2014; Niu et al., 2019; Borovitskiy et al., 2020; Dunson
et al., 2022). However, these methods often assume globally smooth true functions and thus may not fully adapt
to functions with local discontinuities. And the effects of
structured features and other unstructured features are usually modeled separately. For example, conventional spatial
GP regressions (Gelfand et al., 2010) often assume an additive form, f (s, x) = f (x) + f (s), where f (x) is modeled
by a parametric function such as a linear regression and
f (s) is a spatial random effect modeled by a GP. However,

