F ED N EST: Federated Bilevel, Minimax, and Compositional Optimization

Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh 1 Mingchen Li 2 Christos Thrampoulidis 3 Samet Oymak 2

Abstract
Standard federated optimization methods successfully apply to stochastic problems with singlelevel structure. However, many contemporary
ML problems – including adversarial robustness,
hyperparameter tuning, actor-critic – fall under
nested bilevel programming that subsumes minimax and compositional optimization. In this
work, we propose F ED N EST: A federated alternating stochastic gradient method to address general nested problems. We establish provable convergence rates for F ED N EST in the presence of
heterogeneous data and introduce variations for
bilevel, minimax, and compositional optimization.
F ED N EST introduces multiple innovations including federated hypergradient computation and variance reduction to address inner-level heterogeneity. We complement our theory with experiments
on hyperparameter & hyper-representation learning and minimax optimization that demonstrate
the benefits of our method in practice.

1. Introduction
In the federated learning (FL) paradigm, multiple clients
cooperate to learn a model under the orchestration of a
central server (McMahan et al., 2017) without directly exchanging local client data with the server or other clients.
The locality of data distinguishes FL from traditional distributed optimization and also motivates new methodologies
to address heterogeneous data across clients. Additionally,
cross-device FL across many edge devices presents additional challenges since only a small fraction of clients participate in each round, and clients cannot maintain state across
rounds (Kairouz et al., 2019).

FL and incur high communication costs. To overcome this
issue, popular FL methods, such as F EDAVG (McMahan
et al., 2017), use local client updates, i.e. clients update their
models multiple times before communicating with the server
(aka, local SGD). Although F EDAVG has seen great success,
recent works have exposed convergence issues in certain
settings (Karimireddy et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2019). This
is due to a variety of factors, including client drift, where
local models move away from globally optimal models due
to objective and/or systems heterogeneity.
Existing FL methods, such as F EDAVG, are widely applied
to stochastic problems with single-level structure. Instead,
many machine learning tasks – such as adversarial learning
(Madry et al., 2017), meta learning (Bertinetto et al., 2018),
hyperparameter optimization (Franceschi et al., 2018), reinforcement/imitation learning (Wu et al., 2020; Arora et al.,
2020), and neural architecture search (Liu et al., 2018) – admit nested formulations that go beyond the standard singlelevel structure. Towards addressing such nested problems,
bilevel optimization has received significant attention in
the recent literature (Ghadimi & Wang, 2018; Hong et al.,
2020; Ji et al., 2021); albeit in non-FL settings. On the
other hand, federated versions have been elusive perhaps
due to the additional challenges surrounding heterogeneity,
communication, and inverse Hessian approximation.

2

Contributions: This paper addresses these challenges and
develops F ED N EST: A federated machinery for nested
problems with provable convergence and lightweight communication. F ED N EST is composed of F ED I NN: a federated stochastic variance reduction algorithm (F ED SVRG)
to solve the inner problem while avoiding client drift, and
F ED O UT: a communication-efficient federated hypergradient algorithm for solving the outer problem. Importantly,
we allow both inner & outer objectives to be finite sums over
heterogeneous client functions. F ED N EST runs a variant
of F ED SVRG on inner & outer variables in an alternating
fashion as outlined in Algorithm 1. We make multiple algorithmic and theoretical contributions summarized below.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

• The variance reduction of F ED I NN enables robustness
in the sense that local models converge to the globally
optimal inner model despite client drift/heterogeneity
unlike F EDAVG.
While F ED I NN is similar to
F ED SVRG (Konečnỳ et al., 2018) and F ED L IN (Mitra et al., 2021), we make two key contributions: (i) We

Traditional distributed SGD methods are often unsuitable in
1

Email: tarzanaq@umich.edu, University of Michigan
Emails: {mli176@,oymak@ece.}ucr.edu, University of
California, Riverside 3 Email: cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca, University of British Columbia. Correspondence to: Davoud Ataee
Tarzanagh <tarzanaq@umich.edu>.

