Out-of-Distribution Detection with Deep Nearest Neighbors

Yiyou Sun 1 Yifei Ming 1 Xiaojin Zhu 1 Yixuan Li 1

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a critical
task for deploying machine learning models in
the open world. Distance-based methods have
demonstrated promise, where testing samples are
detected as OOD if they are relatively far away
from in-distribution (ID) data. However, prior
methods impose a strong distributional assumption of the underlying feature space, which may
not always hold. In this paper, we explore the
efficacy of non-parametric nearest-neighbor distance for OOD detection, which has been largely
overlooked in the literature. Unlike prior works,
our method does not impose any distributional assumption, hence providing stronger flexibility and
generality. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
nearest-neighbor-based OOD detection on several
benchmarks and establish superior performance.
Under the same model trained on ImageNet-1k,
our method substantially reduces the false positive rate (FPR@TPR95) by 24.77% compared to
a strong baseline SSD+, which uses a parametric approach Mahalanobis distance in detection.
Code is available: https://github.com/
deeplearning-wisc/knn-ood.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning models deployed in the open
world often struggle with out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs—
samples from a different distribution that the network has
not been exposed to during training, and therefore should
not be predicted at test time. A reliable classifier should not
only accurately classify known in-distribution (ID) samples,
but also identify as “unknown” any OOD input. This gives
rise to the importance of OOD detection, which determines
whether an input is ID or OOD and enables the model to
take precautions.
1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin Madison. Correspondence to: Yiyou Sun, Yixuan Li <sunyiyou,
sharonli@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A rich line of OOD detection algorithms has been developed recently, among which distance-based methods demonstrated promise (Lee et al., 2018; Tack et al., 2020; Sehwag
et al., 2021). Distance-based methods leverage feature embeddings extracted from a model, and operate under the
assumption that the test OOD samples are relatively far
away from the ID data. For example, Lee et al. modeled
the feature embedding space as a mixture of multivariate
Gaussian distributions, and used the maximum Mahalanobis
distance (Mahalanobis, 1936) to all class centroids for OOD
detection. However, all these approaches make a strong
distributional assumption of the underlying feature space
being class-conditional Gaussian. As we verify, the learned
embeddings can fail the Henze-Zirkler multivariate normality test (Henze & Zirkler, 1990). This limitation leads to the
open question:
Can we leverage the non-parametric nearest neighbor
approach for OOD detection?
Unlike prior works, the non-parametric approach does not
impose any distributional assumption about the underlying
feature space, hence providing stronger flexibility and generality. Despite its simplicity, the nearest neighbor approach
has received scant attention. Looking at the literature on
OOD detection in the past several years, there has not been
any work that demonstrated the efficacy of a non-parametric
nearest neighbor approach for this problem. This suggests
that making the seemingly simple idea work is non-trivial.
Indeed, we found that simply using the nearest neighbor
distance derived from the feature embedding of a standard
classification model is not performant.
In this paper, we challenge the status quo by presenting
the first study exploring and demonstrating the efficacy of
the non-parametric nearest-neighbor distance for OOD detection. To detect OOD samples, we compute the k-th
nearest neighbor (KNN) distance between the embedding
of test input and the embeddings of the training set and use
a threshold-based criterion to determine if the input is OOD
or not. In a nutshell, we perform non-parametric level set
estimation, partitioning the data into two sets (ID vs. OOD)
based on the deep k-nearest neighbor distance. KNN offers
compelling advantages of being: (1) distributional assumption free, (2) OOD-agnostic (i.e., the distance threshold is
estimated on the ID data only, and does not rely on infor-

