Transfer Learning In Differential Privacy’s Hybrid-Model

Refael Kohen 1 Or Sheffet 1

Abstract
The hybrid-model (Avent et al., 2017) in Differential Privacy is a an augmentation of the localmodel where in addition to N local-agents we are
assisted by one special agent who is in fact a curator holding the sensitive details of n additional individuals. Here we study the problem of machine
learning in the hybrid-model where the n individuals in the curator’s dataset are drawn from a different distribution than the one of the general population (the local-agents). We give a general scheme –
Subsample-Test-Reweigh – for this transfer learning problem, which reduces any curator-model
DP-learner to a hybrid-model learner in this setting using iterative subsampling and reweighing
of the n examples held by the curator based on
a smooth variation of the Multiplicative-Weights
algorithm (introduced by Bun et al. (2020)). Our
scheme has a sample complexity which relies on
the χ2 -divergence between the two distributions.
We give worst-case analysis bounds on the sample complexity required for our private reduction.
Aiming to reduce said sample complexity, we give
two specific instances our sample complexity can
be drastically reduced (one instance is analyzed
mathematically, while the other - empirically) and
pose several directions for follow-up work.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) has become modern era’s de-facto
gold standard for privacy-preserving data analysis. In particular, the local model of DP — in which each user interacts
in a computation by sending randomized messages whose
view yields at most ϵ-privacy loss — has gained much popularity due to its (relative) design simplicity. In particular,
much work has dealt with the problem of machine learning
in the local-model of DP: assuming the N users’ details are
1

Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Israel. Correspondence to: Refael Kohen <refael.kohen@gmail.com>, Or Sheffet
<or.sheffet@biu.ac.il>.

drawn i.i.d. from some distribution T, how can we design
local-DP protocols for finding an hypothesis h of small loss
w.r.t. T. However, as opposed to the curator-model of DP —
in which all data is held by a trusted curator in charge of
executing the computation — machine learning in the local
model of DP suffers from two drawbacks: (1) its has a much
larger sample complexity and (2) it is of limited learning
capabilities — where only problems that are SQ-learnable
are learnable in the local model, in contrast to the curator
model that allows us to learn (almost) any PAC-learnable
problem (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2008). In order to address
these problems, there has been an extensive study in recent
years regarding augmentations of DP’s local-model. Most
notably, the shuffle model has gained much focus (Bittau
et al., 2017; Cheu et al., 2019; Balle et al., 2019; 2020;
Ghazi et al., 2021a;b) as it reduces the privacy-loss of localmodel protocols drastically. Yet the focus of this work is on
a different, far less studied, augmentation of local-DP.
We study the hybrid-model of differential privacy (Avent
et al., 2017) — in which a local-model computation protocol
with N users is augmented by the aid of one special agent
who is in fact a curator holding the sensitive details of additional n individuals. (We refer to the former N users as the
“local-agents” and the latter n individuals as the “curatoragents.”) The hybrid-model models a situation in which
some users (the n curator agents) trust a proposed curator
and allow her unrestricted access to their sensitive details;
while the remaining N ≫ n users trust solely themselves
and opt for the local-model. Indeed, hybrid-model improves
the learning capabilities of the local-model: the theoretical
work of Beimel et al. (2020) have proven that in the hybridmodel certain problems, which are inefficiently solvable in
the standard local-DP model, are efficiently and privately
computable. Alas, in the analysis of Beimel et al. (2020),
the n curator-agents come from the exact same distribution
T as the remaining N local-agents.1 In contrast, this work is
motivated by a setting in which the n individuals voluntarily
opt-in to the curator-model. Coping with such a “selection bias” was posed by Beimel et al. (2020) as an acute
open problem since (quoting Beimel et al. (2020) verbatim:) “from a practical point of view, this ... is aligned with
1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Such a situation may arise when an extrinsic powerful agency,
e.g. the census, randomly samples n individuals and mandates they
provide the curator with their sensitive details.

