TSPipe: Learn from Teacher Faster with Pipelines

Hwijoon Lim 1 Yechan Kim 2 Sukmin Yun 1 Jinwoo Shin 1 2 Dongsu Han 1 2

Pipeline Idle

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2015) has shown
remarkable success with the teacher-student (TS) framework
in transferring knowledge from a teacher network to a student network. Motivated by this, the TS framework has been
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 2 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Dongsu Han
<dhan.ee@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
The source code is available at https://github.com/
kaist-ina/TSPipe.

GPU 0
GPU 1
GPU 2
GPU 3

Bubble
Forward

Backward

student+teacher

TSPipe

The teacher-student (TS) framework, training a
(student) network by utilizing an auxiliary superior (teacher) network, has been adopted as a popular training paradigm in many machine learning
schemes, since the seminal work—Knowledge
distillation (KD) for model compression and transfer learning. Many recent self-supervised learning (SSL) schemes also adopt the TS framework,
where teacher networks are maintained as the
moving average of student networks, called the
momentum networks. This paper presents TSPipe,
a pipelined approach to accelerate the training process of any TS frameworks including KD and SSL.
Under the observation that the teacher network
does not need a backward pass, our main idea is
to schedule the computation of the teacher and
student network separately, and fully utilize the
GPU during training by interleaving the computations of the two networks and relaxing their dependencies. In case the teacher network requires
a momentum update, we use delayed parameter
updates only on the teacher network to attain high
model accuracy. Compared to existing pipeline
parallelism schemes, which sacrifice either training throughput or model accuracy, TSPipe provides better performance trade-offs, achieving up
to 12.15x higher throughput. 1

GPipe

Abstract

student Update

GPU 0
GPU 1
GPU 2
GPU 3

Forward Forward Forward
teacher student teacher

0

0.25

Backward
student

0.5

Forward Forward Backward

Update

student teacher student

0.75

time

Figure 1. TSPipe achieves high training throughput by eliminating
pipeline bubbles. Top: With GPipe, GPUs are idle, exhibiting
pipeline bubbles. Gray blocks indicate the forward pass, and
orange blocks indicate the backward pass. Bottom: Timeline for
TSPipe. Green, blue, and orange blocks indicate the forward pass
of the teacher network, the forward pass of the student network,
and the backward pass of the student network, respectively. Note
two figures share the same time axis, which is normalized.

used in a broader range of applications—vision (Pham et al.,
2021), natural language processing (Sanh et al., 2019), and
deep reinforcement learning (Yin & Pan, 2017). In particular, many recent studies in self-supervised learning (SSL) for
vision (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Grill et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2021a; Zhou et al., 2021) have successfully learned
visual representations from a large number of unlabeled data
using the TS framework.
However, both KD and SSL often suffer from the extensive
amounts of resource requirements (e.g., GPU memory and
computation) for training. For example, KD often leverages large teacher networks—in Natural Language processing (NLP), the state-of-the-art pre-trained language models
have up to 175B parameters (Brown et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2022), which requires 700 GB of GPU memory only for the
model itself. Many recent SSL methods also employ a largescale of architectures for better representation learning, e.g.,
MoCo-v3 (Chen et al., 2021) adopting ViT (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020), a transformer-based model, takes 128 GPUdays with ViT-B (86 M parameters) to converge. In addition,
SSL methods often require extensive training epochs for
model convergence—BYOL (Grill et al., 2020) needs an
order of magnitude more training epochs to achieve the

