Differentially Private Maximal Information Coefficients

John Lazarsfeld 1 Aaron Johnson 2 Emmanuel Adeniran 1

Abstract
The Maximal Information Coefficient (MIC) is
a powerful statistic to identify dependencies between variables. However, it may be applied to
sensitive data, and publishing it could leak private
information. As a solution, we present algorithms
to approximate MIC in a way that provides differential privacy. We show that the natural application of the classic Laplace mechanism yields
insufficient accuracy. We therefore introduce the
MICr statistic, which is a new MIC approximation
that is more compatible with differential privacy.
We prove MICr is a consistent estimator for MIC,
and we provide two differentially private versions
of it. We perform experiments on a variety of real
and synthetic datasets. The results show that the
private MICr statistics significantly outperform direct application of the Laplace mechanism. Moreover, experiments on real-world datasets show
accuracy that is usable when the sample size is at
least moderately large.

1. Introduction
The Maximal Information Coefficient (MIC) is a powerful
and relatively new tool to detect correlations in data (Reshef
et al., 2011; 2016). MIC uses mutual information to detect general dependencies between numeric attributes, in
contrast to a more common statistic such as Pearson’s correlation coefficient, which is only designed to detect linear
relationships. MIC is thus particularly suited to identify
novel relationships in complex data, as in that setting it is
unknown which properties might be related and how.
However, many datasets that are valuable for such data
mining (such as medical or economic data) contain sensitive
personal information. Moreover, even publishing just the
statistics that result from a correlation analysis can reveal
Department of Computer Science, Yale University 2 U.S.
Naval Research Laboratory. Correspondence to: John Lazarsfeld
<john.lazarsfeld@yale.edu>.

private details of the individuals comprising the data (Homer
et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2009). A scientist or government
analyst must therefore consider not only the effectiveness
of their statistical techniques, but they must also take into
account if the resulting statistics can be published in a way
that protects privacy.
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork & Roth, 2014) has
emerged as the leading method for privacy-preserving data
publishing. Major companies and institutions use differential privacy to publish statistics about their sensitive
data (Cormode et al., 2018; Dwork, 2019). MIC appears at
first to be well-suited to being published in a differentially
private way. At a high level, for a pair of numeric variables,
it measures the maximum mutual information over possible
grids partitioning their joint range. For any given grid, the
effect of changing just one data point, which is the the main
criterion for differential privacy, changes the distribution
of points very little. This fact suggests that a differentially
private MIC could be designed with high accuracy.
However, MIC is difficult to compute, and instead it is suggested to approximate it using the MICe statistic (Reshef
et al., 2016). MICe is efficiently computable because it restricts its optimization to subgrids of a master mass equipartition of the dataset, that is, a grid in which each row and
column contains the same number of data points. This master grid depends on the data, though, and we obtain a bound
on the change in MICe from altering one data point that is
significantly higher than would be expected for MIC.
We therefore investigate a new method to approximate MIC
that is less sensitive to small changes in the dataset. We
propose the MICr statistic, which optimizes over subgrids of
a master range equipartition, that is, a grid in which the rows
and columns divide the range equally. MICr is efficiently
computable, and we obtain a bound on its sensitivity to
input perturbations that is lower than our bound for MICe,
both asymptotically and concretely. We prove that MICr
converges in probability to MIC (or, more properly, to the
analogous statistic defined over distributions).

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We then present two differentially private versions of MICr,
representing fundamentally different approaches to adding
DP noise. MICr-Lap uses the classic Laplace mechanism,
which adds random noise to the function output (in our
case, the non-private MICr value). In contrast, MICr-Geom

