Power-Law Escape Rate of SGD

Takashi Mori 1 Liu Ziyin 2 Kangqiao Liu 2 Masahito Ueda 1 2 3

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) undergoes
complicated multiplicative noise for the meansquare loss. We use this property of SGD
noise to derive a stochastic differential equation
(SDE) with simpler additive noise by performing a random time change. Using this formalism, we show that the log loss barrier ∆ log L =
log[L(θs )/L(θ∗ )] between a local minimum θ∗
and a saddle θs determines the escape rate of SGD
from the local minimum, contrary to the previous
results borrowing from physics that the linear loss
barrier ∆L = L(θs ) − L(θ∗ ) decides the escape
rate. Our escape-rate formula strongly depends
on the typical magnitude h∗ and the number n of
the outlier eigenvalues of the Hessian. This result
explains an empirical fact that SGD prefers flat
minima with low effective dimensions, giving an
insight into implicit biases of SGD.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved breakthroughs in various applications in artificial intelligence such as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; LeCun et al., 2015), speech
recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), natural language processing (Collobert & Weston, 2008), and natural sciences (Iten
et al., 2020; Bapst et al., 2020; Seif et al., 2021). Such
unparalleled success of deep learning hinges crucially on
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants as an
efficient training algorithm.
Although the loss landscape is highly nonconvex, the SGD
often succeeds in finding a global minimum. It has been
argued that the SGD noise plays a key role in escaping
from local minima (Jastrzȩbski et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018;
1

Center for Emergent Matter Science, Riken, Saitama, Japan
Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan 3 Institute for Physics of Intelligence, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Takashi Mori
<takashi.mori.fh@riken.jp>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2020; Zhu et al., 2019; Meng et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2021). It has also been suggested that SGD has
an implicit bias that is beneficial for generalization. For
example, SGD may help the network to find flat minima,
which are considered to imply good generalization (Keskar
et al., 2017; Hoffer et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018; Pittorino
et al., 2022). How and why does SGD help the network
escape from bad local minima and find flat minima? These
questions have been addressed in several works, and it is
now recognized that the SGD noise strength and structure
significantly affect the efficiency of escape from local minima. Our work follows this line of research and adds new
theoretical perspectives.
In physics and chemistry, escape from a local minimum of
the energy landscape due to thermal noise at temperature
T is a thoroughly studied fundamental problem (Kramers,
1940; Eyring, 1935). When the energy barrier is given
by ∆E, the escape rate is proportional to e−∆E/T , which
is known as the Arrhenius law. By analogy, in machine
learning, escape from a local minimum of the loss function
is considered to be determined by the loss barrier height
∆L = L(θs ) − L(θ∗ ), where L(θ) denotes the loss function
at the network parameters θ, θ∗ stands for a local minimum
of L(θ), and θs denotes a saddle point that separates θ∗
from other minima. Indeed, if we assume that the SGD
noise is uniform and isotropic, which is often assumed in
machine-learning literature (Jastrzȩbski et al., 2017), the
escape rate is proportional to e−∆L/D , where D denotes the
SGD noise strength.
In this paper, we show that inhomogeneity of the SGD noise
strength in the parameter space brings about drastic modification for the mean-square loss. We show that the escape
rate is determined by the logarithmic loss barrier height
∆ log L = log L(θs ) − log L(θ∗ ) = log[L(θs )/L(θ∗ )]. In
other words, the escape rate is determined not by the difference but by the ratio of L(θs ) and L(θ∗ ). This result means
that even if the loss barrier height ∆L is the same, minima
with smaller values of L(θ∗ ) are more stable.
Moreover, given the fact that the eigenvalue spectrum of
the Hessian at a minimum consists of a bulk of almost
zero eigenvalues and outliers (Sagun et al., 2017; Papyan,
2019), our escape-rate formula implies that SGD prefers flat
minima with a low effective dimension, where the effective

