Generalizing to Evolving Domains with Latent Structure-Aware
Sequential Autoencoder

Tiexin Qin 1 Shiqi Wang 1 Haoliang Li 1

Abstract
Domain generalization aims to improve the generalization capability of machine learning systems to out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Existing domain generalization techniques embark
upon stationary and discrete environments to
tackle the generalization issue caused by OOD
data. However, many real-world tasks in nonstationary environments (e.g., self-driven car
system, sensor measures) involve more complex
and continuously evolving domain drift, which
raises new challenges for the problem of domain generalization. In this paper, we formulate the aforementioned setting as the problem of
evolving domain generalization. Specifically, we
propose to introduce a probabilistic framework
called Latent Structure-aware Sequential Autoencoder (LSSAE) to tackle the problem of evolving
domain generalization via exploring the underlying continuous structure in the latent space of
deep neural networks, where we aim to identify
two major factors namely covariate shift and concept shift accounting for distribution shift in nonstationary environments. Experimental results on
both synthetic and real-world datasets show that
LSSAE can lead to superior performances based
on the evolving domain generalization setting.

1. Introduction
The success of machine learning techniques typically lies on
the assumption that training data and test data are sampled
independently and identically from similar distributions.
However, this assumption does not hold when deploying the
trained model in many real-world environments where the
distribution of test data varies from training data. This distribution discrepancy, so-called distribution shift, can lead
1
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Correspondence
to: Haoliang Li <haoliang.li1991@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

to the dramatic performance decrease of machine learning
models (Torralba & Efros, 2011). To mitigate this issue,
domain generalization (DG) has been proposed to learn a
more robust model which can be better generalized to OOD
data (Muandet et al., 2013; Balaji et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2018b).
While some progress is being achieved so far, existing DG
methods are limited to the setting of generalization among
discrete and stationary environments. This setting can be
problematic in some real-world applications where we require that model can be generalized among continuous domains (Hoffman et al., 2014). For example, a self-driving
car system, when deployed in the real world, struggles to
perform under an open environment where the accepted data
changes naturally according to the geographic location, time
intervals, and other factors in a gradual manner (Hoffman
et al., 2014). For another example, the measures of sensors can also drift over time due to the outer environments
and inter factors, such as aging (Vergara et al., 2012). In
these scenarios, treating each domain in a separate manner
is unlikely to yield the desired performance as it does not
consider the property of continuous domain structure.
Another limitation of most of the existing DG methods is
that they did not take “concept shift” into consideration.
Such concept shift can also lead to performance drop (Federici et al., 2021). A typical example of concept shift would
be that the incidence rate of a particular disease in certain groups may change over time due to the development
of treatments and preventive measures. Therefore, existing DG techniques may fail to be applied to some other
complex real-world applications in non-stationary environments (Sugiyama et al., 2013; Tahmasbi et al., 2021).
In this paper, we propose to focus on the problem of domain
generalization based on the non-stationary setting, where
data can evolve gradually with both covariate shift and concept shift. Particularly, we formulate this non-stationary
scenario as evolving domain generalization where we only
have access to adequate labeled examples from the sequential source domains. Our objective is to develop algorithms
that can explore the underlying continuous structure of distribution shift and generalize well to evolving target domains
where the samples are unavailable during the training stage.

