Anarchic Federated Learning

Haibo Yang 1 Xin Zhang 2 Prashant Khanduri 1 3 Jia Liu 1

Abstract
Present-day federated learning (FL) systems deployed over edge networks consists of a large
number of workers with high degrees of heterogeneity in data and/or computing capabilities,
which call for flexible worker participation in
terms of timing, effort, data heterogeneity, etc.
To satisfy the need for flexible worker participation, we consider a new FL paradigm called
“Anarchic Federated Learning” (AFL) in this paper. In stark contrast to conventional FL models,
each worker in AFL has the freedom to choose
i) when to participate in FL, and ii) the number
of local steps to perform in each round based on
its current situation (e.g., battery level, communication channels, privacy concerns). However,
such chaotic worker behaviors in AFL impose
many new open questions in algorithm design. In
particular, it remains unclear whether one could
develop convergent AFL training algorithms, and
if yes, under what conditions and how fast the
achievable convergence speed is. Toward this
end, we propose two Anarchic Federated Averaging (AFA) algorithms with two-sided learning
rates for both cross-device and cross-silo settings,
which are named AFA-CD and AFA-CS, respectively. Somewhat surprisingly, we show that, under mild anarchic assumptions, both AFL algorithms achieve the best known convergence rate
as the state-of-the-art algorithms for conventional
FL. Moreover, they retain the highly desirable linear speedup effect with respect of both the number of workers and local steps in the new AFL
paradigm. We validate the proposed algorithms
with extensive experiments on real-world datasets.
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; 2 Department
of Statistics, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA;
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Correspondence to:
Haibo Yang <yang.5952@osu.edu>, Jia Liu <liu@ece.osu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) has recently emerged as an important distributed learning framework that leverages numerous
workers to collaboratively learn a joint model (Li et al.,
2019a; Yang et al., 2019; Kairouz et al., 2019). Since the
inception, FL systems have become increasingly powerful and are able to handle various heterogeneity in data,
network environments, worker computing capabilities, etc.
Furthermore, most of the prevailing FL algorithms (e.g.,
FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2016) and its variants (Li et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2020a; Karimireddy et al., 2020b;a; Acar
et al., 2021)) enjoy a desirable “linear speedup effect,” i.e.,
the convergence time to a first-order stationary point decreases linearly as the number of workers and local steps
increases (Stich, 2018; Yu et al., 2019; Wang & Joshi, 2018;
Khaled et al., 2019; Karimireddy et al., 2020b; Yang et al.,
2021; Qu et al., 2020).
However, to achieve these salient features, most of the existing FL algorithms have adopted a server-centric approach,
i.e., the worker behaviors are tightly “dictated” by the server.
Such dictation is typically manifested in three aspects: i)
determine either all or a subset of workers to participate
in each round of FL update; ii) fully control the timing for
synchronization and whether to accept/reject information
sent from the workers; iii) precisely specify the algorithmic operations (e.g., the number of local steps performed
at each worker before communicating with the server). Despite achieving strong performance guarantees, these servercentric FL algorithms often implicitly rely on the following
strong assumptions: (1) each worker is available for training upon the server’s request and throughout a complete
round; (2) all participating workers are willing to execute
the same number of local updates and communicate with
the server in a synchronous manner following a common
clock. Unfortunately, in edge networks where many FL
systems are deployed, these assumptions are restrictive or
even problematic. First, many requested edge devices on
the worker side may not be available in each round because
of, e.g., communication errors or battery outages. Second,
the use of synchronous communication and an identical
number of local updates across all workers ignores the fact
that worker devices in edge-based FL systems are heterogeneous in computation and communication capabilities. As
a result, stragglers (i.e., slow workers) could significantly

