PAC-Net: A Model Pruning Approach to Inductive Transfer Learning

Sanghoon Myung 1 In Huh 1 Wonik Jang 1 Jae Myung Choe 1
Jisu Ryu 1 Dae Sin Kim 1 Kee-Eung Kim 2 Changwook Jeong 3

Abstract
Inductive transfer learning aims to learn from a
small amount of training data for the target task
by utilizing a pre-trained model from the source
task. Most strategies that involve large-scale deep
learning models adopt initialization with the pretrained model and fine-tuning for the target task.
However, when using over-parameterized models,
we can often prune the model without sacrificing
the accuracy of the source task. This motivates
us to adopt model pruning for transfer learning
with deep learning models. In this paper, we propose PAC-Net, a simple yet effective approach
for transfer learning based on pruning. PAC-Net
consists of three steps: Prune, Allocate, and Calibrate (PAC). The main idea behind these steps is
to identify essential weights for the source task,
fine-tune on the source task by updating the essential weights, and then calibrate on the target
task by updating the remaining redundant weights.
Under the various and extensive set of inductive
transfer learning experiments, we show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance by
a large margin.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks trained with massive data have exceeded humans in accuracy across various tasks, e.g., vision recognition (He et al., 2016) or natural language processing (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). However, in real-world
situations where the training samples are scarce, the performance of deep neural networks often deteriorates significantly. Transfer learning techniques have been introduced
to overcome such performance degradation in the small data
1

CSE Team, Innovation Center, Samsung Electronics 2 Kim
Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST 3 Graduate School of Semicondutor Materials and Devices Engineering, UNIST. Correspondence to: Sanghoon Myung <shoon.myung@samsung.com>,
Changwook Jeong <changwook.jeong@unist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

regime (Pan & Yang, 2009). In particular, inductive transfer
learning is a promising framework that allows learning with
a limited target dataset by leveraging a pre-trained source
model, under the assumption that the source and target tasks
are closely related to each other (Li et al., 2018) (Li et al.,
2019). For successful inductive transfer learning with deep
neural networks, it is crucial to utilize the weights of the
source model by transferring the core knowledge embedded
in the weights to the target model. Typically, it is realized
by fine-tuning (Yosinski et al., 2014) which initializes the
weight vector of the target model as that pre-trained on the
source task. Some follow-up studies (Li et al., 2018; Li &
Zhang, 2021; Li et al., 2019) further regularize the target
model to prevent diverging from the source weight vector
during the fine-tuning.
However, we found that these methods can easily overfit the
target data despite their novel initialization and regularization. We hypothesize that this is because the model cannot
preserve the core source knowledge when learning the target
data. Consider a simple problem of learning dynamics for a
real-world oscillator (e.g., a spring-mass-damper system),
as depicted in Figure 1. The conservation of energy is one
of the principal laws that govern the dynamical behavior
of the ideal spring-mass system (top of Figure 1 (a)). On
the other hand, the real-world oscillator interacts with the
environment, thus losing its mechanical energy due to the
damping factor (bottom of Figure 1 (a)). What we expect
from inductive transfer learning is that the model learns
the law of the conservation of energy from the source task,
then recognizes the damping term that causes the energy
loss from a small number of measured target samples. The
leftmost column of Figure 1 (b) shows the model pre-trained
on the source data has learned the energy conservation principle. After the fine-tuning process (Yosinski et al., 2014;
Li et al., 2018; 2019), unfortunately, the model overfits on
few samples and forgets the law of conservation of energy;
as shown in the center of Figure 1 (b), the transferred model
predicts the oscillator gains its energy from the environment,
which violates the fundamental law of physics.
To overcome this problem, we propose a simple yet effective
algorithm that can learn the target task (e.g., loss of energy)
while preserving the relevant knowledge obtained from the
source task (e.g., conservation of energy), as shown in the

