Exploring the Gap between Collapsed & Whitened Features
in Self-Supervised Learning

Bobby He 1 † Mete Ozay 2

Abstract
Avoiding feature collapse, when a Neural Network (NN) encoder maps all inputs to a constant
vector, is a shared implicit desideratum of various
methodological advances in self-supervised learning (SSL). To that end, whitened features have
been proposed as an explicit objective to ensure
uncollapsed features (Zbontar et al., 2021; Ermolov et al., 2021; Hua et al., 2021; Bardes et al.,
2022). We identify power law behaviour in eigenvalue decay, parameterised by exponent β≥0, as
a spectrum that bridges between the collapsed &
whitened feature extremes. We provide theoretical & empirical evidence highlighting the factors
in SSL, like projection layers & regularisation
strength, that influence eigenvalue decay rate, &
demonstrate that the degree of feature whitening
affects generalisation, particularly in label scarce
regimes. We use our insights to motivate a novel
method, Post-hoc Manipulation of the Principal
Axes & Trace (PostMan-Pat), which efficiently
post-processes a pretrained encoder to enforce
eigenvalue decay rate with power law exponent
β, & find that PostMan-Pat delivers improved label efficiency and transferability across a range of
SSL methods and encoder architectures.

1. Introduction
As label procurement can be expensive relative to the availability of unlabelled data, self-supervised learning (SSL),
where a learning algorithm operates without access to labels, has grown both in importance & interest in recent years.
Without labels, a general recipe that has produced impressive results is: 1) learning NN features/representations that
are invariant to transformations of the same input, whilst
2) avoiding a completely collapsed representation, when all
inputs map to a constant feature vector.
†

Researched while interning at Samsung Research UK.
University of Oxford, 2 Samsung Research UK. Correspondence
to: Bobby He <bobby.he@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A variety of approaches have been proposed to successfully
avoid feature collapse, including: contrastive learning (Chen
et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020b); clustering (Caron et al.,
2018; 2020); non-contrastive learning (Grill et al., 2020;
Chen & He, 2021); and kernel dependence maximisation (Li
et al., 2021). Of particular relevance to this work are feature
decorrelation/whitening SSL methods (Ermolov et al., 2021;
Zbontar et al., 2021; Hua et al., 2021; Bardes et al., 2022),
which promote whitened/decorrelated features as a sufficient
condition to avoid collapse.
Existing theoretical analyses into feature collapse & its
mechanisms in SSL have focused on explaining why it does
not occur in non-contrastive SSL (Tian et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2022) or how a related notion of dimensional collapse
(Hua et al., 2021), where features span a low-dimension subspace of the entire feature space, occurs (Jing et al., 2021).
In these works, (dimensional) feature collapse can be interpreted in terms of a binary outcome for each dimension of
the encoder NN: collapsed or uncollapsed. Thus, the size of
uncollapsed feature dimensions and the importance of their
rate of decay have so far been unexplored in SSL.
In this work, we examine the gap between collapsed &
whitened features, highlighting its significance by first identifying power law behaviour in eigenvalue decay as a bridge
between collapse & whitening in Section 2. We theoretically
& empirically study elements of SSL that affect eigenvalue
decay rate in Section 3, including projector head depth &
regularisation strength, before demonstrating that generalisation performance in SSL is non-monotonic in the degree
of feature whitening/collapse in Section 4. We show that the
extent of feature whitening has implications for generalisation in low-labelled data regimes in Section 4.1, & use this to
motivate our methodological contribution in Section 5: Posthoc Manipulation of the Principal Axes & Trace (PostManPat or PMP), which takes a pretrained SSL encoder and
enforces a power law in its feature eigenspectrum. In Section 6, we show that PMP improves label-efficiency and
transferability of pretrained SSL encoders under linear evaluation & often outperforms semi-supervised finetuning. For
example, a pretrained Barlow Twins (Zbontar et al., 2021)
encoder is improved by over 1% top-1 accuracy (56.2% vs
55.0%) on ImageNet-1K with only 1% of labels.

