Selling Data To a Machine Learner: Pricing via Costly Signaling

Junjie Chen * 1 Minming Li * 1 Haifeng Xu * 2

Abstract
We consider a new problem of selling data to a machine learner who looks to purchase data to train
his machine learning model. A key challenge in
this setup is that neither the seller nor the machine
learner knows the true quality of data. When designing a revenue-maximizing mechanism, a data
seller faces the tradeoff between the cost and precision of data quality estimation. To address this
challenge, we study a natural class of mechanisms
that price data via costly signaling. Motivated by
the assumption of i.i.d. data points as in classic
machine learning models, we first consider selling
homogeneous data and derive an optimal selling
mechanism. We then turn to the sale of heterogeneous data, motivated by the sale of multiple data
sets, and show that 1) on the negative side, it is
NP-hard to approximate the optimal mechanism
e
+o(1); while 2) on the
within a constant ratio e+1
1
positive side, there is a k -approximate algorithm,
where k is the number of the machine learner’s
private types.

1. Introduction
Last decade has witnessed rapid advances made in machine
learning (ML), especially the deep learning field (Pouyanfar
et al., 2018). The key factor driving these breakthroughs is
the explosive growth of data over the Internet. Nowadays,
from startups to giant companies like Microsoft and Alibaba,
industries deploy trained ML models to their business operations and realize that relevant training data of good quality
play a vital role in obtaining good performance of these
models. As data now are becoming increasingly valuable, a
∗

α-β order 1 Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 2 Department of
Computer Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
USA (work done while this author is at UVA). Correspondence to: Junjie Chen <junjchen9-c@my.cityu.edu.hk>,
Minming Li <minming.li@cityu.edu.hk>, Haifeng Xu
<haifengxu@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

new type of economy, i.e., data economy, is receiving more
attention (Mehta et al., 2019; Bergemann et al., 2019).
Given the importance of data for machine learning nowadays, we take the first step to study a new data selling scenario: a seller (she) sells data to a machine learner (he), i.e.,
a buyer who would like to purchase data to train his ML
model. It is worth pointing out that selling data is a problem different from selling items in the traditional auction
model, in which items are usually indivisible. As pointed
out by previous works (Agarwal et al., 2019; Babaioff et al.,
2012), several key properties make the sale of data crucially
different from the sale of physical goods:
• Ex ante unverifiable: It is hard to verify beforehand
whether the data is suitable for training an ML model
or not (Agarwal et al., 2019). In practice, even trained
on the same data, two models of different design can
yield different performances. It is typical that the true
performance (i.e., the usefulness of data) of the ML
model can be revealed only after deploying (possibly
some portion of) data into the ML model for training.
• Free duplication: Data can be freely duplicated with
negligible marginal cost. Therefore, once a machine
learner accesses some portion of the data (e.g., to partially verify its quality), the value of these data is immediately lost since the learner can keep a copy of that
portion of data.
Challenges. The above two properties post new challenges to the mechanism design of selling data to a machine
learner. The ex ante unverifiable property implies that the
usefulness of data (i.e., quality of data) depends on both the
ML model design and the data set (e.g., size, distribution),
which are controlled by the learner and the seller respectively. Therefore, neither the seller nor the learner knows the
true quality of data in advance, due to i) The machine learner
cannot access the seller’s data due to the seller’s concern of
free duplication and thus cannot evaluate the true quality of
data beforehand due to the ex ante unverifiable property; ii)
The data seller cannot access the learner’s model (typically
due to business secrecy) and thus cannot evaluate the quality
of data either. This intriguing situation makes our problem
fundamentally different from the recent line of work on
information selling (Liu et al., 2021; Babaioff et al., 2012;

