PACE: A Parallelizable Computation Encoder for Directed Acyclic Graphs

Zehao Dong * 1 Muhan Zhang * 2 3 Fuhai Li 4 Yixin Chen 1

Abstract
Optimization of directed acyclic graph (DAG)
structures has many applications, such as neural architecture search (NAS) and probabilistic
graphical model learning. Encoding DAGs into
real vectors is a dominant component in most
neural-network-based DAG optimization frameworks. Currently, most DAG encoders use an
asynchronous message passing scheme which sequentially processes nodes according to the dependency between nodes in a DAG. That is, a node
must not be processed until all its predecessors
are processed. As a result, they are inherently not
parallelizable. In this work, we propose a Parallelizable Attention-based Computation structure
Encoder (PACE) that processes nodes simultaneously and encodes DAGs in parallel. We demonstrate the superiority of PACE through encoderdependent optimization subroutines that search
the optimal DAG structure based on the learned
DAG embeddings. Experiments show that PACE
not only improves the effectiveness over previous sequential DAG encoders with a significantly
boosted training and inference speed, but also generates smooth latent (DAG encoding) spaces that
are beneficial to downstream optimization subroutines. Our source code is available at https:
//github.com/zehao-dong/PACE.

1. Introduction
Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are ubiquitous in various real-world problems including neural architecture
search (Elsken et al., 2019; Wen et al., 2020), source code
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, USA
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing,
China 3 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China 4 Institute for Informatics and Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, USA. Correspondence to: Yixin Chen <chen@cse.wustl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

modeling (Allamanis et al., 2018), structure learning of
Bayesian networks (Koller & Friedman, 2009; Zhang et al.,
2019), etc. One key challenge in DAG optimization problems is the difficulty to use gradient strategies to quickly adjust the structure of a DAG towards the right direction due to
the absence of gradient information. Some earlier works propose to directly optimize the discrete DAG structure through
black-box optimization techniques such as reinforcement
learning (Zoph & Le, 2016), evolutionary algorithms (Liu
et al., 2017), and Bayesian optimization (Kandasamy et al.,
2018), which are inherently less efficient. A more recent
approach is to encode DAGs into some continuous space for
searching, and various DAG encoders have been developed.
In general, these DAG encoding schemes fall into two categories: structure-aware encoding scheme (Ying et al., 2019;
Wen et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2020) and computation-aware
(performance-aware) encoding scheme (Zhang et al., 2019;
Thost & Chen, 2021).
Due to the superior graph representation learning ability,
graph neural networks (GNNs) have broadly achieved stateof-art performance on various graph learning tasks, such
as node classification (Velickovic et al., 2018; Hamilton
et al., 2017), graph classification (Xu et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2018b; Duvenaud et al., 2015), link prediction (Zhang
& Chen, 2018), and hyperlink prediction (Zhang et al.,
2018a). Basically, GNNs follow the message passing
scheme (Gilmer et al., 2017) where each node aggregates
node features from its one-hop neighborhood repeatedly
to update its own feature, and this aggregation happens at
all nodes simultaneously. However, Thost & Chen (2021)
suggests that such a framework cannot exploit the inductive
bias of the computation dependency defined by DAGs, thus
failing to generate a smooth encoding space beneficial to
downstream optimization and prediction routines.
Hence, in order to model the dependency between nodes
in DAGs, various GNNs specifically designed for encoding DAGs, such as D-VAE (Zhang et al., 2019) and
DAGNN (Thost & Chen, 2021), are developed to inject the
computation dependency between nodes into the representation learning process. Instead of updating node features
simultaneously, these DAG encoders are constructed upon
a gated recurrent unit (GRU) and will not update the representation of a node until all of its predecessors are updated.
Such an asynchronous message passing scheme actually

