Volatility Based Kernels and Moving Average Means
for Accurate Forecasting with Gaussian Processes

Greg Benton * 1 Wesley J. Maddox * 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GP) have had significant success in
time series modeling, making them strong candidates for
the challenging tasks of modeling and forecasting time dependent financial and climatological data. However, building GPs has historically relied on selecting out-of-the-box
kernels and mean functions that make assumptions that do
not hold for all cases; for example, Matérn and RBF kernels
assume stationarity of the data, and constant or linear means
assume that the underlying trends in the data are not timevarying. While the quest to build more flexible GPs has
led to a significant amount of research into kernel functions
such as spectral mixture and deep kernels, these kernels
have been primarily developed for general problems, rather
than constructing a kernel from prior knowledge about the
*
Equal contribution 1 New York University. Correspondence to:
Greg Benton <gwb260@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Vol

Y

9
0.0

0.1
0.5

Vol

0.2
0.1
0.0
10
9

1.0

1.5

1.0

1.5

1.0

1.5

True Vol.
Learned Vol.
Predicted Vol.

0.5

Data
Predictions

Y

A broad class of stochastic volatility models are
defined by systems of stochastic differential equations. While these models have seen widespread
success in domains such as finance and statistical
climatology, they typically lack an ability to condition on historical data to produce a true posterior
distribution. To address this fundamental limitation, we show how to re-cast a class of stochastic volatility models as a hierarchical Gaussian
process (GP) model with specialized covariance
functions. This GP model retains the inductive
biases of the stochastic volatility model while providing the posterior predictive distribution given
by GP inference. Within this framework, we take
inspiration from well studied domains to introduce a new class of models, Volt and Magpie, that
significantly outperform baselines in stock and
wind speed forecasting, and naturally extend to
the multitask setting.

Data
Volatility0.2

10

0.0

0.5

X

Figure 1. An overview of stochastic volatility, Volt, and forecasting. Top: the observed data over and the corresponding volatility
path. Middle: the learned volatility from the data, and volatility
forecasts. Bottom: the data over 1 year and forecasts, with each
sample path corresponding to a distinct sample from the volatility
forecast.

task at hand. In this work, we approach GP modeling by
building on domain knowledge to construct a novel set of
kernel and mean functions with inductive biases well suited
for forecasting in domains such as finance and climatology,
where the data evolves stochastically through time.
Both financial and climatological time series are nonstationary, and are characterized by having time-varying and
stochastic volatilities, or degrees of variation. Motivated by
stochastic volatility (SV) models, we develop a hierarchical
GP model with specialized kernels, terming the model Volt
Bollerslev (1986); Wilson and Ghahramani (2010); Hagan
et al. (2002). Volt uses forecasts of volatility to specify
the covariance structure over future data observations. By
considering not only a single volatility forecast, but a distribution of volatility forecasts, we induce a distribution over
covariance functions in the data domain. Accounting for un-

