Online Nonsubmodular Minimization with Delayed Costs: From Full
Information to Bandit Feedback
Tianyi Lin * 1 Aldo Pacchiano * 2 Yaodong Yu * 1 Michael. I. Jordan 1 3

Abstract
Motivated by applications to online learning in
sparse estimation and Bayesian optimization, we
consider the problem of online unconstrained nonsubmodular minimization with delayed costs in
both full information and bandit feedback settings.
In contrast to previous works on online unconstrained submodular minimization, we focus on
a class of nonsubmodular functions with special
structure, and prove regret guarantees for several
variants of the online and approximate online bandit gradient descent algorithms in static and delayed scenarios. We derive bounds for the agent’s
regret in the full information and bandit feedback
setting, even if the delay between choosing a decision and receiving the incurred cost is unbounded.
Key to our approach is the notion of (α, β)-regret
and the extension of the generic convex relaxation model from El Halabi & Jegelka (2020), the
analysis of which is of independent interest. We
conduct and showcase several simulation studies
to demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithms.

1. Introduction
With machine learning systems increasingly being deployed
in real-world settings, there is an urgent need for online
learning algorithms that can minimize cumulative costs over
the long run, even in the face of complete uncertainty about
future outcomes. There exist a myriad of works that deal
with this setting, most prominently in the area of online
learning and bandits (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). The majority of this literature
deals with problems where the decisions are taken from
either a small set (such as in the multi armed bandit framework (Auer, 2002)), a continuous decision space (as in linear
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, UC Berkeley 2 Microsoft Research, NYC
3
Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley. Correspondence to:
Tianyi Lin <darren lin@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

bandits (Auer, 2002; Dani et al., 2008)) or in the case the
decision set is combinatorial in nature, the response is often
assumed to maintain a simple functional relationship with
the input (e.g., linear (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2012)).
In this paper, we depart from these assumptions and explore what we believe is a more realistic type of model for
the setting where the actions can be encoded as selecting
a subset of a universe of size n. We study a sequential interaction between an agent and the world that takes place
in rounds. At the beginning of round t, the agent chooses
a subset S t ⊆ [n] (e.g., selecting the set of products in a
factory (McCormick, 2005)), after which the agent suffers
cost ft (S t ) such that ft is an α−weakly DR-submodular
and β−weakly DL-supermodular function (Lehmann et al.,
2006). The agent then may receive extra information about
ft as feedback, for example in the full information setting
the agent observes the whole function ft and in the bandit feedback scenario the learner does not receive any extra information about ft beyond the value of ft (S t ). The
standard metric to measure an online learning algorithm is
regret (Blum & Mansour,
PT2007): the regret at time T is
the difference between t=1 ft (S t ) that is the total cost
PT
achieved by the algorithm and minx∈A t=1 ft (x) that is
the total cost achieved by the best fixed action in hindsight.
A no-regret learning algorithm is one that achieves sublinear regret (as a function of T ). Many no-regret learning
algorithms have been developed based on online convex
optimization toolbox (Zinkevich, 2003; Kalai & Vempala,
2005; Shalev-Shwartz & Singer, 2006; Hazan et al., 2007;
Shalev-Shwartz, 2011; Arora et al., 2012; Hazan, 2016)
many of them achieving minimax-optimal regret bounds for
different cost functions even when these are produced by
the world in an adversarial fashion. However, many online
decision-making problems remain open, for example when
the decision space is discrete and large (e.g., exponential in
the number of problem parameters) and the cost functions
are nonlinear (Hazan & Kale, 2012).
To the best of our knowledge, Hazan & Kale (2012) were
the first to investigate non-parametric online learning in
combinatorial domains by considering the setting where
the costs ft are all submodular functions. In this formulation the decision space is the set of all subsets of a set of

