ViT-NeT: Interpretable Vision Transformers with Neural Tree Decoder

Sangwon Kim 1 Jaeyeal Nam 1 Byoung Chul Ko 1

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs), which have demonstrated a state-of-the-art performance in image
classification, can also visualize global interpretations through attention-based contributions. However, the complexity of the model makes it difficult to interpret the decision-making process, and
the ambiguity of the attention maps can cause incorrect correlations between image patches. In
this study, we propose a new ViT neural tree
decoder (ViT-NeT). A ViT acts as a backbone,
and to solve its limitations, the output contextual image patches are applied to the proposed
NeT. The NeT aims to accurately classify finegrained objects with similar inter-class correlations and different intra-class correlations. In addition, it describes the decision-making process
through a tree structure and prototype and enables a visual interpretation of the results. The
proposed ViT-NeT is designed to not only improve the classification performance but also provide a human-friendly interpretation, which is
effective in resolving the trade-off between performance and interpretability. We compared the
performance of ViT-NeT with other state-of-art
methods using widely used fine-grained visual categorization benchmark datasets and experimentally proved that the proposed method is superior in terms of the classification performance
and interpretability. The code and models are
publicly available at https://github.com/
jumpsnack/ViT-NeT.

1. Introduction
Transformer structures, which have recently led to successful results in natural language processing (NLP), have also
1

Department of Computer Engineering, Keimyung University, Daegu, South Korea. Correspondence to: Byoung Chul Ko
<niceko@kmu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A ViT-NeT is a novel way of using a neural tree decoder to grant intrinsic interpretability to the ViT. In particular,
the proposed NeT supports the interpretation of the sequential
decision-making procedure for a given image. At each tree node,
attention is concentrated on the glitter rump, green throat, and tail
covert, and the image is classified as a “Bird” through a specific
node path. ViT-NeT is compatible with any ViT methods and
datasets for fine-grained visual classification.

been applied to computer vision. In the same manner in
which NLP divides a sentence into several words and allows
the transformer to learn the association between each word,
a vision transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) learns
the association between image patches. Consequently, it has
been proven that the ViT structure performs better in the
field of vision than a convolutional neural network (CNN)
structure. However, because the ViT and CNN approaches
are based on a black-box learning mechanism, there are limitations in terms of the interpretability of the model. Thus,
demand is increasing for information on the model interpretability, an explanation of the results, and the model
performance.
In the field of computer vision, interpretability can be
broadly divided into two approaches, i.e., those that provide attention (e.g., heat map and saliency) to the prediction
results and those using the interpretability (transparency) of
the model itself. First, attention based explainable models
(Samek et al., 2017; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Chattopadhay
et al., 2018; Itaya et al., 2021) provide saliency to the image
pixels to explain why a predictive model classifies objects
into specific classes. However, these methods have limita-

