Biased Gradient Estimate with Drastic Variance Reduction
for Meta Reinforcement Learning

Yunhao Tang 1

Abstract
Despite the empirical success of meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL), there are still a number poorly-understood discrepancies between theory and practice. Critically, biased gradient estimates are almost always implemented in practice,
whereas prior theory on meta-RL only establishes
convergence under unbiased gradient estimates.
In this work, we investigate such a discrepancy.
In particular, (1) we show that unbiased gradient estimates have variance Θ(N ) which linearly
depends on the sample size N of the inner loop
updates; (2) we propose linearized score function (LSF)
gradient estimates, which have bias
√
O(1/ N ) and variance O(1/N ); (3) we show
that most empirical prior work in fact implements
variants of the LSF gradient estimates. This implies that practical algorithms "accidentally" introduce bias to achieve better performance; (4) we establish theoretical guarantees for the LSF gradient
estimates in meta-RL regarding its convergence
to stationary points, showing better dependency
on N than prior work when N is large.
By design, many reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
learn from scratch. This entails RL to achieve high profile
success in a number of important and challenging applications (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016; Levine et al.,
2016). However, at the same time, RL is highly inefficient
compared to how humans learn, usually consuming orders
of magnitude more samples to acquire skills at the same
level as humans. One potential source of such inefficiencies
is that unlike humans, RL algorithms do not exploit prior
knowledge on the tasks at hand.
To resolve such an issue, meta-reinforcement learning (metaRL) formalizes the learning and transfer of prior knowledge
in RL (Duan et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Finn et al.,

2017). On a high level, an agent interacts with a distribution
of tasks at meta-training time. The objective is that after
meta-training, the agent can learn significantly faster when
faced with unseen tasks at meta-testing time. If an agent
achieves good performance at meta-testing time, it embodies
the ability to transfer knowledge from prior experiences
during meta-training. There are many concrete formulations
of meta-RL (see, e.g. (Wang et al., 2015; Duan et al., 2016;
Houthooft et al., 2018; Rakelly et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al.,
2019; Fakoor et al., 2019; Ortega et al., 2019; Oh et al., 2020;
Xu et al., 2020)), Our focus is meta-RL through gradientbased adaptations (Finn et al., 2017), where the agent carries
out policy gradient (PG) inner loop updates (Sutton et al.,
2000) at both meta-training and meta-testing time.
Motivation. Our work is motivated by a number of important discrepancies between meta-RL theory and practice.
Recently, there is a growing interest in establishing performance guarantees for meta-RL algorithms with unbiased
gradient estimates (Fallah et al., 2020a). However, since the
inception of the field, meta-RL practitioners have almost
always implemented biased gradient estimates (Finn et al.,
2017; Al-Shedivat et al., 2017; Rothfuss et al., 2018; Liu
et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2021). It is natural to ask: why are
unbiased gradient estimates potentially undesirable in practice, and what do we gain by introducing bias into gradient
estimates?
Our focus. We focus on the N-sample meta-RL objective
where the inner loop updates are N -sample PG estimates.
In prior work, this was called the E-MAML objective (AlShedivat et al., 2017; Rothfuss et al., 2018; Fallah et al.,
2020a), as opposed to the MAML objective (Finn et al.,
2017) where the inner loop update is exact PG. This objective is of practical interest, because at meta-testing time,
inner loop updates can only be implemented with N -sample
PG estimates. See Sec 1 for details.

1
DeepMind. Correspondence to: Yunhao Tang <robintyh@deepmind.com>.

Summary of this work. We make a number of developments to bridge meta-RL theory and practice.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

• High variance of unbiased estimates. By formulating
the meta-RL problem as optimizing a generic N -sample
additive Monte-Carlo objective, we show that the unbi-

