Efficient Variance Reduction for Meta-Learning

Hansi Yang 1 James T. Kwok 1

Abstract
Meta-learning tries to learn meta-knowledge from
a large number of tasks. However, the stochastic meta-gradient can have large variance due to
data sampling (from each task) and task sampling
(from the whole task distribution), leading to slow
convergence. In this paper, we propose a novel
approach that integrates variance reduction with
first-order meta-learning algorithms such as Reptile. It retains the bilevel formulation which better captures the structure of meta-learning, but
does not require storing the vast number of taskspecific parameters in general bilevel variance
reduction methods. Theoretical results show that
it has fast convergence rate due to variance reduction. Experiments on benchmark few-shot classification data sets demonstrate its effectiveness over
state-of-the-art meta-learning algorithms with and
without variance reduction.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning (Hospedales et al., 2021), or learning to
learn (Thrun & Pratt, 1998), aims to quickly learn new tasks
by utilizing meta-knowledge from tasks that are already
learned. This is especially useful for deep networks, as they
typically have to train on a huge amount of labeled samples
for each task. Meta-learning has been successfully used in
various applications such as few-shot learning (Wang et al.,
2020; Finn et al., 2017; Nichol et al., 2018), reinforcement
learning (Clavera et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2018), neural architecture search (Elsken et al., 2020), and semi-supervised
learning (Shu et al., 2019; Ren et al., 2020). In this paper, we
focus on a particularly well-known family of meta-learning
algorithms which is based on the MAML (Finn et al., 2017)
and its variants (such as Reptile (Nichol et al., 2018) and
ANIL (Raghu et al., 2020)).
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: James Kwok
<jamesk@cse.ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Mathematically, meta-learning is often formulated as a
bilevel optimization problem (Franceschi et al., 2018). The
outer problem learns some meta-parameter useful to all
the tasks; while the lower-level problem (one for each
task) learns a task-specific model by adapting the metaparameter. As meta-learning involves learning from a lot of
tasks, variance of the stochastic meta-gradient comes from
two sources: (i) variance of data samples for each task, and
(ii) variance of task samples from the task distribution. This
is different from simpler machine learning problems involving only one task, in which the variance comes only from
the data samples. When the tasks are diverse, meta-learning
algorithms can suffer from large variance of their updates,
leading to slow convergence (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Ji et al.,
2020).
To have faster convergence, a natural approach is to use
variance reduction (Gower et al., 2020), which accelerates
convergence by reducing the variance in the stochastic gradients. As is demonstrated by the classic variance reduction methods such as SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013) and
SARAH (Nguyen et al., 2017), this can achieve convergence
rates faster than SGD both theoretically and empirically.
However, the batch gradient has to be computed occasionally, which can still be very expensive when the training
data set is large. To alleviate this problem, a recent variance
reduction algorithm, STORM (Cutkosky & Orabona, 2019),
proposes to perform variance reduction without the need for
batch gradient, while still achieving the same convergence
rate as previous variance reduction methods.
Very recently, Wang et al. (2021) made an initial attempt
to use variance reduction in meta-learning. They proposed
VFML, which integrates STORM into the first-order metalearning algorithm Reptile. However, VFML ignores the
bilevel structure in meta-learning. Moreover, a theoretical
study on its variance reduction properties is lacking.
While classic variance reduction algorithms mainly focus
on single-level stochastic optimization problems, there are
recent extensions to bilevel stochastic optimization (Khanduri et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021). In principle, these can
be straightforwardly incorporated into meta-learning algorithms, by simply replacing the original gradients by their
variance-reduced counterparts. However, during optimization, this requires storing the task-specific parameters for all

