Stabilizing Q-learning with Linear Architectures
for Provably Efficient Learning

Andrea Zanette 1 Martin J. Wainwright 2

Abstract
The Q-learning algorithm is a simple and widelyused stochastic approximation scheme for reinforcement learning, but the basic protocol can
exhibit instability in conjunction with function
approximation. Such instability can be observed
even with linear function approximation. In practice, tools such as target networks and experience
replay appear to be essential, but the individual
contribution of each of these mechanisms is not
well understood theoretically. This work proposes
an exploration variant of the basic Q-learning protocol with linear function approximation. Our
modular analysis illustrates the role played by
each algorithmic tool that we adopt: a second order update rule, a set of target networks, and a
mechanism akin to experience replay. Together,
they enable state of the art regret bounds on linear
MDPs while preserving the most prominent feature of the algorithm, namely a space complexity
independent of the number of step elapsed. We
show that the performance of the algorithm degrades very gracefully under a novel and more permissive notion of approximation error. The algorithm also exhibits a form of instance-dependence,
in that its performance depends on the “effective”
feature dimension.

1. Introduction
The Q-learning algorithm (Watkins, 1989) is a classical
and widely-used method for estimating optimal Q-value
functions. As a stochastic approximation procedure for solving the Bellman fixed point equation, it comes with strong
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Sciences and Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to:
Andrea Zanette <zanette@berkeley.edu>, Martin J. Wainwright
<wainwrig@berkeley.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

convergence guarantees when applied to tabular Markov
decision processes (e.g., (Tsitsiklis, 1994; Kearns & Singh,
1999; Even-Dar et al., 2003; Wainwright, 2019a; Li et al.,
2021)). When combined with function approximation, however, the basic Q-learning algorithm need not converge, and
can exhibit instability. This challenge has motivated various
proposals for stabilizing the updates. Among other modifications, experience replay is one ingredient that seems
essential to state-of-the-art performance. From a theoretical
point of view, however, these mechanisms are not well understood. This state of affairs leaves us with the following
open question: is it possible to derive a stable Q-learning
procedure with rigorous guarantees for a broad class of
problem instances?
On one hand, recent work has unveiled informationtheoretic barriers applicable to any algorithm (Weisz et al.,
2020; Zanette, 2020; Wang et al., 2020a; 2021; Weisz et al.,
2021; Foster et al., 2021). On the other hand, there exist
several MDP models for which sample-efficient RL is possible. In particular, a recent line of papers (Krishnamurthy
et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2018; Zanette
et al., 2020b; Jin et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021) provide analyses of RL procedures for certain MDP classes, and provide
procedures that have polynomial sample complexity, albeit
with non-polynomial computational complexity.
The starting point of this paper is to study Q-learning
in some settings in which model-free algorithms1 admit
polynomial-time implementation. Examples include the
class of low-rank MDPs (Jin et al., 2020; Zanette et al.,
2020a; Agarwal et al., 2020b;a; Zanette et al., 2021a), and
various generalizations thereof (Wang et al., 2019; 2020b).
Although the underlying algorithms are polynomial-time,
they can still require prohibitive amounts of computation
and storage in practical settings. For instance, the memory
requirement scales linearly with the amount of experience
collected, which limits its practical applicability.
The Q-learning algorithm is popular in applications precisely because of its low computational complexity, as well
1

Sample efficient learning algorithms have also been obtained
for other settings, see the papers (Ayoub et al., 2020; Modi et al.,
2020; 2021).

