Actor-Critic based Improper Reinforcement Learning

Mohammadi Zaki 1 Avinash Mohan 2 Aditya Gopalan 1 Shie Mannor 3

Abstract
We consider an improper reinforcement learning
setting where a learner is given M base controllers
for an unknown Markov decision process, and
wishes to combine them optimally to produce a
potentially new controller that can outperform
each of the base ones. This can be useful in tuning
across controllers, learnt possibly in mismatched
or simulated environments, to obtain a good controller for a given target environment with relatively few trials. Towards this, we propose two
algorithms: (1) a Policy Gradient-based approach;
and (2) an algorithm that can switch between a
simple Actor-Critic (AC) based scheme and a Natural Actor-Critic (NAC) scheme depending on the
available information. Both algorithms operate
over a class of improper mixtures of the given
controllers. For the first case, we derive convergence rate guarantees assuming access to a gradient oracle. For the AC-based approach we provide
convergence rate guarantees to a stationary point
in the basic AC case and to a global optimum in
the NAC case. Numerical results on (i) the standard control theoretic benchmark of stabilizing
an cartpole; and (ii) a constrained queueing task
show that our improper policy optimization algorithm can stabilize the system even when the base
policies at its disposal are unstable.

1. Introduction
A natural approach to design effective controllers for large,
complex systems is to first approximate the system using a
tried-and-true Markov decision process (MDP) model, such
as the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) (Dean et al., 2017)
or tabular MDPs (Auer et al., 2009), and then compute
(near-) optimal policies for the assumed model. Though this
1
Department of ECE, IISc, Bangalore, India 2 Boston University,
Massachusetts, USA 3 Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion,
Haifa, Israel and NVIDIA Research, Israel.. Correspondence to:
Mohammadi Zaki <mohammadi@iisc.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

yields favorable results in principle, it is quite possible that
errors in describing or understanding the system – leading
to misspecified models – may lead to ‘overfitting’, resulting in subpar controllers in practice. Moreover, in many
cases, the stability of the designed controller may be crucial and more desirable than optimizing a fine-grained cost
function. From the controller design standpoint, it is often
easier, cheaper and more interpretable to specify or hardcode control policies based on domain-specific principles,
e.g., anti-lock braking system (ABS) controllers (Radac &
Precup, 2018). For these reasons, we investigate in this
paper a promising, general-purpose reinforcement learning
(RL) approach towards designing controllers1 given predesigned ensembles of basic or atomic controllers, which
(a) allows for flexibly combining the given controllers to obtain richer policies than the atomic policies, and, at the same
time, (b) can preserve the basic structure of the given class
of controllers and confer a high degree of interpretability on
the resulting hybrid policy.
Overview of the approach. We consider a situation where
we are given ‘black-box access’ to M controllers (maps
from state to action distributions) {K1 , . . . , KM } for an
unknown MDP. By this we mean that we can choose to
invoke any of the given controllers at any point during the
operation of the system. With the understanding that the
given family of controllers is ’reasonable,’ we frame the
problem of learning the best combination of the controllers
by trial and error. We first set up an improper policy class of
all randomized mixtures of the M given controllers – each
such mixture is parameterized by a probability distribution
over the M base controllers. Applying an improper policy
in this class amounts to selecting independently at each
time a base controller according to this distribution and
implementing the recommended action as a function of the
present state of the system. The learner’s goal is to find the
best performing mixture policy by iteratively testing from
the pool of given controllers and observing the resulting
state-action-reward trajectory.
Note that the underlying parameterization in our setting is
over a set of given controllers which could be potentially
abstract and defined for complex MDPs with continuous
1

We use the terms ’policy’ and ’controller’ interchangeably in
this article.

