Contrastive UCB: Provably Efficient Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning in
Online Reinforcement Learning

Shuang Qiu 1 Lingxiao Wang 2 Chenjia Bai 3 Zhuoran Yang 4 Zhaoran Wang 2

Abstract
In view of its power in extracting feature representation, contrastive self-supervised learning has
been successfully integrated into the practice of
(deep) reinforcement learning (RL), leading to
efficient policy learning on various applications.
Despite its tremendous empirical successes, the
understanding of contrastive learning for RL remains elusive. To narrow such a gap, we study
contrastive-learning empowered RL for a class of
Markov decision processes (MDPs) and Markov
games (MGs) with low-rank transitions. For both
models, we propose to extract the correct feature
representations of the low-rank model by minimizing a contrastive loss. Moreover, under the
online setting, we propose novel upper confidence
bound (UCB)-type algorithms that incorporate
such a contrastive loss with online RL algorithms
for MDPs or MGs. We further theoretically prove
that our algorithm recovers the true representations and simultaneously achieves sample efficiency in learning the optimal policy and Nash
equilibrium in MDPs and MGs. We also provide
empirical studies to demonstrate the efficacy of
the UCB-based contrastive learning method for
RL. To the best of our knowledge, we provide the
first provably efficient online RL algorithm that incorporates contrastive learning for representation
learning.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved great
empirical successes in various real-world decision-making
1

University of Chicago. 2 Northwestern University. 3 Shanghai
4
AI Laboratory.
Yale University.
Correspondence to:
Shuang Qiu <qiush@umich.edu>, Lingxiao Wang <lingxiaowang2022@u.northwestern.edu>, Chenjia Bai <baichenjia255@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

problems (e.g., Mnih et al. (2015); Silver et al. (2016; 2017);
Sallab et al. (2017); Sutton & Barto (2018); Silver et al.
(2018); Vinyals et al. (2019)). A key to the success of DRL
is the superior representation power of the neural networks,
which extracts the effective information from raw input pixel
states. Nevertheless, learning such effective representation
of states typically demands millions of interactions with the
environment, which limits the usefulness of RL algorithms
in domains where the interaction with environments is expensive or prohibitive, such as healthcare (Yu et al., 2021)
and autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2021).
To improve the sample efficiency of RL algorithms, recent works propose to learn low-dimensional representations of the states via solving auxiliary problems (Jaderberg
et al., 2016; Hafner et al., 2019a;b; Gelada et al., 2019;
François-Lavet et al., 2019; Bellemare et al., 2019; Srinivas et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Yang
& Nachum, 2021; Stooke et al., 2021). Among the recent
breakthroughs in representation learning for RL, contrastive
self-supervised learning gains popularity for its superior
empirical performance (Oord et al., 2018b; Sermanet et al.,
2018; Dwibedi et al., 2018; Anand et al., 2019; Schwarzer
et al., 2020; Srinivas et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). A typical
paradigm for such contrastive RL is to construct an auxiliary
contrastive loss for representation learning, add it to the loss
function in RL, and deploy an RL algorithm with the learned
representation being the state and action input. However,
the theoretical underpinnings of such an enterprise remain
elusive. To summarize, we raise the following question:
Can contrastive self-supervised learning provably improve
the sample efficiency of RL via representation learning?
To answer such a question, we face two challenges. Firstly,
how to integrate contrastive self-supervised learning into the
provably efficient online exploration strategies, such as exploration with the upper confidence bound (UCB), remains
unknown. Secondly, how to analyze the sample complexity
of such integration between self-supervised learning and RL
remains unknown. This paper takes an initial step towards
tackling such challenges based on an instantiation of the
contrastive self-supervised learning empowered RL. Concretely, we first investigate the sample complexity of the
online single-agent RL problem under the low-rank MDP

