Shuffle Private Linear Contextual Bandits
Sayak Ray Chowdhury * 1 Xingyu Zhou * 2

Abstract
Differential privacy (DP) has been recently introduced to linear contextual bandits to formally
address the privacy concerns in its associated personalized services to participating users (e.g., recommendations). Prior work largely focus on two
trust models of DP – the central model, where a
central server is responsible for protecting users’
sensitive data, and the (stronger) local model,
where information needs to be protected directly
on users’ side. However, there remains a fundamental gap in the utility achieved by learning
algorithms under these two privacy models, e.g.,
if all
√users are unique within a learning horizon T ,
e
O( T ) regret in the central model as compared
e 3/4 ) regret in the local model. In this work,
to O(T
we aim to achieve a stronger model of trust than
the central model, while suffering a smaller regret
than the local model by considering recently popular shuffle model of privacy. We propose a general
algorithmic framework for linear contextual bandits under the shuffle trust model, where there
exists a trusted shuffler – in between users and the
central server– that randomly permutes a batch
of users data before sending those to the server.
We then instantiate this framework with two specific shuffle protocols – one relying on privacy
amplification of local mechanisms, and another
incorporating a protocol for summing vectors and
matrices of bounded norms. We prove that both
these instantiations lead to regret guarantees that
significantly improve on that of the local model,
e 3/5 ) if all
and can potentially be of the order O(T
users are unique. We also verify this regret behavior with simulations on synthetic data. Finally,
under the practical scenario of non-unique users,
we show that the regret of our shuffle private algorithm scale as e
O(T 2/3 ), which matches what the
*

Equal contribution 1 Boston University, USA 2 Wayne State
University, USA. Correspondence to: Sayak Ray Chowdhury
<sayak@bu.edu>, Xingyu Zhou <xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

central model could achieve in this case.

1. Introduction
In the linear contextual bandit problem (Auer, 2003; Chu
et al., 2011), a learning agent observes the context information ct of an user at every round t. The goal is to recommend
an action at to the user so that the resulting reward yt is
maximized. The mean reward is given by a linear function
of an unknown parameter vector θ∗ ∈ Rd , d ∈ N, i.e.,
E [yt | ct , at ] = ⟨θ∗ , ϕ(ct , at )⟩ ,
where ϕ : C × X → Rd maps a context-action pair to a
d-dimensional feature vector, and ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes the standard
Euclidean inner product. The context and action sets C and
X are arbitrary, and can also possibly be varying with time.
An agent’s performance over T rounds is typically measured
through the cumulative pseudo-regret

XT 
Reg(T ) =
max⟨θ∗ , ϕ(ct , a)⟩ − ⟨θ∗ , ϕ(ct , at )⟩ ,
t=1

a∈X

which is the total loss suffered due to not recommending the
actions generating highest possible rewards corresponding
to observed contexts. This framework has found applications in many real-life settings such as internet advertisement selection (Abe et al., 2003), article recommendation
in web portals (Li et al., 2010), mobile health (Tewari &
Murphy, 2017), to name a few. The general applicability
of this framework has motivated a line of work (Shariff &
Sheffet, 2018; Zheng et al., 2020) studying linear contextual
bandit problems under the additional constraint of differential privacy (Dwork, 2008), which guarantees that the users’
contexts and generated rewards will not be inferred by an
adversary during this learning process.
To illustrate the privacy concern in the contextual bandit
problem, let us consider a mobile medical application in
which an mobile app recommends a tailored treatment plan
(i.e., action) to each patient (i.e., user) based on her personal
information such as age, weight, height, medical history
etc. (i.e., context). Meanwhile, this mobile app’s recommendation algorithm also needs to be updated once in a
while in a cloud server after collecting data from a batch
of patients, including treatment outcomes (i.e., rewards)

