Parsimonious Learning-Augmented Caching

Sungjin Im 1 Ravi Kumar 2 Aditya Petety 1 Manish Purohit 2

Abstract
Learning-augmented algorithms—in which, traditional algorithms are augmented with machinelearned predictions—have emerged as a framework to go beyond worst-case analysis. The
overarching goal is to design algorithms that perform near-optimally when the predictions are accurate yet retain certain worst-case guarantees
irrespective of the accuracy of the predictions.
This framework has been successfully applied to
online problems such as caching where the predictions can be used to alleviate uncertainties.
In this paper we introduce and study the setting in which the learning-augmented algorithm
can utilize the predictions parsimoniously. We
consider the caching problem—which has been
extensively studied in the learning-augmented
setting—and show that one can achieve quantitatively similar results but only using a sublinear
number of predictions.

1. Introduction
Learning-augmented algorithms have recently emerged
as a framework to strengthen traditional algorithms with
machine-learned predictions. Traditional algorithm design
focuses on formal guarantees for all inputs. Hence, it is often geared towards working well on worst-case inputs and
not for typical, real-world instances. In contrast, machine
learning (ML) performs extremely well on typical instances
but can occasionally fail on rare instances. The learningaugmented framework aims to design algorithms that can
benefit from the machine-learned predictions while retaining worst-case guarantees.
This framework was initiated by Kraska et al. (2018), who
demonstrated that indexed data structures can be improved
1
UC Merced 2 Google Mountain View.
Correspondence to: Sungjin Im <sjin.im@gmail.com>, Ravi Kumar <ravi.k53@gmail.com>, Manish Purohit <mpurohit@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

using learned predictions. Inspired by their work, Lykouris
& Vassilvitskii (2018) studied the classic online caching
problem and obtained an algorithm whose performance
guarantee gracefully degrades as the prediction quality
worsens but still remains robust regardless of the prediction quality. The learning-augmented framework has since
found applications in streaming algorithms, data structures,
and particularly for online algorithms where predictions
can alleviate the uncertainties for unseen future inputs; see
the survey by Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii (2020).
In this paper we focus on an important yet largely overlooked aspect in previous works—the cost of obtaining predictions. Predictions are typically obtained from a machine learned model, which can be computationally expensive; this makes it highly desirable to use predictions
parsimoniously. We study online caching in the learningaugmented framework in which hints are used sparingly.
Online caching. In the online caching problem, a sequence of page requests arrives at a cache of size k. If
the requested page is in the cache, then it can be served
at no extra cost, but otherwise a cache miss occurs to
fetch the missing page into the cache. The goal of an online algorithm is to minimize the number of cache misses.
A number of randomized algorithms are known to be
Θ(log k)-competitive (Achlioptas et al., 2000; Fiat et al.,
1991)—meaning that they incur O(log k) times more cache
misses than the offline optimal solution for all inputs—and
this is the best possible. Belady’s furthest-in-future algorithm (Belady, 1966) that always evicts the page whose
next request is the furthest in the future is well-known to
be the optimal offline algorithm
To exploit predictions, Lykouris & Vassilvitskii (2018) proposed an algorithm that assumes the knowledge of the next
predicted request time of all pages in the cache. For the
`1 -norm prediction error with respect to the actual arrival
times, they showed that the algorithm’s competitive ratio improves to O(1) as the error tends to 0 and remains
O(log k) always. These bounds have further been quantitatively improved recently by Rohatgi (2020); Wei (2020).
Our contributions. We show that we can use significantly fewer predictions for online caching to obtain results similar to the aforementioned work. More precisely,

