Fighting Fire with Fire: Avoiding DNN Shortcuts through Priming

Chuan Wen 1 Jianing Qian 2 Jierui Lin 3 Jiaye Teng 1 Dinesh Jayaraman 2 Yang Gao 1 4

Abstract
Across applications spanning supervised classification and sequential control, deep learning
has been reported to find “shortcut” solutions
that fail catastrophically under minor changes
in the data distribution. In this paper, we show
empirically that DNNs can be coaxed to avoid
poor shortcuts by providing an additional “priming” feature computed from key input features,
usually a coarse output estimate. Priming
relies on approximate domain knowledge of
these task-relevant key input features, which is
often easy to obtain in practical settings. For
example, one might prioritize recent frames
over past frames in a video input for visual
imitation learning, or salient foreground over
background pixels for image classification. On
NICO image classification, MuJoCo continuous
control, and CARLA autonomous driving, our
priming strategy works significantly better
than several popular state-of-the-art approaches
for feature selection and data augmentation.
We connect these empirical findings to recent
theoretical results on DNN optimization, and
argue theoretically that priming distracts the
optimizer away from poor shortcuts by creating
better, simpler shortcuts.
Project website:
https://sites.google.com/view/
icml22-fighting-fire-with-fire/.

1. Introduction
Supervised deep neural networks (DNNs) have led to remarkable achievements across many applications (He et al.,
2016; Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020). Today’s DNNs learn from a very limited form of supervision,
namely, target annotations for each sample in a training
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua
University 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 University of Texas at
Austin 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute. Correspondence to: Yang Gao
<gaoyangiiis@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

labeled dataset (𝑥, 𝑦)

learned hypotheses

zebra
DNN Training

labeled dataset (𝑥, 𝑦) key input specification

learned hypotheses

zebra

,

Primed
DNN Training

✓

Figure 1. DNNs trained only from label annotation supervision
often struggle to disambiguate between competing hypotheses
for a target concept, and end up learning “shortcuts”, such as
classifying the background as the “zebra”. We propose to expand
DNN supervision to include a key input specification function that
identifies important portions of the input (such as the foreground
object) according to domain knowledge, leading the optimization
towards the intended solution.

dataset. In contrast, when humans learn from annotated
examples, they often benefit from richer supervision. When
teaching a child to recognize a “zebra” in a zoo enclosure, a
parent might draw the child’s attention to the animal and its
black-and-white stripes. Without such priming, the learning
task is much more poorly defined and there are many equally
plausible concepts that the child might learn to identify as
“zebra”, such as a zoo enclosure, or any large equine animal
including horses and donkeys.
Indeed, modern DNNs suffer from problems very reminiscent of this confused child. For example, Beery et al. (2018)
reports that DNNs trained for animal image recognition successfully classify cows on grass but not on beaches, because
they wrongly attribute the label “cow” to the grass. Similarly, autonomous driving DNNs, rather than generating
new steering actions in response to changing road observations, commonly learn to copy the previous action, since
adjacent actions in training data were almost always very
similar (Wen et al., 2020; Bansal et al., 2019; Codevilla
et al., 2019). We review more such examples in Section 2.
In all these cases, the annotated examples in the training
dataset alone cannot sufficiently distinguish the correct solution and prevent the DNN from learning the wrong thing.
Following Geirhos et al. (2020), we use the term “shortcut issue” to refer to these phenomena where DNNs fail

