Balancing Sample Efficiency and Suboptimality
in Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Angelo Damiani * 1 Giorgio Manganini * 1 Alberto Maria Metelli * 2 Marcello Restelli 2

Abstract
We propose a novel formulation for the Inverse
Reinforcement Learning (IRL) problem, which
jointly accounts for the compatibility with the
expert behavior of the identified reward and its
effectiveness for the subsequent forward learning phase. Albeit quite natural, especially when
the final goal is apprenticeship learning (learning policies from an expert), this aspect has been
completely overlooked by IRL approaches so far.
We propose a new model-free IRL method that is
remarkably able to autonomously find a trade-off
between the error induced on the learned policy
when potentially choosing a sub-optimal reward,
and the estimation error caused by using finite
samples in the forward learning phase, which can
be controlled by explicitly optimizing also the
discount factor of the related learning problem.
The approach is based on a min-max formulation
for the robust selection of the reward parameters
and the discount factor so that the distance between the expert’s policy and the learned policy is
minimized in the successive forward learning task
when a finite and possibly small number of samples is available. Differently from the majority
of other IRL techniques, our approach does not
involve any planning or forward Reinforcement
Learning problems to be solved. After presenting
the formulation, we provide a numerical scheme
for the optimization, and we show its effectiveness on illustrative numerical cases.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy 2 Dipartimento di
Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy. Correspondence to: Giorgio Manganini
<giorgio.manganini@gssi.it>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL, Ng & Russell, 2000)
is the process of recovering, from (demonstrations of) an
expert’s policy, a reward function, which, in many cases, is
the most parsimonious way to describe the behavior of the
expert. The learned reward is intended to be successively
used in forward Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton &
Barto, 2018) to find new policies that could generalize over
unseen states or even improve the expert’s actions in new
environments.
Learning policies from demonstrated examples, also known
as Imitation Learning (Osa et al., 2018), is indeed often a
much easier way to capture the expert’s behavior compared
to specifying an informative reward function, especially in
complex problems (Ng & Russell, 2000), which usually
involves some not straightforward tuning and tweaking to
elicit the desired result. A direct approach to imitation learning, known as Behavioral Cloning (Bain & Sammut, 1995),
involves the direct extrapolation of the policy function from
the expert’s demonstrations by using some supervised learning technique, but this may lead to surprisingly poor behaviors, especially under environment modifications (Ng &
Russell, 2000; Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Bagnell, 2015). On
the contrary, IRL methods are some of the most successful
approaches to Imitation Learning, where first a reward function is learnt under the assumption of the expert’s optimality,
and then used to recover the expert’s policy using forward
RL (rather than mimic it). This accounts for a better generalization and transferability of the expert’s intention, which
is compactly described by its reward function.
Although theoretically sound, the IRL problem is scattered
itself by a number of difficulties, to which many studies
were devoted in the literature. The main dilemma is the “illposedness” of IRL, i.e., the fact that a policy can be optimal
for multiple reward functions (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Lopes
et al., 2009). To obtain a unique solution, some approaches
propose ad-hoc objective functions to be optimized, such
as margin between the optimal policy and others (Ng &
Russell, 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ratliff et al., 2006;
2009; Silver et al., 2010), or the selection of a maximal
entropy policy (Ziebart et al., 2008; Ziebart, 2010; Kitani
et al., 2012; Shiarlis et al., 2016).

