Task-aware Privacy Preservation for Multi-dimensional Data

Jiangnan Cheng 1 Ao Tang 1 Sandeep Chinchali 2

Abstract
Local differential privacy (LDP) can be adopted
to anonymize richer user data attributes that will
be input to sophisticated machine learning (ML)
tasks. However, today’s LDP approaches are
largely task-agnostic and often lead to severe performance loss – they simply inject noise to all data
attributes according to a given privacy budget, regardless of what features are most relevant for the
ultimate task. In this paper, we address how to significantly improve the ultimate task performance
with multi-dimensional user data by considering
a task-aware privacy preservation problem. The
key idea is to use an encoder-decoder framework
to learn (and anonymize) a task-relevant latent
representation of user data. We obtain an analytical near-optimal solution for the linear setting with mean-squared error (MSE) task loss.
We also provide an approximate solution through
a gradient-based learning algorithm for general
nonlinear cases. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our task-aware approach significantly
improves ultimate task accuracy compared to standard benchmark LDP approaches with the same
level of privacy guarantee.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a tremendous growth in the
volume of available data for machine learning (ML) tasks,
leading to increasing emphasis on protecting user privacy.
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006; 2014) is a
state-of-the-art technique for data privacy, and its local variant – local differential privacy (LDP) (Kasiviswanathan
et al., 2011) – provides stronger privacy guarantees for indi1
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX. Correspondence to: Jiangnan Cheng
<jc3377@cornell.edu>, Ao Tang <atang@cornell.edu>,
Sandeep Chinchali <sandeepc@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

vidual users without dependence on any trusted third party.
In practice, LDP has been successfully deployed in the products of companies like Google (Erlingsson et al., 2014),
Apple (Differential Privacy Team), and Microsoft (Ding
et al., 2017) for some basic frequency or histogram estimation tasks where raw user data is restricted to an n-bit
discrete variable.
In the future, LDP has the promising potential to be adopted
in more complex scenarios (Hassan et al., 2019; Dankar &
El Emam, 2013; Zhao et al., 2014; Cortés et al., 2016) (e.g.,
health care, power grids, Internet of Things) that feature
richer user data attributes that feed into more sophisticated
downstream ML tasks (Cheng et al., 2021; Nakanoya et al.,
2021). In such cases, today’s standard task-agnostic LDP
approaches may not be ideal. For example, consider complex user data that must be anonymized before being passed
into a ML task function, such as a neural network classifier
for credit scores. A standard approach would be to simply perturb the data by adding artificial noise whose scale
depends on the sensitivity of user data (i.e. worst-case variation among a user population) and a given privacy budget,
regardless of what ultimate task the anonymized data will
be used for. However, as the dimension and variability of
user data inevitably grows, today’s methods would generally
have to increase the scale of noise to provide the same LDP
guarantee, even though many data attributes might be highly
variable across a user population, but minimally relevant for
a task. As a consequence, one often adds excessive noise to
all data attributes, which can severely degrade an ultimate
task’s performance.
To address these challenges, this paper introduces a fundamentally different task-aware LDP approach. Our method
improves the performance of ML tasks that operate on multidimensional user data while still guaranteeing the same levels of privacy. Our key technical insight is to characterize
the dependence of task performance on various user data attributes, which guides how we learn a concise, task-relevant
encoding (i.e. latent representation) of user data. Then,
for the same privacy budget, we can directly expose and
perturb only the task-relevant encoding rather than raw user
data, which often allows us to add less noise and thereby
improve task accuracy (see Section 2 for a concrete example). Crucially, user privacy is guaranteed under the same
privacy budget according to the post-processing immunity

