More Than a Toy: Random Matrix Models Predict How
Real-World Neural Representations Generalize

Alexander Wei 1 Wei Hu 1 Jacob Steinhardt 1

Abstract
Of theories for why large-scale machine learning
models generalize despite being vastly overparameterized, which of their assumptions are needed
to capture the qualitative phenomena of generalization in the real world? On one hand, we find
that most theoretical analyses fall short of capturing these qualitative phenomena even for kernel
regression, when applied to kernels derived from
large-scale neural networks (e.g., ResNet-50) and
real data (e.g., CIFAR-100). On the other hand,
we find that the classical GCV estimator (Craven
and Wahba, 1978) accurately predicts generalization risk even in such overparameterized settings.
To bolster this empirical finding, we prove that
the GCV estimator converges to the generalization
risk whenever a local random matrix law holds.
Finally, we apply this random matrix theory lens
to explain why pretrained representations generalize better as well as what factors govern scaling
laws for kernel regression. Our findings suggest
that random matrix theory, rather than just being
a toy model, may be central to understanding the
properties of neural representations in practice.

1. Introduction
The fact that deep neural networks trained with many more
parameters than data points can generalize well contradicts
conventional statistical wisdom (Zhang et al., 2017). This
observation has inspired much theoretical work, with one
of the goals being to explain the generalization and scaling
behavior of such models. In this paper, we study how these
theoretical perspectives map onto reality. What assumptions
are necessary (or sufficient) to capture the qualitative phenomena (e.g., pretraining vs. random initialization, scaling
laws) of large-scale models? And what do they reveal about
generalization in the real world?
1
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Alexander Wei <awei@berkeley.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Predicted vs. actual generalization risk of a pretrained
ResNet-34 empirical NTK on CIFAR-100 over dataset sizes N and
ridge regularizations λ. Corresponding training risks are plotted in
the background. The fit achieving the lowest MSE has 19.9% test
error on CIFAR-100 (vs. 15.9% from finetuning the ResNet).

An adequate theoretical treatment should at least predict
the behavior of high-dimensional linear models. To assess
this, we focus on linear models derived from neural representations (e.g., final layer activations or empirical neural
tangent kernels) of large-scale networks on vision data. We
test whether different theories can predict how kernel ridge
regression on these representations generalizes, given only
the training data.
In this setting of regression on realistic kernels, we find that
most theoretical analyses already face severe challenges. A
major difficulty is that the ground truth function has large—
effectively infinite—kernel norm, which we verify empirically on several datasets. Consequently, norm-based generalization bounds are vacuous or even increase with dataset
size, echoing concerns raised by Belkin et al. (2018) and
Nagarajan & Kolter (2019). Other challenges for estimating
generalization include the slow convergence of the empirical covariance matrix and the fact that noise and signal are
indistinguishable in high-dimensional settings.
However, not all is lost. We find that the generalized crossvalidation (GCV) estimator (Craven & Wahba, 1978) does
accurately predict the generalization risk, even when typical
norm- or spectrum-based formulas struggle. GCV is accu-

