C ONTENT V EC : An Improved Self-Supervised Speech Representation by
Disentangling Speakers

Kaizhi Qian * 1 Yang Zhang * 1 Heting Gao 2 Junrui Ni 2 Cheng-I Jeff Lai 3 David Cox 1
Mark Hasegawa-Johnson 2 Shiyu Chang 4

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) in speech involves
training a speech representation network on a
large-scale unannotated speech corpus, and then
applying the learned representations to downstream tasks. Since the majority of the downstream tasks of SSL learning in speech largely focus on the content information in speech, the most
desirable speech representations should be able to
disentangle unwanted variations, such as speaker
variations, from the content. However, disentangling speakers is very challenging, because removing the speaker information could easily result in
a loss of content as well, and the damage of the
latter usually far outweighs the benefit of the former. In this paper, we propose a new SSL method
that can achieve speaker disentanglement without
severe loss of content. Our approach is adapted
from the HuBERT framework, and incorporates
disentangling mechanisms to regularize both the
teachers (masked prediction labels) and the students (learned representations). We evaluate the
benefit of speaker disentanglement on a set of
content-related downstream tasks, and observe a
consistent and notable performance advantage of
our speaker-disentangled representations.1

1. Introduction
Over the recent years, self-supervised learning (SSL) has
emerged as a state-of-the-art solution to many speech processing problems with relatively few annotated data. The
*

Equal contribution 1 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 2 University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 3 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 4 University of California, Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Kaizhi Qian <kqian@ibm.com>, Yang Zhang
<yang.zhang2@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/
auspicious3000/contentvec

basic idea of SSL in speech is to train a speech representation network on large-scale unannotated corpora, with an
objective to capture and elicit meaningful speech structures
and information. The resulting speech representation is then
applied to the training of downstream tasks with a small
amount of annotated data. Since the speech representation
is already well-structured, it reduces the the dependency of
downstream task training on large-scale datasets.
While speech SSL has demonstrated advantages in a surprisingly wide range of tasks, one of the primary foci of
speech SSL is on tasks that process the content of speech,
such as speech recognition/phone classification, speech content generation, etc. For these tasks, the most desirable
speech representations should be the ones that can disentangle content information in speech from other interfering
variations, such as speaker variations. However, among the
most widely-used existing speech representations, few can
achieve a reasonable disentanglement of speaker variations.
For example, the H U BERT representation (Hsu et al., 2021)
can achieve a speaker identification accuracy of up to 81.4%
on the SUPERB benchmark (Yang et al., 2021). This observation suggests that there may still be room for performance
gain for SSL on content-related speech processing tasks, if
the disentanglement of speaker is adequately addressed.
However, it has been widely acknowledged that disentangling speakers is very challenging. Since no text annotations
are accessible during the training of the speech representation network, any attempt to remove speaker variations from
speech representation could easily lead to a loss of content
information (Choi et al., 2021). In most content-related
downstream tasks, the cost of losing content information far
outweighs the advantage in disentangling speakers.
In this paper, we seek to investigate the following two research questions. First, is there a way to disentangle speaker
variations during SSL training without significant content
loss? To this end, we propose C ONTENT V EC, an SSL framework that is adapted from the H U BERT training paradigm.
The key idea of H U BERT is that by having some relatively
poor speech representations, such as MFCC, serve as the
teacher labels for the masked prediction task, one can derive
speech representations (which are sometimes referred to

