Neuro-Symbolic Language Modeling with Automaton-augmented Retrieval

Uri Alon 1 Frank F. Xu 1 Junxian He 1 Sudipta Sengupta 2 Dan Roth 3 Graham Neubig 1
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Amazon AWS 3 AWS AI Labs
{ualon,fangzhex,junxianh,gneubig}@cs.cmu.edu {sudipta,drot}@amazon.com
1

Abstract
Retrieval-based language models (R-LM) model
the probability of natural language text by combining a standard language model (LM) with examples retrieved from an external datastore at
test time. While effective, a major bottleneck
of using these models in practice is the computationally costly datastore search, which can be
performed as frequently as every time step. In
this paper, we present R ETO M ATON – retrieval
automaton – which approximates the datastore
search, based on (1) saving pointers between consecutive datastore entries, and (2) clustering of
entries into “states”. This effectively results in
a weighted finite automaton built on top of the
datastore, instead of representing the datastore as
a flat list. The creation of the automaton is unsupervised, and a R ETO M ATON can be constructed
from any text collection: either the original training corpus or from another domain. Traversing
this automaton at inference time, in parallel to
the LM inference, reduces its perplexity by up to
1.85, or alternatively saves up to 83% of the nearest neighbor searches over kNN-LM (Khandelwal et al., 2020) without hurting perplexity. Our
code and trained models are available at https:
//github.com/neulab/retomaton .

1. Introduction
Retrieval-based language models (R-LMs) have recently
been shown to improve over standard neural models in a
variety of tasks such as unconditional language modeling
(Guu et al., 2018; He et al., 2020), machine translation
(Zhang et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2018; Khandelwal et al., 2021),
1

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Amazon AWS 3 Amazon. Correspondence to: Uri Alon
<ualon@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

question answering (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Ram et al.,
2021), and code generation (Hayati et al., 2018; Hashimoto
et al., 2018). The key ingredient of R-LMs is their ability to
utilize training examples at test time without having to rely
on the information encoded in the model’s weights only.
In these models, the retrieval component first searches for
nearest neighbor examples in an external datastore; then, the
base model references these examples during the prediction.
This fusion of language models (LMs) and retrieval improves the base language model from several perspectives,
including higher accuracy (Xu et al., 2021), domain adaptability (Jiang et al., 2021), and reduced size (Borgeaud et al.,
2021). Further, the retrieved examples provide information
regarding the provenance of the model’s predictions, and
retrieval allows for modifying the dataset without retraining the model. Nevertheless, the most critical bottleneck
of these models is their frequent search over the datastore,
which hinders the use of R-LMs in practical settings.
k-Nearest Neighbors Language Model One prominent example of such a retrieval-based model is kNN-LM (Grave
et al., 2017; Khandelwal et al., 2020), which predicts a token
by linearly interpolating the base LM’s output with a nonparametric nearest neighbor distribution. This distribution is
constructed by searching for the k-nearest neighbors (kNN)
in the datastore and weighting them according to their distance to the current test context. Notably, this k-nearest
neighbor search is performed for every generated test token,
introducing severe inference overhead, since this search is
significantly slower than the LM’s standard “forward pass”.
Our Approach: R ETO M ATON Our main insight is that
retrieved neighbors at the current time step also hint at the
neighbors that will be retrieved at future time steps, and can
thus save repetitive searches later. Specifically, we construct
a weighted finite automaton (WFA) on top of an existing
datastore, by keeping pointers between datastore entries and
clustering similar entries, in a completely unsupervised way.
This automaton allows sporadic, infrequent, kNN searches,
and a much cheaper traversal of the automaton at other
time steps. We call our model R ETO M ATON – retrieval
automaton. R ETO M ATON is illustrated in Figure 1.

