Bit Prioritization in Variational Autoencoders via Progressive Coding

Rui Shu * 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
The hierarchical variational autoencoder (HVAE)
is a popular generative model used for many representation learning tasks. However, its application to image synthesis often yields models with
poor sample quality. In this work, we treat image
synthesis itself as a hierarchical representation
learning problem and regularize an HVAE toward
representations that improve the model’s image
synthesis performance. We do so by leveraging
the progressive coding hypothesis, which claims
hierarchical latent variable models that are good
at progressive lossy compression will generate
high-quality samples. To test this hypothesis, we
first show empirically that conventionally-trained
HVAEs are not good progressive coders. We then
propose a simple method that constrains the hierarchical representations to prioritize the encoding
of information beneficial for lossy compression,
and show that this modification leads to improved
sample quality. Our work lends further support
to the progressive coding hypothesis and demonstrates that this hypothesis should be exploited
when designing variational autoencoders.

1. Introduction
The task of generating of high-dimensional image data has
inspired the development of many successful deep generative models such as autoregressive models (Uria et al.,
2016; Oord et al., 2016b), flow-based models (Dinh et al.,
2014; 2016), generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Rezende et al., 2014), and diffusion models (Ho et al.,
2020; Song & Ermon, 2019). These models have since
been applied to many other modeling tasks such as speech
synthesis (Oord et al., 2016a; Donahue et al., 2018), reinforcement learning (Zhang et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2019),
and scene-understanding (Eslami et al., 2018). In this work,
*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford Computer Science.. Correspondence to: Rui Shu <ruishu@stanford.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

we focus on the application of hierarchical variational autoencoders (VAEs) to image synthesis. Despite the success
of VAEs in numerous fields (Akuzawa et al., 2018; Hsu et al.,
2017; Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018; Sultan et al., 2018;
Van Hoof et al., 2016), the application of VAEs to image synthesis has been challenging (Theis et al., 2015), and many
existing works sought to improve VAEs’ image synthesis
capabilities by addressing the optimization challenges associated with VAE training (Rezende & Viola, 2018; Child,
2020; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Sønderby et al., 2016). Given
the success of VAEs as a representation learning algorithm,
we take the complementary position that VAEs should also
be regularized toward representations bespoke to the task of
interest (Levine et al., 2019). We apply this perspective to
HVAE image synthesis and seek representations that will
improve the model’s image synthesis performance.
In order to find representations suitable for image synthesis,
we critically examine diffusion models, a special class of hierarchical latent variable models that has demonstrated superior image synthesis performance in recent years (Ho et al.,
2020; Song & Ermon, 2019). Ho et al. (2020) suggested that
the diffusion model’s strong performance on image synthesis may be attributable to such models having a bit ordering
that is good for progressive lossy compression—which we
shall refer to as the Progressive Coding Hypothesis. Our
main contributions are thus as follows,
1. We formalize the principle of progressive coding and
show that the diffusion model objective can be derived
as a special application of this principle.
2. We show that conventionally-trained HVAEs are suboptimal progressive coders. We then develop an alternative training procedure that prioritizes the informationtheoretic bits beneficial for progressive coding, and
show that the resulting model has improved sample
quality as measured by FID—thus lending support to
the progressive coding hypothesis.
3. Finally, we take initial steps toward understanding why
the progressive coding hypothesis works in practice.
Our work supports the use of progressive coding as an effective principle for designing hierarchical variational autoencoders and encourages further research into the theory
and practice of progressive coding.

