Finding the Task-Optimal Low-Bit Sub-Distribution in Deep Neural Networks

Runpei Dong 1 * Zhanhong Tan 2 * Mengdi Wu 2 Linfeng Zhang 2 Kaisheng Ma 2

Abstract
Quantized neural networks typically require
smaller memory footprints and lower computation complexity, which is crucial for efficient deployment. However, quantization inevitably leads
to a distribution divergence from the original network, which generally degrades the performance.
To tackle this issue, massive efforts have been
made, but most existing approaches lack statistical considerations and depend on several manual configurations. In this paper, we present an
adaptive-mapping quantization method to learn
an optimal latent sub-distribution that is inherent
within models and smoothly approximated with
a concrete Gaussian Mixture (GM). In particular,
the network weights are projected in compliance
with the GM-approximated sub-distribution. This
sub-distribution evolves along with the weight
update in a co-tuning schema guided by the direct task-objective optimization. Sufficient experiments on image classification and object detection over various modern architectures demonstrate the effectiveness, generalization property,
and transferability of the proposed method. Besides, an efficient deployment flow for the mobile CPU is developed, achieving up to 7.46×
inference acceleration on an octa-core ARM CPU.
Our codes have been publicly released at https:
//github.com/RunpeiDong/DGMS.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become the de-facto
method in plentiful applications, including computer vision (He et al., 2016; 2020), natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020), speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), and robotics (Kim & Moon,
2016; Liu et al., 2016a). Although DNNs are pushing the
*

1
Equal
contribution
Xi’an
Jiaotong
University
Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Kaisheng Ma
<kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Full-precision
DNN

Quantized
Distribution

Weight
Distribution

Previous Method

Our Method: DGMS

concrete prior
distribution

model-inherent
sub-distribution

Align weight and
prior distributions

Search for the optimal
sub-distribution

Optimization: ELBO

Optimization: Task Objective

Manual

Automatic

Weight ~ Concrete Prior Distribution

Weight ~ Task-Optimal Sub-distribution

Quantized DNN

Figure 1: Comparison between the previous methods and
our proposed DGMS. The training objective of the previous methods is ELBO while it is the task-objective only
for DGMS, and the previous methods depend on manual
configurations while our DGMS is fully automated.

limits of generalization performance across various areas,
the growing memory and computation severely hinder the
practical deployment. Abundant acceleration and compression methods have been proposed to tackle this issue, such
as pruning (LeCun et al., 1989; Han et al., 2016), weight
quantization (Fiesler et al., 1990; Rastegari et al., 2016),
knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), efficient model
design (Ma et al., 2018; Han et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2021),
and even neural architecture search (Zoph et al., 2018).
Among the aforementioned schemes, weight quantization,
as one of the mainstream techniques, aims to eliminate the
representative redundancy via shortened bit-width. Generically, quantization can be represented as a projection
Q : W ∈ R → Q = {q0 , q1 , . . . , qK }, where W ∼ DW
is the real-valued preimage while Q ∼ DQ denotes the
compressed and discrete representation. The categorical
distribution DQ can be viewed as a factorized Dirac distribution for the expected precision, which inherently suffers
a divergence from the preimage DW . Consequently, the
weight deviation after low-bit quantization generally leads
to significant performance degradation.

