Staged Training for Transformer Language Models

Sheng Shen 1 Pete Walsh 2 Kurt Keutzer 1 Jesse Dodge 2 Matthew Peters 2 Iz Beltagy 2

Abstract
The current standard approach to scaling transformer language models trains each model size
from a different random initialization. As an
alternative, we consider a staged training setup
that begins with a small model and incrementally increases the amount of compute used for
training by applying a “growth operator” to increase the model depth and width. By initializing each stage with the output of the previous
one, the training process effectively re-uses the
compute from prior stages and becomes more efficient. Our growth operators each take as input the entire training state (including model parameters, optimizer state, learning rate schedule,
etc.) and output a new training state from which
training continues. We identify two important
properties of these growth operators, namely that
they preserve both the loss and the “training dynamics” after applying the operator. While the
loss-preserving property has been discussed previously, to the best of our knowledge this work is
the first to identify the importance of preserving
the training dynamics (the rate of decrease of the
loss during training). To find the optimal schedule for stages, we use the scaling laws from (Kaplan et al., 2020) to find a precise schedule that
gives the most compute saving by starting a new
stage when training efficiency starts decreasing.
We empirically validate our growth operators and
staged training for autoregressive language models, showing up to 22% compute savings compared to a strong baseline trained from scratch.
Our code is available at https://github.
com/allenai/staged-training.

1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Allen Institute for AI.
Correspondence to: Iz Beltagy <beltagy@allenai.org>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: We train a GPT2LARGE (768M parameters) transformer language model by first training a model 1/4 the
size (orange line), then increasing the model size by 4x by
applying a growth operator to the entire training state, and
restarting training (green line). The result is a large size
model with comparable loss to one trained from scratch
(blue line) but with reduced compute cost illustrated initially by the dashed red arrow.

1. Introduction
Language models form the backbone of many modern NLP
systems, and these language models have become progressively larger in recent years. Parameter counts for these
models have grown significantly from ELMo (94 M) (Peters et al., 2018) to GPT-3 (175 B) (Brown et al., 2020).
While larger models with more learnable parameters perform better on a wide range of tasks, the computational cost
to train or even just to evaluate these models has become
prohibitively expensive (Schwartz et al., 2020). In this paper, we demonstrate a method to reduce the compute cost
of training transformer language models (Vaswani et al.,
2017) through a staged training setup that iteratively builds
a large model from a smaller one.
Most prior work on scaling language models initializes
each model size from a random initialization and trains to
convergence (Kaplan et al., 2020). This work illustrated an
intriguing property of model training shown in Figure 1,
namely that smaller models are initially more compute efficient then larger models, but eventually the larger model
will reach a lower loss. Our central idea is to take advantage
of this property by first training a smaller model in the compute efficient region, applying a growth operator to the en-

