Online and Consistent Correlation Clustering

Vincent Cohen-Addad * 1 Silvio Lattanzi * 1 Andreas Maggiori * 2 Nikos Parotsidis * 1

Abstract
In the correlation clustering problem the input is
a signed graph where the sign indicates whether
each pair of points should be placed in the same
cluster or not. The goal of the problem is to
compute a clustering which minimizes the number of disagreements with such recommendation.
Thanks to its many practical applications, correlation clustering is a fundamental unsupervised
learning problem and has been extensively studied in many different settings. In this paper we
study the problem in the classic online setting
with recourse; The vertices of the graphs arrive
in an online manner and the goal is to maintain
an approximate clustering while minimizing the
number of times each vertex changes cluster. Our
main contribution is an algorithm that achieves
logarithmic recourse per vertex in the worst case.
We also complement this result with a tight lower
bound. Finally we show experimentally that our
algorithm achieves better performances than stateof-the-art algorithms on real world data.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervised learning. In clustering one is interested in partitioning the input
elements so that similar elements are grouped together and
different elements are assigned to different clusters. A natural way to capture this notion is the classic correlation
clustering problem. Thanks to its simple and elegant formulation, the correlation clustering problem received a lot
of attention from the theory and applied communities and
it has found many practical applications including finding
clustering ensembles (Bonchi et al., 2013), duplicate detection (Arasu et al., 2009), community mining (Chen et al.,
2012), disambiguation tasks (Kalashnikov et al., 2008), au*

Equal contribution 1 Google 2 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Andreas Maggiori <andreas.maggiori@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tomated labelling (Agrawal et al., 2009; Chakrabarti et al.,
2008) and many more.
Formally, in the correlation clustering problem (Bansal et al.,
2004) we receive as input a weighted graph, where positive edges represent similarities between nodes and negative
edges represent dissimilarities between them. The goal is
to find a partitioning of the input graph so that the sum of
the weights of the negative edges inside clusters and the
positive edges between clusters is minimized. The problem
is NP-hard and several approximation algorithms have been
proposed for it. In particular, when we focus on the cases
where all edges have weights in {−1, +1} the best known
algorithm (Chawla et al., 2015) has an approximation guarantee of 2.06 while for arbitrary weights a O(log n) approximation algorithm is also known (Demaine et al., 2006)1 .
Since real world datasets continuously evolve in time, the
design of approximation algorithms that maintain a good
solution over time is becoming a central question in machine
learning. Unfortunately, classic approximation algorithms
often are either unpractical or they return very unstable solutions on dynamic datasets. In particular, the clustering
returned by the algorithm may drastically change over time,
potentially leading to inconsistent decisions. For this reason
a lot of attention has been devoted in the past few years
in designing efficient and consistent clustering algorithms
for evolving datasets (Lattanzi & Vassilvitskii, 2017; Fichtenberger et al., 2021; Jaghargh et al., 2019; Cohen-Addad
et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2021). In this paper, we study the
correlation clustering problem in the online setting. In this
setting, nodes arrive one at the time and with them also their
clustering preferences to the previously disclosed nodes are
revealed, or in other word the set of positive and negative
edges to the nodes that have already arrived. The algorithm
has to assign a cluster to every node at its arrival and this
assignment cannot change in the course of the algorithm.
Unfortunately this setting is too restrictive and in fact it has
been shown (Mathieu et al., 2010) that any algorithm for
the online correlation clustering problem has at least Ω(n)
competitive ratio. Intuitively, this is true because if the first
1
Note also that there is an important amount of work on the
version of the problem where the objective is to maximize the
number of positive edges whose both endpoints are in the same
cluster plus the number negative edges across clusters

