Faster Fundamental Graph Algorithms via Learned Predictions

Justin Y. Chen 1 * Sandeep Silwal 1 * Ali Vakilian 2 * Fred Zhang 3 *

Abstract
We consider the question of speeding up classic graph algorithms with machine-learned predictions. In this model, algorithms are furnished
with extra advice learned from past or similar instances. Given the additional information, we
aim to improve upon the traditional worst-case
run-time guarantees. Our contributions are the
following:
(i) We give a faster algorithm for minimumweight bipartite matching via learned duals, improving the recent result by Dinitz,
Im, Lavastida, Moseley and Vassilvitskii
(NeurIPS, 2021);
(ii) We extend the learned dual approach to the
single-source shortest path problem (with
negative edge lengths), achieving an almost
linear runtime given sufficiently accurate
predictions which improves upon the classic
fastest algorithm due to Goldberg (SIAM J.
Comput., 1995);
(iii) We provide a general reduction-based framework for learning-based graph algorithms,
leading to new algorithms for degreeconstrained subgraph and minimum-cost 0-1
flow, based on reductions to bipartite matching and the shortest path problem.
Finally, we give a set of general learnability theorems, showing that the predictions required by
our algorithms can be efficiently learned in a PAC
fashion.

1. Introduction
There has been recent interest in moving beyond the traditional and often pessimistic worst-case analysis of algorithms by using machine-learned predictions. This
*

Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 TTIC 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Fred Zhang <z0@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

paradigm of learning-augmented algorithms is inspired by
the great success of machine learning (ML) and aims to utilize ML predictions to improve the performance of classic
algorithms.
The extra information assumed in learning-augmented algorithms can be supplied in a variety of settings. For example,
in data streams, the observation that underlying patterns in
real-world datasets do not change quickly over time has led
to the development of an oracle capable of predicting frequently occurring stream elements. In distribution learning,
it is natural to have access to different but related distributions that can aid our learning tasks. In many other applications, the current input can be similar to past instances
that might help us to avoid computing the solution from
scratch. All these scenarios fall under the general umbrella
of a “warm start”, which enables better initialization of the
algorithms to improve their performance.
This learning-based paradigm has been successfully applied
in many algorithmic domains. They all share an underlying goal to minimize some resource constraints: in online
algorithms, predictions are used to make better future decisions and reduce regret and competitive ratios (Lykouris &
Vassilvtiskii, 2018). In streaming algorithms and data structures, predictors have been developed to optimize space
usage (Kraska et al., 2018; Hsu et al., 2019). In sublinear
algorithms, predictors can reduce the sample complexity of
a task (Eden et al., 2021).
Despite this activity, only recently have there been works
on provably improving the time complexity of algorithms
under this framework. Two recent works which consider
this resource include the work of (Ergun et al., 2021) on the
k-means clustering problem and the work of (Dinitz et al.,
2021) on graph matching; our paper relates to the latter.
In (Dinitz et al., 2021), the authors give a learning-based
algorithm for (min-cost) bipartite matching and show that
predictions provably result in faster algorithms. Our paper
is motivated by three natural follow-up questions:
(i) Can we derive learning-augmented algorithms which
exploit warm starts and other auxilliary information for
other important graph optimization problems besides
bipartite matching?
(ii) Do we need a tailor made learning-augmented algo-

