A Marriage between Adversarial Team Games and 2-player Games:
Enabling Abstractions, No-regret Learning, and Subgame Solving

Luca Carminati 1 Federico Cacciamani 1 Marco Ciccone 2 Nicola Gatti 1

Abstract

Ex ante correlation is becoming the mainstream
approach for sequential adversarial team games,
where a team of players faces another team in a
zero-sum game. It is known that team members’
asymmetric information makes both equilibrium
computation APX-hard and team’s strategies not
directly representable on the game tree. This
latter issue prevents the adoption of successful
tools for huge 2-player zero-sum games such as,
e.g., abstractions, no-regret learning, and subgame solving. This work shows that we can recover from this weakness by bridging the gap between sequential adversarial team games and 2player games. In particular, we propose a new,
suitable game representation that we call teampublic-information, in which a team is represented as a single coordinator who only knows
information common to the whole team and prescribes to each member an action for any possible private state. The resulting representation
is highly explainable, being a 2-player tree in
which the team’s strategies are behavioral with
a direct interpretation and more expressive than
the original extensive form when designing abstractions. Furthermore, we prove payoff equivalence of our representation, and we provide techniques that, starting directly from the extensive
form, generate dramatically more compact representations without information loss. Finally, we
experimentally evaluate our techniques when applied to a standard testbed, comparing their performance with the current state of the art.

1
Politecnico di Milano 2 Politecnico di Torino. Correspondence to: Luca Carminati <luca.carminati@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Research efforts on imperfect-information games customarily focus on 2-player zero-sum games (“2p0s” games
from here on), in which two players act receiving opposite payoffs. In this setting, superhuman performances
have been achieved in real-world instances, such as Poker
Hold’em (Brown & Sandholm, 2017b; 2019; Moravcı́k
et al., 2017) and Starcraft II (Vinyals et al., 2019). The
successful approach for 2p0s games is generally based on
the generation of a game abstraction used offline to find a
blueprint strategy which is refined online during the play.
In our work, we focus on sequential adversarial team
games in which a team of 2 (or more) players cooperates
against a common adversary or team of adversaries. In
particular, we focus on ex ante coordination, in which the
team members agree on a common strategy beforehand and
commit to playing it during the game without communicating any further. The team members share the same payoffs and coordinate against an adversary having opposite
payoffs, in face of private information given separately to
each team member. Examples include collusion in poker
games, bidding in the game of Bridge, and a team of drones
acting against an intruder. Celli & Gatti (2018) show that
the computation of a solution, called Team Maxmin Equilibrium with Correlation (TMEcor), is APX-hard. Furthermore, team members’ asymmetric information makes
a team equivalent to a single-player without perfect recall and therefore, as showed by Kuhn (1953), behavioral
strategies defined on the game tree and normal-form strategies are not realization equivalent. In particular, normalform strategies may lead to arbitrarily better outcomes than
behavioral strategies. However, this comes at the cost of an
exponential explosion of the strategy space and the impossibility to use tools for huge 2p0s games as normal-form
strategies are not directly representable on game trees.
Related Work. To the best of our knowledge, Celli & Gatti
(2018) are the first to compute the TMEcor of an adversarial team game by proposing the Hybrid Column Generation
(HCG) algorithm. At each iteration, HCG exploits a Linear Program (LP) to compute a max-min solution and then
an Integer LP (ILP) to find the team’s best response to be
added to the LP at the next iteration. Successively, Farina

