Estimating and Penalizing Induced Preference Shifts in Recommender Systems

Micah Carroll 1 Anca Dragan 1 Stuart Russell 1 Dylan Hadfield-Menell 2

Abstract
The content that a recommender system (RS)
shows to users influences them. Therefore, when
choosing a recommender to deploy, one is implicitly also choosing to induce specific internal states
in users. Even more, systems trained via longhorizon optimization will have direct incentives
to manipulate users, e.g. shift their preferences
so they are easier to satisfy. We focus on induced
preference shifts in users. We argue that – before
deployment – system designers should: estimate
the shifts a recommender would induce; evaluate
whether such shifts would be undesirable; and perhaps even actively optimize to avoid problematic
shifts. These steps involve two challenging ingredients: estimation requires anticipating how hypothetical policies would influence user preferences
if deployed – we do this by using historical user
interaction data to train a predictive user model
which implicitly contains their preference dynamics; evaluation and optimization additionally require metrics to assess whether such influences
are manipulative or otherwise unwanted – we use
the notion of “safe shifts”, that define a trust region within which behavior is safe: for instance,
the natural way in which users would shift without interference from the system could be deemed
“safe”. In simulated experiments, we show that
our learned preference dynamics model is effective in estimating user preferences and how they
would respond to new recommenders. Additionally, we show that recommenders that optimize for
staying in the trust region can avoid manipulative
behaviors while still generating engagement.

1. Introduction
Recommender systems (RSs) generally show users feeds of
items with the goal of maximizing their engagement, and
users choose what to click on based on their preferences.
Importantly, the recommender’s actions are not independent
1

Berkeley 2 MIT. Correspondence to: <mdc@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of changes in users’ internal states: simple changes in the
content displayed to users can affect their behavior (Wilhelm et al., 2018; Hohnhold et al., 2015), mood (Kramer
et al., 2014), beliefs (Allcott et al., 2020), and preferences
(Adomavicius et al., 2013; Epstein & Robertson, 2015).
Given the dependence between users’ internal state and the
recommender system, when a system designer chooses a
specific recommender algorithm (policy), they are implicitly also choosing how to influence user’s behaviors, mood,
preferences, etc. While traditionally RS policies have been
myopic (tended at satisfying users’ current desires), optimizing long-term user engagement has been a growing trend
– typically via reinforcement learning (Afsar et al., 2021);
these non-myopic policies are commonly referred to as longterm value, or LTV, systems. However, these policies will
have incentives to manipulate users as a side-effect (Albanie et al., 2017; Krueger et al., 2020; Evans & Kasirzadeh,
2021): for example, certain preferences are easier to satisfy than others, leading to more potential for engagement
– this could be because of availability of more content for
some preferences compared to others, or because strong
preferences for a particular type of content lead to higher
engagement than more neutral ones. This can make LTV systems a particularly poor choice for avoiding undesired shifts
in user’s behaviors, moods, preferences, etc. While it has
been proposed to prevent the RS from reasoning about manipulation pathways (e.g., by keeping it myopic) (Krueger
et al., 2020; Farquhar et al., 2022), even such systems can
influence users in systematically undesirable ways (Jiang
et al., 2019; Mansoury et al., 2020; Chaney et al., 2018).
In this work, we focus on user’s preference shifts, which
is a particularly challenging problem that has been gaining
more attention (Franklin et al., 2022). Any recommender
policy will have some influence on user preferences. While
this might seem cause for concern, the degree to which
undesirable and manipulative preference influence occurs in
practice has yet to be measured. Moreover, no framework
has yet been proposed to explicitly account for a policy’s
influence on users when choosing which policy to deploy.
We attempt to propose such a framework here – requiring
us to tackle two critical problems.
Firstly, we need to anticipate what preference shifts a RS
policy will cause before it is deployed. This alone would
enable system designers to generate visualizations such as
those in Fig. 1 (explained in more depth in our experiments):

