Differentiable Top-k Classification Learning

Felix Petersen 1 Hilde Kuehne 2 3 Christian Borgelt 4 Oliver Deussen 1

Abstract
The top-k classification accuracy is one of the
core metrics in machine learning. Here, k is conventionally a positive integer, such as 1 or 5, leading to top-1 or top-5 training objectives. In this
work, we relax this assumption and optimize the
model for multiple k simultaneously instead of
using a single k. Leveraging recent advances in
differentiable sorting and ranking, we propose a
family of differentiable top-k cross-entropy classification losses. This allows training while not
only considering the top-1 prediction, but also,
e.g., the top-2 and top-5 predictions. We evaluate
the proposed losses for fine-tuning on state-ofthe-art architectures, as well as for training from
scratch. We find that relaxing k not only produces
better top-5 accuracies, but also leads to top-1 accuracy improvements. When fine-tuning publicly
available ImageNet models, we achieve a new
state-of-the-art for these models.

1. Introduction
Classification is one of the core disciplines in machine learning and computer vision. The advent of classification problems with hundreds or even thousands of classes let the
top-k classification accuracy establish as an important metric, i.e., one of the top-k classes has to be the correct class.
Usually, models are trained to optimize the top-1 accuracy;
and top-5 etc. are used for evaluation only. Some works
(Lapin et al., 2016; Berrada et al., 2018) have challenged
this idea and proposed top-k losses, such as a smooth top-5
margin loss. These methods have demonstrated superior robustness over the established top-1 softmax cross-entropy in
the presence of additional label noise (Berrada et al., 2018).
In standard classification settings, however, these methods
have so far not shown improvements over the established
top-1 softmax cross-entropy.
1

University of Konstanz 2 University of Frankfurt 3 MIT-IBM
Watson AI Lab 4 University of Salzburg. Correspondence to: Felix
Petersen <felix.petersen@uni.kn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this work, instead of selecting a single top-k metric such
as top-1 or top-5 for defining the loss, we propose to specify k to be drawn from a distribution PK , which may or
may not depend on the confidence of specific data points
or on the class label. Examples for distributions PK are
[.5, 0, 0, 0, .5] (50% top-1 and 50% top-5), [.1, 0, 0, 0, .9]
(10% top-1 and 90% top-5), and [.2, .2, .2, .2, .2] (20% topk for each k from 1 to 5). Note that, when k is drawn from
a distribution, this is done sampling-free as we can compute
the expectation value in closed form.
Conventionally, given scores returned by a neural network,
softmax produces a probability distribution over the top-1
rank. Recent advances in differentiable sorting and ranking (Grover et al., 2019; Prillo & Eisenschlos, 2020; Cuturi
et al., 2019; Petersen et al., 2021a) provide methods for
generalizing this to probability distributions over all ranks
represented by a matrix P . Based on differentiable ranking, multiple differentiable top-k operators have recently
been proposed. They found applications in differentiable
k-nearest neighbor algorithms, differentiable beam search,
attention mechanisms, and differentiable image patch selection (Cordonnier et al., 2021). In these areas, integrating
differentiable top-k improved results considerably by creating a more natural end-to-end learning setting. However, to
date, none of the differentiable top-k operators have been
employed as neural network losses for top-k classification
learning with k > 1.
Building on differentiable sorting and ranking methods, we
propose a new family of differentiable top-k classification
losses where k is drawn from a probability distribution. We
find that our top-k losses improve not only top-k accuracies,
but also top-1 accuracy on multiple learning tasks.
We empirically evaluate our method using four differentiable sorting and ranking methods on the CIFAR-100
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009), the ImageNet-1K (Deng et al.,
2009), and the ImageNet-21K-P (Ridnik et al., 2021) data
sets. Using CIFAR-100, we demonstrate the capabilities of
our losses to train models from scratch. On ImageNet-1K,
we demonstrate that our losses are capable of fine-tuning
existing models and achieve a new state-of-the-art for publicly available models on both top-1 and top-5 accuracy.
We benchmark our method on multiple recent models and
demonstrate that our proposed method consistently outper-

