NeuroFluid: Fluid Dynamics Grounding with Particle-Driven
Neural Radiance Fields
Shanyan Guan 1 Huayu Deng 1 Yunbo Wang 1 Xiaokang Yang 1

Abstract
Deep learning has shown great potential for modeling the physical dynamics of complex particle
systems such as fluids. Existing approaches, however, require the supervision of consecutive particle properties, including positions and velocities. In this paper, we consider a partially observable scenario known as fluid dynamics grounding,
that is, inferring the state transitions and interactions within the fluid particle systems from sequential visual observations of the fluid surface.
We propose a differentiable two-stage network
named NeuroFluid. Our approach consists of (i)
a particle-driven neural renderer, which involves
fluid physical properties into the volume rendering function, and (ii) a particle transition model
optimized to reduce the differences between the
rendered and the observed images. NeuroFluid
provides the first solution to unsupervised learning of particle-based fluid dynamics by training
these two models jointly. It is shown to reasonably estimate the underlying physics of fluids with
different initial shapes, viscosity, and densities.

1. Introduction
Intuitive physics or intuitive physical inference is a research
area that gathers a lot of interest in the machine learning
community. Recent methods mainly focus on building neural models to reason about stability, collisions, forces, and
velocities from images or videos (Battaglia et al., 2013; Wu
et al., 2017a). In this paper, we explore a new problem in intuitive physics, namely fluid dynamics grounding, defined as
inferring the physical dynamics of fluids from a sequence of
2D visual observations collected from a sparse set of views.
As shown in Figure 1, to understand the underlying physics,
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. Correspondence
to: Yunbo Wnag <yunbow@sjtu.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Observed images

Fluid
Dynamics
Grounding
PhysNeRF

PhysNeRF
Gradients

Physical
Dynamics
Particles
inferred at time

t

Particles
inferred at

t+1

Figure 1. Fluid dynamics grounding is to reason about the underlying physical dynamics in fluid particle systems from sequential
visual observations. We propose NeuroFluid, the first fully differentiable solution to this problem, in which a key component is the
particle-driven neural renderer named PhysNeRF.

the key is to solve the inverse problem of synthesizing the
visual scenes. A typical forward modeling process includes
two steps: fluid simulation and dynamic scene rendering.
Despite recent progress in learning particle-based fluid simulators (Li et al., 2018b; Ummenhofer et al., 2019; Kim
et al., 2019; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020), it remains an
open question whether neural networks can infer fluid dynamics directly from observed images, since all existing
work requires engineered simulators to provide consecutive
particle locations as training data. To answer this question,
we propose NeuroFluid, the first fully differentiable solution
to fluid dynamics grounding. The key idea is to link particlebased fluid simulation with particle-driven neural rendering
in an end-to-end trainable framework, such that the two networks can be jointly optimized to obtain reasonable particle
representations between them.
However, since we generally do not have any prior knowledge of the physical properties of the fluid in this intuitive
physics setup, it is difficult to impose learning constraints on
the particle representations directly. Therefore, to keep fluid

