A Study of Face Obfuscation in ImageNet

Kaiyu Yang 1 Jacqueline Yau 2 Li Fei-Fei 2 Jia Deng 1 Olga Russakovsky 1

Abstract
Face obfuscation (blurring, mosaicing, etc.) has
been shown to be effective for privacy protection;
nevertheless, object recognition research typically
assumes access to complete, unobfuscated images.
In this paper, we explore the effects of face
obfuscation on the popular ImageNet challenge
visual recognition benchmark. Most categories in
the ImageNet challenge are not people categories;
however, many incidental people appear in the
images, and their privacy is a concern. We
first annotate faces in the dataset. Then we
demonstrate that face obfuscation has minimal
impact on the accuracy of recognition models.
Concretely, we benchmark multiple deep neural
networks on obfuscated images and observe
that the overall recognition accuracy drops only
slightly (≤ 1.0%). Further, we experiment with
transfer learning to 4 downstream tasks (object
recognition, scene recognition, face attribute
classification, and object detection) and show that
features learned on obfuscated images are equally
transferable. Our work demonstrates the feasibility of privacy-aware visual recognition, improves
the highly-used ImageNet challenge benchmark,
and suggests an important path for future visual
datasets. Data and code are available at https:
//github.com/princetonvisualai/
imagenet-face-obfuscation.

1. Introduction
Visual data is being generated at an unprecedented scale.
People share billions of photos daily on social media (Meeker, 2014). There is one security camera for every
4 people in China and the United States (Lin & Purnell,
2019). Even your home can be watched by smart devices
1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Kaiyu Yang <kaiyuy@cs.princeton.edu>, Olga
Russakovsky <olgarus@cs.princeton.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

taking photos (Butler et al., 2015; Dai et al., 2015). Learning
from the visual data has led to computer vision applications
that promote the common good, e.g., better traffic management (Malhi et al., 2011) and law enforcement (Sajjad et al.,
2020). However, it also raises privacy concerns, as images
may capture sensitive information such as faces, addresses,
and credit cards (Orekondy et al., 2018).
Extensive research has focused on preventing unauthorized
access to sensitive information in private datasets (Fredrikson et al., 2015; Shokri et al., 2017). However, are publicly
available datasets free of privacy concerns? Taking the
popular ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009) as an example,
there are only 3 people categories1 in the 1000 categories
of the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC) (Russakovsky et al., 2015); nevertheless, the
dataset exposes many people co-occurring with other objects in images (Prabhu & Birhane, 2021), e.g., people sitting on chairs, walking dogs, or drinking beer (Fig. 1). It is
concerning since ILSVRC is freely available for academic
use2 and widely used by the research community.
In this paper, we attempt to mitigate ILSVRC’s privacy issues. Specifically, we construct a privacy-enhanced version
of ILSVRC and gauge its utility as a benchmark for image
classification and as a dataset for transfer learning.
Face annotation. As an initial step, we focus on a prominent type of private information—faces. To examine and
mitigate their privacy issues, we first annotate faces in ImageNet using face detectors and crowdsourcing. We use
Amazon Rekognition to detect faces automatically, and then
refine the results through crowdsourcing on Amazon Mechanical Turk to obtain accurate annotations.
We have annotated 1,431,093 images in ILSVRC, resulting in 562,626 faces from 243,198 images (17% of all
images have at least one face). Many categories have
more than 90% images with faces, even though they are
not people categories, e.g., volleyball and military
uniform. Our annotations confirm that faces are ubiquitous in ILSVRC and pose a privacy issue. We release the
face annotations to facilitate subsequent research in privacyaware visual recognition on ILSVRC.
1
2

scuba diver, bridegroom, and baseball player
https://image-net.org/request

