Self-supervised Models are Good Teaching Assistants for Vision Transformers

Haiyan Wu * 1 Yuting Gao * 2 Yinqi Zhang 1 Shaohui Lin 1 Yuan Xie 1 Xing Sun 2 Ke Li 2
Supervised DeiT-S

Abstract
Input

Transformers have shown remarkable progress
on computer vision tasks in the past year. Compared to their CNN counterparts, transformers
usually need the help of distillation to achieve
comparable results on middle or small sized
datasets. Meanwhile, recent researches discover
that when transformers are trained with supervised and self-supervised manner respectively, the
captured patterns are quite different both qualitatively and quantitatively. These findings motivate us to introduce a self-supervised teaching
assistant (SSTA) besides the commonly used supervised teacher to improve the performance of
transformers. Specifically, we propose a headlevel knowledge distillation method that selects
the most important head of the supervised teacher
and self-supervised teaching assistant, and let the
student mimic the attention distribution of these
two heads, so as to make the student focus on
the relationship between tokens deemed by the
teacher and the teacher assistant. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of SSTA and
demonstrate that the proposed SSTA is a good
compensation to the supervised teacher. Meanwhile, some analytical experiments towards multiple perspectives (e.g. prediction, shape bias, robustness, and transferability to downstream tasks)
with supervised teachers, self-supervised teaching assistants and students are inductive and may
inspire future researches. The code is released in
https://github.com/GlassyWu/SSTA

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China 2 Tencent
Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China. This work was done when Haiyan Wu
was an intern at Tencent Youtu Lab. Correspondence to: Yuan Xie
<yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>, Shaohui Lin <shlin@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Head 1

Head 2

Head 3

Head 4

Head 5

Head 6

Head 5

Head 6

Self-supervised DeiT-S

Head 1

Head 2

Head 3

Head 4

Figure 1. Visualizations of self-attention maps from the last layer
of DeiT-S (Touvron et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Recently, Vision Transformers (ViTs) have been successfully used for computer vision tasks, including image recognition, object detection, semantic segmentation and so on.
Remarkably, ViTs are capable to reach superior performance
on image classification task when trained with large-scale
datasets, e.g. JFT-300M (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). However, ViTs achieve lower accuracies than Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) on medium-scale or small-scale
datasets (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). To alleviate the demand
for data, DeiT (Touvron et al., 2021) distills the inductive
bias from a large CNN teacher by introducing an extra distillation token and shows satisfactory results.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) and supervised learning (SL)
are two different paradigms w.r.t. the way they construct
training objectives. With the development of transformer,
self-supervised learning for transformers has also attracted
widespread attention from the community, and many approaches have been proposed (Chen et al., 2021b; Caron
et al., 2021). (Caron et al., 2021) reported an interesting discovery that self-attention visualizations of self-supervised
vision transformers and supervised vision transformers represent different tendentiousness. As shown in Figure 1,
vision transformers trained with supervised signal pay more
attention to texture, while self-supervised counterparts focus on shape. In addition, when the size of the annotated
training dataset is small, the supervised transformer is more
prone to overfitting. For example, when the training dataset
is ImageNet-1K (Russakovsky et al., 2015), self-supervised
ViT can transfer better to downstream tasks than its counterpart (Caron et al., 2021).

