Demystifying the Adversarial Robustness of Random Transformation Defenses

Chawin Sitawarin 1 Zachary Golan-Strieb 1 David Wagner 1

Abstract
Neural networks’ lack of robustness against attacks raises concerns in security-sensitive settings
such as autonomous vehicles. While many countermeasures may look promising, only a few withstand rigorous evaluation. Defenses using random
transformations (RT) have shown impressive results, particularly BaRT (Raff et al., 2019) on
ImageNet. However, this type of defense has
not been rigorously evaluated, leaving its robustness properties poorly understood. Their stochastic properties make evaluation more challenging
and render many proposed attacks on deterministic models inapplicable. First, we show that
the BPDA attack (Athalye et al., 2018a) used in
BaRT’s evaluation is ineffective and likely overestimates its robustness. We then attempt to construct the strongest possible RT defense through
the informed selection of transformations and
Bayesian optimization for tuning their parameters. Furthermore, we create the strongest possible attack to evaluate our RT defense. Our new
attack vastly outperforms the baseline, reducing
the accuracy by 83% compared to the 19% reduction by the commonly used EoT attack (4.3×
improvement). Our result indicates that the RT defense on Imagenette dataset (a ten-class subset of
ImageNet) is not robust against adversarial examples. Extending the study further, we use our new
attack to adversarially train RT defense (called
AdvRT), resulting in a large robustness gain.
Code is available at https://github.com/wagnergroup/demystify-random-transform.

1. Introduction
Today, deep neural networks are widely deployed in safetycritical settings such as autonomous driving and cyberse1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley CA, USA. Correspondence to: Chawin Sitawarin <chawins@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

curity. Despite their effectiveness at solving a wide-range
of challenging problems, they are known to have a major
vulnerability. Tiny crafted perturbations added to inputs (so
called adversarial examples) can arbitrarily manipulate the
outputs of these large models, posing a threat to the safety
and privacy of the millions of people who rely on existing
ML systems. The importance of this problem has drawn
substantial attention, and yet the research community has
not devised a concrete countermeasure.
Adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018) has been the foremost approach for defending against adversarial examples.
While adversarial training provides increased robustness,
it results in a loss of accuracy on benign inputs. Recently,
a promising line of defenses against adversarial examples
has emerged. These defenses randomize either the model
parameters or the inputs themselves (Lecuyer et al., 2019;
He et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2018; Zhang &
Liang, 2019; Bender et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2018; Cohen
et al., 2019; Dhillon et al., 2018). Introducing randomness
into the model can be thought of as a form of smoothing that
removes sinuous portions of the decision boundary where
adversarial examples frequently lie (He et al., 2018). Other
works attribute its success to the ensemble (Guo et al., 2018)
or the “moving-target” (Chen et al., 2021) effect. Among
these randomization approaches, Raff et al. (2019) propose
Barrage of Random Transforms (BaRT), a new defense
which applies a large set of random image transformations
to classifier inputs. They report a 24× increase in robust
accuracy over previously proposed defenses.
Despite these promising results, researchers still lack a clear
understanding of how to properly evaluate random defenses.
This is concerning as a defense can falsely appear more robust than it actually is when evaluated using sub-optimal attacks (Athalye et al., 2018a; Tramer et al., 2020). Therefore,
in this work, we improve existing attacks on randomized
defenses, and use them to rigorously evaluate BaRT and
more generally, random transformation (RT) defenses. We
find that sub-optimal attacks have led to an overly optimistic
view of these RT defenses. Notably, we show that even our
best RT defense is much less secure than previously thought,
formulating a new attack that reduces its security (from 70%
adversarial accuracy found by the baseline attack to only
6% on Imagenette).

