Fair Generalized Linear Models with a Convex Penalty

Hyungrok Do 1 Preston Putzel 2 Axel Martin 1 Padhraic Smyth 2 Judy Zhong 1

Abstract
Despite recent advances in algorithmic fairness,
methodologies for achieving fairness with generalized linear models (GLMs) have yet to be
explored in general, despite GLMs being widely
used in practice. In this paper we introduce two
fairness criteria for GLMs based on equalizing
expected outcomes or log-likelihoods. We prove
that for GLMs both criteria can be achieved via
a convex penalty term based solely on the linear
components of the GLM, thus permitting efficient
optimization. We also derive theoretical properties for the resulting fair GLM estimator. To
empirically demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed fair GLM, we compare it with other wellknown fair prediction methods on an extensive
set of benchmark datasets for binary classification
and regression. In addition, we demonstrate that
the fair GLM can generate fair predictions for a
range of response variables, other than binary and
continuous outcomes.

1. Introduction
Though machine learning is increasingly being used to support and perform crucial decision making tasks, recent research has clearly demonstrated that data-driven predictive
models can often retain systematic biases that are present
in the underlying data and can propagate these inequalities
to their predictions. For example, large biases in prediction
performance have been detected for machine learning models in areas such as criminal recidivism prediction relative
to race (Angwin et al., 2016), ranking of job candidates relative to gender (Lahoti et al., 2018), face recognition relative
to both race and gender (Ryu et al., 2018; Buolamwini &
Gebru, 2018), and in multiple healthcare applications relative to gender, race, and insurance status (Char et al., 2018;
1
Department of Population Health, NYU Grossman School of
Medicine, New York, NY, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Judy Zhong <judy.zhong@nyulangone.org>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Larrazabal et al., 2020; Seyyed-Kalantari et al., 2020).
To address these issues there has recently been a significant body of work in the machine learning community on
algorithmic fairness in the context of predictive modeling,
including (i) data preprocessing methods that try to reduce
disparities, (ii) in-process approaches which enforce fairness
during model training, and (iii) post-process approaches
which adjust a model’s predictions to achieve fairness after
training is completed. However, the majority of this work
has focused on classification problems with binary outcome
variables, and to a lesser extent on regression. There has
been little to no investigation of fairness in contexts that
include other types of outcome variables such as multiclass
or count outputs.
Generalized linear models (GLMs) provide a natural and
systematic approach to handle a variety of different types of
response variables Y including real-valued, binary, categorical, ordinal, and count outcomes (Nelder & Wedderburn,
1972; McCullagh & Nelder, 1989; Hilbe, 1994). More
specifically, GLMs can be viewed as a generalization of
standard linear regression, where the normality assumption
on the conditional distribution of Y is relaxed to allow for
a range of distributional forms, including binomial, multinomial, and Poisson. While GLMs have a significantly
simpler functional form compared to flexible modern machine learning models (such as tree-based models and deep
neural networks), they nonetheless are a frequent method
of choice for building predictive models across many applications areas such as biology, medicine, social science,
engineering, climate analysis, and risk analysis (Lindsey,
2000).
Thus, there is a gap between the practical use of GLMs and
the development of fairness-aware methodologies for GLMs
in the research literature. This paper addresses the gap by:
• Developing a new framework for GLMs to achieve fair
predictions for under-represented groups;
• Providing theoretical performance properties and optimization guarantees for fair GLMs;
• Demonstrating that the proposed fair GLM can improve prediction parities for a variety of outcomes including the less-studied count and multinomial outcomes, and investigating, via a systematic empirical
study across 11 datasets, the accuracy-disparity trade-

