On the Optimization Landscape of Neural Collapse under MSE Loss:
Global Optimality with Unconstrained Features

Jinxin Zhou * 1 Xiao Li * 2 Tianyu Ding 3 Chong You 4 Qing Qu 2 Zhihui Zhu 1

Abstract
When training deep neural networks for classification tasks, an intriguing empirical phenomenon
has been widely observed in the last-layer classifiers and features, where (i) the class means
and the last-layer classifiers all collapse to the
vertices of a Simplex Equiangular Tight Frame
(ETF) up to scaling, and (ii) cross-example withinclass variability of last-layer activations collapses
to zero. This phenomenon is called Neural Collapse (NC), which seems to take place regardless of the choice of loss functions. In this
work, we justify NC under the mean squared
error (MSE) loss, where recent empirical evidence shows that it performs comparably or even
better than the de-facto cross-entropy loss. Under a simplified unconstrained feature model, we
provide the first global landscape analysis for
vanilla nonconvex MSE loss and show that the
(only!) global minimizers are neural collapse solutions, while all other critical points are strict
saddles whose Hessian exhibit negative curvature directions. Furthermore, we justify the usage
of rescaled MSE loss by probing the optimization landscape around the NC solutions, showing that the landscape can be improved by tuning the rescaling hyperparameters. Finally, our
theoretical findings are experimentally verified
on practical network architectures. The source
code is available at https://github.com/
jinxinzhou/neural-collapse-MSE.

1. Introduction
Despite the dramatic success of modern deep neural networks (DNNs) across engineering and sciences (Goodfellow
et al., 2016; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; LeCun et al., 2015; Senior et al., 2020) that we have witnessed in the past decade,
the practice of deep learning has yet been shrouded with
mysteries, ranging from the design of appropriate network
architectures (Martens et al., 2021; Qi et al., 2020) to the
generalization and robustness properties (Madry et al., 2018;
Nakkiran et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020) of the learned networks. For instance, even the right choice of training loss
function has not been thoroughly justified. For classification problems, although the cross entropy (CE) loss is the
standard choice for network training, recent work (Hui &
Belkin, 2021) demonstrated with extensive experiments that
DNNs trained with mean-squared error (MSE) loss achieve
on par or even better performance compared to those of the
CE loss.
Towards demystifying DNN, a recent interesting line of
work (Ergen & Pilanci, 2021; Fang et al., 2021; Graf et al.,
2021a; Han et al., 2022; Mixon et al., 2020; Papyan, 2020;
Papyan et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021) studied and characterized the learned deep representations during the terminal
phase of training, where several intriguing phenomena have
been discovered. In particular, recent seminal work of (Han
et al., 2022; Papyan et al., 2020) empirically demonstrated
that last-layer features and classifiers of a trained DNN
exhibit the following Neural collapse (N C) property:
(N C1) Variability collapse: the individual features of each
class concentrate to their class-means.
(N C2) Convergence to simplex ETF: the class-means have
the same length and are maximally distant; they form
a Simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF).

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical & Computer (N C3) Convergence to self-duality: the last-layer linear clasEngineering, University of Denver, Denver, USA 2 Department
sifiers perfectly match their class-means.
of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA 3 Microsoft, Redmond, USA 4 Google Re- (N C4) Simple decision rule: the last-layer classifier is equivsearch, New York City, USA. Correspondence to: Qing Qu
alent to a Nearest Class-Center decision rule.
<qingqu@umich.edu>, Zhihui Zhu <zhihui.zhu@du.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

It has been empirically demonstrated that the N C persists
across the range of canonical classification problems with
the CE loss. These results imply that deep networks are

