Exploiting Independent Instruments: Identification and Distribution
Generalization
Sorawit Saengkyongam 1 Leonard Henckel 1 Niklas Pfister 1 Jonas Peters 1

Abstract
Instrumental variable models allow us to identify
a causal function between covariates X and a response Y , even in the presence of unobserved
confounding. Most of the existing estimators assume that the error term in the response Y and
the hidden confounders are uncorrelated with the
instruments Z. This is often motivated by a graphical separation, an argument that also justifies
independence. Positing an independence restriction, however, leads to strictly stronger identifiability results. We connect to the existing literature
in econometrics and provide a practical method
called HSIC-X for exploiting independence that
can be combined with any gradient-based learning procedure. We see that even in identifiable
settings, taking into account higher moments may
yield better finite sample results. Furthermore, we
exploit the independence for distribution generalization. We prove that the proposed estimator is
invariant to distributional shifts on the instruments
and worst-case optimal whenever these shifts are
sufficiently strong. These results hold even in the
under-identified case where the instruments are
not sufficiently rich to identify the causal function.

1. Introduction
When estimating the causal function between a vector of
covariates X and a response Y in the presence of unobserved confounding, standard regression procedures such
as ordinary least squares (OLS) are even asymptotically
biased. Instrumental variable approaches (Wright, 1928; Imbens & Angrist, 1994; Newey, 2013) exploit the existence
of exogenous heterogeneity in the form of an instrumental
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Sorawit Saengkyongam
<ss@math.ku.dk>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

variable (IV) Z and estimate, under suitable conditions, the
causal function consistently. Importantly, the errors in Y
and the hidden confounders U should be uncorrelated with
the instruments Z. Usually, this has to be argued for with
background knowledge. Often this is done by assuming
that the data generating process follows a structural causal
model (SCM) (Pearl, 2009; Bongers et al., 2021) (so that the
distribution is Markov with respect to the induced graph),
and that Y and U are d-separated from Z in the graph obtained by removing the edge from X to Y (this is the case
for the DAG at the beginning of Section 2, for example). In
particular, this requires an argument that Z is not causing
Y directly but only via X. But this argument does not only
imply that the errors in Y and U are uncorrelated but also
that they are independent. This independence comes with
several benefits.
For example, even in settings where the causal function
can be identified by classical approaches based on uncorrelatedness, it has been observed that the independence
can be exploited to construct estimators that achieve the
semiparametric efficiency bound, at least when the error distribution comes from a known, parametric family (Hansen
et al., 2010). Furthermore, the independence restriction is
stronger than uncorrelatedness and therefore yields stronger
identifiability results, which has been reported in the field
of econometrics (e.g., Imbens & Newey, 2009; Chesher,
2003). For example, even binary instruments may be able to
identify nonlinear effects (Dunker et al., 2014; Torgovitsky,
2015; Loh, 2019).
In this work, we investigate the independence restriction
in more detail: we add to existing identifiability results,
provide methods for exploiting the restriction for finite data
and analyse implications for distribution generalisation.
More precisely, in Section 2 we discuss the identifiability
conditions in a general and simple form, list some of the
existing identifiability results that they imply, add novel
results to this list, and extend the framework to conditional
IV.
We also provide a practical method that exploits the above
independence for estimating causal effects from data. It relies on the Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC)
(Gretton et al., 2008) which has become a widely used tool

