Phasic Self-Imitative Reduction for
Sparse-Reward Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning

Yunfei Li * 1 Tian Gao * 1 Jiaqi Yang 2 Huazhe Xu 3 Yi Wu 1 4
Online

Abstract
It has been a recent trend to leverage the power of
supervised learning (SL) towards more effective
reinforcement learning (RL) methods. We propose a novel phasic approach by alternating online RL and offline SL for tackling sparse-reward
goal-conditioned problems. In the online phase,
we perform RL training and collect rollout data
while in the offline phase, we perform SL on those
successful trajectories from the dataset. To further
improve sample efficiency, we adopt additional
techniques in the online phase including task reduction to generate more feasible trajectories and
a value- difference-based intrinsic reward to alleviate the sparse-reward issue. We call this overall algorithm, PhAsic self-Imitative Reduction (PAIR).
PAIR substantially outperforms both non-phasic
RL and phasic SL baselines on sparse-reward
goal-conditioned robotic control problems, including a challenging stacking task. PAIR is the first
RL method that learns to stack 6 cubes with only
0/1 success rewards from scratch.

1. Introduction
Despite great advances achieved by deep reinforcement
learning (RL) in a wide range of application domains such
as playing games (Mnih et al., 2015; Schrittwieser et al.,
2020), controlling robots (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Hwangbo
et al., 2019; Akkaya et al., 2019), and solving scientific
problems (Jeon & Kim, 2020), deep RL methods have been
empirically shown to be brittle and extremely sensitive to
hyper-parameter tuning (Tucker et al., 2018; Ilyas et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University
of California, Berkeley, CA, USA 3 Stanford University, CA,
USA 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Yunfei Li <liyf20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Yi Wu
<jxwuyi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

𝒂𝒕

Success

Offline

Offline
dataset

𝒓𝒊𝒏𝒕
𝒕
𝒔𝒕+𝟏 , 𝒓𝒕

𝒓𝒊𝒏𝒕
Data
𝒕 ≔
Failure
𝑽 𝒔𝒕+𝟏 − 𝑽(𝒔𝒕 )
augmentation
On-policy
update

Task reduction
Supervised
Learning
Start Subgoal Goal

Figure 1. Overall workflow of PAIR. PAIR iteratively alternates
between online RL and offline SL phases. During online phases,
the agent is trained using both environment reward and a valuedifference-based intrinsic reward. Meantime, it collects trajectories
and augments them with task reduction into successful demonstrations for offline training. In the offline phases, the agent runs supervised learning to improve its policy using the generated dataset.

2020; Engstrom et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021a; Andrychowicz et al., 2021), which largely limits the practice use of
deep RL in many real-world scenarios. On the contrary, supervised learning (SL) provides another learning paradigm
by imitating given demonstrations, which is much simpler
for tuning and typically results in a much more steady optimization process (Lynch et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2020).
Inspired by the success of training powerful fundamental
models by SL (Brown et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020;
Jumper et al., 2021), it has also been a recent trend in RL
to leverage the power of SL to develop more powerful and
stable deep RL algorithms (Levine, 2021).
One representative line of research that incorporates SL
into RL is offline RL, which assumes that a large offline
dataset of transition data is available and solely performs
learning on the dataset without interacting with the environment (Lange et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020;
Kumar et al., 2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021). However, both
empirical (Yu et al., 2021b) and theoretical (Rashidinejad
et al., 2021) evidence suggests that the success of recent offline RL methods rely on the quality of the dataset. Accord-

