A Closer Look at Smoothness in Domain Adversarial Training

Harsh Rangwani * 1 Sumukh K Aithal * 1 2 Mayank Mishra 1 Arihant Jain 1 3 R. Venkatesh Babu 1

Abstract
Domain adversarial training has been ubiquitous for achieving invariant representations and
is used widely for various domain adaptation
tasks. In recent times, methods converging to
smooth optima have shown improved generalization for supervised learning tasks like classification. In this work, we analyze the effect of
smoothness enhancing formulations on domain
adversarial training, the objective of which is a
combination of task loss (eg. classification, regression etc.) and adversarial terms. We find that
converging to a smooth minima with respect to
(w.r.t.) task loss stabilizes the adversarial training
leading to better performance on target domain.
In contrast to task loss, our analysis shows that
converging to smooth minima w.r.t. adversarial
loss leads to sub-optimal generalization on the
target domain. Based on the analysis, we introduce the Smooth Domain Adversarial Training
(SDAT) procedure, which effectively enhances
the performance of existing domain adversarial
methods for both classification and object detection tasks. Our analysis also provides insight into
the extensive usage of SGD over Adam in the
community for domain adversarial training.

1. Introduction
Domain Adversarial Training (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015)
(DAT) refers to adversarial learning of neural network
based feature representations that are invariant to the domain. For example, the learned feature representations for
car images from the Clipart domain should be similar to
that from the Web domain. DAT has been widely useful in diverse areas (cited 4200 times) such as recognition
*
Equal contribution 1 Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of
Science, Bengaluru, India 2 PES University, Bengaluru 3 Amazon,
India (Work done at Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru). Correspondence to: Harsh Rangwani <harshr@iisc.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Long et al., 2018; Cui et al., 2020; Rangwani et al., 2021),
fairness (Adel et al., 2019), object detection (Saito et al.,
2019), domain generalization (Li et al., 2018), image-toimage translation (Liu et al., 2017) etc. The prime driver of
research on DAT is its application in unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (DA), which aims to learn a classifier using labeled source data and unlabeled target data, such that it
generalizes well on target data. Various enhancements like
superior objectives (Acuna et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2019),
architectures (Long et al., 2018), etc. have been proposed
to improve the effectiveness of DAT for unsupervised DA.
As DAT objective is a combination of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
(adversarial loss) and Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
(Vapnik, 2013) (task loss) objectives, there has not been
much focus on explicitly analyzing and improving the
nature of optimization in DAT. In optimization literature,
one direction that aims to improve the generalization focuses on developing algorithms that converge to a smooth
(or a flat) minima (Foret et al., 2021; Keskar & Socher,
2017). However, we find that these techniques, when
directly applied for DAT, do not significantly improve the
generalization on the target domain (Sec. 7).
In this work, we analyze the loss landscape near the
optimal point obtained by DAT to gain insights into the nature of optimization. We first focus on the eigen-spectrum
of Hessian (i.e. curvature) of the task loss (ERM term
for classification) where we find that using Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) as optimizer converges to a
smoother minima in comparison to Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2014). Further, we find that smoother minima w.r.t. task
loss results in stable DAT leading to better generalization
on the target domain. Contrary to task loss, we find that
smoothness enhancing formulation for adversarial components worsens the performance, rendering techniques
(Cha et al., 2021) which enhance smoothness for all loss
components ineffective. Hence we introduce Smooth
Domain Adversarial Training (SDAT) (Fig. 1), which aims
to reach a smooth minima only w.r.t. task loss and helps in
generalizing better on the target domain. SDAT requires an
additional gradient computation step and can be combined
easily with existing methods. We show the soundness of
the SDAT method theoretically through a generalization

