Improving Ensemble Distillation With
Weight Averaging and Diversifying Perturbation

Giung Nam 1 Hyungi Lee 1 Byeongho Heo 2 Juho Lee 1 3

Abstract
Ensembles of deep neural networks have demonstrated superior performance, but their heavy
computational cost hinders applying them for
resource-limited environments. It motivates distilling knowledge from the ensemble teacher into
a smaller student network, and there are two important design choices for this ensemble distillation: 1) how to construct the student network,
and 2) what data should be shown during training. In this paper, we propose a weight averaging
technique where a student with multiple subnetworks is trained to absorb the functional diversity
of ensemble teachers, but then those subnetworks
are properly averaged for inference, giving a single student network with no additional inference
cost. We also propose a perturbation strategy that
seeks inputs from which the diversities of teachers
can be better transferred to the student. Combining these two, our method significantly improves
upon previous methods on various image classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep Ensemble (DE; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) averages outputs of multiple models of the same architecture
trained with the same data. Despite being simple to implement, DE achieves state-of-the-art performances for various
tasks, serving as an oracle for many algorithms to compare
against. However, the computational cost of DE scales linearly with the number of models involved in the ensemble,
both for training and inference. Especially, the inference
cost often becomes critical for a real-world scenario where
both memory and time budget is limited.
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea 2 Naver, Korea 3 AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Giung Nam <giung@kaist.ac.kr>, Juho Lee
<juholee@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Knowledge Distillation (KD; Hinton et al., 2015) is a
method to transfer knowledge from a large teacher network
to a smaller student network. The heavy inference cost of
DE thus naturally motivates applying KD to reduce it, where
a DE is set as a teacher and a single neural network is introduced to be set as a student network. This task of distilling
an ensemble teacher network (or distilling from multiple
teachers if we treat each ensemble member as a teacher)
is often called ensemble distillation and has recently been
studied actively (Tran et al., 2020; Mariet et al., 2021; Nam
et al., 2021; Ryabinin et al., 2021; Du et al., 2020).
For a successful ensemble distillation, one should carefully
choose the architecture for a student network. The most
straightforward choice would be using a single neural network having the same architecture as the teacher, but this
usually yields suboptimal results due to the limited flexibility of the student network. Another choice is to use a student
network having subnetworks, where the subnetworks share
most of the parameters but have a small number of individual parameters, e.g., rank-one factors (Wen et al., 2020;
Mariet et al., 2021) or multiple classification heads (Tran
et al., 2020). The ensemble distillation with subnetworks
are reported to improve performance upon vanilla ensemble
distillation (Mariet et al., 2021; Tran et al., 2020; Nam et al.,
2021), but they usually require additional computational
costs for inference. For instance, the inference cost of a
student network having subnetworks defined with rank-one
factors scales linearly to the number of subnetworks.
Another important choice for an ensemble distillation algorithm is the training data perturbation strategy. Recently,
Nam et al. (2021) studied the importance of diversities in
ensemble distillation. When ensemble teachers achieve nearzero train error, the outputs of ensemble teachers for a training data point would be nearly identical, so the ensemble
distillation with normal training data would not effectively
transfer diversities of the ensemble teachers to students. To
this end, Nam et al. (2021) proposed to perturb training
data to output-diversifying directions (Tashiro et al., 2020)
and use them for distillation. While this indeed improves
performance, the perturbation strategy proposed in Nam
et al. (2021) only considers teachers without considering
how a student would react to such perturbed data. Student

