Regret Minimization with Performative Feedback

Meena Jagadeesan 1 Tijana Zrnic 1 Celestine Mendler-Dünner 2

Abstract
In performative prediction, the deployment of a
predictive model triggers a shift in the data distribution. As these shifts are typically unknown
ahead of time, the learner needs to deploy a model
to get feedback about the distribution it induces.
We study the problem of finding near-optimal
models under performativity while maintaining
low regret. On the surface, this problem might
seem equivalent to a bandit problem. However, it
exhibits a fundamentally richer feedback structure
that we refer to as performative feedback: after every deployment, the learner receives samples from
the shifted distribution rather than bandit feedback
about the reward. Our main contribution is regret
bounds that scale only with the complexity of
the distribution shifts and not that of the reward
function. The key algorithmic idea is careful exploration of the distribution shifts that informs a
novel construction of confidence bounds on the
risk of unexplored models. The construction only
relies on smoothness of the shifts and does not
assume convexity. More broadly, our work establishes a conceptual approach for leveraging
tools from the bandits literature for the purpose of
regret minimization with performative feedback.

1. Introduction
Predictive models deployed in social settings are often performative. This means that the model’s predictions—by
means of being used to inform consequential decisions—
influence the outcomes the model aims to predict in the
first place. For example, travel time estimates influence
routing decisions and thus realized travel times, stock price
predictions influence trading activity and hence prices. Such
1 University of California, Berkeley 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen. Correspondence to:
Meena Jagadeesan <mjagadeesan@berkeley.edu>, Tijana Zrnic <tijana.zrnic@berkeley.edu>, Celestine Mendler-Dünner <
cmendler@tuebingen.mpg.de.>.

Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

feedback-loop behavior arises in a variety of domains, including public policy, trading, traffic predictions, and recommendation systems.
Perdomo et al. (2020) formalized this phenomenon under
the name performative prediction. A key concept in this
framework is the distribution map, which formalizes the dependence of the data distribution on the deployed predictive
model. This object maps a model, encoded by a parameter
vector θ, to a distribution D(θ) over instances. Naturally, in
a performative environment, a model’s performance is measured on the distribution that results from its deployment.
That is, given a loss function `(z; θ), which measures the
learner’s loss when they predict on instance z using model
θ, we evaluate a model based on its performative risk:
PR(θ) := Ez∼D(θ) `(z; θ).

(1)

In contrast with the risk function studied in usual supervised
learning, the performative risk takes an expectation over a
model-dependent distribution. Importantly, this distribution
is unknown ahead of time; for example, one can hardly
anticipate the distribution of travel times induced by a traffic
forecasting system without deploying the system first.
Due to this inherent uncertainty about D(θ), it is not possible to find a model with low performative risk offline. The
learner needs to interact with the environment and deploy
models θ to explore the induced distributions D(θ). Given
the online nature of this task, we measure the loss incurred
by deploying a sequence of models θ1 , . . . , θT by evaluating
the performative regret:
Reg(T ) :=

T 

X
E PR(θt ) − min PR(θ) ,
t=1

θ

where the expectation is taken over the possible randomness
in the choice of {θt }Tt=1 . Performative regret measures the
suboptimality of the deployed sequence of models relative
to a performative optimum θPO ∈ argminθ PR(θ).
At first glance, performative regret minimization might seem
equivalent to a classical bandit problem. Bandit solutions
minimize regret while requiring only noisy zeroth-order access to the unknown reward function—in our case PR. The
resulting regret bounds generally grow with some notion of
complexity of the reward function.

