Continual Learning via Sequential Function-Space Variational Inference

Tim G. J. Rudner 1 Freddie Bickford Smith 1 Qixuan Feng 1 Yee Whye Teh 1 Yarin Gal 1

Abstract
Sequential Bayesian inference over predictive
functions is a natural framework for continual
learning from streams of data. However, applying
it to neural networks has proved challenging in
practice. Addressing the drawbacks of existing
techniques, we propose an optimization objective
derived by formulating continual learning as sequential function-space variational inference. In
contrast to existing methods that regularize neural network parameters directly, this objective allows parameters to vary widely during training,
enabling better adaptation to new tasks. Compared to objectives that directly regularize neural
network predictions, the proposed objective allows for more flexible variational distributions
and more effective regularization. We demonstrate that, across a range of task sequences, neural networks trained via sequential function-space
variational inference achieve better predictive accuracy than networks trained with related methods while depending less on maintaining a set of
representative points from previous tasks.

1. Introduction
Continual learning promises to enable applications of machine learning to settings with resource constraints, privacy
concerns, or non-stationary data distributions. However,
continual learning in deep neural networks remains a challenge. While progress has been made to mitigate “forgetting”
of previously learned abilities, existing objective-based approaches to continual learning still fall short.
A popular family of objectives penalizes changes in parameters from one task to another (Ahn et al., 2019; Aljundi et al.,
2018; Chaudhry et al., 2018; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018; Loo et al., 2020; Nguyen et al.,
2018; Park et al., 2019; Ritter et al., 2018; Schwarz et al.,
1
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Tim
G. J. Rudner <tim.rudner@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2018; Swaroop et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2020a;b; Zenke et al.,
2017). However, explicitly regularizing parameters in this
way may be ineffective, since parameters are only a proxy
for a neural network’s predictive function. For example,
predictive functions defined by overparameterized neural
networks may be obtained with several different parameter
configurations, and small changes in a network’s parameters
may cause large changes in its predictions.
An alternative approach that addresses this shortcoming
is to regularize the predictive function directly (Benjamin
et al., 2019; Bui et al., 2017; Buzzega et al., 2020; Jung
et al., 2018; Kapoor et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2018; Li and
Hoiem, 2018; Moreno-Muñoz et al., 2019; Pan et al., 2020;
Titsias et al., 2020). Existing function-space regularization
methods represent the state of the art among objective-based
approaches to continual learning (Kapoor et al., 2021; Pan
et al., 2020; Titsias et al., 2020). Yet, as we demonstrate,
these methods still leave room for improvement. For example, “functional regularization of the memorable past”
(FROMP; Pan et al., 2020) uses a Laplace approximation
and as such does not directly optimize variance parameters, while “functional regularization for continual learning”
(FRCL; Titsias et al., 2020) is constrained to linear models.
To address these limitations, we frame continual learning
as sequential function-space variational inference (S - FSVI)
and adapt the variational objective proposed by Rudner et al.
(2021) to the continual-learning setting. The resulting variational optimization objective has three key advantages over
existing alternatives. First, it is expressed purely in terms of
distributions over predictive functions, which allows greater
flexibility than with parameter-space regularization methods (Figure 1). Second, unlike FROMP, it allows direct optimization of variational variance parameters. Third, unlike
FRCL, it can be applied to fully-stochastic neural networks—
not just to Bayesian linear models.
We demonstrate that S - FSVI outperforms existing objectivebased continual learning methods—in some cases by a significant margin—on a wide range of task sequences, including single-head split MNIST, multi-head split CIFAR,
and multi-head sequential Omniglot. We further present
empirical results that showcase the usefulness of learned
variational variance parameters and demonstrate that S - FSVI
is less reliant on careful selection of datapoints that summarize past tasks than other methods.

