Biological Sequence Design with GFlowNets

Moksh Jain 1 2 Emmanuel Bengio 1 3 Alex-Hernandez Garcia 1 2 Jarrid Rector-Brooks 1 2
Bonaventure F. P. Dossou 1 2 4 Chanakya Ekbote 1 Jie Fu 1 2 Tianyu Zhang 1 2 Michael Kilgour 5
Dinghuai Zhang 1 2 Lena Simine 3 Payel Das 6 Yoshua Bengio 1 2 7

Abstract
Design of de novo biological sequences with desired properties, like protein and DNA sequences,
often involves an active loop with several rounds
of molecule ideation and expensive wet-lab evaluations. These experiments can consist of multiple
stages, with increasing levels of precision and
cost of evaluation, where candidates are filtered.
This makes the diversity of proposed candidates
a key consideration in the ideation phase. In this
work, we propose an active learning algorithm
leveraging epistemic uncertainty estimation and
the recently proposed GFlowNets as a generator
of diverse candidate solutions, with the objective
to obtain a diverse batch of useful (as defined by
some utility function, for example, the predicted
anti-microbial activity of a peptide) and informative candidates after each round. We also propose
a scheme to incorporate existing labeled datasets
of candidates, in addition to a reward function, to
speed up learning in GFlowNets. We present empirical results on several biological sequence design tasks, and we find that our method generates
more diverse and novel batches with high scoring
candidates compared to existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Biological sequences like proteins and DNA have a broad
range of applications to several impactful problems ranging
from medicine to material design. For instance, design of
novel anti-microbial peptides (AMPs; short sequences of
amino-acids) is crucial, and identified as the first target to
tackle the growing public health risks posed by increasing
anti-microbial resistance (AMR; Murray et al., 2022). This
1
Mila 2 Université de Montréal 3 McGill University 4 Jacobs
University Bremen 5 New York University 6 IBM 7 CIFAR Fellow and AI Chair. Correspondence to: Moksh Jain <mokshjn00@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

is particularly alarming according to a recent report2 by
the World Health Organization, which predicts millions of
human lives lost per year (with the potential breakdown of
healthcare systems and many more indirect deaths), unless
methods to efficiently control (and possibly stop) the fastgrowing AMR are found.
Considering the diverse nature of the biological targets,
modes of attack, structures, as well as the evolving nature
of such problems, diversity becomes a key consideration in
the design of these sequences (Mullis et al., 2019). Another
reason for the importance of being able to propose a diverse
set of good candidates is that cheap screening methods (like
in-silico simulations or in-vitro experiments) may not reflect
well future outcomes in animals and humans, as illustrated
in Figure 1. To maximize the chances that at least one
of the candidates will work in the end, it is important for
these candidates to cover as much as possible the modes
of a goodness function that estimates future success. The
design of new biological sequences involves searching over
combinatorially large discrete search spaces on the order
of O(1060 ) candidates. Machine learning methods that can
exploit the combinatorial structure in these spaces (e.g., due
to laws of physics and chemistry) have the potential to speed
up the design process for such biological sequences (PyzerKnapp, 2018; Terayama et al., 2021; Das et al., 2021).
The development process of such biological sequences, for
a particular application, involves several rounds of a candidate ideation phase (possibly starting with a random library)
followed by an evaluation phase, as shown in Figure 1. The
evaluation consists of several stages ranging from numerical simulations to expensive wet-lab experiments, possibly
culminating in clinical trials. These stages filter candidates
with progressively higher fidelity oracles that measure different aspects of the usefulness of a candidate. For example,
the typical evaluation for an antibiotic drug after ideation
would comprise of: (1) in-silico screening using approximate models to estimate anti-microbial activity of O(106 )
candidates (2) in-vitro experiments to measure single-cell
effectiveness against a target bacterium species of O(103 )
2

https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/antibiotic-resistance

