Learning to Hash Robustly, Guaranteed

Alexandr Andoni 1 Daniel Beaglehole 2

Abstract
The indexing algorithms for the high-dimensional
nearest neighbor search (NNS) with the best
worst-case guarantees are based on the randomized Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH), and its
derivatives. In practice, many heuristic approaches exist to "learn" the best indexing method
in order to speed-up NNS, crucially adapting to
the structure of the given dataset. Oftentimes,
these heuristics outperform the LSH-based algorithms on real datasets, but, almost always,
come at the cost of losing the guarantees of either
correctness or robust performance on adversarial queries, or apply to datasets with an assumed
extra structure/model. In this paper, we design
an NNS algorithm for the Hamming space that
has worst-case guarantees essentially matching
that of theoretical algorithms, while optimizing
the hashing to the structure of the dataset (think
instance-optimal algorithms) for performance on
the minimum-performing query. We evaluate the
algorithm’s ability to optimize for a given dataset
both theoretically and practically. On the theoretical side, we exhibit a natural setting (dataset
model) where our algorithm is much better than
the standard theoretical one. On the practical side,
we run experiments that show that our algorithm
has a 1.8x and 2.1x better recall on the worstperforming queries to the MNIST and ImageNet
datasets.

1. Introduction
In the nearest neighbor search (NNS) problem, we are to
preprocess a dataset of points P so that later, given a new
query point q, we can efficiently report the closest point
p∗ ∈ P to q. The problem is fundamental to many high1
Computer Science and Engineering, UCSD, La Jolla, California 2 Department of Computer Science, Columbia University,
New York, New York. Correspondence to: Daniel Beaglehole
<dbeaglehole@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

dimensional geometric tasks, and consequently to modern
data analysis, with applications from computer vision to information retrieval and others (Shakhnarovich et al., 2006).
See surveys (Wang et al., 2015; Andoni et al., 2018).
Depending on whether the algorithm has worst-case theoretical guarantees, the indexing solutions for the NNS problem
are essentially split into two categories. The first category
of algorithms, with theoretical guarantees, are usually based
on randomized space partitions, namely Locality-Sensitive
Hashing (LSH), and its derivatives—conceptually similar to
the random dimension reduction (Johnson & Lindenstrauss,
1984). In order to provide a worst-case guarantee, one focuses on the c-approximate version, for some approximation
c > 1, where one has to report a point p ∈ P at distance at
most cr as long as kq −p∗ k ≤ r. For example, in the case of
the d-dimensional Hamming space Hd = {0, 1}d , the original LSH paper (Har-Peled et al., 2012) gives an algorithm
with O(nρ d) query time and O(n1+ρ + nd) space where
ρ = 1/c, which is optimal for LSH algorithms (O’Donnell
et al., 2014). Crucially, the algorithm guarantees that, if
there exists a point p∗ at distance at most r, then the data
structure returns a point at distance at most cr with probability at least, say, 90% over the randomness of the algorithm
(termed success probability).
Algorithms from the second category are based on the idea
of finding (learning) the best possible space partition (hashing) for the given dataset, which, in practice, is usually
"nicer" than a worst-case one. For example, PCA trees use
partitions based on the Principal Component Analysis of the
dataset (Sproull, 1991; McNames, 2001; Verma et al., 2009;
Abdullah et al., 2014; Keivani & Sinha, 2018), although
many more methods exist; see survey (Wang et al., 2015)
for some of them as well as more recent (Dong et al., 2020).
While usually more efficient in practice, such algorithms
come at the cost of losing the worst-case guarantees. Most
often, the correctness is not guaranteed per query: there
are (adversarial) queries on which the data structure will
fail. Alternatively, the runtime may devolve into a (naïve)
linear scan. To address such issues, one approach has been
to prove guarantees assuming the dataset has extra structural
properties: e.g., that it has low doubling dimension, or that
it is generated according to a random model.
Bridging the gap between these two categories of algorithms

