Sauté RL: Almost Surely Safe Reinforcement Learning
Using State Augmentation

Aivar Sootla 1 Alexander I. Cowen-Rivers 1 2 Taher Jafferjee 1 Ziyan Wang 1 David Mguni 1 Jun Wang 3
Haitham Bou-Ammar 1 4

Abstract
Satisfying safety constraints almost surely (or
with probability one) can be critical for the deployment of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in reallife applications. For example, plane landing and
take-off should ideally occur with probability one.
We address the problem by introducing Safety
Augmented (Sauté) Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs), where the safety constraints are eliminated by augmenting them into the state-space
and reshaping the objective. We show that Sauté
MDP satisfies the Bellman equation and moves
us closer to solving Safe RL with constraints satisfied almost surely. We argue that Sauté MDP
allows viewing the Safe RL problem from a different perspective enabling new features. For instance, our approach has a plug-and-play nature,
i.e., any RL algorithm can be “Sautéed”. Additionally, state augmentation allows for policy generalization across safety constraints. We finally
show that Sauté RL algorithms can outperform
their state-of-the-art counterparts when constraint
satisfaction is of high importance.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) offers a great framework for
solving sequential decision-making problems using interactions with an environment (Sutton & Barto, 2018). In
this context, safety constraint satisfaction and robustness
are vital properties for the successful deployment of RL
algorithms. Safe RL has received significant attention in
recent years, but many unsolved challenges remain, e.g.,
1
Huawei R&D UK. 2 Technische Universität Darm3
stadt.
University College London 4 Honorary Lecturer at University College London.
Correspondence
to:
Aivar Sootla <aivar.sootla@huawei.com>, Haitham
Bou-Ammar <haitham.ammar@huawei.com>, Jun Wang
<jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

constraint satisfaction during and after training, efficient
algorithms, etc. While different types of constraints were
considered in the past, e.g. averaged over trajectory, CVaR,
and chance constraints (Chow et al., 2017), satisfying constraints almost surely (or with probability one) received
less attention to date. This problem is quite important as
many safety-critical applications require constraint satisfaction almost surely. For example, we ideally would like to
guarantee a safe plane landing and take-off with probability
one, while landing with a probability of 0.99 may not be
sufficient. Similarly, an autonomous vehicle should be able
to stay in the lane with probability one, while keeping this
constraint “on average” can potentially lead to catastrophic
consequences.
We represent the safety constraints as a (discounted) sum of
nonnegative costs bounded from above by (what we call) a
safety budget. As the safety costs are accumulated during
an episode, there is less freedom in choosing a safe trajectory and hence the available safety budget diminishes over
time. We can treat the remaining safety budget as a new
state quantifying the risk of constraint violation. This idea
can be traced back to classical control methods of augmenting the safety constraints into the state-space cf. (Daryin
& Kurzhanski, 2005), however, we adapt it to stochastic
problems and RL applications. First, we reshape the objective to take into account the remaining safety budget by
assigning infinite values if the budget was spent. Thus we
obtain Safety AUgmenTEd (Sauté) Markov Decision Process (MDP). Incorporating the constraint into the objective
enforces this constraint for every controlled trajectory which
leads to constraint satisfaction with probability one. Furthermore, Sauté MDP satisfies the Bellman equation justifying
the use of any critic-based RL method. Finally, since the
value functions now additionally depend on the safety information, the cost-to-go in our setting implicitly includes
information about possible safety constraint violations.
Employing the state augmentation for safe RL has been explored in the past. For example, (Calvo-Fullana et al., 2021)
augmented the Lagrangian multiplier into the state space,
while keeping the Lagrangian objective. The Lagrangian
multiplier contains information about the safety cost that

