Smoothed Adaptive Weighting for Imbalanced Semi-Supervised Learning:
Improve Reliability Against Unknown Distribution Data

Zhengfeng Lai * 1 Chao Wang * 2 Henrry Gunawan 1 Sen-Ching Cheung 3 Chen-Nee Chuah 1

Abstract
Despite recent promising results on semisupervised learning (SSL), data imbalance, particularly in the unlabeled dataset, could significantly
impact the training performance of a SSL algorithm if there is a mismatch between the expected
and actual class distributions. The efforts on how
to construct a robust SSL framework that can effectively learn from datasets with unknown distributions remain limited. We first investigate the
feasibility of adding weights to the consistency
loss and then we verify the necessity of smoothed
weighting schemes. Based on this study, we propose a self-adaptive algorithm, named Smoothed
Adaptive Weighting (SAW). SAW is designed to
enhance the robustness of SSL by estimating the
learning difficulty of each class and synthesizing the weights in the consistency loss based on
such estimation. We show that SAW can complement recent consistency-based SSL algorithms
and improve their reliability on various datasets including three standard datasets and one gigapixel
medical imaging application without making any
assumptions about the distribution of the unlabeled set.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks have repeatedly achieved
promising performance on various tasks (He et al., 2016;
Chen et al., 2019; Chan et al., 2019), their success heavily
relies on the accessibility of large annotated datasets that
typically involve labor-intensive labeling. The labeling cost
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA
2
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University
of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, P.R. China (Work
done at UC Davis.) 3 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. Correspondence to: Zhengfeng Lai <lzhengfeng@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

could be even higher in medical imaging applications where
images are at gigapixel level (Lai et al., 2021) and specific
domain knowledge is required (Chan et al., 2019). Semisupervised learning (SSL) is one of the promising methods
to reduce the labeling cost by leveraging unlabeled data.
To leverage unlabeled data effectively, recent state-of-theart SSL algorithms (Arazo et al., 2020; Sohn et al., 2020;
Berthelot et al., 2020) produce pseudo labels on unlabeled
data, and then train the model by iteratively optimizing consistency loss as a regularization via pseudo labels. These
SSL methods typically assume that labeled and unlabeled
data are balanced (i.e., equal representation from different
classes). One challenge for the wide-adoption of SSL is
that the performance may suffer from imbalanced training
set (Kim et al., 2020; Calderon-Ramirez et al., 2020; Pulido
et al., 2020), such as a long-tailed dataset from CIFAR10 shown in Figure 1(a) (Krizhevsky, 2009). Specifically,
the model’s predictions can be biased towards the majority classes and away from minority classes that have few
samples (Dong et al., 2018). This affects the quality of
pseudo labels, which could subsequently make the model
even more biased with self-reinforcing errors (Tai et al.,
2021). Consider the example shown in Figure 1: using
FixMatch (Sohn et al., 2020) on the long-tailed CIFAR-10
dataset, Figure 1(c) shows that the numbers of pseudo labels
for minority classes {6, 7, 8, 9, 10} are significantly smaller
than the true distribution. In fact, the smallest class receives
no pseudo labels at all. Figure 1(b) shows that original SSL
model generates more pseudo labels for majority classes.
The bias in the pseudo label distribution has prolonged the
training and affected the classification performance.
In supervised learning (SL), re-weighting (Cao et al., 2019;
Tan et al., 2020) and re-sampling (Kang et al., 2020; 2019;
Chawla et al., 2002) based methods have shown their success. However, they were designed for SL and require label
information of the entire dataset. Hence they may not be directly applicable in SSL settings where the majority samples
are unlabeled. A few recent studies (Kim et al., 2020; Yang
& Xu, 2020; Hyun et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021) try to address the issue in SSL settings, but all of these methods may
introduce additional heavy computations (e.g. complicated
re-sampling (Wei et al., 2021), pseudo label alignment (Kim

