Probabilistic ODE Solutions in Millions of Dimensions
Nicholas Krämer * 1 Nathanael Bosch * 1 Jonathan Schmidt * 1 Philipp Hennig 1 2

Abstract

2020b; Tronarp et al., 2021; Bosch et al., 2021; Krämer
& Hennig, 2020). Like other filtering-based ODE solvers
(“ODE filters”), the algorithm used herein translates the
numerical approximation of ODE solutions to a problem of
probabilistic inference. The resulting (approximate) posterior distribution quantifies the uncertainty associated with
the unavoidable discretisation error (Bosch et al., 2021) and
provides a language that integrates well with other data
inference schemes (Kersting et al., 2020a; Schmidt et al.,
2021). The main difference to prior work is that we focus
on the setting where the dimension d of the ODE is high,
that is, say, d ≫ 100. (It is not clearly defined at which
point an ODE counts as high-dimensional, but d ≈ 100 is already a scale of problems in which previous state-of-the-art
probabilistic ODE solvers faced computational challenges.)

Probabilistic solvers for ordinary differential equations (ODEs) have emerged as an efficient framework for uncertainty quantification and inference on dynamical systems. In this work, we
explain the mathematical assumptions and detailed implementation schemes behind solving
high-dimensional ODEs with a probabilistic numerical algorithm. This has not been possible
before due to matrix-matrix operations in each
solver step, but is crucial for scientifically relevant problems—most importantly, the solution
of discretised partial differential equations. In a
nutshell, efficient high-dimensional probabilistic
ODE solutions build either on independence assumptions or on Kronecker structure in the prior
model. We evaluate the resulting efficiency on
a range of problems, including the probabilistic
numerical simulation of a differential equation
with millions of dimensions.

1. Introduction
Problem Statement This paper discusses a class of algorithms that computes the solution of initial value problems
based on ordinary differential equations (ODEs), i.e. finding
a function y that satisfies
ẏ(t) = f (y(t), t),

(1)

for all t ∈ [t0 , tmax ], as well as the initial condition y(t0 ) =
y0 ∈ Rd . Usually, f is non-linear, in which case the solution of Equation (1) cannot generally be derived in closed
form and has to be approximated numerically. We continue
the work of probabilistic numerical algorithms for ODEs
(Schober et al., 2019; Tronarp et al., 2019; Kersting et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Nicholas Krämer
<nicholas.kraemer@uni-tuebingen.de>, Nathanael Bosch
<nathanael.bosch@uni-tuebingen.de>,
Jonathan Schmidt
<jonathan.schmidt@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Motivation and Impact High-dimensional ODEs describe the interaction of large networks of dynamical systems and appear in many disciplines in the natural sciences.
The perhaps most prominent example is the simulation of
discretised partial differential equations. There, the dimension of the ODE equals the number of grid points used to
discretise the problem (with e.g. finite differences; Schiesser,
2012). More recently, ODEs gained popularity in machine
learning through the advent of neural ODEs (Chen et al.,
2018) or physics-informed neural networks (Raissi et al.,
2019). With the growing complexity of the model, each of
the above can quickly become high-dimensional. If such use
cases shall gain from probabilistic solvers, fast algorithms
for large ODE systems are crucial.
Prior Work and State-of-the-Art Many nonprobabilistic ODE solvers, for example, explicit
Runge–Kutta methods, have a computational complexity linear in the ODE dimension d (Hairer et al.,
1993). Explicit Runge–Kutta methods are often the default
choices in ODE solver software packages. Compared to
the efficiency of the methods provided by DifferentialEquations.jl (Rackauckas & Nie, 2017), SciPy (Virtanen
et al., 2020), or Matlab (Shampine & Reichelt, 1997),
probabilistic methods have lacked behind so far. Intuitively,
ODE filters are a fusion of ODE solvers and Gaussian
process models—two classes of algorithms that suffer from
high dimensionality. More precisely, the problem is that
probabilistic solvers require matrix-matrix operations at

