Adapting k-means Algorithms for Outliers

Christoph Grunau * 1 Václav Rozhoň * 1

Abstract

This paper shows how to adapt several simple
and classical sampling-based algorithms for the
k-means problem to the setting with outliers. Recently, Bhaskara et al. (NeurIPS 2019) showed
how to adapt the classical k-means++ algorithm
to the setting with outliers. However, their algorithm needs to output O(log(k)·z) outliers, where
z is the number of true outliers, to match the
O(log k)-approximation guarantee of k-means++.
In this paper, we build on their ideas and show
how to adapt several sequential and distributed
k-means algorithms to the setting with outliers,
but with substantially stronger theoretical guarantees: our algorithms output (1+ε)z outliers while
achieving an O(1/ε)-approximation to the objective function. In the sequential world, we achieve
this by adapting a recent algorithm of Lattanzi and
Sohler (ICML 2019). In the distributed setting,
we adapt a simple algorithm of Guha et al. (IEEE
Trans. Know. and Data Engineering 2003) and
the popular k-meansk of Bahmani et al. (PVLDB
2012). A theoretical application of our techniques
is an algorithm with running time Õ(nk 2 /z) 1
that achieves an O(1)-approximation to the objective function while outputting O(z) outliers,
assuming k  z  n. This is complemented
with a matching lower bound of Ω(nk 2 /z) for
this problem in the oracle model.

*
1
Equal contribution
ETH Zürich.
Correspondence
to: Christoph Grunau <cgrunau@ethz.ch>, Václav Rozhoň
<rozhonv@ethz.ch>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Õ(.) hides polylogarithmic factors in n. We assume that the
minimum distance between any two points is 1 and the maximum
distance between any two points ∆ is bounded by poly(n). Our
algorithms work in general metric spaces and we assume a unit
cost to evaluate the distance between two points.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental tool in machine learning and
data analysis. It aims to partition a given set of objects
into clusters in such a way that similar objects end up in
the same cluster. The classical way of approaching the
clustering problem is via the k-means formulation. In this
formulation, one works with a set X consisting of n points
in the d-dimensional Euclidean space Rd and the objective
is to output a set C consisting of k centers so as to minimize
the sum of squared distances of points in X to C, i.e.,
X
ϕ(X, C) =
min kx − ck2 .
x∈X

c∈C

Assigning each point to its closest cluster center naturally
induces a partition of the points where nearby points tend to
end up in the same partition.
k-means with Outliers One major drawback of kmeans in practice is its sensitivity to outliers (GKL+ 17).
This motivates optimizing a more robust version of the kmeans objective. Probably the simplest such formulation
is the k-means with outliers formulation (CKMN01). In
this formulation, one additionally receives a number z ∈
{0, 1, . . . , n}. The aim is to find a set C consisting of k cluster centers and additionally a set Xout ⊆ X consisting of z
outliers so as to optimize the cost of inliers Xin := X\Xout .
That is, we optimize minXout ,C ϕ(X \ Xout , C).
Known Results for k-means with Outliers It is known
that the problem can be approximated up to a constant factor in polynomial time by rounding a certain linear program (Che08; KLS18). However, the complexity of these
known algorithms is a large polynomial. Moreover, as we
observe in Section 6, every constant factor approximation
algorithm that outputs exactly z outliers needs to perform
Ω(z 2 ) queries in the query model.
This motivates to weaken our requirements and look for fast
algorithms that are allowed to output slightly more than z
outliers. There is a line of work that makes progress toward
such algorithms (CKMN01; MOP04; GKL+ 17; GLZ17;
BVX19; IQM+ 20). However, to the best of our knowledge, known algorithms either need to output Az outliers,
for some large constant A  1 to obtain a reasonable approximation guarantee, or they suffer from at least a Ω(z 2 )

