PDE-Based Optimal Strategy for Unconstrained Online Learning

Zhiyu Zhang 1 Ashok Cutkosky 1 Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis 1

Abstract
Unconstrained Online Linear Optimization (OLO)
is a practical problem setting to study the training of machine learning models. Existing works
proposed a number of potential-based algorithms,
but in general the design of these potential functions relies heavily on guessing. To streamline
this workflow, we present a framework that generates new potential functions by solving a Partial
Differential Equation (PDE). Specifically, when
losses are 1-Lipschitz, our framework produces
a√
novel algorithm
pwith anytime regret bound
√
C T +∥u∥ 2T [ log(1 + ∥u∥/C)+2], where
C is a user-specified constant and u is any comparator unknown and unbounded a priori. Such
a bound attains an optimal loss-regret trade-off
without the impractical doubling trick. Moreover,
a matching lower bound shows that the leading
√ order term, including the constant multiplier 2, is
tight. To our knowledge, the proposed algorithm
is the first to achieve such optimalities.

1. Introduction
Advances in online learning have brought deeper understanding and better algorithms to the training of machine
learning models. Among all the problem settings therein,
unconstrained online learning has received special attention
since the parameter of the model is often unrestricted before
seeing any data. Compared to conventional settings with a
bounded domain, the unconstrained setting poses an additional challenge: starting from a poor initialization, how can
an algorithm quickly find an optimal parameter that may be
far-away? With the growing popularity of high-dimensional
models, such an issue becomes increasingly important.
In this paper, we address this issue by studying a theoretical

problem called unconstrained Online Linear Optimization
(OLO). Given an unbounded domain Rd , we need to design
an algorithm such that in each round it makes a deterministic prediction xt ∈ Rd , observes a loss gradient gt ∈ Rd
and suffers a loss ⟨gt , xt ⟩, where gt is adversarial (can arbitrarily depend on x1 , . . . , xt ) and satisfies ∥gt ∥≤ 1. The
considered performance metric is the regret
RT (u) =

T
X
t=1

⟨gt , xt ⟩ −

T
X

⟨gt , u⟩ ,

t=1

and the goal is to achieve low regret for all comparators u ∈
Rd , time horizon T ∈ N+ , and loss gradients g1 , . . . , gT .
Besides seeking the optimal rate on T , we are also interested
in the dependence of RT (u) on ∥u∥, as it captures how well
the algorithm performs if the optimal fixed prediction (in
hindsight) turns out to be far-away from the user’s prior
guess (in this case, the origin).
Many algorithms for unconstrained OLO are based on the
potential method. Given a potential function Vt (·), the key
idea is toP
accumulate the history into a “sufficient statistic”
t−1
St = − i=1 gi and predict the gradient of Vt (·) at St ,
i.e., xt = ∇Vt (St ). Through this procedure, designing new
algorithms is converted into a more tangible task of finding
good potentials. Specifically, with an arbitrary constant C,
existing works (e.g., Orabona & Pál 2016; Mhammedi &
Koolen 2020) adopted the one-dimensional potential
 2
C
St
Vt (St ) = √ exp
(1)
2t
t
and its variants to achieve the regret bound
s
√ 
∥u∥ T 
RT (u) ≤ C + ∥u∥O  T log
.
C

(2)

Future versions available at https://arxiv.org/
abs/2201.07877. 1 Boston University. Correspondence
to:
Zhiyu Zhang <zhiyuz@bu.edu>, Ashok Cutkosky
<ashok@cutkosky.com>, Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis <yannisp@bu.edu>.

Among all the achievable upper bounds with RT (0) ≤ C,
the order of ∥u∥ and T in (2) is optimal up to multiplicative
constants. In practice, these algorithms (Orabona & Tommasi, 2017; Chen et al., 2022) have demonstrated promising
performance with minimum hyperparameter tuning.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Despite these strong results, there is still room for improvement. Intuitively, requiring a constant RT (0) all the time
amounts to a strong belief that the initialization of the model

