It’s Raw! Audio Generation with State-Space Models

Karan Goel 1 Albert Gu 1 Chris Donahue 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
Developing architectures suitable for modeling
raw audio is a challenging problem due to the
high sampling rates of audio waveforms. Standard sequence modeling approaches like RNNs
and CNNs have previously been tailored to fit
the demands of audio, but the resultant architectures make undesirable computational tradeoffs
and struggle to model waveforms effectively. We
propose S A S HI M I, a new multi-scale architecture
for waveform modeling built around the recently
introduced S4 model for long sequence modeling. We identify that S4 can be unstable during autoregressive generation, and provide a simple improvement to its parameterization by drawing connections to Hurwitz matrices. S A S HI M I
yields state-of-the-art performance for unconditional waveform generation in the autoregressive
setting. Additionally, S A S HI M I improves nonautoregressive generation performance when used
as the backbone architecture for a diffusion model.
Compared to prior architectures in the autoregressive generation setting, S A S HI M I generates piano
and speech waveforms which humans find more
musical and coherent respectively, e.g. 2× better
mean opinion scores than WaveNet on an unconditional speech generation task.1 On a music generation task, S A S HI M I outperforms WaveNet on
density estimation and speed at both training and
inference even when using 3× fewer parameters.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling of raw audio waveforms is a challenging frontier for machine learning due to their highdimensionality—waveforms contain tens of thousands of
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Karan Goel <kgoel@cs.stanford.edu>, Albert Gu
<albertgu@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Examples:
https://hazyresearch.stanford.
edu/sashimi-examples

timesteps per second and exhibit long-range behavior at multiple timescales. A key problem is developing architectures
for modeling waveforms with the following properties:
1. Globally coherent generation, which requires modeling
unbounded contexts with long-range dependencies.
2. Computational efficiency through parallel training, and
fast autoregressive and non-autoregressive inference.
3. Sample efficiency through a model with inductive biases
well suited to high-rate waveform data.
Among the many training methods for waveform generation,
autoregressive (AR) modeling is a fundamentally important
approach. AR models learn the distribution of future variables conditioned on past observations, and are central to
recent advances in machine learning for language and image generation (Brown et al., 2020; Ramesh et al., 2021;
Bommasani et al., 2021). With AR models, computing
the exact likelihood is tractable, which makes them simple
to train, and lends them to applications such as lossless
compression (Kleijn et al., 2018) and posterior sampling (Jayaram & Thickstun, 2021). When generating, they can
condition on arbitrary amounts of past context to sample
sequences of unbounded length—potentially even longer
than contexts observed during training. Moreover, architectural developments in AR waveform modeling can have
a cascading effect on audio generation more broadly. For
example, WaveNet—the earliest such architecture (van den
Oord et al., 2016)—remains a central component of stateof-the-art approaches for text-to-speech (TTS) (Li et al.,
2019), unconditional generation (Lakhotia et al., 2021), and
non-autoregressive (non-AR) generation (Kong et al., 2021).
Despite notable progress in AR modeling of (relatively)
short sequences found in domains such as natural language (e.g. 1K tokens), it is still an open challenge
to develop architectures that are effective for the much
longer sequence lengths of audio waveforms (e.g. 1M samples). Past attempts have tailored standard sequence modeling approaches like CNNs (van den Oord et al., 2016),
RNNs (Mehri et al., 2017), and Transformers (Child et al.,
2019) to fit the demands of AR waveform modeling, but
these approaches have limitations. For example, RNNs
lack computational efficiency because they cannot be parallelized during training, while CNNs cannot achieve global

