Greedy when Sure and Conservative when Uncertain about the Opponents

Haobo Fu * 1 Ye Tian * 1 Hongxiang Yu 2 Weiming Liu 1 3 Shuang Wu 1 Jiechao Xiong 1 Ying Wen 2 Kai Li 4 5
Junliang Xing 6 Qiang Fu 1 Wei Yang 1

Abstract
We develop a new approach, named Greedy when
Sure and Conservative when Uncertain (GSCU),
to competing online against unknown and nonstationary opponents. GSCU improves in four
aspects: 1) introduces a novel way of learning opponent policy embeddings offline; 2) trains offline
a single best response (conditional additionally
on our opponent policy embedding) instead of a
finite set of separate best responses against any
opponent; 3) computes online a posterior of the
current opponent policy embedding, without making the discrete and ineffective decision which
type the current opponent belongs to; and 4) selects online between a real-time greedy policy
and a fixed conservative policy via an adversarial bandit algorithm, gaining a theoretically better regret than adhering to either. Experimental studies on popular benchmarks demonstrate
GSCU’s superiority over the state-of-the-art methods. The code is available online at https:
//github.com/YeTianJHU/GSCU.

1. Introduction
Developing agents that play competitively against other opponents is challenging in multiagent scenarios, especially
when the opponents are nonstationary. One approach is
computing a strong yet fixed policy, which has been the
goal in many human-played games, such as Go (Silver et al.,
2016), StarCraft II (Vinyals et al., 2019), poker (Moravčı́k
et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018; 2019), Mahjong (Fu
et al., 2021), etc. In two-player zero-sum games, the target
*

Equal contribution 1 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 3 University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China 4 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 5 School of
Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China 6 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Haobo Fu <haobofu@tencent.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of such a policy is often a Nash Equilibrium (NE) policy,
which is guaranteed to not lose in expectation to any opponent. Yet, playing a fixed policy may be too conservative
if the opponent has some exploitable weakness, since the
weakness can be otherwise modelled and exploited.
Alternatively, opponent modelling methods (HernandezLeal et al., 2017; Albrecht & Stone, 2018) condition an
agent policy on not only its environmental observation but
also predictions about relevant properties (such as policies
and goals) of the opponents. Yet, making accurate such predictions is not easy (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2017; Albrecht
& Stone, 2018), and training a policy dependent additionally
on the predictions is often more difficult than solely on the
observation. As a result, knowing when opponent modelling
is effective is as important as opponent modelling itself.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of competing online against unknown opponents, which can be either stationary or nonstationary. We consider a competitive multiagent
setting, where we control only one agent (the main agent)
and all other agents are opponents. We contribute by answering two questions: (1) What can be done offline to prepare
the main agent for competing online against unknown opponents? (2) During online execution, what policy should the
main agent use against the current opponents?
• Answering question (1): We propose a novel training procedure based on Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma
& Welling, 2014) for learning opponent policy embeddings offline. In comparison with previous policy embedding learning methods using VAEs, we decouple the learning of policy embedding from the representation learning
of other information by conditioning the encoder solely on
an opponent index. For the decoder, a sampled embedding
together with an opponent observation produces the probability of an opponent action. The decoupling facilitates
effective policy embedding learning in terms of both discrimination and generalization. Afterwards, a conditional
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is invoked to train a single
best response against potential opponents. Compared to
a finite set of separate best responses targeting specific
opponent policies, our single best response, which takes
additionally our opponent policy embedding as input, is
better at generalizing to infinite opponent policies.

