The Primacy Bias in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Evgenii Nikishin * 1 Max Schwarzer * 1 Pierluca D’Oro * 1 Pierre-Luc Bacon 1 Aaron Courville 1

Abstract
This work identifies a common flaw of deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms: a tendency
to rely on early interactions and ignore useful evidence encountered later. Because of training on
progressively growing datasets, deep RL agents
incur a risk of overfitting to earlier experiences,
negatively affecting the rest of the learning process. Inspired by cognitive science, we refer to
this effect as the primacy bias. Through a series
of experiments, we dissect the algorithmic aspects
of deep RL that exacerbate this bias. We then propose a simple yet generally-applicable mechanism
that tackles the primacy bias by periodically resetting a part of the agent. We apply this mechanism
to algorithms in both discrete (Atari 100k) and
continuous action (DeepMind Control Suite) domains, consistently improving their performance.
“Your assumptions are your windows on the world. Scrub
them off every once in a while, or the light won’t come in.”
–Isaac Asimov

1. Introduction
Bob is learning a difficult passage on a guitar to rehearse it
with his band. After long nights of practice, he is able to
play it but with straining finger positions and unclean sound.
Alice, another fellow guitarist, shows him a less fatiguing
and nicer-sounding way to play the passage which Bob is
theoretically able to understand and execute well. Nonetheless, in subsequent rehearsal sessions, Bob’s unconscious
mind automatically resorts to the first bad-sounding solution,
discouraging him and his bandmates from trying more technically challenging pieces of music. Bob is experiencing an
instance of the primacy bias, a cognitive bias demonstrated
by studies of human learning (Marshall & Werder, 1972;
Shteingart et al., 2013).
*

1

Equal contribution Mila, Université de Montréal. Correspondence to: Evgenii Nikishin <evgenii.nikishin@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The outcomes of first experiences can have long-lasting effects on subsequent learning and behavior. Thanks to Alice,
Bob has already collected new data sufficient for improving
his performance on that passage and guitar playing in general; however, because of the priming provided by his long
training nights with a bad technique, he is unable to leverage
his new experience. The primacy bias generates a vicious
circle: since Bob cannot improve his guitar skills in the face
of new data, he will not be able to collect more interesting
data by playing more challenging guitar passages, crippling
his overall learning.
The central finding of this paper is that deep reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms are susceptible to a similar bias.
We refer to the primacy bias in deep RL as a tendency to
overfit early interactions with the environment preventing
the agent from improving its behavior on subsequent experiences. The consequences of this phenomenon compound:
an agent with poor performance will collect data of poor
quality and the poor data will amplify the difficulty of recovering from an overfitted solution.
Standard components of deep RL algorithms magnify the
effect of the primacy bias. For instance, experience replay (Mnih et al., 2015) allows efficient data reuse but exposes the agent to its initial samples more than recent ones.
In the interest of sample efficiency, deep RL algorithms
often additionally use a high replay ratio (van Hasselt et al.,
2019; Fedus et al., 2020) updating the agent more times on
the same data. Such design choices can improve the agent’s
performance but come with a risk of exacerbating the effects
of early interactions.
How can a deep RL algorithm avoid the primacy bias? Coming back to Bob, he could re-establish his learning progression by simply forgetting his bad practices and directly
learning from newer experience. Similarly, deep RL agents
affected by the primacy bias can forget parts of a solution
which was derived by overfitting to early experiences before
continuing the learning process.
As a remedy for the primacy bias, we propose a resetting
mechanism allowing the agent to forget a part of its knowledge. Our strategy is simple and compatible with any deep
RL algorithm equipped with a replay buffer: we periodically
re-initialize the last layers of an agent’s neural networks,
while maintaining the experience within the buffer.

