Robust alignment of cross-session recordings of neural population activity by
behaviour via unsupervised domain adaptation

Justin Jude 1 Matthew G. Perich 2 Lee E. Miller 3 Matthias H. Hennig 1

Abstract
Neural population activity relating to behaviour is
assumed to be inherently low-dimensional despite
the observed high dimensionality of data recorded
using multi-electrode arrays. Therefore, predicting behaviour from neural population recordings
has been shown to be most effective when using
latent variable models. Over time however, the
activity of single neurons can drift, and different
neurons will be recorded due to movement of implanted neural probes. This means that a decoder
trained to predict behaviour on one day performs
worse when tested on a different day. On the other
hand, evidence suggests that the latent dynamics
underlying behaviour may be stable even over
months and years. Based on this idea, we introduce a model capable of inferring behaviourally
relevant latent dynamics from previously unseen
data recorded from the same animal, without any
need for decoder recalibration. We show that unsupervised domain adaptation combined with a
sequential variational autoencoder, trained on several sessions, can achieve good generalisation to
unseen data and correctly predict behaviour where
conventional methods fail. Our results further support the hypothesis that behaviour-related neural
dynamics are low-dimensional and stable over
time, and will enable more effective and flexible
use of brain computer interface technologies.

1. Introduction
In the brain, stimuli and behaviour can be decoded from
the activity of populations of neurons, and it is well estab1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
Scotland, EH8 9AB 2 Université de Montréal and Mila, Montréal,
QC, Canada H3C 3J7 3 Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern, Chicago, IL 60611. Correspondence to: Justin Jude <justinjude@me.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lished that correlations or co-variations between neurons
are a key ingredient in neural population codes (Saxena &
Cunningham, 2019). There has been considerable success
developing methods for decoding external variables from
recordings of even modestly sized populations of 10s or
100s of neurons (Hurwitz et al., 2021a), raising hopes that
brain computer interfaces (BCIs) can be an effective assistive technology for severely disabled patients. However,
a decoder, once trained, requires stable recordings to perform well. Over the course of days and weeks, the signals
recorded from implanted extracellular probes will inevitably
change and drift due to factors such as impedance changes,
gliosis and probe and brain movement (Chestek et al., 2011).
Non-invasive systems such as electromyography (EMG) sensors will not be worn permanently and positioned slightly
differently every time, creating even stronger variations in
recorded signals. Moreover, the activity of individual neurons can change considerably over similar time scales due
to neural plasticity (Rule et al., 2019). Together these fluctuations will lead to degradation of decoder performance
over time, thus to be effective, frequent recalibration of BCI
systems would be inevitable.
Given the limited long-term stability of recorded neural signals, reports of relatively stable behaviour decoding over
days with the same decoder may seem surprising (Chestek
et al., 2007). Recent work by Gallego et al. (2020) however showed that some aspects of the population activity of
cortical neurons remain very stable even over months and
years. Specifically, this study showed that neural population
activity in the primary motor cortex is highly restricted to
and evolves along a low-dimensional manifold that is stable
even when single neuron activity constantly fluctuates.
Low-dimensional neural dynamics can be effectively extracted from neural population activity with latent variable
models (Hurwitz et al., 2021a). These models use an often
small number of latent variables (or factors) together with an
appropriate observation model that relates latent variables
to the recorded activity. Importantly, the latent variables in
such models often predict stimuli or behaviour very well
even when they were only optimised to reproduce neural
activity (Hurwitz et al., 2021a). Nonlinear state space models such as LFADS are particularly powerful in predicting

