Model-Free Opponent Shaping

Chris Lu 1 Timon Willi 1 Christian Schroeder de Witt 1 Jakob Foerster 1

Abstract
In general-sum games, the interaction of selfinterested learning agents commonly leads to collectively worst-case outcomes, such as defectdefect in the iterated prisoner’s dilemma (IPD).
To overcome this, some methods, such as Learning with Opponent-Learning Awareness (LOLA),
shape their opponents’ learning process. However, these methods are myopic since only a small
number of steps can be anticipated, are asymmetric since they treat other agents as naive learners,
and require the use of higher-order derivatives,
which are calculated through white-box access to
an opponent’s differentiable learning algorithm.
To address these issues, we propose Model-Free
Opponent Shaping (M-FOS). M-FOS learns in a
meta-game in which each meta-step is an episode
of the underlying (“inner”) game. The meta-state
consists of the inner policies, and the meta-policy
produces a new inner policy to be used in the next
episode. M-FOS then uses generic model-free
optimisation methods to learn meta-policies that
accomplish long-horizon opponent shaping. Empirically, M-FOS near-optimally exploits naive
learners and other, more sophisticated algorithms
from the literature. For example, to the best of our
knowledge, it is the first method to learn the wellknown Zero-Determinant (ZD) extortion strategy
in the IPD. In the same settings, M-FOS leads to
socially optimal outcomes under meta-self-play.
Finally, we show that M-FOS can be scaled to
high-dimensional settings.

1. Introduction
While much past work in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has focused on fully-cooperative learning in
1

Department of Engineering Sciences, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to:
Chris Lu <christopher.lu@exeter.ox.ac.uk>, Timon Willi <timon.willi@exeter.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

domains such as Dec-POMDP’s (Oliehoek & Amato, 2016)
or zero-sum games like Starcraft and Go (Silver et al., 2017;
Vinyals et al., 2019), these settings only represent a fraction
of potential real-world multi-agent environments. Generalsum games, which can be neither fully-cooperative nor fullycompetitive, describe many domains such as agent-based
modeling, social dilemmas, and systems of interacting selfinterested agents like self-driving cars.
Even simple social dilemmas commonly present unique
challenges that are not present in single-agent learning (Foerster et al., 2018a). For example, in the IPD (Axelrod &
Hamilton, 1981; Harper et al., 2017), learning agents that
treat their opponents as static parts of the environment typically converge on unconditional mutual defection, which is
the globally worst outcome.
To avoid such catastrophic outcomes, Foerster et al. (2018a)
introduce LOLA, which takes into account the opponents’
learning step in order to shape their policy. In the self-play
setting, LOLA was one of the first methods to discover the
reciprocating tit-for-tat (TFT) strategy in the IPD.
However, LOLA and related algorithms, such as SOS
(Letcher et al., 2019b) and Meta Multi-Agent Policy Gradient (Kim et al., 2021, Meta-MAPG), assume that the opponent is a naive learning (NL) agent, which is often incorrect,
e.g. in self-play. Furthermore, to shape their opponents,
these methods use second-order derivatives, which are typically high-variance, making learning unstable (Foerster
et al., 2018a). Lastly, they are also myopic – they only shape
the opponent’s next few learning steps, not their long-term
development.
To resolve all of these issues, we introduce Model-Free
Opponent Shaping (M-FOS). M-FOS is a general metalearning algorithm that learns over multiple opponentlearning steps without requiring a model of its opponent’s
underlying learning algorithm.
The core of M-FOS is a meta-game in which each metastep is an episode of the underlying (“inner”) game. The
meta-state consists of the inner policies, and the meta-policy
produces a new inner policy to be used in the next episode.
M-FOS then uses generic model-free optimisation methods,
rather than approaches that require higher-order derivatives,
to learn meta-policies that accomplish long-horizon oppo-

