Greedy based Value Representation for Optimal Coordination
in Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning

Lipeng Wan * 1 Zeyang Liu * 1 Xingyu Chen 1 Xuguang Lan 1 Nanning Zheng 1

Abstract
Due to the representation limitation of the joint Q
value function, multi-agent reinforcement learning methods with linear value decomposition
(LVD) or monotonic value decomposition (MVD)
suffer from relative overgeneralization. As a result, they can not ensure optimal consistency (i.e.,
the correspondence between individual greedy actions and the maximal true Q value). In this paper,
we derive the expression of the joint Q value function of LVD and MVD. According to the expression, we draw a transition diagram, where each
self-transition node (STN) is a possible convergence. To ensure optimal consistency, the optimal
node is required to be the unique STN. Therefore,
we propose the greedy-based value representation
(GVR), which turns the optimal node into an STN
via inferior target shaping and further eliminates
the non-optimal STNs via superior experience
replay. In addition, GVR achieves an adaptive
trade-off between optimality and stability. Our
method outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in
experiments on various benchmarks. Theoretical proofs and empirical results on matrix games
demonstrate that GVR ensures optimal consistency under sufficient exploration.

1. Introduction
By taking advantage of the deep learning technique, cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) shows
great scalability and excellent performance on challenging
tasks (Vorotnikov et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2020) such as StarCraft unit micromanagement (Foerster et al., 2018). An
essential problem of cooperative MARL is credit assignment. As a popular approach to address the problem, value
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence, Xian
Jiaotong University, Xian, Shaanxi, China. Correspondence to:
Xuguang Lan <xglan@mail.xjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

decomposition gains growing attention. The main concern
of value decomposition is the optimality of coordination. In
a successful case of credit assignment via value decomposition, agents perform individual greedy actions according
to their local utility functions and achieve the best team
performance (i.e., the optimal true Q value). Here we define
the correspondence between the individual greedy actions
and the optimal true Q value as optimal consistency.
Due to the representation limitation of the joint Q value
function, linear value decomposition (LVD) or monotonic
value decomposition (MVD) suffer from relative overgeneralization (RO) (Panait et al., 2006; Wei et al., 2018). As a
result, they can not ensure the optimal consistency. Recent
works address RO from two different perspectives. The first
kind of method completes the representation capacity of the
joint Q value function (e.g., QTRAN (Son et al., 2019) and
QPLEX (Wang et al., 2020)). However, learning the complete representation is impractical in complicated MARL
tasks because the joint action space increases exponentially
with the number of agents. The other kind of method tries
to prevent sub-optimal convergences by learning a biased
joint Q value function (e.g., WQMIX (Rashid et al., 2020)
and MAVEN (Mahajan et al., 2019)), which depends on
heuristic parameters and is only applicable in specific tasks.
More discussions about RO and related works are provided
in Appendix A.
In this paper, we derive the expression of the joint Q value
function of LVD and MVD and draw some interesting conclusions. Firstly, LVD and MVD share the same expression
of the joint Q value function. Secondly, the joint Q value
of any action depends on the true Q values of all actions
in the whole joint action space. Thirdly, the joint Q values
transfer with greedy actions, by which a transition diagram
is acquired. In the transition diagram, each self-transition
node (STN) is a possible convergence. A node that satisfies
the optimal consistency is called an optimal node, otherwise,
we call it a non-optimal node. To ensure the optimal consistency, the optimal node is required to be the unique STN,
which is the target problem of this paper.
To address the target problem, we propose the greedy-based
value representation (GVR). Firstly, we reshape the representation target of the inferior actions (i.e., the actions with

