Subspace Learning for Effective Meta-Learning

Weisen Jiang 1 2 James T. Kwok 2 Yu Zhang 1 3

Abstract
Meta-learning aims to extract meta-knowledge
from historical tasks to accelerate learning on
new tasks. Typical meta-learning algorithms like
MAML learn a globally-shared meta-model for all
tasks. However, when the task environments are
complex, task model parameters are diverse and a
common meta-model is insufficient to capture all
the meta-knowledge. To address this challenge, in
this paper, task model parameters are structured
into multiple subspaces, and each subspace represents one type of meta-knowledge. We propose
an algorithm to learn the meta-parameters (i.e.,
subspace bases). We theoretically study the generalization properties of the learned subspaces. Experiments on regression and classification metalearning datasets verify the effectiveness of the
proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
Humans are capable of learning new tasks from few trials
by taking advantage of prior experiences. However, the
state-of-the-art performance of deep networks heavily relies on the availability of large amounts of labeled samples.
To improve data efficiency, meta-learning (or learning-tolearn) (Bengio et al., 1991; Thrun & Pratt, 1998) seeks to
design algorithms that extract meta-knowledge from historical tasks to accelerate learning on unseen tasks. Metalearning has been widely used for few-shot learning (Finn
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020b), neural architecture search
(Zoph & Le, 2017; Liu et al., 2018), hyperparameter optimization (Maclaurin et al., 2015; Franceschi et al., 2018),
reinforcement learning (Nagabandi et al., 2018; Rakelly
et al., 2019), and natural language processing (Gu et al.,
1
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
Correspondence to: Yu Zhang <yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2018; Obamuyide & Vlachos, 2019).
Typical meta-learning algorithms (Finn et al., 2017; Denevi
et al., 2019; Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2019) learn
a globally-shared meta-model for all tasks. For example, the
Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) algorithm (Finn
et al., 2017) learns a meta-initialization such that a good
model for an unseen task can be fine-tuned from limited
samples by a few gradient updates. However, when the task
environments are heterogeneous, task model parameters are
diverse and a single meta-model may not be sufficient to
capture all the meta-knowledge.
To tackle this issue, a variety of methods have been proposed
to learn structured meta-knowledge by exploring the task
structure (Jerfel et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2019; 2020; Wang
et al., 2020a; Zhou et al., 2021a; Kong et al., 2020; Tripuraneni et al., 2021). For example, Jerfel et al. (2019) formulate
the task distribution as a mixture of hierarchical Bayesian
models, and update the components (i.e., initializations) using an Expectation Maximization procedure. TSA-MAML
(Zhou et al., 2021a) first trains task models using vanilla
MAML. Tasks are grouped into clusters by k-means clustering, and cluster centroids form group-specific initializations.
Alternatively, task model parameters can be formulated into
a subspace. In the linear regression setting where task model
vectors are sampled from a low-dimensional subspace, recent attempts (Kong et al., 2020; Tripuraneni et al., 2021)
use a moment-based estimator to recover the subspace based
on the property that the column space of the sample covariance matrix recovers the underlying subspace. However, for
nonlinear models such as deep networks, this nice property
no longer holds and the moment-based methods cannot be
generalized.
In this paper, we propose a model-agnostic algorithm called
MUSML (MUltiple Subspaces for Meta-Learning). Each
subspace represents one type of meta-knowledge, and subspace bases are treated as meta-parameters. For each task,
the base learner builds a task model from each subspace.
The meta-learner then updates the subspace bases by minimizing a weighted validation loss of the task models. We
theoretically establish upper bounds on the population risk,
empirical risk and generalization gap. All these bounds
depend on the complexity of the subspace mixture (number
of component subspaces and subspace dimensionality). Ex-

