Implicit Regularization in Hierarchical Tensor Factorization
and Deep Convolutional Neural Networks

Noam Razin † Asaf Maman † Nadav Cohen †

Abstract
In the pursuit of explaining implicit regularization in deep learning, prominent focus was given
to matrix and tensor factorizations, which correspond to simplified neural networks. It was shown
that these models exhibit an implicit tendency towards low matrix and tensor ranks, respectively.
Drawing closer to practical deep learning, the
current paper theoretically analyzes the implicit
regularization in hierarchical tensor factorization,
a model equivalent to certain deep convolutional
neural networks. Through a dynamical systems
lens, we overcome challenges associated with hierarchy, and establish implicit regularization towards low hierarchical tensor rank. This translates
to an implicit regularization towards locality for
the associated convolutional networks. Inspired
by our theory, we design explicit regularization
discouraging locality, and demonstrate its ability
to improve the performance of modern convolutional networks on non-local tasks, in defiance
of conventional wisdom by which architectural
changes are needed. Our work highlights the potential of enhancing neural networks via theoretical analysis of their implicit regularization.1

1

Introduction

One of the central mysteries in deep learning is the ability of neural networks to generalize when having far more
learnable weights than training examples. The fact that this
generalization takes place even in the absence of any explicit
regularization (Zhang et al., 2017) has given rise to a common view by which gradient-based optimization induces
an implicit regularization — a tendency to fit data with
†

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel. Correspondence to: Noam Razin <noamrazin@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Due to lack of space, a significant portion of the paper is
deferred to the appendices. We refer the reader to Razin et al.
(2022) for a self-contained version of the text.

predictors of low complexity (see, e.g., Neyshabur (2017)).
Efforts to mathematically formalize this intuition have led
to theoretical focus on matrix and tensor factorizations.2
Matrix factorization refers to minimizing a given loss (over
matrices) by parameterizing the solution as a product of
matrices, and optimizing the resulting objective via gradient descent. Tensor factorization is a generalization of
this procedure to multi-dimensional arrays. There, a tensor
is learned through gradient descent over a sum-of-outerproducts parameterization. Various works analyzed the implicit regularization in matrix and tensor factorizations (Gunasekar et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Du et al., 2018; Arora
et al., 2019; Razin & Cohen, 2020; Chou et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2021a; Razin et al., 2021; Ge et al., 2021). Though
initially conjectured to be equivalent to norm minimization
(see Gunasekar et al. (2017)), recent studies (Arora et al.,
2019; Razin & Cohen, 2020; Chou et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2021a; Razin et al., 2021) suggest that this is not the case in
general, and instead adopt a dynamical systems approach.
They establish that gradient descent (with small learning
rate and near-zero initialization) induces a momentum-like
effect on the components of a factorization, leading them
to move slowly when small and quickly when large. This
implies a form of incremental learning that results in low matrix rank solutions for matrix factorization, and low tensor
rank solutions for tensor factorization.
From a deep learning perspective, matrix factorization can
be seen as a linear neural network (fully connected neural
network with linear activation), and, in a similar vein, tensor factorization corresponds to a certain shallow (depth
two) non-linear convolutional neural network (see Cohen
et al. (2016b); Razin et al. (2021)). As theoretical surrogates
for deep learning, the practical relevance of these models
is limited. The former lacks non-linearity, while the latter misses depth — both crucial features of modern neural
networks. A natural extension of matrix and tensor factorizations that accounts for both non-linearity and depth is
hierarchical tensor factorization,3 which corresponds to a
2
The term “tensor factorization” refers throughout to the classic CP factorization (see Kolda & Bader (2009); Hackbusch (2012)
for an introduction to tensor factorizations).
3
The term “hierarchical tensor factorization” refers throughout
to a variant of the Hierarchical Tucker factorization (Hackbusch &
Kühn, 2009), presented in Section 3.

