Generalized Strategic Classification and the Case of Aligned Incentives

Sagi Levanon 1 Nir Rosenfeld 1

Abstract
Strategic classification studies learning in settings
where self-interested users can strategically modify their features to obtain favorable predictive
outcomes. A key working assumption, however,
is that “favorable” always means “positive”; this
may be appropriate in some applications (e.g.,
loan approval), but reduces to a fairly narrow view
of what user interests can be. In this work we argue for a broader perspective on what accounts
for strategic user behavior, and propose and study
a flexible model of generalized strategic classification. Our generalized model subsumes most
current models, but includes other novel settings;
among these, we identify and target one intriguing sub-class of problems in which the interests of
users and the system are aligned. This setting reveals a surprising fact: that standard max-margin
losses are ill-suited for strategic inputs. Returning to our fully generalized model, we propose a
novel max-margin framework for strategic learning that is practical and effective, and which we
analyze theoretically. We conclude with a set of
experiments that empirically demonstrate the utility of our approach.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly being used in domains
where human users are the subject of prediction. But when
users stand to gain from certain predictive outcomes, they
may be prone to act in ways that promote the outcomes
they desire. A growing recognition of this idea has led to
much recent interest in methods that are able to account for
how humans respond to learned models. One such line of
research considers the problem of strategic classification
(Brückner & Scheffer, 2011; Hardt et al., 2016), in which
1

Faculty of Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Nir Rosenfeld
<nirr@cs.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

users can modify their features (at some cost) to obtain favorable predictions, and the goal in learning is to be robust
to such behavior. Common tasks include loan approval, university admissions, and hiring—all examples in which users
have incentive to be classified positively, and in which systems must anticipate user behavior in order to predict well.
Strategic classification is appealing as a learning problem
in that it is simple yet succinctly captures a natural form
of tension that can arise between systems and their users.
This has made it the focus of many recent works (Sundaram
et al., 2021; Zhang & Conitzer, 2021; Levanon & Rosenfeld,
2021; Ghalme et al., 2021; Jagadeesan et al., 2021; Zrnic
et al., 2021; Estornell et al., 2021; Lechner & Urner, 2021).
But despite the elegant way in which it extends standard
binary classification, strategic classification remains narrow
in the scope of strategic behavior it permits. A key working
assumption is that while the system is interested in correct
predictions, users are interested in positive predictions. One
artifact of this is that learning is essentially restricted to
settings in which one outcome is globally “good” for users
(e.g., loan approved), while the other is “bad” (e.g., loan
denied); another is that users are grimly framed as always
acting to “game” the system. But not all outcomes are “good”
or “bad”, and not all strategic behavior is gaming. Here we
argue for a broader perspective on what constitutes strategic
behavior in classification.
Towards this goal, we propose and study the novel problem of generalized strategic classification (GSC), which
includes standard strategic classification (SC) as a special
case, as well as other rich problem sub-classes. Our formulation relies on the simple observation that strategic behavior
depends on three key elements: (i) what users know, (ii)
what users want, and (iii) how users use their knowledge
to promote their goals. For example, in standard strategic
classification, users know their true features (whereas the
system does not); want positive predictions (rather than correct predictions); and are willing to invest effort or resources
to obtain them (by applying costly feature modifications).
But other forms of knowledge, aims, and means lead to
other types of strategic interactions between a system and
its users. The power of our framework lies in providing
a simple handle for reasoning about the effects of general
forms of interaction on learning.

