Data-Efficient Double-Win Lottery Tickets from Robust Pre-training

Tianlong Chen 1 Zhenyu Zhang 1 Sijia Liu 2 3 Yang Zhang 3 Shiyu Chang 4 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract
Pre-training serves as a broadly adopted starting point for transfer learning on various downstream tasks. Recent investigations of lottery tickets hypothesis (LTH) demonstrate such enormous
pre-trained models can be replaced by extremely
sparse subnetworks (a.k.a. matching subnetworks)
without sacrificing transferability. However, practical security-crucial applications usually pose
more challenging requirements beyond standard
transfer, which also demand these subnetworks to
overcome adversarial vulnerability. In this paper,
we formulate a more rigorous concept, DoubleWin Lottery Tickets, in which a located subnetwork from a pre-trained model can be independently transferred on diverse downstream tasks, to
reach BOTH the same standard and robust generalization, under BOTH standard and adversarial
training regimes, as the full pre-trained model
can do. We comprehensively examine various
pre-training mechanisms and find that robust pretraining tends to craft sparser double-win lottery
tickets with superior performance over the standard counterparts. For example, on downstream
CIFAR-10/100 datasets, we identify double-win
matching subnetworks with the standard, fast adversarial, and adversarial pre-training from ImageNet, at 89.26%/73.79%, 89.26%/79.03%, and
91.41%/83.22% sparsity, respectively. Furthermore, we observe the obtained double-win lottery tickets can be more data-efficient to transfer, under practical data-limited (e.g., 1% and
10%) downstream schemes. Our results show
that the benefits from robust pre-training are amplified by the lottery ticket scheme, as well as
the data-limited transfer setting. Codes are available at https://github.com/VITA-Group/
Double-Win-LTH.
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin 2 Michigan State University 3 MIT-IBM
Watson AI Lab 4 University of California, Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Robust) Dense Pre-training

Sparse Subnetworks

Identify
Tickets
Standard
Transfer

Adversarial
Transfer

Figure 1. Overview of our work paradigm: we investigate the existence of double-win lottery tickets drawn from robust pre-training
in the scenario of transfer learning, with the full training data and
the limited training being available, respectively.

1. Introduction
The lottery tickets hypothesis (LTH) (Frankle & Carbin,
2018) demonstrates that there exist subnetworks in dense
neural networks, which can be trained in isolation from the
same random initialization and match the performance of
the dense counterpart. We call such subnetworks as winning tickets. Unlike the conventional pipeline (Han et al.,
2016) of model compression that follows the train-compressretrain process and aims for efficient inference, the LTH
sheds light on the potential for more computational savings
by training a small subnetwork from the start if only we
had known which subnetwork to choose. However, finding
these intriguing subnetworks is quite costly since the current most effective approach, iterative magnitude pruning
(IMP) (Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Han et al., 2016), requires
multiple rounds of burdensome (re-)training, especially for
large models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2018). Fortunately,
recent studies (Chen et al., 2020b;a) provide a remedy by
leveraging the popular paradigm of pre-training and finetuning, which first identifies critical subnetworks (a.k.a. pretrained tickets) from standard pre-training and then transfers

