Near-Optimal Algorithms for Autonomous Exploration and Multi-Goal
Stochastic Shortest Path
Haoyuan Cai 1 Tengyu Ma 2 Simon Du 3

Abstract
We revisit the incremental autonomous exploration problem proposed by Lim & Auer (2012).
In this setting, the agent aims to learn a set of nearoptimal goal-conditioned policies to reach the Lcontrollable states: states that are incrementally
reachable from an initial state s0 within L steps in
expectation. We introduce a new algorithm with
stronger sample complexity bounds than existing
ones. Furthermore, we also prove the first lower
bound for the autonomous exploration problem.
In particular, the lower bound implies that our
proposed algorithm, Value-Aware Autonomous
Exploration, is nearly minimax-optimal when the
number of L-controllable states grows polynomially with respect to L. Key in our algorithm
design is a connection between autonomous exploration and multi-goal stochastic shortest path,
a new problem that naturally generalizes the classical stochastic shortest path problem. This new
problem and its connection to autonomous exploration can be of independent interest.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) with a known state space has
been studied in a wide range of settings (e.g., Schmidhuber, 1991; Oudeyer et al., 2007; Oudeyer & Kaplan, 2009;
Baranes & Oudeyer, 2009). When the state space is large, it
is difficult for a learning agent to discover the whole environment. Instead, the agent can only explore a small portion
of the environment. At a high level, we hope that the agent
can discover states near the initial state, expand the range of
known states by exploration, and learn near-optimal goalconditioned policies for the known states. Because the agent
1

2
Tsinghua
University
Stanford
University
3
University
of
Washington.
Correspondence
to:
Haoyuan
Cai
<victorique1929@gmail.com>,
Tengyu
Ma
<tengyuma@stanford.edu>,
Simon
Du
<ssdu@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

discovers its known states of the environment incrementally,
this learning problem was named Autonomous Exploration
(AX) (Lim & Auer, 2012; Tarbouriech et al., 2020).
The autonomous exploration problem generalizes the
Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) problem (Bertsekas et al.,
2000) where the agent aims to reach a predefined goal state
while minimizing its total expected cost. However, in the
autonomous exploration setting, the agent aims to discover
a set of reachable states in a large environment and find
the optimal policies to reach them. The autonomous exploration formulation is applicable to an increasing number of
real-world RL problems, ranging from navigation in mazes
(Devo et al., 2020) to game playing (Mnih et al., 2013). For
example, in the maze navigation problem, a robot aims to
follow a predefined path in an unknown environment, and
the robot has to discover and expand the size of regions
known to itself autonomously without prior knowledge of
the environment. See (Lim & Auer, 2012) for more discussions.
Related Work. The setting of autonomous exploration
(AX) was introduced by Lim & Auer (2012), who gave
the first algorithm, UcbExplore, with sample complexity
e
O(L3 S 2 A/ε3 ). Here L denotes the distance within which
we hope the learning agent to discover, S denotes the number of states we need to explore,1 A denotes the size of the
action space, and ε denotes the error that we can tolerate. Recent work by Tarbouriech et al. (2020) designed the DisCo
algorithm with a sample complexity bound e
O(L3 S 2 A/ε2 )2 ,
which improves the 1/ε dependency. We will briefly discuss
the two algorithms in Sect. 2.1. In this paper, we present
a new algorithm, VALAE (Alg. 2), to further improve the
sample complexity, and we also derive the first lower bound.
1.1. Contributions
In this paper, we take important steps toward resolving the
autonomous exploration problem. We compare our results
1
In AX, S is often significantly smaller than the size of the
entire state space.
2
We translate their absolute error εabs to the relative error εrel ,
and εabs = εrel L. We will explain the difference of two definitions
of ε in Sect. 2.1.

