Learning Stochastic Shortest Path with Linear Function Approximation

Yifei Min 1 Jiafan He 2 Tianhao Wang 1 Quanquan Gu 2

Abstract
We study the stochastic shortest path (SSP) problem in reinforcement learning with linear function approximation, where the transition kernel
is represented as a linear mixture of unknown
models. We call this class of SSP problems as
linear mixture SSPs. We propose a novel algorithm with Hoeffding-type confidence sets for
learning the linear
p mixture SSP, which can at1.5
e
tain an O(dB
K/cmin ) regret. Here K is the
?
number of episodes, d is the dimension of the feature mapping in the mixture model, B? bounds
the expected cumulative cost of the optimal policy, and cmin > 0 is the lower bound of the cost
function. Our algorithm also applies to the case
e 2/3 ) regret is guarwhen cmin = 0, and an O(K
anteed. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first algorithm with a sublinear regret guarantee
for learning linear mixture SSP. Moreover, we design a refined Bernstein-type confidence set and
propose an improved
p algorithm, which provably
e
achieves an O(dB
? K/cmin ) regret. In complement to the regret upper √
bounds, we also prove
a lower bound of Ω(dB? K). Hence, our improved algorithm matches the lower bound up to
√
a 1/ cmin factor and poly-logarithmic factors,
achieving a near-optimal regret guarantee.

1. Introduction
The Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) model refers to a type
of reinforcement learning (RL) problems where an agent
repeatedly interacts with a stochastic environment and aims
to reach some specific goal state while minimizing the cumulative cost. Compared with other popular RL settings
such as episodic and infinite-horizon Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), the horizon length in SSP is random, varies
1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University,
CT 06520, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University
of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to:
Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

across different policies, and can potentially be infinite because the interaction only stops when arriving at the goal
state. Therefore, the SSP model includes both episodic and
infinite-horizon MDPs as special cases, and is comparably
more general and of broader applicability. In particular,
many goal-oriented real-world problems fit better into the
SSP model, such as navigation and GO game (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Nasiriany et al., 2019).
In recent years, there emerges a line of works on developing efficient algorithms and the corresponding analyses for
learning SSP. Most of them consider the episodic setting,
where the interaction between the agent and the environment
proceeds in K episodes (Cohen et al., 2020; Tarbouriech
et al., 2020a). For tabular SSP models where the sizes of
the action and state space are finite, Cohen et al. (2021)
developed a finite-horizon√
reduction algorithm that achieves
e ? SAK), where B? is the largest
the minimax regret O(B
expected cost of the optimal policy starting from any state,
S is the number of states and A is the number of actions. In
a similar setting, Tarbouriech et al. (2021b) proposed the
first algorithm that is minimax optimal, parameter-free and
horizon-free at the same time. However, the algorithms mentioned above only apply to tabular SSP problems where the
state and action space are small. In order to deal with SSP
problems with large state and action spaces, function approximation techniques (Yang & Wang, 2019; Jin et al., 2020;
Jia et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021b; Wang et al., 2020b;a)
are needed.
Following the recent line of work on model-based reinforcement learning with linear function approximation (Modi
et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2020; Ayoub et al., 2020; Zhou et al.,
2021b), we consider a linear mixture SSP model, which
extends the tabular SSP. More specifically, we assume that
the transition probability is parametrized by P(s0 |s, a) =
hφ(s0 |s, a), θ ∗ i for all triplet (s, a, s0 ) ∈ S × A × S, where
S is the state space and A is the action space. Here we assume that φ ∈ Rd is a known ternary feature mapping, and
θ ∗ ∈ Rd is an unknown model parameter vector that needs
to be learned. Such a setting has been previously studied for
episodic MDPs (Modi et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2020; Ayoub
et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2020) and infinite-horizon discounted
MDPs (Zhou et al., 2021b). Nevertheless, algorithms developed in these works do not apply to SSP since the horizon
length is random as mentioned above.

