Online Decision Transformer
Qinqing Zheng 1 Amy Zhang 1 2 Aditya Grover 1 3

Abstract
Recent work has shown that offline reinforcement
learning (RL) can be formulated as a sequence
modeling problem (Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al.,
2021) and solved via approaches similar to largescale language modeling. However, any practical
instantiation of RL also involves an online component, where policies pretrained on passive offline
datasets are finetuned via task-specific interactions with the environment. We propose Online
Decision Transformers (ODT), an RL algorithm
based on sequence modeling that blends offline
pretraining with online finetuning in a unified
framework. Our framework uses sequence-level
entropy regularizers in conjunction with autoregressive modeling objectives for sample-efficient
exploration and finetuning. Empirically, we show
that ODT is competitive with the state-of-the-art
in absolute performance on the D4RL benchmark
but shows much more significant gains during the
finetuning procedure.

1

Introduction

Generative pretraining for sequence modeling has emerged
as a unifying paradigm for machine learning in a number of domains and modalities, notably in language and
vision (Radford et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Brown
et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022). Recently, such a pretraining
paradigm has been extended to offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021), wherein an
agent is trained to autoregressively maximize the likelihood
of trajectories in the offline dataset. During training, this
paradigm essentially converts offline RL to a supervised
learning problem (Schmidhuber, 2019; Srivastava et al.,
2019; Emmons et al., 2021). However, these works present
an incomplete picture as policies learned via offline RL are
limited by the quality of the training dataset and need to be
1

Meta AI Research 2 University of California, Berkeley
University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Qinqing Zheng <zhengqinqing@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

finetuned to the task of interest via online interactions. It
remains an open question whether such supervised learning
paradigm can be extended to online settings.
Unlike language and perception, online finetuning for RL
is fundamentally different from the pretraining phase as it
involves data acquisition via exploration. The need for exploration renders traditional supervised learning objectives
(e.g., mean squared error) for offline RL insufficient in the
online setting. Moreover, it has been observed that for standard online algorithms, access to offline data can often have
zero or even negative effect on the online performance (Nair
et al., 2020). Hence, the overall pipeline for offline pretraining followed by online finetuning for RL policies needs a
careful consideration of training objectives and protocols.
We introduce Online Decision Transformers (ODT), a learning framework for RL that blends offline pretraining with online finetuning for sample-efficient policy optimization. Our
framework builds on the decision transformer (DT) (Chen
et al., 2021) architecture previously introduced for offline
RL and is especially catered to scenarios where online interactions can be expensive which necessitates both offline
pretraining and sample-efficient finetuning. We identify
several key shortcomings with DTs that are incompatible
with online learning and rectify them, leading to superior
performance for our overall pipeline.
First, we shift from deterministic to stochastic policies for
defining exploration objectives during the online phase. We
quantify exploration via the entropy of the policy similar
to max-ent RL frameworks (Levine, 2018). Unlike traditional frameworks however, the policy entropy for ODT
is constrained at an aggregate level over trajectories (as
opposed to individual time-steps) and its dual form regularizes a supervised learning objective (as opposed to direct
return maximization). Next, we develop a novel replay
buffer (Mnih et al., 2015) consistent with the architecture
and training protocol of ODT. The buffer stores trajectories and is populated via online rollouts from ODT. Since
ODT parameterizes return-conditioned policies, we further
investigate strategies for specifying the desired returns during online rollouts. This value however might not match
with the true returns observed during a rollout. To address
this challenge, we extend a notion of hindsight experience
replay (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) to our setting and relabel rolled out trajectories with the corrected return tokens

