A3 T: Alignment-Aware Acoustic and Text Pretraining for
Speech Synthesis and Editing
He Bai * 1 Renjie Zheng * 2 Junkun Chen 3 Xintong Li 2 Mingbo Ma 2 Liang Huang 3

Abstract
Recently, speech representation learning has improved many speech-related tasks such as speech
recognition, speech classification, and speech-totext translation. However, all the above tasks are
in the direction of speech understanding, but for
the inverse direction, speech synthesis, the potential of representation learning is yet to be realized, due to the challenging nature of generating
high-quality speech. To address this problem,
we propose our framework, Alignment-Aware
Acoustic-Text Pretraining (A3 T), which reconstructs masked acoustic signals with text input
and acoustic-text alignment during training. In
this way, the pretrained model can generate high
quality reconstructed spectrogram, which can be
applied to the speech editing and unseen speaker
TTS directly. Experiments show A3 T outperforms
SOTA models on speech editing, and improves
multi-speaker speech synthesis without the external speaker verification model.1

1. Introduction
Recently, speech representation learning has attracted much
attention in the speech community due to its strong performance to many speech-related downstream tasks, such as
speech recognition, speech classification, and speech translation (Baevski et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2020; Zheng et al., 2021; Hsu et al., 2021)
However, all these efforts can only support speech under*
Equal contribution 1 University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada (work done at Baidu Research USA) 2 Baidu Research,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA 3 Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
USA. Correspondence to: Renjie Zheng <zrenj11@gmail.com>,
Liang Huang <liang.huang.sh@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
See demos at https://educated-toothpaste-462.notion.
site/Demo-b0edd300e6004c508744c6259369a468. Code available
at: https://github.com/richardbaihe/a3t

Model

Data

Reconstructed
Masked
Speech

hs, xi

hsi

wav2vec 2.0
Hubert
SLAM

discrete units

X

X
X
X

MAM
FAT-MLM

X

X
X

low-quality
spectrogram

A3 T

X

X

high-quality
spectrogram

Tasks
Speech Text-toEditing Speech

X

X

Table 1. Comparisons of A3 T with other existing speech pretraining models. Here s stands for speech input, while x stands for text,
and hs, xi denotes parallel speech-text data.

standing tasks which take speech as input, but for the inverse
direction, speech synthesis, which synthesis speech as output, the potential of representation learning is yet to be
realized. For example, one line of work, such as wav2vec
2.0 (Baevski et al., 2020), Hubert (Hsu et al., 2021) and
SLAM (Bapna et al., 2021), learn discrete quantized speech
units as latent representations. In this way, these models
are good at recognizing and extracting discrete information
from speech and successfully improves automatic speech
recognition (ASR), but they are unable to generate continuous acoustic signals for speech synthesis. On the other hand,
another line of work, such as MAM (Chen et al., 2020)
and FAT-MLM (Zheng et al., 2021), show that reconstructing masked spectrogram with continuous units can improve
speech-to-text translation. However, the quality of their proposed speech reconstruction is far from the requirement of
speech synthesis tasks (see Fig. 5(f)).
To address this problem, we propose our framework,
Alignment-Aware Acoustic-Text Pretraining (A3 T), where
we introduce cross-modal alignment embeddings which
make the model easier to learn the alignment between the
acoustic and phoneme input during multi-modal pretraining,
and significantly improve the quality of the reconstructed
acoustic signals. Different from the segment embeddings
used in Segatron and SegaBERT (Bai et al., 2021; 2022),
which improve language modeling by grouping tokens according to the sentence position and paragraph position, our
alignment embeddings can align a phoneme and its frames
together to learn the cross-modal self-attention (Fig. 6).

