Rotting Infinitely Many-Armed Bandits

Jung-hun Kim 1 Milan Vojnović 2 Se-Young Yun 1

Abstract
We consider the infinitely many-armed bandit
problem with rotting rewards, where the mean
reward of an arm decreases at each pull of the
arm according to an arbitrary trend with maximum rotting rate % = o(1). We show that
√this
learning problem has an Ω(max{%1/3 T, T })
worst-case regret lower bound where T is the time
horizon. We show
√ that a matching upper bound
Õ(max{%1/3 T, T }), up to a poly-logarithmic
factor, can be achieved by an algorithm that
uses a UCB index for each arm and a threshold
value to decide whether to continue pulling an
arm or remove the arm from further consideration, when the algorithm knows the value of the
maximum rotting rate %. We also show that an
Õ(max{%1/3 T, T 3/4 }) regret upper bound can
be achieved by an algorithm that does not know
the value of %, by using an adaptive UCB index
along with an adaptive threshold value.

1. Introduction
We consider a fundamental sequential learning problem in
which an agent must play one option at a time from an
infinite set of options with non-stationary reward distributions, where the mean reward of an option decreases at
each play of this option. This is naturally studied as the
infinitely many-armed bandit problem with rotting rewards.
The assumption of infinitely many arms models practical
situations when there is a finite but large number of arms
relative to the number of available experiments. There is an
abundance of applications in which one must choose from a
large set of options with rotting rewards, e.g. online advertising where arms correspond to ads and rewards decrease
over exposures of an ad to a user, content recommendation
systems where arms correspond to media items and rotting
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon, South Korea 2 London School of Economics, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Se-Young Yun <yunseyoung@kaist.ac.kr>,
Milan Vojnović <m.vojnovic@lse.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

arises because of user boredom when watching the same
content, and clinical trials where the efficacy of a medicine
may decrease because of drug tolerance when a patient takes
the same medicine several times. While there has been a
lot of work on multi-armed bandits with a finite number
of arms with stationary or non-stationary rewards, and an
infinite number of arms with stationary rewards, not much
seems to be known for the case of infinitely many arms with
non-stationary rewards.
In this paper we make first steps to understand the fundamental limits of sequential learning for infinite number of arms
whose mean rewards decrease with the number of pulls—
the case commonly referred to as the rested rotting bandits.
Our focus is on rotting trends where the mean reward of
an arm decreases arbitrary for at most a fixed amount % at
each pull of this arm. The initial mean rewards of arms
are assumed to be independent and identically distributed
according to uniform distribution on [0, 1]. The objective
is to find a policy that minimizes the expected cumulative
regret over a time horizon of T time steps with respect to
playing the best arm.
We show that the worst-case√
regret for this problem is lower
bounded by Ω(max{%1/3 T, T }), where % is the maximum
rotting rate, and show that this lower bound is tight up to a
poly-logarithmic factor. This reveals that the rotting trend
starts to have an effect on regret precisely at the threshold
% = Θ(1/T 3/2 ). Our result implies that the rotting rested
bandit problem with infinitely many arms is harder than for
the stationary rewards
√ case, as in the latter case the regret
lower bound is Ω( T ) (Wang et al., 2009). This stands in
stark contrast to the√case of finite K arms in which case
it is known that Õ( KT ) can be achieved for the rotting
case (Seznec et al., 2019), which matches the optimal bound
in the stationary case (Auer et al., 2002b) up to a polylogarithmic factor.
In the case of infinitely many arms with stationary rewards,
it is not possible to explore all arms to find an optimal arm,
hence, it is required to find a near-optimal arm; contrast this
with the case of finitely many arms, where all arms must be
explored to identify an optimal arm. Further, when we consider rotting rewards, the learner must keep exploring new
arms because a near-optimal arm may become suboptimal
as it is being pulled. Based on this fact, we design algo-

