Personalization Improves Privacy–Accuracy Tradeoffs
in Federated Learning

Alberto Bietti 1 Chen-Yu Wei 2 Miroslav Dudı́k 3 John Langford 3 Zhiwei Steven Wu 4

Abstract
Large-scale machine learning systems often involve data distributed across a collection of users.
Federated learning algorithms leverage this structure by communicating model updates to a central
server, rather than entire datasets. In this paper,
we study stochastic optimization algorithms for
a personalized federated learning setting involving local and global models subject to user-level
(joint) differential privacy. While learning a private global model induces a cost of privacy, local
learning is perfectly private. We provide generalization guarantees showing that coordinating
local learning with private centralized learning
yields a generically useful and improved tradeoff
between accuracy and privacy. We illustrate our
theoretical results with experiments on synthetic
and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Many modern applications of machine learning involve
data from a large set of users. In such settings, both privacy
considerations and bandwidth limits may require keeping
each user’s data on their device, instead communicating
with a centralized server via shared model updates, a
scenario commonly known as federated learning (Kairouz
et al., 2021). When the data distribution varies across
users, it is often beneficial to consider personalized models
where parts of the model (e.g., user-specific embeddings,
or additive offsets) are local to each user, leading to updates
that may be performed locally. Such personalized federated
learning has been deployed at scale in a wide range of applications, including keyboard next-word prediction (Wang
et al., 2019), automated speech recognition, and news
1
Center for Data Science, New York University 2 University of
Southern California 3 Microsoft Research, New York 4 Carnegie
Mellon University. Correspondence to: Alberto Bietti <alberto.bietti@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

personalization (Paulik et al., 2021).
In this paper, we focus on personalized federated learning
algorithms based on stochastic optimization, which are the
most widely used in this context (McMahan et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2021). Concretely, we consider stochastic optimization problems of the following form:
(
min

w,θ1:N

)
N
1 X
Eξ∼Pi [fi (w, θi , ξ)] , (1)
f (w, θ1:N ) :=
N i=1

where N is the number of users, w a global parameter,
θ1:N = (θ1 , . . . , θN ) a set of local parameters, and Pi denotes the sample distribution for user i. Similar objectives
have been considered in other works (Agarwal et al., 2020;
Hanzely et al., 2021). The personalization problem raises
the question of how much learning should happen at the
local vs global level: if the local models are expressive
enough, local learning alone should suffice to learn good
models with enough samples per user, yet if the data has
some shared structure across users, a global model may help
us learn more efficiently.
Although federated learning algorithms do not store user
data in the central server, private user information may still
be leaked in the resulting models, unless appropriate mechanisms are applied to guarantee privacy. In this work, we
consider the notion of user-level (joint) differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork et al., 2006; 2010a; Kearns et al., 2014), which
ensures an adversary cannot reliably detect the presence or
absence of all the data associated with a single user based
on the output information. Such a notion has been used
successfully in federated learning problems, with practical
optimization algorithms that lead to useful privacy guarantees (McMahan et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, assuring such privacy may come at a cost to
accuracy (see, for example, the lower bounds of (Bassily
et al., 2014)). The key question we address is:
Can we leverage personalization to improve privacy–
accuracy tradeoffs in federated learning?
The insight motivating our work is that in personalized federated learning, it is only the global portion of the optimization that needs to experience this drop in accuracy. A user’s

