Streaming Algorithm for Monotone k-Submodular Maximization with
Cardinality Constraints

Alina Ene * 1 Huy L. Nguyen * 2

Abstract
Maximizing a monotone k-submodular function
subject to cardinality constraints is a general
model for several applications ranging from influence maximization with multiple products to
sensor placement with multiple sensor types and
online ad allocation. Due to the large problem
scale in many applications and the online nature
of ad allocation, a need arises for algorithms that
process elements in a streaming fashion and possibly make online decisions. In this work, we
develop a new streaming algorithm for maximizing a monotone k-submodular function subject to
a per-coordinate cardinality constraint attaining
an approximation guarantee close to the state of
the art guarantee in the offline setting. Though not
typical for streaming algorithms, our streaming
algorithm also readily applies to the online setting
with free disposal. Our algorithm is combinatorial
and enjoys fast running time and small number of
function evaluations. Furthermore, its guarantee
improves as the cardinality constraints get larger,
which is especially suited for the large scale applications. For the special case of maximizing
a submodular function with large budgets, our
combinatorial algorithm matches the guarantee of
the state-of-the-art continuous algorithm, which
requires significantly more time and function evaluations.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the problem of maximizing a ksubmodular function subject to size constraints. In this
problem, we have a finite set V of elements. The goal is to
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Boston
University 2 Khoury College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University. Correspondence to: Alina Ene
<aene@bu.edu>, Huy Nguyen <hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

select a k-tuple (S1 , . . . , Sk ) of disjoint subsets of V that
maximizes an objective function f subject to the constraints
that each set Si has size at most a given budget Bi . In many
applications, the objective function f is monotone and ksubmodular: the function value can only increase as the sets
Si increase, and the function exhibits a natural analogue of
the diminishing returns property of submodular functions.
When k = 1, the problem coincides with the well-studied
problem of maximizing a monotone submodular function
subject to a cardinality constraint.
The problem is a general model for several applications
(Feldman et al., 2009; Ohsaka & Yoshida, 2015). One motivating application is the influence maximization problem
with multiple products or topics (Ohsaka & Yoshida, 2015).
In this setting, the goal is to select a seed set Si for each
product i ∈ [k] in order to maximize the total influence of
the seed sets (S1 , . . . , Sk ) subject to constraints on the sizes
of each of the seed sets. In the well-studied models of influence propagation — the independent cascades and the linear
threshold models — the influence function is monotone and
k-submodular (Ohsaka & Yoshida, 2015).
A second motivating application arises in sensor placement
with different types of sensors (Ohsaka & Yoshida, 2015).
Here we have k types of sensors, each of which provides
different measurements, and we have Bi sensors of type i for
each i ∈ [k]. The ground set V is a set of possible locations
for the sensors. The goal is to equip each location with at
most one sensor in order to maximize the total information
gained from the sensors.
A third motivating application arises in online advertising.
In the online ad allocation problem (Feldman et al., 2009),
we have k advertisers that are known in advance and n ad
impressions that arrive online one at a time. Each advertiser i ∈ [k] has a contract of Bi impressions. For each
impression j and each advertiser i, there is a non-negative
weight wji that captures how much value advertiser i accrues from being allocated impression j. When impression
j arrives, the values {wji : i ∈ [k]} are revealed, and the
algorithm needs to allocate impression j to at most one
advertiser. In the online ad allocation with free disposal,
the algorithm may allocate more than Bi impressions to
advertiser i, and advertiser i is charged for only the Bi

