Optimal Clustering with Noisy Queries via Multi-Armed Bandit

Jinghui Xia 1 Zengfeng Huang 1 2

Abstract
Motivated by many applications, we study clustering with a faulty oracle. In this problem, there
are n items belonging to k unknown clusters,
and the algorithm is allowed to ask the oracle
whether two items belong to the same cluster
or not. However, the answer from the oracle
is correct only with probability 12 + 2δ . The
goal is to recover the hidden clusters with minimum number of noisy queries. Previous works
have shown that the problem can be solved with
n
O( nk δlog
+ poly(k, 1δ , log n)) queries, while
2
nk
Ω( δ2 ) queries is known to be necessary. So,
for any values of k and δ, there is still a nontrivial gap between upper and lower bounds. In
this work, we obtain the first matching upper and
lower bounds for a wide range of parameters. In
particular, a new polynomial time algorithm with
n)
+ poly(k, 1δ , log n)) queries is proO( n(k+log
δ2
posed. Moreover, we prove a new lower bound
n
of Ω( n log
δ 2 ), which, combined with the existing
Ω( nk
δ 2 ) bound, matches our upper bound up to
an additive poly(k, 1δ , log n) term. To obtain the
new results, our main ingredient is an interesting
connection between our problem and multi-armed
bandit, which might provide useful insights for
other similar problems.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study clustering with noisy queries, a.k.a.
clustering with a faulty oracle. In this problem, there are n
vertices (or items) belonging to k unknown clusters, and the
algorithm is allowed to ask the oracle whether two vertices
belong to the same cluster or not. However, the answer from
the oracle is correct only with probability 12 + 2δ . The goal
is to recover the hidden clusters with minimum number of
1

School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing. Correspondence to: Zengfeng Huang <huangzf@fudan.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

noisy queries. This elegant theoretical model is first proposed in (Mazumdar & Saha, 2017a), which is motivated by
many application scenarios, e.g., crowdsourced entity resolution (CER). Entity resolution aims to identify all records
in a database that refer to the same underlying entity, which
is a fundamental data mining task (Fellegi & Sunter, 1969;
Elmagarmid et al., 2007; Getoor & Machanavajjhala, 2012).
Based on crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon Mechanical
Turk, leveraging human knowledge to improve the accuracy
of automated ER techniques is a promising direction (Karger
et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012; Dalvi et al., 2013; Vesdapunt
et al., 2014; Mazumdar & Saha, 2017b). The answers from
crowd workers are often very noisy (Prelec et al., 2017) and
the goal of CER is to recover entities with minimum number
of queries. Thus, clustering with noisy queries well captures CER. See (Mazumdar & Saha, 2017a) for discussions
on more real applications, e.g., signed edge prediction and
correlation clustering.
On the theory side, the model is intimately connected with
the stochastic block model (SBM). SBM is a popular random graph model for studying clustering and community
detection algorithms, and plays a key role in studying statistical and computational tradeoffs for many statistical problems (McSherry, 2001; Abbe, 2018). In SBM, n vertices
belong to k hidden clusters; each inter-cluster edge exists
with probability q and each intra-cluster edge exists with
probability p, where 0 ≤ q < p ≤ 1. Given a graph sampled from the above model, the goal is to recover all hidden
clusters. When q = 12 − 2δ and p = 21 + 2δ , SBM is equivalent
to clustering with noisy queries, except that SBM always
observes all O(n2 ) queries while our goal is to use o(n2 )
queries.
Problem definition. Given a set V of n vertices (or items),
there is an unknown partition {V1 , ..., Vk } of V and each
vertex i belongs to a unique cluster Vc(i) . Define a function
τ : V × V → ±1 such that τ (u, v) = 1 if u, v belong to the
same cluster and τ (u, v) = −1 if u, v belong to different
clusters. To know whether a pair (u, v) is in the same cluster,
the algorithm can make queries to an oracle, but the oracle
will only return the correct answer with probability 12 + 2δ
for some δ ∈ (0, 1). Equivalently, the algorithm has access
to a noisy version of τ , denoted as τ̃ :
τ̃ (u, v) = σu,v · τ (u, v),

