An Equivalence Between Data Poisoning and Byzantine Gradient Attacks

Sadegh Farhadkhani * 1 Rachid Guerraoui 1 Lê-Nguyên Hoang * 1 Oscar Villemaud * 1

Abstract
To study the resilience of distributed learning, the
“Byzantine” literature considers a strong threat
model where workers can report arbitrary gradients to the parameter server. Whereas this model
helped obtain several fundamental results, it has
sometimes been considered unrealistic, when the
workers are mostly trustworthy machines. In
this paper, we show a surprising equivalence between this model and data poisoning, a threat
considered much more realistic. More specifically, we prove that every gradient attack can be
reduced to data poisoning, in any personalized
federated learning system with PAC guarantees
(which we show are both desirable and realistic). This equivalence makes it possible to obtain new impossibility results on the resilience
of any “robust” learning algorithm to data poisoning in highly heterogeneous applications, as
corollaries of existing impossibility theorems on
Byzantine machine learning. Moreover, using
our equivalence, we derive a practical attack that
we show (theoretically and empirically) can be
very effective against classical personalized federated learning models.

1. Introduction
Learning algorithms typically leverage data generated by
a large number of users (Smith et al., 2013; Wang et al.,
2019a;b) to often learn a common model that fits a large
population (Konecný et al., 2015), but also sometimes to
construct a personalized model for each individual (Ricci
et al., 2011). Autocompletion (Lehmann & Buschek,
2021), conversational (Shum et al., 2018) and recommendation (Ie et al., 2019) schemes are examples of such personalization algorithms already deployed at scale. To be ef*
1
Equal contribution
IC Schoold, EPFL, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Sadegh Farhadkhani <sadegh.farhadkhani@epfl.ch>, Lê-Nguyên Hoang
<le.hoang@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

fective, besides huge amounts of data (Brown et al., 2020;
Fedus et al., 2021), these algorithms require customization, motivating research into the promising but challenging field of personalized federated learning (Fallah et al.,
2020; Hanzely et al., 2020; Dinh et al., 2020).
Now, classical learning algorithms generally regard as desirable to fit all available data. However, this approach
dangerously fails in the context of user-generated data,
as goal-oriented users may provide untrustworthy data to
reach their objectives. In fact, in applications such as
content recommendation, activists, companies, and politicians have strong incentives to do so to promote certain
views, products or ideologies (Hoang, 2020; Hoang et al.,
2021). Perhaps unsurprisingly, this led to the proliferation of fabricated activities to bias algorithms (Bradshaw
& Howard, 2019; Neudert et al., 2019), e.g. through “fake
reviews” (Wu et al., 2020). The scale of this phenomenon
is well illustrated by the case of Facebook which, in 2019
alone, reported the removal of around 6 billion fake accounts from its platform (Fung & Garcia, 2019). This is
highly concerning in the era of “stochastic parrots” (Bender et al., 2021): climate denialists are incentivized to pollute textual datasets with claims like “climate change is
a hoax”, rightly assuming that autocompletion, conversational and recommendation algorithms trained on such data
will more likely spread these views (McGuffie & Newhouse, 2020). This raises serious concerns about the vulnerability of personalized federated learning to misleading
data. Data poisoning attacks clearly constitute now a major
machine learning security issue in already deployed systems (Kumar et al., 2020).
Overall, in adversarial environments like social media, and
given the advent of deep fakes (Johnson & Diakopoulos, 2021), we should expect most data to be strategically
crafted and labeled. In this context, the authentication of
the data provider is critical. In particular, the safety of
learning algorithms arguably demands that they be trained
solely on cryptographically signed data, namely, data that
provably come from a known source. But even signed data
cannot be wholeheartedly trusted since users typically have
preferences over what ought to be recommended to others.
Naturally, even “authentic” users have incentives to behave
strategically in order to promote certain views or products.

