Denoised MDPs: Learning World Models Better Than the World Itself

Tongzhou Wang 1 Simon S. Du 2 Antonio Torralba 1 Phillip Isola 1 Amy Zhang 3 4 Yuandong Tian 4
RewardRelevant

Abstract
The ability to separate signal from noise, and
reason with clean abstractions, is critical to intelligence. With this ability, humans can efficiently perform real world tasks without considering all possible nuisance factors. How can artificial agents do the same? What kind of information
can agents safely discard as noises? In this work,
we categorize information out in the wild into four
types based on controllability and relation with
reward, and formulate useful information as that
which is both controllable and reward-relevant.
This framework clarifies the kinds information
removed by various prior work on representation
learning in reinforcement learning (RL), and leads
to our proposed approach of learning a Denoised
MDP that explicitly factors out certain noise distractors. Extensive experiments on variants of
DeepMind Control Suite and RoboDesk demonstrate superior performance of our denoised world
model over using raw observations alone, and
over prior works, across policy optimization control tasks as well as the non-control task of joint
position regression.
Project Page:
ssnl.github.io/denoised_mdp
Code: github.com/facebookresearch/denoised_mdp

1. Introduction
The real world provides us a plethora of information, from
microscopic physical interactions to abstracted semantic
signals such as the latest COVID-19 news. Fortunately,
processing each and every signal is unnecessary (and also
impossible). In fact, any particular reasoning or decision
often only relies on a small portion of information.
Imagine waking up and wanting to embrace some sunlight.
As you open the curtain, a nearby resting bird is scared
1

MIT CSAIL 2 University of Washington 3 UC Berkeley 4 Meta
AI. Correspondence to: Tongzhou Wang <tongzhou@mit.edu>.
Work done while Tongzhou Wang was an intern at Meta AI.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

RewardIrrelevant

Uncontrollable

Controllable

(a) GOAL: Letting in as much sunlight as possible.

Denoise

(b) Optimal control only relies on information that is both
controllable and reward-relevant. Good world models
should ignore other factors as noisy distractors.
Figure 1: Illustrative example: (a) Four distinct kinds of information in the scenario described in Section 1, where the person
desires to increase the amount of sunlight let into the room. Their
opening of the curtain scares away the bird. (b) A denoised world
model only includes a small subset of all information.

away and you are pleasantly met with a beautiful sunny day.
Far away, a jet plane is slowly flying across the sky.
This may seem a simple activity, but in fact highlights four
distinct types of information (see Figure 1), with respect to
the goal of letting in as much sunlight as possible:
• Controllable and reward-relevant: curtain, influenced
by actions and affecting incoming sunlight;
• Controllable and reward-irrelevant: bird, influenced
by actions but not affecting sunlight;
• Uncontrollable and reward-relevant: weather, independent with actions but affecting sunlight;
• Uncontrollable and reward-irrelevant: plane, independent with both actions and the sunlight.
Our optimal actions towards the goal, however, only in fact
depend on information that is controllable and reward-

