Causal structure-based root cause analysis of outliers

Kailash Budhathoki 1 Lenon Minorics 1 Patrick Blöbaum 1 Dominik Janzing 1

Abstract
Current techniques for explaining outliers cannot
tell what caused the outliers. We present a formal method to identify “root causes” of outliers,
amongst variables. The method requires a causal
graph of the variables along with the functional
causal model. It quantifies the contribution of
each variable to the target outlier score, which explains to what extent each variable is a “root cause”
of the target outlier. We study the empirical performance of the method through simulations and
present a real-world case study identifying “root
causes” of extreme river flows.

1. Introduction
Outlier detection has been studied extensively over the
years (Aggarwal, 2013; Akoglu, 2021; Chandola et al., 2009;
Blázquez-Garcı́a et al., 2021). Besides the development in
outlier detection, we have also made some progress in recent years towards explaining outliers (Knorr & Ng, 1999;
Liu et al., 2018; Macha & Akoglu, 2018; Idé et al., 2021).
When the purpose of explaining outliers is to take actions
(e.g. fixing a cloud service that slowed down a website),
explanations should have causal relations to the target outliers. Existing methods, however, do not provide causal
explanations; they only describe observed correlations to
target outliers. A formal way to define “root causes” of
outliers seems to be missing.
Our problem setup is simple. We consider the scenario
where the value xn of a target variable Xn has been flagged
as an outlier by an existing outlier detection algorithm.
This is an updated version of the original paper with 3 changes.
We fixed the notation of the context set in Eq. (11), added missing
parentheses in the expression of NNJR in §5.2, and renamed the
title of Apx. B “Misconception” followed by a general result on
potential misconceptions around the proposed approach.
1

Amazon Research Tübingen. Correspondence to: Kailash
Budhathoki <kaibud@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We jointly observed values (x1 , . . . , xn ) =: x of variables
(X1 , . . . , Xn ) =: X. Our goal is to identify the “root causes”
of the outlier xn amongst variables X1 , . . . , Xn .1
We make three key assumptions to this end.
A1 The causal relationships between variables X1 , . . . , Xn
is known in the form of a directed acyclic graph, also
called causal graph (Pearl, 2009).
A2 The causal graph comes with the functional causal
model (FCM) (Pearl, 2009) that describes how each
variable Xj is generated from its parents PAj in the
causal graph. In an FCM, each variable Xj is a function fj of its parents PAj in the causal graph and an
unobserved noise term Nj , i.e.,
Xj := fj (PAj , Nj ),

(1)

where the noises N1 , . . . , Nn are statistically jointly
independent (Pearl, 2009).
A3 The FCM is invertible (Zhang et al., 2015). That is,
we can recover the noise value nj —of the noise term
Nj —corresponding to the observed variable Xj from
its observed value xj and the values pa j of its parents.
This paper presents a formal method to identify “root causes”
of outlier xn among variables X1 , . . . , Xn by quantifying
the contribution of each noise Nj to the outlier score of xn .
This notion of contribution captures the contribution of the
“causal mechanism” of event xj (at node Xj ) to the outlier
score of xn . We illustrate the outcome of the method on a
hypothetical example in Figure 1. There are two key steps
involved in formalising the method:
• As there exists a multitude of outlier detection algorithms (Aggarwal, 2013), our method should be applicable to most, if not all, of them. To this end, we introduce
information-theoretic (IT) outlier scores, which probabilistically calibrate existing outlier scores (Section 2).
The probabilistic calibration also renders IT outlier scores
1
We assume that variables X1 , . . . , Xn contain the root causes
of outliers. If other variables explain the outliers, we need to
include them in the analysis, search for root causes among them
and their ancestors.

