Transformer Neural Processes:
Uncertainty-Aware Meta Learning Via Sequence Modeling

Tung Nguyen 1 Aditya Grover 1

Abstract
Neural Processes (NPs) are a popular class of approaches for meta-learning. Similar to Gaussian
Processes (GPs), NPs define distributions over
functions and can estimate uncertainty in their
predictions. However, unlike GPs, NPs and their
variants suffer from underfitting and often have
intractable likelihoods, which limit their applications in sequential decision making. We propose Transformer Neural Processes (TNPs), a new
member of the NP family that casts uncertaintyaware meta learning as a sequence modeling
problem. We learn TNPs via an autoregressive
likelihood-based objective and instantiate it with a
novel transformer-based architecture. The model
architecture respects the inductive biases inherent
to the problem structure, such as invariance to the
observed data points and equivariance to the unobserved points. We further investigate knobs within
the TNP framework that tradeoff expressivity of
the decoding distribution with extra computation.
Empirically, we show that TNPs achieve state-ofthe-art performance on various benchmark problems, outperforming all previous NP variants on
meta regression, image completion, contextual
multi-armed bandits, and Bayesian optimization.

1. Introduction
The goal of meta learning (Schmidhuber, 1987; Vanschoren,
2018) is to learn models that can adapt quickly to unseen
tasks with only a few labeled examples. Since the amount
of labeled data for any new task is limited, we ideally require the model to have both high accuracy and quantify
the uncertainty in its predictions. This is particularly important within sequential decision making, e.g., for Bayesian
optimization (Mockus et al., 1978; Schonlau et al., 1998;
1

Department of Computer Science, UCLA. Correspondence to:
Tung Nguyen <tungnd@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Shahriari et al., 2015; Hakhamaneshi et al., 2021) and multiarmed bandits (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Riquelme
et al., 2018), where the quantified uncertainty can guide
data acquisition. We call this paradigm uncertainty-aware
meta learning, which is the main focus of our paper.
Neural Processes (NPs) (Garnelo et al., 2018a;b) are a rich
class of models for such problems. NPs offer a flexible way
to modeling distributions over functions, and are trained via
a meta-learning framework that enables rapid adaptation to
new functions at test time. More specifically, NPs are structured similar to a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma
& Welling, 2013) over datasets, wherein we employ a latent
variable model to estimate the conditional distribution over
the labels of the unlabeled (context) points given the set of
labeled (target) points. By amortizing the functional uncertainty in the encoded latent variables, NPs can be quickly
adapted to a new task at test-time.
However, NPs and their variants suffer from two major
drawbacks. First, many NP variants often have intractable
marginal likelihoods due to the presence of latent variables
and instead optimize for a surrogate variational lower bound
of the log-likelihood. The standard justification for using
latent variables is that they can represent functional uncertainty and improve the predictive performance in some
cases (Le et al., 2018). However, it is also known that
optimizing variational lower bounds of the log-likelihood
does not necessarily lead to a meaningful latent representation and can require non-trivial adjustments to the objective (Chen et al., 2016; Alemi et al., 2018). Second, it has
been observed that NPs tend to underfit to the data distribution. Attentive Neural Processes (ANPs) (Kim et al., 2019)
partly address this problem by incorporating attention mechanisms into the NP encoder-decoder architecture. While
ANPs provide a considerably improved fit, these models
tend to make overconfident predictions and have poor performance on sequential decision making problems.
We propose Transformer Neural Processes (TNPs), a new
framework for uncertainty-aware meta learning derived
from a sequence modeling perspective. The learning objective for TNPs is to autoregressively maximize the conditional log-likelihood of the target points (observed only
during training) conditioned on the context points (observed

