Strategic Representation

Vineet Nair 1 Ganesh Ghalme 2 Inbal Talgam-Cohen 1 Nir Rosenfeld 1

Abstract
Humans have come to rely on machines for reducing excessive information to manageable representations. But this reliance can be abused—strategic
machines might craft representations that manipulate their users. How can a user make good
choices based on strategic representations? We
formalize this as a learning problem, and pursue
algorithms for decision-making that are robust to
manipulation. In our main setting of interest, the
system represents attributes of an item to the user,
who then decides whether or not to consume. We
model this interaction through the lens of strategic classification (Hardt et al. 2016), reversed:
the user, who learns, plays first; and the system,
which responds, plays second. The system must
respond with representations that reveal ‘nothing
but the truth’ but need not reveal the entire truth.
Thus, the user faces the problem of learning set
functions under strategic subset selection, which
presents distinct algorithmic and statistical challenges. Our main result is a learning algorithm
that minimizes error despite strategic representations, and our theoretical analysis sheds light on
the trade-off between learning effort and susceptibility to manipulation.

1. Introduction
There is a growing recognition that learning systems deployed in social settings are likely to induce strategic interactions between the system and its users. One promising
line of research in this domain is strategic classification
(Hardt et al., 2016), which studies learning in settings where
users can strategically modify their features in response to a
learned classification rule. The primary narrative in strategic
classification is one of self-interested users that act to ‘game’
the system, and of systems that should defend against this
1

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology. 2 Indian Institute
of Technology, Hyderabad. Correspondence to: Vineet Nair <vineet@cs.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

form of gaming behavior. In this paper, we initiate the study
of reversed scenarios, in which it is the system that strategically games its users. We argue that this is quite routine: In
settings where users make choices about items (e.g., click,
buy, watch), decisions are often made on the basis of only
partial information. But the choice of what information to
present to users often lies in the hands of the system, which
can utilize its representation power to promote its own goals.
Here we formalize the problem of strategic representation,
and study how learning can now aid users in choosing well
despite strategic system behavior.
As a concrete example, consider a user browsing for a hotel
in an online booking platform. Hotels on the platform are
represented by a small set of images; as there are many images available for each hotel, the system must choose which
subset of these to display. Clearly, the choice of representation can have a significant effect on users’ decision-making
(whether to click the hotel, and subsequently whether to
book it), and in turn, on the system’s profit. The system may
well attempt to capitalize on the control it has over what
information is presented to the user—at the expense of the
user, who may be swayed to make sub-optimal decisions.
Given that users rely on system-crafted representations for
making decisions, choosing well requires users to account
for the strategic nature of the representations they face.
Our goal in this paper is to study when and how learning can
aid users in making decisions that are strategically robust.
We model users as deciding based on a choice strategy h
mapping represented items to binary choices, which can
be learned from the user’s previous experiences (e.g., hotels stayed in, and whether they were worthwhile). Since
in reality full descriptions of items are often too large for
humans to process effectively (e.g., hundreds or thousands
of attributes), the role of the system is to provide users with
compact representations (e.g., a small subset of attributes).
We therefore model the system as responding to h with a
representation mapping ϕ, which determines for each item
x its representation z = ϕ(x), on which users rely for making choices (i.e., h is a function of z). We focus on items
x that are discrete and composed of a subset of ground elements; accordingly, we consider representation mappings ϕ
that are lossy but truthful, meaning they reveal a cardinalityconstrained subset of the item’s full set of attributes: z ⊆ x
and k1 ≤ |z| ≤ k2 for some exogenously-set k1 , k2 .

