Generative Trees: Adversarial and Copycat

Richard Nock 1 Mathieu Guillame-Bert 1

Abstract
While Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
achieve spectacular results on unstructured data
like images, there is still a gap on tabular data,
data for which state of the art supervised learning still favours decision tree (DT)-based models.
This paper proposes a new path forward for the
generation of tabular data, exploiting decades-old
understanding of the supervised task’s best components for DT induction, from losses (properness), models (tree-based) to algorithms (boosting). The properness condition on the supervised
loss – which postulates the optimality of Bayes
rule – leads us to a variational GAN-style loss
formulation which is tight when discriminators
meet a calibration property trivially satisfied by
DTs, and, under common assumptions about the
supervised loss, yields ”one loss to train against
them all” for the generator: the χ2 . We then introduce tree-based generative models, generative
trees (GTs), meant to mirror on the generative side
the good properties of DTs for classifying tabular
data, with a boosting-compliant adversarial training algorithm for GTs. We also introduce copycat
training, in which the generator copies at run time
the underlying tree (graph) of the discriminator
DT and completes it for the hardest discriminative
task, with boosting compliant convergence. We
provide experiments on tasks including fake/real
distinction and missing data imputation.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks have early established a
gold standard for both neural networks as generative models and the loss to train generative models via a variational
measure-based distortion (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Nowozin
et al., 2016; Nock et al., 2017). While they have achieved
spectacular results on a variety of unstructured data (Ni
1
Google Research. Correspondence to: Richard Nock
<richardnock@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2021), the quality of outcomes on tabular data is still
lagging behind with the sentiment that new approaches are
needed (Camino et al., 2020). This is an important problem: recently, tabular data was still representing the most
prevalent data type in real world AI (Chui et al., 2018, pp.
15). Interestingly, this chasm separating astonishing generation on unstructured data to suboptimal generation on
tabular data mirrors another one, on the supervised side,
where neural nets can achieve superhuman recognition on
unstructured data (Linsley et al., 2021) but require massive
amounts of sophistication to compete against standard libraries using decision-tree (DT) based models on tabular
data (Arık & Pfister, 2021). DT induction has been perfected
over decades, starting with core supervised loss functions
known as proper (Savage, 1971; Reid & Williamson, 2011),
using particularly fit and simple graph-based tree models
(Breiman et al., 1984; Quinlan, 1993), and culminating with
a powerful algorithmic machinery to learn them, boosting
(Kearns & Mansour, 1996; Friedman et al., 2000; Schapire
& Singer, 1998). One would expect that potential generative
approaches for tabular data would “mirror” those three key
components on the generative side, but to our knowledge,
none has been achieved. Such is our objective, and our
paper thus contains three main technical contributions:
On losses, the GAN approach formulates the generator’s
loss from a variational measure-based divergence, unveiling
the discriminator’s loss (Nowozin et al., 2016). Instead, we
start from the discriminator’s side and a general proper loss,
i.e. a loss for which Bayes prediction is optimal, which is
standard for DT induction since Breiman et al. (1984). We
relate the corresponding information (De Groot, 1962) to a
GAN-style formulation which provides us with the generator’s loss. A difference with GANs’ variational formulation
is there is no slack in the characterisation if the discriminator meets a calibration condition trivially satisfied by DTs:
unlike e.g. Nowozin et al. (2016, Ineq. (4)), we get identities all the way through. A surprising corollary follows. If
the discriminator’s partial losses meet a property that most
popular choices meet, then to minimize the generator’s loss,
it is sufficient to minimize the χ2 between real and fake data:
we get one loss to ”train generators against them all”. This
first contribution is not specific to DTs as it holds for all
calibrated discriminators in the properness framework.
On models, we introduce generative trees (GTs). In the
same way as generator and discriminator in GANs include

