Certified Neural Network Watermarks with Randomized Smoothing

Arpit Bansal * 1 Ping-yeh Chiang * 1 Michael Curry 1 Rajiv Jain 2 Curtis Wigington 2 Varun Manjunatha 2
John P Dickerson 1 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract
Watermarking is a commonly used strategy to
protect creators’ rights to digital images, videos
and audio. Recently, watermarking methods have
been extended to deep learning models – in principle, the watermark should be preserved when
an adversary tries to copy the model. However,
in practice, watermarks can often be removed by
an intelligent adversary. Several papers have proposed watermarking methods that claim to be empirically resistant to different types of removal
attacks, but these new techniques often fail in
the face of new or better-tuned adversaries. In
this paper, we propose a certifiable watermarking
method. Using the randomized smoothing technique proposed in Chiang et al., we show that
our watermark is guaranteed to be unremovable
unless the model parameters are changed by more
than a certain `2 threshold. In addition to being certifiable, our watermark is also empirically
more robust compared to previous watermarking
methods.

1. Introduction
With the rise of deep learning, there has been an extraordinary growth in the use of neural networks in various computer vision and natural language understanding tasks. In
parallel with this growth in applications, there has been exponential growth in terms of the cost required to develop
and train state-of-the-art models (Amodei & Hernandez,
2018). For example, the latest GPT-3 generative language
model (Brown et al., 2020) is estimated to cost around 4.6
million dollars (Li, 2020) in TPU cost alone. This does not
include the cost of acquiring and labeling data or paying
engineers, which may be even greater. With up-front in*
Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland, College
Park 2 Adobe Research, USA. Correspondence to: Arpit
Bansal <bansal01@umd.edu>, Ping-yeh Chiang <pchiang@cs.umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

vestment costs growing, if access to models is offered as
a service, the incentive is strong for an adversary to try to
steal the model, sidestepping the costly training process.
Incentives are equally strong for companies to protect such
a significant investment.
Watermarking techniques have long been used to protect the
copyright of digital multimedia (Hartung & Kutter, 1999).
The copyright holder hides some imperceptible information in images, videos, or sound. When they suspect a
copyright violation, the source and destination of the multimedia can be identified, enabling appropriate follow-up
actions (Hartung & Kutter, 1999). Recently, watermarking
has been extended to deter the theft of machine learning
models (Uchida et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018). The model
owner either imprints a predetermined signature into the
parameters of the model (Uchida et al., 2017) or trains the
model to give predetermined predictions (Zhang et al., 2018)
for a certain trigger set (e.g. images superimposed with a
predetermined pattern).
A strong watermark must also resist removal by a motivated
adversary. Even though the watermarks in (Uchida et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2018; Adi et al., 2018) initially claimed
some resistance to various watermark removal attacks, it was
later shown in (Shafieinejad et al., 2019; Aiken et al., 2020)
that these watermarks can in fact be removed with more
sophisticated methods, using a combination of distillation,
parameter regularization, and finetuning. To avoid the catand-mouse game of ever-stronger watermark techniques
that are only later defeated by new adversaries, we propose
a certifiable watermark: unless the attacker changes the
model parameters by more than a certain `2 distance, the
watermark is guaranteed to remain.
To the best of our knowledge, our proposed watermarking
technique is the first to provide a certificate against an `2
adversary. We also analyzed whether `2 adversary is a reasonable threat model as well as the magnitude of appropriate
defense radius. Surprisingly, we find our certified radius
to be quite substantial relative to the range of meaningful
radius that one could certify. Additionally we empirically
find that our certified watermark is more resistant to previously proposed watermark removal attacks (Shafieinejad
et al., 2019; Aiken et al., 2020) compared to its counterparts

