Pessimistic Minimax Value Iteration: Provably Efficient Equilibrium Learning
from Offline Datasets
Han Zhong * 1 Wei Xiong * 2 Jiyuan Tan * 3 Liwei Wang 1 4 Tong Zhang 2 5 Zhaoran Wang 6 Zhuoran Yang 7

Abstract
We study episodic two-player zero-sum Markov
games (MGs) in the offline setting, where the
goal is to find an approximate Nash equilibrium
(NE) policy pair based on a dataset collected a
priori. When the dataset does not have uniform
coverage over all policy pairs, finding an approximate NE involves challenges in three aspects: (i)
distributional shift between the behavior policy
and the optimal policy, (ii) function approximation to handle large state space, and (iii) minimax
optimization for equilibrium solving. We propose a pessimism-based algorithm, dubbed as pessimistic minimax value iteration (PMVI), which
overcomes the distributional shift by constructing
pessimistic estimates of the value functions for
both players and outputs a policy pair by solving a correlated coarse equilibrium based on the
two value functions. Furthermore, we establish a
data-dependent upper bound on the suboptimality which recovers a sublinear rate without the
assumption on uniform coverage of the dataset.
We also prove an information-theoretical lower
bound, which shows our upper bound is nearly
minimax optimal, which suggests that the datadependent term is intrinsic. Our theoretical results
also highlight a notion of “relative uncertainty”,
which characterizes the necessary and sufficient
condition for achieving sample efficiency in offline MGs. To the best of our knowledge, we
provide the first nearly minimax optimal result for
offline MGs with function approximation.
*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Data Science, Peking University 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 Fudan University 4 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
MOE, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 5 Google
Research 6 Northwestern University 7 Yale University. Correspondence to: Han Zhong <hanzhong@stu,pku.edu.cn>, Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>, Zhuoran Yang <zhuoran.yang@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently achieved tremendous empirical success, including Go (Silver et al., 2016;
2017), Poker (Brown and Sandholm, 2019), robotic control (Kober et al., 2013), and Dota (Berner et al., 2019),
many of which involve multiple agents. RL system with
multiple agents acting in a common environment is referred
to as multi-agent RL (MARL) where each agent aims to
maximize its own long-term return by interacting with the
environment and other agents (Zhang et al., 2021). Two key
components of these successes are function approximation
and efficient simulators. For modern RL applications with
large state spaces, function approximations such as neural
networks are used to approximate the value functions or
the policies and contributes to the generalization across different state-action pairs. Meanwhile, an efficient simulator
serves as the environment which allows the agent to collect
millions to billions of trajectories for the training process.
However, for various scenarios, e.g., healthcare (Pan et al.,
2017) and auto-driving (Wang et al., 2018) where either collecting data is costly and risky, or online exploration is not
possible (Fu et al., 2020), it is far more challenging to apply
(MA)RL methods in a trial-and-error fashion. To tackle
these issues, offline RL aims to learn a good policy from a
pre-collected dataset without further interacting with the environment. Recently, there has been impressive progress in
the theoretical understanding about single-agent offline RL
(Jin et al., 2020b; Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Zanette et al.,
2021; Xie et al., 2021; Yin and Wang, 2021; Uehara and
Sun, 2021), indicating that pessimism is critical for designing provably efficient offline algorithms. More importantly,
these works demonstrate that the necessary and sufficient
condition for achieving sample efficiency in offline MDP
is the single policy (optimal policy) coverage. That is, it
suffices for the offline dataset to have good coverage over
the trajectories induced by the optimal policy.
In offline MARL for zero-sum Markov games, agents are not
only facing the challenges of unknown environments, function approximation, and the distributional shift between the
behavior policy and the optimal policy, but also challenged
by the sophisticated minimax optimization for equilibrium
solving. Due to these challenges, theoretical understand-

