When and How Mixup Improves Calibration

Linjun Zhang * 1 Zhun Deng * 2 Kenji Kawaguchi 3 James Zou 4

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, it is important for the model to provide confidence scores
that accurately capture its prediction uncertainty.
Although modern learning methods have achieved
great success in predictive accuracy, generating
calibrated confidence scores remains a major challenge. Mixup, a popular yet simple data augmentation technique based on taking convex combinations of pairs of training examples, has been
empirically found to significantly improve confidence calibration across diverse applications.
However, when and how Mixup helps calibration is still a mystery. In this paper, we theoretically prove that Mixup improves calibration in
high-dimensional settings by investigating natural
statistical models. Interestingly, the calibration
benefit of Mixup increases as the model capacity
increases. We support our theories with experiments on common architectures and datasets. In
addition, we study how Mixup improves calibration in semi-supervised learning. While incorporating unlabeled data can sometimes make the
model less calibrated, adding Mixup training mitigates this issue and provably improves calibration.
Our analysis provides new insights and a framework to understand Mixup and calibration.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning methods have dramatically improved the predictive accuracy in many learning tasks (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Srivastava et al., 2015; He
et al., 2016a). The deployment of AI-based systems in high
risk fields such as medical diagnosis (Jiang et al., 2012) requires a predictive model to be trustworthy, which makes the
topic of accurately quantifying the predictive uncertainty an
*
Equal contribution 1 Rutgers University 2 Harvard University
National University of Singapore 4 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Linjun Zhang <linjun.zhang@rutgers.edu>, Zhun
Deng <zhundeng@g.harvard.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

increasingly important problem (Thulasidasan et al., 2019).
However, as pointed out by Guo et al. (2017), many popular modern architectures such as neural networks are very
poorly calibrated. A variety of methods have been proposed
for quantifying predictive uncertainty including training
multiple probabilistic models with ensembling or bootstrap
(Osband et al., 2016) and re-calibration of probabilities on
a validation set through temperature scaling (Platt et al.,
1999), which usually involves much more complicated procedures and extra computation. Meanwhile, recent work
(Thulasidasan et al., 2019) has shown that models trained
with Mixup (Zhang et al., 2017), a simple data augmentation
technique based on taking convex combinations of pairs of
examples and their labels, are significantly better calibrated.
However, when and how Mixup helps calibration is still not
well-understood, especially from a theoretical perspective.
As our first contribution, we demonstrate that the calibration improvement brought by Mixup is more significant in
the high-dimensional settings, i.e. the number of parameters is comparable to the training sample size. Figure 1
shows a motivating experiment on CIFAR-10. The Expected
Calibration Error (ECE), which is a standard measure of
how un-calibrated a model is, is smaller with Mixup augmentation compared to those without Mixup augmentation,
especially when the model is wider or deeper. We provide a
theoretical explanation for this phenomenon under several
natural statistical models. In particular, our theory holds
when the data distribution can be described by a Gaussian
generative model, which is very flexible and includes many
generative adversarial networks (GANs). In a Gaussian generative model, a function is used to map a Gaussian random
variable to an input vector of some models such as neural
networks. Because the function used to map a Gaussian random variable is arbitrary and can be nonlinear, our theory is
applicable to a very broad class of data distributions.
As our second contribution, we investigate how Mixup
helps calibration in semi-supervised learning, which is relatively under-explored. Labeled data are usually expensive
to obtain, and training models by combining a small amount
of labeled data with abundant unlabeled data plays an important role in AI (Chapelle et al., 2009). In light of this, we
investigate the effect of Mixup in semi-supervised learning,
where we focus on the commonly used pseudo-labeling algorithm (Chapelle et al., 2009; Carmon et al., 2019). We

