Hermite Polynomial Features for Private Data Generation

Margarita Vinaroz * 1 Mohammad-Amin Charusaie * 1 Frederik Harder 1 Kamil Adamczewski 1
Mi Jung Park 2

Abstract
Kernel mean embedding is a useful tool to represent and compare probability measures. Despite
its usefulness, kernel mean embedding considers infinite-dimensional features, which are challenging to handle in the context of differentially
private data generation. A recent work (Harder
et al., 2021) proposes to approximate the kernel
mean embedding of data distribution using finitedimensional random features, which yields analytically tractable sensitivity. However, the number
of required random features is excessively high,
often ten thousand to a hundred thousand, which
worsens the privacy-accuracy trade-off. To improve the trade-off, we propose to replace random
features with Hermite polynomial features. Unlike the random features, the Hermite polynomial
features are ordered, where the features at the
low orders contain more information on the distribution than those at the high orders. Hence, a
relatively low order of Hermite polynomial features can more accurately approximate the mean
embedding of the data distribution compared to
a significantly higher number of random features.
As demonstrated on several tabular and image
datasets, Hermite polynomial features seem better suited for private data generation than random
Fourier features.

1. Introduction
One of the popular distance metrics for generative modelling
is Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al.,
2012). MMD computes the average distance between the
realizations of two distributions mapped to a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). Its popularity is due to several
*
Equal contribution 1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tuebingen, Germany 2 University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. CIFAR AI Chair at AMII. Correspondence to: Mi
Jung Park <mijungp@cs.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

facts: (a) MMD can compare two probability measures in
terms of all possible moments (i.e., infinite-dimensional
features), resulting in no information loss due to a particular
selection of moments; and (b) estimating MMD does not
require the knowledge of the probability density functions.
Rather, MMD estimators are in closed form, which can
be computed by pair-wise evaluations of a kernel function
using the points drawn from two distributions.
However, using the MMD estimators for training a generator is not well suited when differential privacy (DP) of
the generated samples is taken into consideration. In fact,
the generated points are updated in every training step and
the pair-wise evaluations of the kernel function on generated and true data points require accessing data multiple
times. One of the key properties of DP is composability that
implies each access of data causes privacy loss. Hence, privatizing the MMD estimator in every training step – which
is necessary to ensure the resulting generated samples are
differentially private – incurs a large privacy loss.
A recent work (Harder et al., 2021), called DP-MERF, uses
a particular form of MMD via a random Fourier feature
representation (Rahimi & Recht, 2008) of kernel mean embeddings for DP data generation. Under this representation, one can approximate the MMD in terms of two finitedimensional mean embeddings (as in eq. 3), where the approximate mean embedding of the true data distribution
(data-dependent) is detached from that of the synthetic data
distribution (data-independent). Thus, the data-dependent
term needs privatization only once and can be re-used repeatedly during training of a generator. However, DP-MERF
requires an excessively high number of random features to
approximate the mean embedding of data distributions.
We propose to replace1 the random feature representation
of the kernel mean embedding with the Hermite polynomial
representation. We observe that Hermite polynomial features are ordered where the features at the low orders contain
more information on the distribution than those at the high
orders. Hence, the required order of Hermite polynomial
features is significantly lower than the required number of
1
There are efforts on improving the efficiency of randomized
Fourier feature maps, e.g., by using quasi-random points in (Avron
et al., 2016).

