Understanding and Improving Knowledge Graph Embedding
for Entity Alignment

Lingbing Guo * 1 2 3 Qiang Zhang * 1 2 3 Zequn Sun 4 Mingyang Chen 1 3 Wei Hu 4 Huajun Chen 1 2 3

Abstract
Embedding-based entity alignment (EEA) has recently received great attention. Despite significant
performance improvement, few efforts have been
paid to facilitate understanding of EEA methods.
Most existing studies rest on the assumption that
a small number of pre-aligned entities can serve
as anchors connecting the embedding spaces of
two KGs. Nevertheless, no one has investigated
the rationality of such an assumption. To fill the
research gap, we define a typical paradigm abstracted from existing EEA methods and analyze
how the embedding discrepancy between two potentially aligned entities is implicitly bounded by
a predefined margin in the score function. Further,
we find that such a bound cannot guarantee to
be tight enough for alignment learning. We mitigate this problem by proposing a new approach,
named NeoEA, to explicitly learn KG-invariant
and principled entity embeddings. In this sense,
an EEA model not only pursues the closeness of
aligned entities based on geometric distance, but
also aligns the neural ontologies of two KGs by
eliminating the discrepancy in embedding distribution and underlying ontology knowledge. Our
experiments demonstrate consistent and significant performance improvement against the bestperforming EEA methods.

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs), such as DBpedia (Auer et al.,
2007) and Wikidata (Vrandečić & Krötzsch, 2014), have be*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University 2 ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and
Technological Innovation Center 3 Alibaba-Zhejiang University
Joint Reseach Institute of Frontier Technologies 4 State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China.
Correspondence to: Qiang Zhang <qiang.zhang.cs@zju.edu.cn>,
Huajun Chen <huajunsir@zju.edu.cn >.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

come crucial resources for many AI applications. Although
a large-scale KG offers structured knowledge derived from
millions of facts in the real world, it is still incomplete by
nature, and the downstream applications always demand
more knowledge. Entity alignment (EA) is then proposed
to solve this issue, which exploits the potentially aligned
entities among different KGs to facilitate knowledge fusion
and exchange (Suchanek et al., 2012).
Recently, embedding-based entity alignment (EEA) methods (Chen et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2019; Wu
et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2020b; Fey et al., 2020) have been
prevailing in the EA area. The central idea is to encode entity/relation semantics into embeddings and estimate entity
similarity based on their embedding distance. These methods either learn an alignment function fa to minimize the
distance between the embeddings of a pair of aligned entities
(Wang et al., 2018), or directly map these two entities to one
vector representation (Sun et al., 2017). Meanwhile, they
leverage a shared score function fs to encode semantics into
representations, such that two potentially aligned entities
shall have similar feature expression. During this process,
a small number of aligned entity pairs (a.k.a., seed alignment) are required as supervision data to align (or merge)
the embedding spaces of two KGs.
Different from the conventional methods (Suchanek et al.,
2012; El-Roby & Aboulnaga, 2015; Lacoste-Julien et al.,
2013) that manually collect and select discriminative features, EEA ones rarely rely on third-party tools or pipeline
for preprocessing. Commonly, they just need triples or
adjacency matrices of KGs as the input data, and have
achieved comparable or better performance on many benchmarks (Sun et al., 2017; 2018; 2020c).
Another strength is that EEA is free of symbolic heterogeneity of two KGs (Sun et al., 2020c). The relationships
among entities are interpreted by the score function fs and
manifested as distances in the embedding space. Hence,
the similarity between a pair of entities can be defined and
estimated smoothly. Without loss of generality, we consider
the score function of TransE (Bordes et al., 2013) as fs . It
describes a triple (ei , r, ej ) by ei + r ≈ ej , where ei , r, ej
are the head entity, relation, and tail entity, respectively. The

