Learning to Predict Graphs with Fused Gromov-Wasserstein Barycenters

Luc Brogat-Motte 1 Rémi Flamary 2 Céline Brouard 3 Juho Rousu 4 Florence d’Alché-Buc 1

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel and generic framework to solve the flagship task of supervised labeled graph prediction by leveraging Optimal
Transport tools. We formulate the problem as
regression with the Fused Gromov-Wasserstein
(FGW) loss and propose a predictive model relying on a FGW barycenter whose weights depend
on inputs. First we introduce a non-parametric estimator based on kernel ridge regression for which
theoretical results such as consistency and excess
risk bound are proved. Next we propose an interpretable parametric model where the barycenter
weights are modeled with a neural network and
the graphs on which the FGW barycenter is calculated are additionally learned. Numerical experiments show the strength of the method and its
ability to interpolate in the labeled graph space on
simulated data and on a difficult metabolic identification problem where it can reach very good
performance with very little engineering.

1. Introduction
Graphs allow to represent entities and their interactions.
They are ubiquitous in real-world: social networks, molecular structures, biological protein-protein networks, recommender systems, are naturally represented as graphs.
Nevertheless, graphs structured data can be challenging to
process. An important effort has been made to design welltailored machine learning methods for graphs. For example,
many kernels for graphs have been proposed allowing to
perform graph classification, graph clustering, graph regression (Kriege et al., 2020). Many deep learning architecture
have also been developped (Zhang et al., 2022), including
1
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, CMAP,
UMR 7641, Palaiseau, France 3 Université de Toulouse, INRAE,
UR MIAT, France 4 Department of Computer Science, Aalto
University, Finland. Correspondence to: Luc Brogat-Motte
<luc.motte@telecom-paris.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) that are powerful
models for processing graphs.
Most of existing works in machine learning consider graphs
as inputs, but predicting a graph as output given an input
from an arbitrary input space has received much less attention. In this work, we target the difficult problem of supervised learning of graph-valued functions. In contrasts with
node classification (Bhagat et al., 2011), or link prediction
(Lü & Zhou, 2011), entire graphs are predicted. Supervised
Graph Prediction (SGP) can be considered as an emblematic
instance of Structured Prediction (SP) with the difficulty that
the output space is of finite but huge cardinality and contains
structures of different sizes. In principle, any of the three
main approaches to SP, energy-based models, surrogate
approaches and end-to-end learning, are eligible. In energybased models (Tsochantaridis et al., 2005; Chen et al., 2015;
Belanger & McCallum, 2016), predictions are obtained by
maximizing a score function for input-output pairs over the
output space. In surrogate approaches (Cortes et al., 2005;
Geurts et al., 2006; Brouard et al., 2016b; Ciliberto et al.,
2016), a feature map is used to embed the structured outputs.
After minimizing a surrogate loss a decoding procedure
is used to map back the surrogate solution. End-to-end
learning methods attempt to solve structured prediction by
directly learning to generate a structured object (Belanger
et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2017) and leverage differentiable
and relaxed definition of energy-based methods (see for
instance Pillutla et al. (2018); Mensch & Blondel (2018)).
Nevertheless, to our knowledge, among surrogate methods,
only Input Output Kernel Regression (IOKR) (Brouard et al.,
2016b) that leverages kernel trick in the output space has
been successfully applied to SGP while on the side of endto-end learning, several generative models allow to build
and predict graphs but in general in an unsupervised setting.
Gómez-Bombarelli et al. (2018) try to obtain a continuous
representation of molecules using a variational autoencoding (VAE) of text representations of molecules (SMILES).
Kusner et al. (2017) incorporates in the VAE architecture
knowledge about the structure of SMILES thanks to its available grammar. Olivecrona et al. (2017); Liu et al. (2017); Li
et al. (2018a); You et al. (2018); Shi et al. (2020) propose
models that generate graphs using a sequential process generating one node/edge at a time, and train it by maximizing
the likelihood.

