Fast Population-Based Reinforcement Learning on a Single Machine

Arthur Flajolet 1 Claire Bizon Monroc 1 Karim Beguir 1 Thomas Pierrot 1

Abstract
Training populations of agents has demonstrated
great promise in Reinforcement Learning for
stabilizing training, improving exploration and
asymptotic performance, and generating a diverse
set of solutions. However, population-based training is often not considered by practitioners as it
is perceived to be either prohibitively slow (when
implemented sequentially), or computationally
expensive (if agents are trained in parallel on independent accelerators). In this work, we compare implementations and revisit previous studies to show that the judicious use of compilation
and vectorization allows population-based training to be performed on a single machine with one
accelerator with minimal overhead compared to
training a single agent. We also show that, when
provided with a few accelerators, our protocols
extend to large population sizes for applications
such as hyperparameter tuning. We hope that
this work and the public release of our code will
encourage practitioners to use population-based
learning more frequently for their research and
applications.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, Deep Learning and Deep Reinforcement
Learning have led to breakthroughs in many fields such
as computer vision, games, natural language processing,
robotics, and bioinformatics. At a very high level, these
methods all involve randomly initializing the parameters
of neural networks and repeatedly applying the following
steps until convergence: (1) computing a loss function over
some training data, (2) differentiating it with respect to
the parameters, and (3) updating them with a variant of
stochastic gradient descent.
1

InstaDeep Ltd.
Correspondence to: Arthur Flajolet
<a.flajolet@instadeep.com>,
Thomas
Pierrot
<t.pierrot@instadeep.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Schematic of two different parallelization implementations for population-based learning. The stereotypical implementation is depicted on the left where each agent is trained using a
dedicated hardware accelerator. The right panel depicts another
approach, which we revisit in this study, where computations are
vectorized over the population using a single accelerator, leveraging the parallelization capabilities of the hardware until saturation.

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), an agent learns to interact
with an environment. At each time step, the agent receives
an observation and takes, conditionally to this observation,
an action. Once the action is carried out in the environment,
the agent receives a reward as well as a new observation
and the process repeats itself. The goal of the agent is to
maximize the rewards it receives during these interactions.
Deep policy search methods, a widely used class of Deep
Reinforcement Learning methods, use a neural network to
parametrize the agent’s policy, i.e. the function that maps
observations to actions. These algorithms alternate between
two steps: data collection and policy update. Typically, the
agent interacts with the environment for a fixed number of
time steps after which its policy gets updated following the
generic Deep Learning recipe by formulating a loss function and using the data that has been collected during the
previous interactions. In many popular approaches, the data
collected by the agent in the environment is not immediately discarded but instead stored inside a replay buffer,
a data structure with a maximum size and a first-in firstout insertion rule, from which the agent can sample during
subsequent update periods.

