The Power of First-Order Smooth Optimization for Black-Box Non-Smooth
Problems
Alexander Gasnikov 1 2 3 Anton Novitskii 1 2 Vasilii Novitskii 1 Farshed Abdukhakimov 3 Dmitry Kamzolov 3 1
Aleksandr Beznosikov 1 4 3 Martin Takáč 3 Pavel Dvurechensky 5 Bin Gu 3
where B2d (γ) is the Euclidean ball with center at 0 and
radius γ > 0 in Rd . Using these objects, we make the
following assumptions.1

Abstract
Gradient-free/zeroth-order methods for black-box
convex optimization have been extensively studied in the last decade with the main focus on
oracle call complexity. In this paper, besides
the oracle complexity, we focus also on iteration
complexity, and propose a generic approach that,
based on optimal first-order methods, allows to
obtain in a black-box fashion new zeroth-order
algorithms for non-smooth convex optimization
problems. Our approach not only leads to optimal
oracle complexity, but also allows to obtain iteration complexity similar to first-order methods,
which, in turn, allows to exploit parallel computations to accelerate the convergence of our algorithms. We also elaborate on extensions for
stochastic optimization problems, saddle-point
problems, and distributed optimization.

• The set Q is convex and the function f is convex on the
set Qγ ; 2
• The function f is Lipschitz-continuous with constant M ,
i.e. |f (y) − f (x)| ≤ M ∥y − x∥p on Qγ , where p ∈ [1, 2]
and ∥ · ∥p is the p-norm. If p = 2 we use the notation M2
for the Lipschitz constant.

1. Problem Formulation
We consider optimization problem
min f (x)

x∈Q⊆Rd

(1)

in the setting of a zeroth-order oracle. This means that an
oracle returns the value f (x) at a requested point x (Conn
et al., 2009), possibly with some adversarial noise that is
uniformly bounded by a small value ∆ > 0. Let γ > 0 be
a small number to be defined later and Qγ := Q + B2d (γ),
1

Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia 2 ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia 3 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE 4 National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russian Federation 5 Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and
Stochastics, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Alexander Gasnikov <gasnikov.av@mipt.ru>, Dmitry Kamzolov <kamzolov.dmitry@mbzuai.ac.ae>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

This class of problems was widely investigated and optimal
algorithms in terms of the number of zeroth-order oracle
calls were developed in non-smooth setting (Nesterov &
Spokoiny, 2017; Duchi et al., 2015; Gasnikov et al., 2017;
Shamir, 2017; Bayandina et al., 2018) and smooth setting
(Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2017; Dvurechensky et al., 2021;
Gorbunov et al., 2022). At the same time, to the best of
our knowledge, the development of optimal algorithms in
terms of the number of iterations is still an open research
question (Duchi et al., 2015; Bubeck et al., 2019). The goal
of this paper is to propose a generic approach that allows us
to construct algorithms with the best iteration complexity
among the algorithms that have optimal oracle complexity.
This can be seen as a two-criteria optimization problem if
one would like to improve both: oracle complexity and iteration complexity. An important observation of this paper
is that there is no need to sacrifice oracle complexity to
obtain better iteration complexity. A special focus is made
1

Note that, for most of the algorithms in this paper, we can
make these assumptions only on the intersection of Qγ and the ball
x0 + Bpd (R) for some p ∈ [1, 2], where x0 is the starting point
of the algorithm and R = O ∥x0 − x∗ ∥p ln d with x∗ being a
solution of (1) closest to x0 (Gorbunov et al., 2019a).
2
This assumption on the availability of the objective values f
in a small vicinity Qγ of the feasible set Q is quite standard in
the literature, see, e.g., (Yousefian et al., 2012; Duchi et al., 2012)
and can be established in two ways. The first one is changing
e such that
the set Q in problem (1) to a slightly smaller set Q
e + B2d (γ) ⊆ Q, see, e.g., (Beznosikov et al., 2020b). The
Q
second one is the extension of f to the whole space Rd with
preserving the convexity and Lipschitz continuity (Risteski & Li,
2016). Moreprecisely, by changing the objective to fnew (x) :=
f projQ (x) + α miny∈Q ∥x − y∥2 .

