RankSim: Ranking Similarity Regularization for Deep Imbalanced Regression

Yu Gong * 1 2 Greg Mori 1 2 Frederick Tung 2

Abstract
Data imbalance, in which a plurality of the data
samples come from a small proportion of labels,
poses a challenge in training deep neural networks. Unlike classification, in regression the
labels are continuous, potentially boundless, and
form a natural ordering. These distinct features of
regression call for new techniques that leverage
the additional information encoded in label-space
relationships. This paper presents the RankSim
(ranking similarity) regularizer for deep imbalanced regression, which encodes an inductive bias
that samples that are closer in label space should
also be closer in feature space. In contrast to
recent distribution smoothing based approaches,
RankSim captures both nearby and distant relationships: for a given data sample, RankSim encourages the sorted list of its neighbors in label
space to match the sorted list of its neighbors in
feature space. RankSim is complementary to conventional imbalanced learning techniques, including re-weighting, two-stage training, and distribution smoothing, and lifts the state-of-the-art performance on three imbalanced regression benchmarks: IMDB-WIKI-DIR, AgeDB-DIR, and STSB-DIR.

1. Introduction
Skewed data distributions, in which a plurality of the data
instances are from a small number of labels, widely exist in the real world and pose challenges to conventional
machine learning techniques. Although deep learning has
made much progress and shown its potential in many application domains, imbalanced datasets often present practical difficulties, causing models to exhibit undesirable bias
towards the majority labels and under-representing the minority labels. Prior work has thoroughly studied how to
*

This work was done during an internship at Borealis AI.
Simon Fraser University 2 Borealis AI. Correspondence to: Yu
Gong <gongyug@sfu.ca>.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The RankSim (ranking similarity) regularizer for deep
imbalanced regression introduces an inductive bias that items that
are closer in label space should also be closer in feature space.
Matrices S y and S z encode pairwise similarities in label space
and feature space, respectively. For a given input sample, RankSim
encourages the sorted list of its neighbors in label space to match
the sorted list of its neighbors in feature space.

improve model training on imbalanced data, such as via
cost-sensitive learning, representation learning, and decoupled learning. However, previous attempts have almost
exclusively focused on the task of imbalanced classification.
A very recent work (Yang et al., 2021) drew attention to the
nuances of regression with imbalanced data and identified
the task of deep imbalanced regression as a distinct problem.
Compared to classification, how to train deep regression
models with imbalanced data is not yet as well understood.
Unlike classification networks predicting discrete labels to
model the categorical distributions, regression networks aim
to predict labels with continuous values. The continuity
in label space makes deep imbalanced regression different
from deep imbalanced classification. On the one hand, the
target values can be infinite and boundless, which makes
many methods designed for deep imbalanced classification
untenable. On the other hand, the continuity in label space
can also play a positive role by providing extra information
about data instance relationships.
In regression, the prediction targets form a natural ordering.
For example, if we are interested in age estimation, we may
order people from youngest to oldest; if we are performing
home valuation, we may order properties from cheapest to
most expensive. We can use this natural ordering of labels
to regularize the representation learned by a neural network.
For example, we can nudge the network in a direction such
that the feature representation for the face of a 21-year old

