Leverage Score Sampling for Tensor Product Matrices in Input Sparsity Time

David P. Woodruff * 1 Amir Zandieh * 2

Abstract
We propose an input sparsity time sampling algorithm that can spectrally approximate the Gram
matrix corresponding to the q-fold column-wise
tensor product of q matrices using a nearly optimal number of samples, improving upon all previously known methods by poly(q) factors. Furthermore, for the important special case of the
q-fold self-tensoring of a dataset, which is the
feature matrix of the degree-q polynomial kernel, the leading term of our method’s runtime is
proportional to the size of the input dataset and
has no dependence on q. Previous techniques
either incur poly(q) slowdowns in their runtime
or remove the dependence on q at the expense
of having sub-optimal target dimension, and depend quadratically on the number of data-points
in their runtime. Our sampling technique relies
on a collection of q partially correlated random
projections which can be simultaneously applied
to a dataset X in total time that only depends on
the size of X, and at the same time their q-fold
Kronecker product acts as a near-isometry for any
fixed vector in the column span of X ⊗q . We also
show that our sampling methods generalize to
other classes of kernels beyond polynomial, such
as Gaussian and Neural Tangent kernels.

1. Introduction
In many learning problems such as regression or PCA, one is
given a feature (or design) matrix Φ ∈ Rm×n and needs to
compute the inverse or singular value decomposition (SVD)
of the Gram matrix Φ⊤ Φ. However, the feature matrices Φ,
particularly the features that correspond to kernel functions,
often have a massive (sometimes infinite) number of rows,
which makes the storage and computations involving Φ⊤ Φ
*
Equal contribution 1 Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: David Woodruff
<dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>, Amir Zandieh <azandieh@mpiinf.mpg.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

prohibitively expensive. This has motivated a long line of
work on approximating the Gram matrix Φ⊤ Φ by a low-rank
matrix (Williams & Seeger, 2001; Rahimi & Recht, 2009;
Avron et al., 2014; El Alaoui & Mahoney, 2014; Cohen
et al., 2015; Musco & Musco, 2017; Avron et al., 2017).
In this work, we focus on feature matrices whose columns
are tensor products of a large number of arbitrary vectors, i.e., Φ = X (1) ⊗ X (2) ⊗ . . . X (q) for datasets
X (1) , . . . X (q) ∈ Rd×n (for tensor product notations see
Definitions 2.1 and 2.2). Note that the tensor product matrix
Φ defined this way has dq rows and n columns. This type
of tensor product feature matrix Φ is of great importance in
learning applications, particularly because the special case
of X (1) = · · · = X (q) corresponds to the feature matrix of
the degree-q polynomial kernel, i.e., the Gram matrix Φ⊤ Φ
is the degree-q polynomial kernel matrix. To tackle scalability challenges, much work has focused on compressing the
large number of rows of such tensor product feature matrices through linear sketching or sampling techniques (Pham
& Pagh, 2013; Avron et al., 2014; Ahle et al., 2020; Meister
et al., 2019; Zandieh et al., 2021; Song et al., 2021).
The aim of our work is to devise efficient sampling methods
for reducing the dimensionality (number of rows) of tensor
product matrices while preserving the spectral structure
of the Gram matrix. Formally, for any given ϵ, λ > 0
and any X (1) , . . . X (d) ∈ Rd×n , if the feature matrix is
defined as Φ := X (1) ⊗. . . X (q) , we want to find a sampling
d
matrix Π ∈ Rs×d , such that the sub-sampled Gram matrix
⊤ ⊤
Φ Π ΠΦ is an (ϵ, λ)-spectral approximation to Φ⊤ Φ, i.e.,
Φ⊤ Φ + λI
Φ⊤ Φ + λI
⪯ Φ⊤ Π⊤ ΠΦ + λI ⪯
.
1+ϵ
1−ϵ

(1)

Sampling a small number of rows of any matrix Φ according
to its leverage scores is known to yield a spectral approximation to Φ⊤ Φ (Li et al., 2013). Our goal is to generate a
sampling matrix Π according to the ridge leverage scores
of

Pq
(j)
Φ in input sparsity time, i.e., O
.
j=1 nnz X
1.1. Our Main Results
• It is well-known that for any linear sketch or sampling matrix Π to satisfy (1), its number s of rows needs
to be proportional to the statistical dimension sλ :=

