Be Like Water:
Adaptive Floating Point for Machine Learning

Thomas Y. Yeh 1 Maxwell R. Sterner 1 Zerlina Lai 2 Brandon Y. Chuang 3 Alexander Ihler 4

Abstract
In the pursuit of optimizing memory and compute
density to accelerate machine learning applications, reduced precision training and inference
has been an active area of research. While some
approaches selectively apply low precision computations, this may require costly off-chip data
transfers or mixed precision support. In this paper, we propose a novel numerical representation,
Adaptive Floating Point (AFP), that dynamically
adjusts to the characteristics of deep learning data.
AFP requires no changes to the model topology,
requires no additional training, and applies to all
layers of DNN models. We evaluate AFP on a
spectrum of representative models in computer
vision and NLP, and show that our technique enables ultra-low precision inference of deep learning models while providing accuracy comparable
to full precision inference. By dynamically adjusting to ML data, AFP increases memory density by
1.6x, 1.6x, and 3.2x and compute density by 4x,
1.3x, and 12x when compared to BFP, BFloat16,
and FP32.

1. Introduction
In the pursuit of optimizing compute density while reducing
memory bandwidth requirements, a number of recent works
have examined reduced precision computations for floating
point (FP) operations during the training and inference of
machine learning models. Two extremes in this spectrum
are the fixed-point format (De Sa et al., 2017; Sa et al., 2018)
and the 4-bit DNN training format (Sun et al., 2020). In the
fixed-point integer format, all exponent bits are removed,
1

Computer Science Department, Pomona College, Claremont,
CA, USA 2 Computer Science Department, Occidental College,
Los Angeles, CA, USA 3 Computer Science Department, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA 4 Department of Computer
Science, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Thomas Y. Yeh <tomyenhsiyeh@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

resulting in a fixed, implicit exponent. In the case of the
4-bit (DNN) training format, all available bits are used to
indicate the sign and the exponent of the value, with only an
implicit “leading one” for the mantissa. With exponent bits
determining the range and the mantissa bits providing the
accuracy, a delicate balance between the two is critical in
optimizing a number representation for machine learning.
In this paper, we present the Adaptive Floating Point
(AFP) representation, a denser alternative to IEEE FP32
or BFloat16 for storing ML data. AFP encapsulates floating
point (FP) values into blocks of FP values along with characterization data that describe the block of numbers. AFP uses
this block information to increase performance and reduce
memory requirement while maintaining high accuracy.
AFP is designed to be effective in large-scale deep learning
models. We use a collection of pre-trained benchmark models to analyze empirically the distribution of values obtained
during inference, showing that 99% of values can be covered
with AFP. In addition, previous compact representations for
ML (Darvish Rouhani et al., 2020; Sa et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2022) may require subsets of the calculations (e.g.,
certain layers) to be computed using high precision. Such a
protocol may cause significant inefficiencies due to its data
conversion and data transfer requirements. In contrast, AFP
provides end-to-end application coverage by enabling all
ML FP computations to utilize AFP.
Our paper’s contributions include:
• We propose Adaptive Floating Point, a novel numerical
datatype for use with all ML floating point data, as an
alternative to IEEE-754 FP32 and Bfloat16 with higher
memory and compute density. The key elements which
provide higher density are:
– Auto Focus feature, where a shared exponent and
private offsets combine to automatically provide
maximum available precision to 99% of all ML
data.
– Shared block-level characterization information
to dynamically improve efficiency.
• We build a simulation infrastructure in Tensorflow to
accurately model the numerical effects of applying
AFP to the weights and layer outputs of ML models.

