Retrieval Augmented Reinforcement Learning

Anirudh Goyal 1 Abram L. Friesen * 2 Theophane Weber * 2 Andrea Banino * 2 Nan Rosemary Ke * 2
Adria Puigdomenech Badia 2 Arthur Guez 2 Mehdi Mirza 2 Peter C. Humphreys 2 Ksenia Konyushkova 2
Laurent Sifre 2 Michal Valko 2 Simon Osindero 2 Timothy Lillicrap 2 Nicolas Heess 2 Charles Blundell 2

Abstract
Most deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms distill experience into parametric behavior
policies or value functions via gradient updates.
While effective, this approach has several disadvantages: (1) it is computationally expensive, (2)
it can take many updates to integrate experiences
into the parametric model, (3) experiences that are
not fully integrated do not appropriately influence
the agent’s behavior, and (4) behavior is limited
by the capacity of the model. In this paper we
explore an alternative paradigm in which we train
a network to map a dataset of past experiences to
optimal behavior. Specifically, we augment an RL
agent with a retrieval process (parameterized as a
neural network) that has direct access to a dataset
of experiences. This dataset can come from the
agent’s past experiences, expert demonstrations,
or any other relevant source. The retrieval process is trained to retrieve information from the
dataset that may be useful in the current context,
to help the agent achieve its goal faster and more
efficiently. The proposed method facilitates learning agents that at test time can condition their
behavior on the entire dataset and not only the current state, or current trajectory. We integrate our
method into two different RL agents: an offline
DQN agent and an online R2D2 agent. In offline
multi-task problems, we show that the retrievalaugmented DQN agent avoids task interference
and learns faster than the baseline DQN agent. On
Atari, we show that retrieval-augmented R2D2
learns significantly faster than the baseline R2D2
agent and achieves higher scores. We run extensive ablations to measure the contributions of the
components of our proposed method.
*

1
Equal contribution
Mila, Université de Montréal
DeepMind. Correspondence to: Anirudh Goyal <anirudhgoyal9119@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
A host is preparing a holiday meal for friends. They remember that the last time they went to the grocery store
during the holiday season, all of the fresh produce was sold
out. Thinking back to this past experience, they decide to
go early! The hypothetical host is employing case-based
reasoning (e.g., Kolodner, 1992; Leake, 1996). Here, an
agent recalls a situation similar to the current one and uses
information from the previous experience to solve the current task. This may involve adapting old solutions to meet
new demands, or using previous experiences to make sense
of new situations.
In contrast, a dominant paradigm in modern reinforcement
learning (RL) is to learn general purpose behaviour rules
from the agent’s past experience. These rules are typically
represented in the weights of a parametric policy or value
function network model. Most deep RL algorithms integrate
information across trajectories by iteratively updating network parameters using gradients that are computed along
individual trajectories (collected online or stored in an experience replay dataset, Lin, 1992). For example, many
off-policy algorithms reuse past experience by “replaying”
trajectory snippets in order to compute weight updates for a
value function represented by a deep network (Ernst et al.,
2005; Riedmiller, 2005; Mnih et al., 2015b; Heess et al.,
2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015).
This paradigm has clear advantages but at least two interrelated limitations. First, after learning, an agent’s past
experiences no longer play a direct role in the agent’s behavior, even if they are relevant to the current situation.
This occurs because detailed information in the agent’s past
experience is lost due to practical constraints on network
capacity. Second, since the information provided by individual trajectories first needs to be distilled into a general
purpose parametric rule, an agent may not be able to exploit the specific guidance that a handful of individual past
experiences could provide, nor rapidly incorporate novel
experience that becomes available—it may take many replays through related traces in the past experiences for this
to occur (Weisz et al., 2021).
In this work, we develop an algorithm that overcomes these

