Closed-Form Diffeomorphic Transformations for Time Series Alignment

Iñigo Martinez 1 Elisabeth Viles 2 3 Igor G. Olaizola 1

Abstract
Time series alignment methods call for highly
expressive, differentiable and invertible warping
functions which preserve temporal topology, i.e
diffeomorphisms. Diffeomorphic warping functions can be generated from the integration of
velocity fields governed by an ordinary differential equation (ODE). Gradient-based optimization
frameworks containing diffeomorphic transformations require to calculate derivatives to the differential equation’s solution with respect to the
model parameters, i.e. sensitivity analysis. Unfortunately, deep learning frameworks typically
lack automatic-differentiation-compatible sensitivity analysis methods; and implicit functions,
such as the solution of ODE, require particular
care. Current solutions appeal to adjoint sensitivity methods, ad-hoc numerical solvers or ResNet’s
Eulerian discretization. In this work, we present
a closed-form expression for the ODE solution
and its gradient under continuous piecewise-affine
(CPA) velocity functions. We present a highly optimized implementation of the results on CPU and
GPU. Furthermore, we conduct extensive experiments on several datasets to validate the generalization ability of our model to unseen data for
time-series joint alignment. Results show significant improvements both in terms of efficiency and
accuracy.

1. Introduction and Context
Time series data recurrently appears misaligned or warped
in time despite exhibiting amplitude and shape similarity.
Temporal misalignment, often caused by differences in ex1
Vicomtech Foundation, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), San Sebastian, Spain 2 TECNUN School
of Engineering, University of Navarra, San Sebastian, Spain
3
Institute of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, University
of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. Correspondence to: Iñigo Martinez
<imartinez@vicomtech.org>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Ours
(2022)

UCR NCC Accuracy

76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62 Euclidean

SoftDTW
(2017)

DTAN
(2019)

ResNet-TW
(2021)

DBA
(2011)
Diameter

10 25

50

Winning
datasets

Figure 1. Correct classification rates using NCC on UCR archive
(Dau et al., 2019). Radius denotes the number of datasets in which
each method achieved top accuracy. Our method was better or no
worse than 94% of the datasets compared with Euclidean, DBA
(77%), SoftDTW (69%), DTAN (76%), ResNet-TW (70%).

ecution, sampling rates, or the number of measurements,
confounds statistical analysis to the point where even the
sample mean of semantically-close time series can obfuscate
actual peaks and valleys, generate non-existent features and
be rendered almost meaningless. Indeed, ignoring temporal
variability can greatly decrease recognition and classification performance (Veeraraghavan et al., 2009).
Time series alignment can be solved by finding a set of
optimal and plausible warping functions ϕ between observations of the same process so that their temporal variability
is minimized. Alignment methods have become critical for
many applications involving time series data, such as bioinformatics, computer vision, industrial data, speech recognition & synthesis, or human action recognition (Srivastava &
Klassen, 2016). Temporal warping functions extend from
low dimensional global transformations described by a few
parameters (e.g. affine transformations) to high dimensional
non-rigid transformations specified at each point of the domain (e.g. diffeomorphisms). A (C 1 ) diffeomorphism is
a differentiable invertible map with a differentiable inverse
(Duistermaat & Kolk, 2000). Diffeomorphisms belong to
the group of homeomorphisms that preserve topology by
design, and thereby are a natural choice in the context of nonlinear time warping, where continuous, differentiable and
invertible functions are preferred (Mumford & Desolneux,

