Federated Learning with Positive and Unlabeled Data

Xinyang Lin * 1 Hanting Chen * 2 Yixing Xu 2 Chao Xu 3 Xiaolin Gui 1 Yiping Deng 4 Yunhe Wang† 2

Abstract
We study the problem of learning from positive
and unlabeled (PU) data in the federated setting,
where each client only labels a little part of their
dataset due to the limitation of resources and time.
Different from the settings in traditional PU learning where the negative class consists of a single
class, the negative samples which cannot be identified by a client in the federated setting may come
from multiple classes which are unknown to the
client. Therefore, existing PU learning methods
can be hardly applied in this situation. To address this problem, we propose a novel framework, namely Federated learning with Positive
and Unlabeled data (FedPU), to minimize the expected risk of multiple negative classes by leveraging the labeled data in other clients. We theoretically analyze the generalization bound of the proposed FedPU. Empirical experiments show that
the FedPU can achieve much better performance
than conventional supervised and semi-supervised
federated learning methods.

1. Introduction
With the development of edge devices (e.g., cameras, microphones, and GPS), more and more decentralized data
are collected and locally stored by different users. Due to
the privacy and transmission concerns, users are unwilling
or not allowed to share the data with each other. In this
case, classical machine learning scheme can hardly learn a
globally effective model for all the users. Therefore, federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017) is proposed to derive
a model with high performance in the central server by
leveraging multiple local models trained by users (clients)
*
Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Electronic and Information
Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Department of Machine
Intelligence, Peking University, China 4 Central Software Institution, Huawei Technologies. Correspondence to: Yunhe Wang†
<yunhe.wang@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

themselves, which ensures the privacy of the local data.
Typically, there is a common assumption in federated learning that the local data (private data) stored on user devices
is well refined (i.e., all of the local data is labeled with
ground truth). However, considering the limitation of time
and resources, only part of the private data in each client
are labeled in reality. To this end, some of the previous
works were proposed to address this federated learning problem following a semi-supervised scheme. (Jeong et al.,
2021) proposed the FedMatch algorithm which introduced
a new inter-client consistency loss and decomposed the parameters for labeled and unlabeled data. (Zhang et al.,
2020) managed to solve this problem by conducting a novel
grouping-based model average method and improved the
convergence efficiency. (Itahara et al., 2020) proposed a
distillation-based algorithm to exchange the local models
among each client and learned the unlabeled data by pseudo
labels. Although these methods can successfully address
the semi-supervised learning problem for federated learning,
they assume that each class has labeled samples in each
client. However, in real world applications, users from each
client may only label part of categories due to their limited
ability.
To address the aforementioned problem, we consider a more
general setting of federated learning with unlabeled data:
1) each client only labels part of their own data which
comes from part of the classes; 2) there are no data in the
central server; 3) nothing except parameters of models can
be exchanged between clients and the central server. Note
that the first constraint of our setting meets the problem of
learning from positive and unlabeled (PU) data. Existing
PU methods (Liu et al., 2003; Liu & Tao, 2015; Xu et al.,
2017) focused on solving the PU problem which regard the
negative class (class that contains no labeled samples) as a
single class. However, since negative class in one client may
consist of multiple positive classes in other clients, there are
multiple negative classes in one client in federated learning,
which results in a multiple-positive-multiple-negative PU
(MPMN-PU) learning problem and cannot be solved using
existing PU learning framework.
In this paper, we propose the Federated learning with Positive and Unlabeled data (FedPU) algorithm, where the local
model in each client is trained with MPMN-PU data. We

