Deep equilibrium networks are sensitive
to initialization statistics
Atish Agarwala 1 Samuel S. Schoenholz 1

Abstract

for any Vector-Jacobian Products (VJPs) of the DEQ layer
which can also be found using a fixed point solver. Training
DEQs requires careful consideration of both initialization
as well as the solver used to find the fixed points (Bai et al.,
2019; 2021). This gives another way to trade off memory and compute, but brings the additional complication
of maintaining convergence of solvers throughout learning.
For example, most practical applications use small initializations to maintain stability (Bai et al., 2019). Empirical
approaches to stabilize learning include regularization of
the Jacobian of the DEQ map (Bai et al., 2021).

Deep equilibrium networks (DEQs) are a promising way to construct models which trade off memory for compute. However, theoretical understanding of these models is still lacking compared to
traditional networks, in part because of the repeated application of a single set of weights. We
show that DEQs are sensitive to the higher order
statistics of the matrix families from which they
are initialized. In particular, initializing with orthogonal or symmetric matrices allows for greater
stability in training. This gives us a practical prescription for initializations which allow for training with a broader range of initial weight scales.

1. Introduction
Deep equilibrium networks (DEQs) are a network architecture which uses implicitly-defined layers to get benefits of
deep networks with a smaller memory footprint (Bai et al.,
2019). DEQs have shown competitive performance on image tasks (Bai et al., 2020; Gilton et al., 2021), as well as
on language tasks with transformer DEQ models (Bai et al.,
2019; 2021).
A DEQ layer can be defined as follows: given an input x,
the output z∗ of a DEQ layer is given implicitly by
∗

∗

z = fθ (x, z )

(1)

for a function f parameterized by θ. One way to solve for z∗
is via direct iteration; in this case the DEQ can be interpreted
as a deep network with identical parameters for each layer
(tied weights), as opposed to the more traditional case of
independent parameters for each layer (untied weights).
Despite their implicit definition, DEQs can be trained with
backpropagation. Equation 1 gives an implicit equation
1

Google Research, Brain Team.
Correspondence to:
Atish Agarwala <thetish@google.com>, Samuel S. Schoenholz
<schsam@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

While deep networks with untied weights have many
theoretically-motivated initialization schemes (Glorot &
Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015; Martens et al., 2021; Schoenholz et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2018), understanding initialization in implicitly defined networks is a relatively new field
(El Ghaoui et al., 2021; Massaroli et al., 2020; Winston &
Kolter, 2021). Some progress has been made on understanding DEQs in the wide-network limit by formally relating
their properties to wide networks in the untied weights setting (Feng & Kolter, 2020). However, in practical settings
DEQs are often trained in a regime where the Jacobians approach divergence (Bai et al., 2019; 2021) - or equivalently,
in regimes where the DEQ effectively has large depth. This
is precisely the regime where the wide network limit breaks
down (Hanin & Nica, 2019).
In this paper we develop a theory of DEQs at initialization
which allows us to understand the differences between the
DEQ setting and the traditional untied weights setting. In
particular, we show that the choice of initial matrix family
can lead to quantitatively different behavior even in the wide
network limit. Using the linear DEQ, whose output can be
computed analytically, we prove the following:
• We compute the convergence properties of the fixed
point for random i.i.d. matrices.
• We prove that the tied weights setting is qualitatively
and quantitatively different than the untied weights setting, particularly when using non-i.i.d Gaussian weight
matrices.
• We show that variance is reduced when initializing with

