Active Sampling for Min-Max Fairness

Jacob Abernethy 1 Pranjal Awasthi 2 Matthäus Kleindessner 3 Jamie Morgenstern 4 Chris Russell 3 Jie Zhang 4

Abstract
We propose simple active sampling and reweighting strategies for optimizing min-max fairness
that can be applied to any classification or regression model learned via loss minimization. The
key intuition behind our approach is to use at
each timestep a datapoint from the group that is
worst off under the current model for updating
the model. The ease of implementation and the
generality of our robust formulation make it an attractive option for improving model performance
on disadvantaged groups. For convex learning
problems, such as linear or logistic regression, we
provide a fine-grained analysis, proving the rate
of convergence to a min-max fair solution.

1. Introduction
A model trained on a dataset containing multiple demographic groups typically has unequal error rates across the
different groups, either because some groups are underrepresented in the training data or the underlying learning task
is inherently harder for particular groups. Many existing
fairness notions aim to equalize the performance on different demographic groups (e.g., Hardt et al., 2016; Zafar
et al., 2019), which can result in deliberately down-grading
the performance on the better off groups and unnecessarily
reducing overall performance. This degradation of performance can correspond to a loss of access to relevant services,
which is referred to as “leveling-down” in law and ethics
where it has received substantial criticism (Holtug, 1998;
Temkin, 2000; Doran, 2001; Mason, 2001; Brown, 2003;
Christiano and Braynen, 2008). In contrast, min-max notions of fairness offer an alternative approach. These notions
“level-up”, by adopting an optimization perspective that pri1
Georgia Tech, USA 2 Google, USA 3 Amazon Web Services, Germany 4 University of Washington, USA. Correspondence to: J. Abernethy <prof@gatech.edu>, P. Awasthi <pranjalawasthi@google.com>, M. Kleindessner <matkle@amazon.de>,
J. Morgenstern <jamiemmt@cs.washington.edu>, C. Russell <cmruss@amazon.de>, J. Zhang <claizhan@uw.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

oritizes improving the model’s performance on the group for
which performance is the worst. Such optimizations only
degrade the performance on a group if it will improve the
performance on the worst off group (Martinez et al., 2020;
Diana et al., 2021).
In this paper, we propose simple and theoretically principled
algorithms for min-max fairness (formally defined in Section 2). We provide a general template in Algorithm 1. The
key idea underlying our approach is to adaptively sample
or reweight data from worst off groups. The intent is that
by providing additional data for these groups, or increasing
the weights associated with them, we improve the model’s
performance on these groups. This is a compellingly simple
approach to mitigating loss disparity between groups, and
we show that for convex learning problems such methods
indeed provably minimize the maximum per-group loss.
We consider two concrete variants of Algorithm 1. The first
one (Algorithm 2) simply samples a point from the worst off
group and updates model parameters via stochastic gradient
descent. We show in Theorem 1 that Algorithm
2 converges
√
to a min-max fair solution at a rate of ∼ 1/ T (as a function
of the number of iterations T ), assuming a convex loss
function. Our second approach (Algorithm 3), accelerated
min-max gradient descent, converges to a min-max fair
solution at a faster rate of ∼ 1/T .
The accelerated Algorithm 3 is based on an adaptive
reweighting scheme and performs in each iteration a gradient descent step for optimizing a weighted population
loss. In contrast, Algorithm 2 samples, in each iteration, a
datapoint from the worst off group and uses it for performing a stochastic gradient descent step. While Algorithm 3
achieves a faster rate of convergence, Algorithm 2 is conceptually simpler, easier to implement and efficient in practice
due to the stochastic nature of the updates. We also provide finite sample generalization bounds for Algorithm 2.
We present an empirical evaluation of both our proposed
algorithms in Section 5.

2. Preliminaries
Let Z be our data space; any z ∈ Z represents a population sample containing both the observed features and
the unobserved label. We assume that there are g disjoint

