Only Tails Matter: Average-Case Universality and
Robustness in the Convex Regime

Leonardo Cunha 1 Gauthier Gidel 1 2 Fabian Pedregosa 3 Damien Scieur 4 Courtney Paquette 5

Abstract
The recently developed average-case analysis
of optimization methods allows a more finegrained and representative convergence analysis
than usual worst-case results. In exchange, this
analysis requires a more precise hypothesis over
the data generating process, namely assuming
knowledge of the expected spectral distribution
(ESD) of the random matrix associated with the
problem. This work shows that the concentration of eigenvalues near the edges of the ESD
determines a problem’s asymptotic average complexity. This a priori information on this concentration is a more grounded assumption than
complete knowledge of the ESD. This approximate concentration is effectively a middle ground
between the coarseness of the worst-case scenario
convergence and the restrictive previous averagecase analysis. We also introduce the Generalized
Chebyshev method, asymptotically optimal under
a hypothesis on this concentration and globally
optimal when the ESD follows a Beta distribution. We compare its performance to classical
optimization algorithms, such as gradient descent
or Nesterov’s scheme, and we show that, in the
average-case context, Nesterov’s method is universally nearly optimal asymptotically.

Despite their relevance, average-case analyses are difficult
to extend to other algorithms, partly because of the intrinsic issue of defining a typical distribution over problem
instances. Recently though, Pedregosa & Scieur (2020)
derived a framework to systemically evaluate the complexity of first-order methods when applied to distributions of
quadratic minimization problems. This derivation is done by
relating the average-case convergence rate to the expected
spectral distribution (ESD) of the objective function’s Hessian, which is a well-studied object in random matrix theory.
In practice, however, the knowledge of the ESD is a much
stronger requirement than the worst-case analysis, which
relies only on knowledge of the distribution’s support.
Paquette et al. (2022) extended the average-case framework
by introducing a noisy generative model for the problems.
Among other results, they derived the average complexity
of the Nesterov Accelerated Method (Nesterov, 2003) on
a particular distribution. Moreover, they showed the concentration of convergence metrics in the infinite sample and
dimensional limit.
Scieur & Pedregosa (2020) showed that for a strongly convex problem with eigenvalues supported on a contiguous
interval, the optimal average-case complexity converges
asymptotically to the one given by the Polyak Heavy Ball
method (Polyak, 1964) in the worst-case.

1. Introduction
The analysis of the average complexity of algorithms has
a long tradition in computer science. Average-case complexity, for instance, drives much of the decisions made in
cryptography (Bogdanov & Trevisan, 2006).
1

MILA and DIRO, Université de Montreal, Montreal,
Canada 2 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 3 Google Research 4 Samsung
SAIT AI Lab, Montreal, Canada 5 McGill University, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to: Leonardo Cunha <leonardocunha2107@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Concentration around the
edges drive complexity

Figure 1. Representation of different spectra with different concentrations of eigenvalues around the support edges. These concentrations determine the average-case rates for non-strongly problems.

