Strategies for Safe Multi-Armed Bandits with Logarithmic Regret and Risk

Tianrui Chen 1 Aditya Gangrade 2 Venkatesh Saligrama 1

Abstract
We investigate a natural but surprisingly unstudied approach to the multi-armed bandit problem
under safety risk constraints. Each arm is associated with an unknown law on safety risks and
rewards, and the learner’s goal is to maximise
reward whilst not playing unsafe arms, as determined by a given threshold on the mean risk.
We formulate a pseudo-regret for this setting that
enforces this safety constraint in a per-round way
by softly penalising any violation, regardless of
the gain in reward due to the same. This has
practical relevance to scenarios such as clinical
trials, where one must maintain safety for each
round rather than in an aggregated sense.
We describe doubly optimistic strategies for this
scenario, which maintain optimistic indices for
both safety risk and reward. We show that schema
based on both frequentist and Bayesian indices
satisfy tight gap-dependent logarithmic regret
bounds, and further that these play unsafe arms
only logarithmically many times in total. This theoretical analysis is complemented by simulation
studies demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed schema, and probing the domains in which
their use is appropriate.

ensuring that unsafe arms—those for which ν k > α—are
not played too often.
We propose the following regret formulation to model the
above criteria. Let µ∗ be the mean reward of the largest safe
action, i.e, the largest µk over arms such that ν k ≤ α. Let
At be the arm pulled by the algorithm at time t. We study
X
RT :=
max(µ∗ − µAt , ν At − α).
(1)
t≤T

Before describing the results, let us sketch a scenario of
particular interest, which informs our formulation.
Clinical Trials. Trial drugs have both positive (eg. curing a
disease) and negative side-effects (headaches, nausea, etc)
on a patient in a clinical trial, and it is as much in the interest
of a patient to ensure that negative side effects are limited as
it is to ensure that the drug is effective (e.g. Genovese et al.,
2013). This scenario motivates the problem of choosing
drug and dosage (arms) that have the maximum positive
response while ensuring that the side-effects remain below
some threshold α. Since each patient responds differently,
the observed response and the manifestation of side-effects
for a specific patient can be modelled as random-variables,
with the corresponding means representing population averages. Importantly, for such a scenario, safety must be
accounted for in a per-round sense - it does no good to alternate between assigning ineffective placebos and effective
but harmful doses. Instead we need to ensure that individuals are not exposed to undue risk while accruing benefits.
How does our formulation account for this scenario?

1. Introduction
We consider the safety constrained multi-armed bandit problem, where each arm, k ∈ [1 : K] is modelled by a tuple,
consisting of a stochastic reward, of mean µk , and an associated stochastic safety-risk, of mean ν k . Upon playing
an arm, the learner observes noisy instances of the reward
and safety-risk. The learner is provided with a tolerated risk
level, denoted α, and the goal of the safe bandit problem is
to maximise the reward gained over the course of play, while
1
Boston University 2 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Aditya Gangrade <agangra2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

• Risk Per Round. Regret ensures that unsafe arms are
rarely played in a per-round (per-patient) sense rather than
ensuring safety in an overall sense–for any k ̸= k ∗ , at
least one of µ∗ − µk or ν k − α must be positive, and so
benefits in efficacy due to unsafe dosages are discounted.
• Small safety violations are penalized less (smoothness).
Small violations of negative side-effects is a permissible
risk (elevated nausea level than desired), worth taking on
for a few patients, in the hope of finding a drug/dosage
that is effective for the population. Our penalty on safety
violations is smooth.
• Control of Cumulative risk and Violations Since choosing
an infeasible arm in any round contributes a constant
amount to the regret, a small RT further ensures that the

