Permutation Search of Tensor Network Structures
via Local Sampling

Chao Li * 1 Junhua Zeng * 2 1 Zerui Tao 3 1 Qibin Zhao 1

Abstract
Recent works put much effort into tensor network
structure search (TN-SS), aiming to select suitable tensor network (TN) structures, involving the
TN-ranks, formats, and so on, for the decomposition or learning tasks. In this paper, we consider
a practical variant of TN-SS, dubbed TN permutation search (TN-PS), in which we search for good
mappings from tensor modes onto TN vertices
(core tensors) for compact TN representations.
We conduct a theoretical investigation of TN-PS
and propose a practically-efficient algorithm to
resolve the problem. Theoretically, we prove the
counting and metric properties of search spaces
of TN-PS, analyzing for the first time the impact
of TN structures on these unique properties. Numerically, we propose a novel meta-heuristic algorithm, in which the searching is done by randomly sampling in a neighborhood established
in our theory, and then recurrently updating the
neighborhood until convergence. Numerical results demonstrate that the new algorithm can reduce the required model size of TNs in extensive
benchmarks, implying the improvement in the expressive power of TNs. Furthermore, the computational cost for the new algorithm is significantly
less than that in (Li & Sun, 2020).

1. Introduction
Over the years, tensor network (TN) has been widely applied to various technical fields. It enables us to resolve
extremely high-dimensional problems, such as deep learning (Novikov et al., 2015; Kossaifi et al., 2020), probability
*
Equal contribution 1 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (RIKEN-AIP), Tokyo, Japan 2 School of Automation,
Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China 3 Tokyo
University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Qibin Zhao <qibin.zhao@riken.jp>, Chao Li
<chao.li@riken.jp>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

density estimation (Glasser et al., 2019; Miller et al., 2021;
Novikov et al., 2021), partial differential equations (Bachmayr et al., 2016; Richter et al., 2021), and quantum circuit
simulation (Markov & Shi, 2008; Huggins et al., 2019), with
acceptable computational and storage costs. However, as an
inevitable side-effect, practitioners have to face a notorious
challenge when applying TNs to practical tasks: how to
efficiently select the optimal TN structures from a massive
quantity of candidates?
Recent works thus put effort into this challenge, in the
heading of TN structure search (TN-SS). Most recently,
there have been studies, which focus on searching TN
ranks (Hashemizadeh et al., 2020; Kodryan et al., 2020), formats (Hayashi et al., 2019; Li & Sun, 2020), and orders (Li
et al., 2020; Qiu et al., 2021) to achieve more compact representations. These results also confirm numerically that the
structures impact the expressive power (Cohen et al., 2016)
of TNs in learning tasks.
In this paper, we consider a practical variant of TN-SS. The
goal is to improve the compactness and expressiveness of a
TN while preserving its format, such as tensor train (TT, Oseledets 2011) or tensor ring (TR, Zhao et al. 2016). Several
existing works (Zhao et al., 2016; Zheng et al., 2021) have
noticed that the mapping from tensor modes onto the TN
vertices, also known as core tensors, also influences the expressive power of the model. To see this, we implement a toy
experiment, in which TR is utilized to approximate a tensor
of order four. Figure 1 shows the required ranks for achieving the same approximation accuracy in the experiment. We
see that a good “mode-vertex” mapping (corresponding to
Model 1) would produce smaller ranks than the other two
models. It implies lower computational and storage costs
and more promising generalization capability in learning
tasks (Khavari & Rabusseau, 2021). This fact thus motivates this work for searching both the optimal TN-ranks and
“mode-vertex” mappings.
Despite the potential benefit, searching for the optimal
“mode-vertex” mappings is non-trivial in general. For instance, there would be O(N !) different candidates for TR
of order N ≥ 3 even though the optimal ranks are known. It
is apparently unacceptable to solve it by exhaustive search,
particularly when combinatorially searching the TN-ranks

