Multi-scale Feature Learning Dynamics: Insights for Double Descent

Mohammad Pezeshki 1 2 Amartya Mitra 3 Yoshua Bengio 1 2 4 Guillaume Lajoie 1 5 4

Abstract
An intriguing phenomenon that arises from the
high-dimensional learning dynamics of neural networks is the phenomenon of “double descent”.
The more commonly studied aspect of this phenomenon corresponds to model-wise double descent where the test error exhibits a second descent with increasing model complexity, beyond
the classical U-shaped error curve. In this work,
we investigate the origins of the less studied
epoch-wise double descent in which the test error
undergoes two non-monotonous transitions, or descents as the training time increases. We study a
linear teacher-student setup exhibiting epoch-wise
double descent similar to that in deep neural networks. In this setting, we derive closed-form analytical expressions describing the generalization
error in terms of low-dimensional scalar macroscopic variables. We find that double descent can
be attributed to distinct features being learned at
different scales: as fast-learning features overfit,
slower-learning features start to fit, resulting in
a second descent in test error. We validate our
findings through numerical simulations where our
theory accurately predicts empirical findings and
remains consistent with observations in deep neural networks.

1. Introduction
Classical wisdom in statistical learning theory predicts a
trade-off between the generalization ability of a machine
learning model and its complexity, with highly complex
models less likely to generalize well (Friedman et al.,
2001). If the number of parameters measures complex1
Mila, Québec AI Institute 2 Dept. of Computer Science and
Operational Research, Université de Montréal 3 University of California, Riverside 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 5 Dept. of Mathematics
and Statistics, Université de Montréal. Correspondence to: Mohammad Pezeshki <pezeshki@mila.quebec>, Guillaume Lajoie
<g.lajoie@umontreal.ca>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ity, deep learning models sometimes go against this prediction (Zhang et al., 2016): deep neural networks trained
by stochastic gradient descent exhibit a so-called double
descent behavior (Spigler et al., 2019; Belkin et al., 2019b)
with increasing model parameters. Specifically, with increasing complexity, the generalization error first obeys the
classical U-shaped curve consistent with statistical learning
theory. However, a second regime emerges as the number
of parameters is further increased past a transition threshold
where generalization error drops again, hence the “double
descent” or more accurately model-wise double descent.
Nakkiran et al. (2019) showed that the phenomenon of double descent is not limited to varying model size and is also
observed as a function of training time or epochs. In this
case as well, the so-called epoch-wise double descent is in
apparent contradiction with the classical understanding of
overfitting (Vapnik, 1998), where one expects that longer
training of a sufficiently large model beyond a certain threshold should result in overfitting. This has important implications for practitioners and raises questions about one of
the most widely used regularization method in deep learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016): early stopping. Indeed, while
one might expect early stopping to prevent overfitting, it
might in fact prevent models from being trained at their
fullest potential.
While there has been significant interest, starting from
1990s, to understand the origins of the non-trivial generalization behaviors of neural networks (Opper, 1995; Opper
& Kinzel, 1996; Ba et al., 2019; Mei & Montanari, 2019;
d’Ascoli et al., 2020; Gerace et al., 2020), the majority of
this previous work has been to understand the asymptotic or
end-of-training model performance. In recent years though,
there has been an interest in studying the non-asymptotic
(finite training) performance (e.g. Saxe et al., 2013; Advani
& Saxe, 2017; Kalimeris et al., 2019; Pezeshki et al., 2020;
Stephenson & Lee, 2021). Among the limited work studying the particular epoch-wise double descent, Nakkiran et al.
(2019) introduces the notion of effective model complexity
and hypothesizes that it increases with training time and
hence unifies both model-wise and epoch-wise double descent phenomena. Heckel & Yilmaz (2020) also study the
dynamics of evolution of single and two layer networks and
show that the superposition of two bias/variance trade-off
curves with different minima leads to a double descent.

