A Simple yet Universal Strategy for Online Convex Optimization

Lijun Zhang 1 2 Guanghui Wang 1 Jinfeng Yi 3 Tianbao Yang 4

Abstract
Recently, several universal methods have been
proposed for online convex optimization, and attain minimax rates for multiple types of convex
functions simultaneously. However, they need to
design and optimize one surrogate loss for each
type of functions, making it difficult to exploit
the structure of the problem and utilize existing
algorithms. In this paper, we propose a simple
strategy for universal online convex optimization,
which avoids these limitations. The key idea is
to construct a set of experts to process the original online functions, and deploy a meta-algorithm
over the linearized losses to aggregate predictions
from experts. Specifically, the meta-algorithm
is required to yield a second-order bound with
excess losses, so that it can leverage strong convexity and exponential concavity to control the
meta-regret. In this way, our strategy inherits the
theoretical guarantee of any expert designed for
strongly convex functions and exponentially concave functions, up to a double logarithmic factor.
As a result, we can plug in off-the-shelf online
solvers as black-box experts to deliver problemdependent regret bounds. For general convex
functions, it maintains the minimax optimality
and also achieves a small-loss bound.

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) has become a leading
online learning framework, and is able to model various realworld problems such as online routing and spam filtering
(Hazan, 2016). OCO can be seen as a structured repeated
game, with the following protocol. At each round t, the
online learner chooses xt from a convex set X . After com1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 3 Frontis.AI, Beijing, China 4 Department of Computer
Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA. Correspondence
to: Lijun Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright
2022 by the author(s).

mitting to this choice, a convex cost function ft : X 7→ R is
revealed, and the loss incurred by the learner is ft (xt ). The
learner
PTaims to minimize the cumulative loss over T rounds,
i.e., t=1 ft (xt ), which is equivalent to minimizing the
regret:
T
T
X
X
ft (xt ) − min
ft (x)
(1)
t=1

x∈X

t=1

defined as the excess loss suffered by the learner compared
to the minimum loss of any fixed choice.
In the literature, there are plenty of algorithms for OCO
(Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Shalev-Shwartz, 2011). √
For
example, online gradient
descent
(OGD)
with
O(1/
t)
√
step size achieves O( T ) regret for general convex functions (Zinkevich, 2003); OGD with O(1/t) step size attains O(log T ) regret for strongly convex functions (ShalevShwartz et al., 2007); online Newton step (ONS) enjoys
O(d log T ) regret for exponentially concave (abbr. expconcave) functions, where d is the dimensionality (Hazan
et al., 2007). Besides, there exist more powerful online
algorithms such as ADAGRAD (Duchi et al., 2011) that are
equipped with problem-dependent regret bounds (Srebro
et al., 2010; Chiang et al., 2012; Kingma & Ba, 2015; Mukkamala & Hein, 2017; Reddi et al., 2018), which become
tighter when the problem has special structures. Although
we have rich theories for OCO, its application requires heavy
domain knowledge: Users must know the type of functions
in order to select an appropriate algorithm, and when dealing
with strongly convex functions and exp-concave functions,
they also need to estimate the moduli of strong convexity
and exponential concavity.
The lack of universality of previous algorithms motivates the
development of universal methods for OCO (Bartlett et al.,
2008; Do et al., 2009). One milestone is MetaGrad of van
Erven & Koolen (2016), which can handle general convex
functions as well as exp-concave functions. Later, Wang
et al. (2019) propose Maler, which further supports strongly
convex functions explicitly. In a subsequent work, Wang
et al. (2020b) develop UFO, which exploits smoothness
to deliver small-loss regret bounds, i.e., regret bounds that
depend on the minimal loss. However, the three aforementioned methods need to design one surrogate loss for each
possible type of functions, which is both tedious and challenging. Furthermore, because they rely on surrogate losses,

