Role-based Multiplex Network Embedding

Hegui Zhang 1 Gang Kou 1

Abstract
In recent years, multiplex network embedding has
received great attention from researchers. However, existing multiplex network embedding methods neglect structural role information, which can
be used to determine the structural similarity between nodes. To overcome this shortcoming, this
work proposes a simple, effective, role-based embedding method for multiplex networks, called
RMNE. The RMNE uses the structural role information of nodes to preserve the structural similarity between nodes in the entire multiplex network.
Specifically, a role-modified random walk is designed to generate node sequences of each node,
which can capture both the within-layer neighbors,
structural role members, and cross-layer structural
role members of a node. Additionally, the variant
of RMNE extends the existing collaborative embedding method by unifying the structural role information into our method to obtain the role-based
node representations. Finally, the proposed methods are evaluated on the network reconstruction,
node classification, link prediction, and multiclass edge classification tasks. The experimental results on eight public, real-world multiplex
networks demonstrate that the proposed methods
outperform state-of-the-art baseline methods.

1. Introduction
The wide applicability of networks and their success in describing real-world complex systems, for example social
(Zhang et al., 2022), traffic(Dapeng & Xiao, 2021), biological (Seninge et al., 2021), and financial (Acemoglu et al.,
2015; Zha et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2021; Stolbov et al., 2021)
systems, have thus garnered considerable research attention
in many fields. Motivated by the demands of network analy1
School of Business Administration, Faculty of Business
Administration, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu 611130, China. Correspondence to: Gang Kou
<kougang@swufe.edu.cn;kougang@yahoo.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

sis tasks, such as node classification, link prediction, node
clustering, and community detection, many network embedding methods (Cui et al., 2018) have been proposed to learn
low-dimensional vector representations of nodes. Unsupervised network representation learning embeds a node representation vector without any external supervision labels.
The basic strategy to extract node embedding is leveraging
the node proximity or structural similarity in the network
structure to learn dense low dimension representations. For
instance, DeepWalk (Perozzi et al., 2014) and Node2vec
(Grover & Leskovec, 2016) capture a node’s proximity by
maximizing the probability of its neighbors generated by a
random walk. Role2vec (Ahmed et al., 2020) learns rolebased embeddings that capture structural roles based on an
attributed random walk. However, most existing popular
methods predominately focus on the single-layer networks
(Khosla et al., 2019), but real-world systems are highly complex; so, using multiplex networks to model these systems
tends to be more realistic (Mucha et al., 2010; Osat et al.,
2017).
Most real networks have the nature of multiplicity, and there
are typically different types of connectivity between two
entities. For instance, in a social network, users are usually
connected through different relationships, such as friends,
colleagues, or relatives. Recent research has demonstrated
that ignoring the multiplicity of multiplex networks can be
potentially dangerous, leading to severe consequences in
system analysis (Osat et al., 2017). Therefore, multiplex
(also known as multi-layer, multi-view or multi-relation) networks are more suitable for modeling complex systems, in
which layers share the same set of individuals but may have
different connectivity between two individuals in different
layers (a toy example is shown in Figure 1).
Compared with a single-layer network, the embedding of a
multiplex network is more challenging due to several reasons. First, the embedding method should be able to capture
the structural information of the whole multiplex network
rather than a single network, that is, the embedding method
should make full use of the structural information of each
layer of the multiplex network to improve the embedding
quality. Second, the embedding method should be able
to capture node proximity and structural similarity both in
within- and cross-layer nodes. The existing research has
denoted that the concept of structural roles is very suitable

