OFA: Unifying Architectures, Tasks, and Modalities Through a Simple
Sequence-to-Sequence Learning Framework

Peng Wang An Yang Rui Men Junyang Lin Shuai Bai
Zhikang Li Jianxin Ma Chang Zhou Jingren Zhou Hongxia Yang

Figure 1. Examples of various tasks supported by OFA.

Abstract
In this work, we pursue a unified paradigm for
multimodal pretraining to break the shackles
of complex task/modality-specific customization.
We propose OFA, a Task-Agnostic and ModalityAgnostic framework that supports Task Comprehensiveness. OFA unifies a diverse set of crossmodal and unimodal tasks, including image generation, visual grounding, image captioning, image
classification, language modeling, etc., in a simple
sequence-to-sequence learning framework. OFA
follows the instruction-based learning in both pretraining and finetuning stages, requiring no extra task-specific layers for downstream tasks. In
comparison with the recent state-of-the-art vision
& language models that rely on extremely large
cross-modal datasets, OFA is pretrained on only
20M publicly available image-text pairs. Despite
its simplicity and relatively small-scale training
data, OFA achieves new SOTAs in a series of
cross-modal tasks while attaining highly competitive performances on uni-modal tasks. Our
further analysis indicates that OFA can also effec-

tively transfer to unseen tasks and unseen domains.
Our code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/OFA-Sys/OFA.

1. Introduction
Building an omnipotent model that handles many tasks and
modalities is an attractive goal in the AI community. The
possibilities of achieving this goal may largely depend on
whether massive varieties of modalities, tasks and training
regimes can be represented with only a few forms that can
be unified and managed by a single model or system.

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, China. Correspondence to:
Chang Zhou <ericzhou.zc@alibaba-inc.com>.

Recent developments of the Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017) architecture have shown its potential for being a universal computation engine (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020; Cobbe et al., 2021; Schneider et al., 2019; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Jaegle et al., 2021b; Su et al., 2019). In
the settings of supervised learning, the “pretrain-finetune”
paradigm achieves excellent success in many domains. In
the regimes of few-/zero-shot learning, language models
with prompt / instruction tuning prove powerful zero-/fewshot learners (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021; Sanh
et al., 2021). These advances have provided more significant
than ever opportunities for the emergence of an omni-model.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

To support better generalization for open-ended problems
while maintaining high multitask performance and ease of
use, we advocate that an omnipotent model should have the

