AnyMorph: Learning Transferable Polices By Inferring Agent Morphology

Brandon Trabucco 1 Mariano Phielipp * 2 Glen Berseth * 3

Abstract
The prototypical approach to reinforcement learning involves training policies tailored to a particular agent from scratch for every new morphology.
Recent work aims to eliminate the re-training of
policies by investigating whether a morphologyagnostic policy, trained on a diverse set of agents
with similar task objectives, can be transferred
to new agents with unseen morphologies without re-training. This is a challenging problem
that required previous approaches to use handdesigned descriptions of the new agent’s morphology. Instead of hand-designing this description,
we propose a data-driven method that learns a
representation of morphology directly from the
reinforcement learning objective. Ours is the first
reinforcement learning algorithm that can train a
policy to generalize to new agent morphologies
without requiring a description of the agent’s morphology in advance. We evaluate our approach on
the standard benchmark for agent-agnostic control, and improve over the current state of the art
in zero-shot generalization to new agents. Importantly, our method attains good performance
without an explicit description of morphology.

1. Introduction
Agent-agnostic reinforcement learning (RL) is an emerging research challenge that involves training policies that
are transferable to new agents with different morphology.
Rather than training policies from scratch for every new
agent, a pretrained agent-agnostic policy can provide an effective solution with potentially no additional training. The
core philosophy motivating agent-agnostic RL is a notion
that large multi-task models exhibit strong generalization
behavior. This result is continually observed in domains
outside robotics, where models like BERT (Devlin et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie
Mellon University, work done while at Intel AI 2 Intel AI 3 Mila.
Correspondence to: Brandon Trabucco <btrabucco@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Agent Design
Observation Format
Position

Angle

Action Format
Encode Morphology

Same
Sensors

Observation

Shoulder

Elbow

Same
Motors

Environment

Action

Figure 1. Overview of the architecture of our policy for an example
reinforcement learning task with three agent morphologies. The
agent’s morphology is represented by a sequence of tokens, and is
processed by a sequence-to-sequence Transformer policy.

2019), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), and CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) exemplify how large multi-task models zeroshot generalize in out-of-domain applications like CLIP in
robotics (Khandelwal et al., 2021). Agent-agnostic RL has
the potential to create policies with comparable generalization to these foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021).
However, agent-agnostic RL is hard because it requires an
effective representation of the agent’s morphology (Huang
et al., 2020), which remains a challenging research problem.
The morphology representation is crucial in agent-agnostic
reinforcement learning because it must contain all the information about the agent’s physics needed for control. In this
work, we consider how to learn this representation instead
of manually designing it, as is standard in current research.
Existing works have approached agent-agnostic RL by assuming the agent obeys strict design criteria. First, the agent
has limbs. Second, each limb has similar proprioceptive
sensors (Wang et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2020; Kurin et al.,
2021). These assumptions restrict agent-agnostic RL to
rigid-body agents in a MuJoCo-like (Todorov et al., 2012)
simulator that exposes congruent limb-observations. Deviating from prior work, we consider a setting that is more
flexible than prior work. Our method does not require the
agent to have limbs, nor does it require observations to be
annotated according to which limb they describe. Instead,
our method automatically infers how the agent’s sensors
and motors are connected from the RL objective, illustrated
in Figure 1. Our approach performs 16% better (see Section 6) than existing methods in zero-shot generalization to

