Consensus Multiplicative Weights Update: Learning to Learn using
Projector-based Game Signatures

Nelson Vadori 1 Rahul Savani 2 Thomas Spooner 1 Sumitra Ganesh 1

Abstract
Cheung and Piliouras (2020) recently showed that
two variants of the Multiplicative Weights Update
method - OMWU and MWU - display opposite
convergence properties depending on whether the
game is zero-sum or cooperative. Inspired by this
work and the recent literature on learning to optimize for single functions, we introduce a new
framework for learning last-iterate convergence to
Nash Equilibria in games, where the update rule’s
coefficients (learning rates) along a trajectory are
learnt by a reinforcement learning policy that is
conditioned on the nature of the game: the game
signature. We construct the latter using a new decomposition of two-player games into eight components corresponding to commutative projection
operators, generalizing and unifying recent game
concepts studied in the literature. We compare the
performance of various update rules when their
coefficients are learnt, and show that the RL policy is able to exploit the game signature across
a wide range of game types. In doing so, we introduce CMWU, a new algorithm that extends
consensus optimization to the constrained case,
has local convergence guarantees for zero-sum bimatrix games, and show that it enjoys competitive
performance on both zero-sum games with constant coefficients and across a spectrum of games
when its coefficients are learnt.

1. Introduction
Motivated by applications in game theory, optimization,
and Generative Adversarial Networks, the machine learning community has recently started using variants of the
gradient method, such as optimistic gradient (Daskalakis
1

J.P. Morgan AI Research 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of Liverpool. Correspondence to: Nelson Vadori <nelson.n.vadori@jpmorgan.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2018) and consensus optimization (Mescheder et al.,
2017). These methods enjoy linear convergence in cases
like (unconstrained) bilinear games, where standard gradient descent fails (see also (Azizian et al., 2020; Gidel
et al., 2019)). In the simplex-constrained setting where
"strategy weights" are restricted to be non-negative and sum
to one, deriving constant step-size 1 learning algorithms
that display last-iterate convergence is difficult: to the best
of our knowledge, existing algorithms include Optimistic
Multiplicative Weights Update (OMWU), Optimistic Mirror
Descent (OMD) and Optimistic Gradient Descent Ascent
(OGDA). Such convergence guarantees with constant stepsize were obtained for zero-sum bimatrix games in the case
of OMWU (Daskalakis & Panageas, 2019), and then extended to the convex-concave zero-sum setting (Lei et al.,
2021); for so-called "coherent" saddle point problems with a
Lipschitz condition in the case of OMD, which includes the
zero-sum bimatrix case (Mertikopoulos et al., 2019) (later
generalized in (Hsieh et al., 2019)); for zero-sum games
satisfying a so-called Saddle-Point Metric Subregularity
condition in the case of OGDA, which includes the bimatrix
and convex-concave setting (Wei et al., 2021). The difficulty
is in part due to simplex constraints on the weights: tweaking one coordinate impacts all others, making it difficult for
such an update rule to admit Nash Equilibria (NE) as fixed
points. Last-iterate convergence is sometimes referred to as
"pointwise", and has to be contrasted with convergence in
the time-averaged sense.
In this work, we introduce Consensus Multiplicative
Weights Update (CMWU), a new algorithm that extends
consensus optimization to the constrained case. It enjoys local last-iterate convergence to NE in the zero-sum bimatrix
case, using constant learning rates. In contrast to OMWU,
its update rule from t to t+1 only depends on players’ strategies at time t. In contrast to OMD and OGDA, CMWU does
not require the computation of mirror coordinates, although
it requires a second order term. OMWU, CMWU and OMD
all use softmax projection, but OGDA requires an orthogonal projection onto the unit simplex with respect to the L2
norm, which requires vector sorting.
CMWU, like OMWU, OMD and OGDA, has convergence
1

in the sense of time-independence.

