A Hierarchical Transitive-Aligned Graph Kernel for Un-attributed Graphs

Lu Bai 1 2 Lixin Cui 2 Edwin R. Hancock 3

Abstract
In this paper, we develop a new graph kernel,
namely the Hierarchical Transitive-Aligned Kernel, by transitively aligning the vertices between
graphs through a family of hierarchical prototype
graphs. Comparing to most existing state-of-theart graph kernels, the proposed kernel has three
theoretical advantages. First, it incorporates the
locational correspondence information between
graphs into the kernel computation, and thus
overcomes the shortcoming of ignoring structural
correspondences arising in most R-convolution
kernels. Second, it guarantees the transitivity
between the correspondence information that is
not available for most existing matching kernels.
Third, it incorporates the information of all graphs
under comparisons into the kernel computation
process, and thus encapsulates richer characteristics. Experimental evaluations demonstrate the
effectiveness of the new transitive-aligned kernel.

1. Introduction
Graph-based representations are powerful tools to represent
structure data that is described with pairwise relationships
between components. The main challenge arising in analyzing the graph-based data is how to learn effective numeric
features of the discrete graph structures. One way to achieve
this is to employ graph kernels, that can characterize graph
structures in a high dimensional space and thus better preserve the structure information (Borgwardt et al., 2020).
Generally speaking, a graph kernel is defined in terms of
a similarity measure between graph structures (Long et al.,
2021). One of the most successful and widely used approach
to defining kernels between a pair of graphs is to decompose
the graphs into substructures and to compare/count pairs of
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University,
Beijing, China. 2 Central University of Finance and Economics, Beijing, China. 3 Department of Computer Science, University of York, York, UK. Correspondence to: Lixin Cui <cuilixin@cufe.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Graphs abstracted from digital images of different angles.

specific isomorphic substructures (Haussler, 1999). Specifically, these graph kernels are the so-called R-convolution
kernels, and any graph decomposition can be used to define
such a kernel, e.g., the graph kernel based on comparing
all pairs of decomposed a) walks (Sugiyama & Borgwardt,
2015), b) paths (Aziz et al., 2013), and c) restricted subgraphs or subtrees (Azaı̈s & Ingels, 2020). With this scenario, Kashima et al. (Kashima et al., 2003) have proposed
a Random Walk Kernel by comparing pairs of isomorphic
random walks. Borgwardt et al. (Borgwardt & Kriegel,
2005) have proposed a Shortest Path Kernel by counting
the numbers of pairwise shortest paths having the same
length. Costa and Grave (Costa & Grave, 2010) have defined a Neighborhood Subgraph Pairwise Distance Kernel
by counting the number of pairwise isomorphic neighborhood subgraphs. Gaidon et al. (Gaidon et al., 2011) have
developed a Subtree Kernel for comparing videos, by considering complex actions as decomposed spatio-temporal
parts and building corresponding binary trees. The resulting
kernel is computed by counting the number of isomorphic
subtree patterns. Other R-convolution graph kernels also include a) the Segmentation Graph Kernel (Harchaoui & Bach,
2007), b) the Pyramid Quantized Weisfeiler-Lehman Kernel (Gkirtzou & Blaschko, 2016), c) the Subgraph Matching Kernel (Kriege & Mutzel, 2012), d) the Wasserstein
Weisfeiler-Lehman Kernel (Togninalli et al., 2019), e) the
Isolation Graph Kernel (Xu et al., 2021a), f) the Quantuminspired Jensen-Shannon Kernel (Bai et al., 2020b), etc.
One major drawback arising in most existing R-convolution
kernels is that they neglect the relative locational information between substructures. Specifically, the R-convolution
kernels usually tend to add an unit value when a pair of
similar substructures are identified. However, these kernels
cannot identify whether these similar substructures are correctly aligned with the overall graph structures, i.e., they do
not check if the topological arrangement of the substructures

