Achieving Fairness at No Utility Cost via Data Reweighing with Influence

Peizhao Li 1 Hongfu Liu 1

Abstract
With the fast development of algorithmic governance, fairness has become a compulsory property for machine learning models to suppress
unintentional discrimination. In this paper, we
focus on the pre-processing aspect for achieving fairness, and propose a data reweighing approach that only adjusts the weight for samples
in the training phase. Different from most previous reweighing methods which usually assign a
uniform weight for each (sub)group, we granularly model the influence of each training sample
with regard to fairness-related quantity and predictive utility, and compute individual weights
based on influence under the constraints from
both fairness and utility. Experimental results
reveal that previous methods achieve fairness at
a non-negligible cost of utility, while as a significant advantage, our approach can empirically release the tradeoff and obtain cost-free fairness for
equal opportunity. We demonstrate the cost-free
fairness through vanilla classifiers and standard
training processes, compared to baseline methods on multiple real-world tabular datasets. Code
available at https://github.com/brandeis-machinelearning/influence-fairness.

1. Introduction
For artificial intelligence technology deployed in high-stakes
applications like welfare distribution or school admission, it
is essential to regulate algorithms and prevent unaware discrimination and unfairness in decision making (Barocas &
Selbst, 2016; Goodman & Flaxman, 2017; Ferguson, 2017;
Civil Rights Act, 1964). Even though general data-driven algorithms are not designed to be unfair, the outcomes can still
violate the AI principle of equality unintentionally (Chouldechova, 2017). Typically learning from historically biased
1
Brandeis University. Correspondence to: Peizhao Li
<peizhaoli@brandeis.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

data, the learner can retain or even amplify the inherent bias
if there is no proper constraint on data or algorithms. As
a consequence, the decisions from these algorithms may
disadvantage users in certain sensitive groups (e.g. female
and African Americans), therefore raising societal concerns.
To mitigate unfairness algorithmically, solutions can be
divided into three main categories: pre-processing, inprocessing, and post-processing. Pre-processing approaches
adjust the input data or training sample weights, and expect
a vanilla learner can deliver fair results from the fair data
transformation (Kamiran & Calders, 2012; Krasanakis et al.,
2018; Calmon et al., 2017; Jiang & Nachum, 2020; Feldman et al., 2015; Yan et al., 2020; Zemel et al., 2013; Rastegarpanah et al., 2019; Chhabra et al., 2021). In-processing
approaches insert fair constraints or penalties into the training pipeline, so the fair performance can be generalized to
inference as achieved during training (Zhang et al., 2018;
Agarwal et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019; Zafar et al., 2017;
Jiang et al., 2020; Kearns et al., 2018; Goh et al., 2016;
Li et al., 2020; 2021; Song et al., 2021). As a drawback,
adding non-convex constraints or balancing the additional
fair penalties with the primary training objective could
rise optimization complexity, and sometimes incur instability (Cotter et al., 2019; Roth et al., 2017). Post-processing
approaches calibrate the outcomes independently from a
model (Hardt et al., 2016; Pleiss et al., 2017), but would
result in sub-optimal solutions (Woodworth et al., 2017) and
request sensitive attributes during the inference stage.
In this work, we advocate the pre-processing category since
it directly diagnoses and corrects the source of bias, and
can be easily adapted to existing data analytic pipelines.
Pre-processing approaches can be further divided into two
subcategories. The first one modifies original data or injects
extra antidote data (Calmon et al., 2017; Feldman et al.,
2015), but will expose to the risk of learning from falsification which could be legally questionable (Barocas & Selbst,
2016; Krasanakis et al., 2018). Conservatively, we consider
sample reweighing, the second subcategory that purely adjusts the weights for samples in the training objective, and
intend to achieve fairness through vanilla classifiers.
To prevent the model from disadvantaging a certain sensitive
group and violating group-level fairness (Dwork et al., 2012;
Hardt et al., 2016), most previous reweighing methods statis-

