Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder with Contrastive Learning
for Multi-Label Classification
Junwen Bai 1 Shufeng Kong 1 Carla Gomes 1

Abstract
Multi-label classification (MLC) is a prediction
task where each sample can have more than one
label. We propose a novel contrastive learning
boosted multi-label prediction model based on
a Gaussian mixture variational autoencoder (CGMVAE), which learns a multimodal prior space
and employs a contrastive loss. Many existing
methods introduce extra complex neural modules
like graph neural networks to capture the label
correlations, in addition to the prediction modules. We find that by using contrastive learning in
the supervised setting, we can exploit label information effectively in a data-driven manner, and
learn meaningful feature and label embeddings
which capture the label correlations and enhance
the predictive power. Our method also adopts
the idea of learning and aligning latent spaces for
both features and labels. In contrast to previous
works based on a unimodal prior, C-GMVAE imposes a Gaussian mixture structure on the latent
space, to alleviate the posterior collapse and overregularization issues. C-GMVAE outperforms existing methods on multiple public datasets and can
often match other models’ full performance with
only 50% of the training data. Furthermore, we
show that the learnt embeddings provide insights
into the interpretation of label-label interactions.

1. Introduction
In many machine learning tasks, an instance can have several labels. The task of predicting multiple labels is known
as multi-label classification (MLC). MLC is common in
domains like computer vision (Wang et al., 2016), natural
language processing (Chang et al., 2019) and biology (Yu
et al., 2013). Unlike the single-label scenario, label corre1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
USA. Correspondence to: Shufeng Kong <sk2299@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lations are more important in MLC. Early works capture
the correlations through classifier chains (Read et al., 2009),
Bayesian inference (Zhang & Zhou, 2007), and dimensionality reduction (Bhatia et al., 2015).
Thanks to the huge capacity of neural networks (NN), many
previous methods can be improved by their neural extensions. For example, classifier chains can be naturally enhanced by recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Wang et al.,
2016). The non-linearity of NN alleviates the complex
design of feature mapping and many deep models can therefore focus on the loss function, feature-label and label-label
correlation modeling.
One trending direction is to learn a deep latent space shared
by features and labels. The encoded samples from the latent
space are then decoded to targets. One typical example is
C2AE (Yeh et al., 2017), which learns latent codes for both
features and labels. The latent codes are passed to a decoder
to derive the target labels. C2AE minimizes an ℓ2 distance
between the feature and label codes, together with a relaxed
orthogonality regularization. However, the learnt deterministic latent space lacks smoothness and structures. Small
perturbations in this latent space can lead to totally different
decoding results. Even if the corresponding feature and label codes are close, we cannot guarantee the decoded targets
are similar. To address this concern, MPVAE (Bai et al.,
2020) proposes to replace the deterministic latent space with
a probabilistic space under a variational autoencoder (VAE)
framework. The Gaussian latent spaces are aligned with
KL-divergence, and the sampling process enforces smoothness. Similar ideas can be found in (Sundar et al., 2020).
However, these methods assume a unimodal Gaussian latent
space, which is known to cause over-regularization and posterior collapse (Dilokthanakul et al., 2016; Wu & Goodman,
2018). A better strategy would be to learn a multimodal
latent space. It is more reasonable to assume the observed
data are generated from a multimodal subspace rather than
a unimodal one.
Another popular group of methods focuses on better label
correlation modeling. Their idea is straightforward: some labels should be more correlated if they co-appear often while
others should be less relevant. Existing methods adopt pairwise ranking loss, covariance matrices, conditional random

