MAML and ANIL Provably Learn Representations

Liam Collins 1 Aryan Mokhtari 1 Sewoong Oh 2 Sanjay Shakkottai 1

Abstract
Recent empirical evidence has driven conventional wisdom to believe that gradient-based metalearning (GBML) methods perform well at fewshot learning because they learn an expressive
data representation that is shared across tasks.
However, the mechanics of GBML have remained
largely mysterious from a theoretical perspective. In this paper, we prove that two well-known
GBML methods, MAML and ANIL, as well as
their first-order approximations, are capable of
learning common representation among a set of
given tasks. Specifically, in the well-known multitask linear representation learning setting, they
are able to recover the ground-truth representation at an exponentially fast rate. Moreover, our
analysis illuminates that the driving force causing MAML and ANIL to recover the underlying
representation is that they adapt the final layer of
their model, which harnesses the underlying task
diversity to improve the representation in all directions of interest. To the best of our knowledge,
these are the first results to show that MAML
and/or ANIL learn expressive representations and
to rigorously explain why they do so.

This was sparked in large part by the introduction of ModelAgnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017), which
achieved impressive results in few-shot image classification
and reinforcement learning scenarios, and led to a series
of related gradient-based meta-learning (GBML) methods
(Raghu et al., 2020; Nichol & Schulman, 2018; Antoniou
et al., 2019; Hospedales et al., 2021). Surprisingly, MAML
does not explicitly try to learn a useful representation; instead, it aims to find a good initialization for a small number
of task-specific gradient descent steps, agnostic of whether
the learning model contains a representation. Nevertheless,
Raghu et al. (2020) empirically argued that MAML’s impressive performance on neural networks is likely due to
its tendency to learn a shared representation across tasks.
To make this argument, they noticed that MAML’s representation does not change significantly when adapted to
each task. Moreover, they showed that a modified version of MAML that freezes the representation during local
adaptation, known as the Almost-No-Inner-Loop algorithm
(ANIL), typically performs at least as well as MAML on
few-shot image classification tasks. Yet it is still not well
understood why these algorithms that search for a good initialization for gradient descent should find useful a global
representation among tasks. Thus, in this paper, we aim to
address the following questions:
Do MAML and ANIL provably learn high-quality
representations? If so, why?

1. Introduction
A widely popular approach to achieve fast adaptation in
multi-task learning settings is to learn a representation that
extracts the important features shared across tasks (Maurer
et al., 2016). However, our understanding of how multitask representation learning should be done and why certain
methods work well is still nascent.
Recently, a paradigm known as meta-learning has emerged
as a powerful means of learning multi-task representations.
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
University of Texas at Austin 2 School of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of Washington. Correspondence to: Liam
Collins <liamc@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

To answer these questions we consider the multi-task linear
representation learning setting (Maurer et al., 2016; Tripuraneni et al., 2021; Du et al., 2020) in which each task is a
noisy linear regression problem in Rd with optimal solution
lying in a shared k-dimensional subspace, where k  d.
The learning model is a two-layer linear network consisting
of a representation (the first layer of the model) and head
(the last layer). The goal is to learn a representation that
projects data onto the shared subspace so as to reduce the
number of samples needed to find the optimal regressor for
a new task from Ω(d) to Ω(k).
Main contributions. We prove, for the first time, that
both MAML and ANIL, as well their first-order approximations, are capable of representation learning and recover
the ground-truth subspace in this setting. Our analysis reveals that MAML and ANIL’s distinctive adaptation updates

