Versatile Offline Imitation from Observations and Examples via
Regularized State-Occupancy Matching

Yecheng Jason Ma 1 Andrew Shen 2 Dinesh Jayaraman 1 Osbert Bastani 1

Abstract
We propose State Matching Offline DIstribution
Correction Estimation (SMODICE), a novel and
versatile regression-based offline imitation learning (IL) algorithm derived via state-occupancy
matching. We show that the SMODICE objective
admits a simple optimization procedure through
an application of Fenchel duality and an analytic
solution in tabular MDPs. Without requiring access to expert actions, SMODICE can be effectively applied to three offline IL settings: (i) imitation from observations (IfO), (ii) IfO with dynamics or morphologically mismatched expert, and
(iii) example-based reinforcement learning, which
we show can be formulated as a state-occupancy
matching problem. We extensively evaluate
SMODICE on both gridworld environments as
well as on high-dimensional offline benchmarks.
Our results demonstrate that SMODICE is effective for all three problem settings and significantly
outperforms prior state-of-art. Project website:
https://sites.google.com/view/smodice/home

1. Introduction
The offline reinforcement learning (RL) framework (Lange
et al., 2012; Levine et al., 2020) aims to use pre-collected,
reusable offline data—without further interaction with the
environment—for sample-efficient, scalable, and practical
data-driven decision-making. However, this assumes that
the offline dataset comes with reward labels, which may
not always be possible. To address this, offline imitation
learning (IL) (Zolna et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2021; Kim
et al., 2022) has recently been proposed as an alternative
where the learning algorithm is provided with a small set of
1
Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA 2 University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. Correspondence to: Yecheng Jason Ma
<jasonyma@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

expert demonstrations and a separate set of offline data of
unknown quality. The goal is to learn a policy that mimics
the provided expert data while avoiding test-time distribution shift (Ross et al., 2011) by using the offline dataset.
Expert demonstrations are often much more expensive to
acquire than offline data; thus, offline IL benefits significantly from minimizing assumptions about the expert data.
In this work, we aim to remove two assumptions about the
expert data in current offline IL algorithms: (i) expert action labels must be provided for the demonstrations, and
(ii) the expert demonstrations are performed with identical
dynamics (same embodiment, actions, and transitions) as
the imitator agent. These requirements preclude applications to important practical problem settings, including (i)
imitation from observations, (ii) imitation with mismatched
expert that obeys different dynamics or embodiment (e.g.,
learning from human videos), and (iii) learning only from
examples of successful outcomes rather than full expert
trajectories (Eysenbach et al., 2021).
For these reasons, many algorithms for online IL have already sought to remove these assumptions (Torabi et al.,
2018; 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Radosavovic et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2021), but extending them to offline IL remains an open problem.
We propose State Matching Offline DIstribution Correction
Estimation (SMODICE), a general offline IL framework that
can be applied to all three problem settings described above.
At a high level, SMODICE is based on a state-occupancy
matching view of IL:
min DKL (dπ (s)∥dE (s)),
π

(1)

which aims to minimize the KL-divergence of the stateoccupancy d between the imitator π and the expert E. This
state-occupancy matching objective intuitively demands inferring the correct actions from the offline data in order to
match the state-occupancy of the provided expert demonstrations. This formulation naturally enables imitation when
expert actions are unavailable, and even when the expert’s
embodiment or dynamics are different, as long as there is a
shared task-relevant state. Finally, we show that examplebased RL (Eysenbach et al., 2021), where only examples
of successful states are provided as supervision, can be for-

