GACT: Activation Compressed Training for Generic Network Architectures

Xiaoxuan Liu 1 Lianmin Zheng 1 Dequan Wang 1 Yukuo Cen 2 Weize Chen 2 Xu Han 2 Jianfei Chen 2
Zhiyuan Liu 2 Jie Tang 2 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1 Michael W. Mahoney 1 3 4 Alvin Cheung 1

Abstract
Training large neural network (NN) models requires extensive memory resources, and Activation Compression Training (ACT) is a promising approach to reduce training memory footprint.
This paper presents GACT, an ACT framework to
support a broad range of machine learning tasks
for generic NN architectures with limited domain
knowledge. By analyzing a linearized version of
ACT’s approximate gradient, we prove the convergence of GACT without prior knowledge on
operator type or model architecture. To make
training stable, we propose an algorithm that decides the compression ratio for each tensor by
estimating its impact on the gradient at run time.
We implement GACT as a PyTorch library that
readily applies to any NN architecture. GACT
reduces the activation memory for convolutional
NNs, transformers, and graph NNs by up to 8.1×,
enabling training with a 4.2× to 24.7× larger
batch size, with negligible accuracy loss.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed the trend of using larger
and larger neural network (NN) models to deliver improved
accuracy and generalization in various machine learning
tasks (Devlin et al., 2018; Fedus et al., 2021). However,
training these models requires a considerable amount of
on-device GPU memory. Unfortunately, the increase of
GPU memory capacity has been relatively slow, leading to a
fundamental barrier to the development of large NN models.
Activation Compression Training (ACT) is a promising approach to reduce the memory footprint of models during
training. As all layers’ activations need to be kept in the
1
UC Berkeley 2 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, BNRist Center, State Key
Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., Tsinghua University 3 ICSI 4 LBNL.
Correspondence to: Jianfei Chen <jianfeic@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

memory for computing the gradients during training, ACT
reduces memory consumption by compressing these saved
activations. Prior work (Chakrabarti & Moseley, 2019; Fu
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Evans & Aamodt, 2021)
has shown the effectiveness of ACT by reducing activation
footprint by up to 12× with 2-bit activations.
Although ACT has already demonstrated impressive compression capabilities, previous work on ACT is restricted to
specific NN architectures. For example, ActNN (Chen et al.,
2021) is a quantization framework for convolutional NNs
only; Mesa (Pan et al., 2021) proposes a per head/layer quantization method for vision transformers; and AC-GC (Evans
& Aamodt, 2021) derives convergence error bound for different types of operators separately.
Developing a generic ACT framework is challenging. Theoretically, convergence guarantees must be made without
assumptions on the network architecture. Algorithmically,
the framework should find effective compression strategies
for all kinds of networks automatically. From the system
perspective, the framework should support arbitrary NN
operations, including user-defined ones.
In this work, we propose GACT, a general framework for
ACT that is agnostic to the NN architecture. Neither specialized mathematical derivations nor customized implementation is needed to support different operators. To enable
this, we develop a general convergence theory by analyzing the stochastic gradient (SG) introduced by ACT. We
show that the SG can be well approximated by a linearized
version, which is unbiased to stochastic compressors. The
variance of the linearized gradient has a particularly simple
structure that allows a numerical algorithm to predict the
variance given a compression strategy. Then, we generate
the strategy by approximately solving an integer program.
We implement our method as a library based on PyTorch
that can be quickly integrated into real-world machine learning systems. The library also provides several optimization
levels to explore the trade-off between memory and speed.
We demonstrate the flexibility and efficiency of GACT on
various tasks, including image classification, object detection, text, and graph node classification. Our evaluation
shows that GACT can reduce activation memory by up to
8.1×, enabling training with a 24.7× larger batch size on the

