Revisiting Consistency Regularization for Deep Partial Label Learning

Dong-Dong Wu 1 2 † Deng-Bao Wang 1 2 † Min-Ling Zhang 1 2 *

Abstract
Partial label learning (PLL), which refers to the
classification task where each training instance
is ambiguously annotated with a set of candidate
labels, has been recently studied in deep learning
paradigm. Despite advances in recent deep PLL
literature, existing methods (e.g., methods based
on self-training or contrastive learning) are confronted with either ineffectiveness or inefficiency.
In this paper, we revisit a simple idea namely consistency regularization, which has been shown
effective in traditional PLL literature, to guide the
training of deep models. Towards this goal, a new
regularized training framework, which performs
supervised learning on non-candidate labels and
employs consistency regularization on candidate
labels, is proposed for PLL. We instantiate the
regularization term by matching the outputs of
multiple augmentations of an instance to a conformal label distribution, which can be adaptively
inferred by the closed-form solution. Experiments
on benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method compared with other
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Collecting large scale datasets with high-quality annotations for supervised learning algorithm is generally difficult. To overcome this problem, weakly supervised learning
has been widely studied in recent years, which includes,
but is not limited to, multi-label learning (Zhang & Zhou,
2013; Liu et al., 2020; Xu & Guo, 2021), noisy-label learning (Natarajan et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2021), positiveunlabeled learning (Kiryo et al., 2017; Su et al., 2021), and
semi-supervised learning (Zhu & Goldberg, 2009; Xu et al.,
† Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China. * Correspondence
to: Min-Ling Zhang <zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2021b). This paper focuses on a typical weakly supervised
learning problem known as partial label learning (PLL),
which refers to the task where each training instance is annotated with a set of candidate labels, among which only
one is the ground-truth. This problem naturally arises in
various real-world applications, such as web mining (Luo &
Orabona, 2010), multimedia content analysis (Zeng et al.,
2013), and automatic image annotations (Chen et al., 2017).
The major difficulty of PLL lies in the ambiguity of label
space, since the ground-truth label is concealed in its candidate label set and not directly accessible to the learning
algorithm. Traditional PLL methods tackle this problem by
conducting label disambiguation before or during training.
For example, Zhang & Yu (2015) solve the PLL problem
by firstly employing label propagation algorithm to disambiguate the partial labels, and then learning a classification
model on the processed dataset. In (Jin & Ghahramani,
2002; Liu & Dietterich, 2012), the ground-truth label of
each instance is regarded as a latent variable which is identified via the EM algorithm. Furthermore, manifold consistency regularization, which assumes that the manifold
structure in the feature space should also be preserved in
the label space, has been shown very effective to help disambiguate the candidate labels during training (Zhang et al.,
2016; Feng & An, 2018; Wang et al., 2019). However, these
methods are usually restricted to linear or kenel-based models and inefficient when dealing with large scale datasets
and hign-dimensional natural features.
As deep neural networks become popular, PLL has been explosively studied in deep learning paradigm recently. Based
on the uniform partial label generation assumption, Feng
et al. (2020) derive two methods which are risk-consistent
and classifier-consistent respectively. Based on the instancedependent partial label generation assumption, Xu et al.
(2021a) propose to recover the latent label distribution with
the variational inference technique. In (Lv et al., 2020; Wen
et al., 2021), self-training technique is adopted in deep learning framework to progressively identify the ground-truth
labels during training. These methods can be efficiently
trained with stochastic optimization and agnostic in specific
network architectures. However, severe error accumulation
problem may be caused due to the low quality prediction in
initial training stage. A recent research (Wang et al., 2022)
adopts the idea of unsupervised contrastive representation

