Privacy for Free: How does Dataset Condensation Help Privacy?

Tian Dong 1 * Bo Zhao 2 Lingjuan Lyu 3
Privacy Barrier

Abstract

Not accessible by adversary

To prevent unintentional data leakage, research
community has resorted to data generators that
can produce differentially private data for model
training. However, for the sake of the data privacy, existing solutions suffer from either expensive training cost or poor generalization performance. Therefore, we raise the question whether
training efficiency and privacy can be achieved
simultaneously. In this work, we for the first time
identify that dataset condensation (DC) which is
originally designed for improving training efficiency is also a better solution to replace the traditional data generators for private data generation,
thus providing privacy for free. To demonstrate
the privacy benefit of DC, we build a connection
between DC and differential privacy, and theoretically prove on linear feature extractors (and
then extended to non-linear feature extractors)
that the existence of one sample has limited impact (O(m/n)) on the parameter distribution of
networks trained on m samples synthesized from
n(n ≫ m) raw samples by DC. We also empirically validate the visual privacy and membership
privacy of DC-synthesized data by launching both
the loss-based and the state-of-the-art likelihoodbased membership inference attacks. We envision
this work as a milestone for data-efficient and
privacy-preserving machine learning.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are notoriously known to suffer
from a wide range of privacy attacks (Lyu et al., 2020), such
as model inversion attack (Fredrikson et al., 2015), membership inference attack (MIA) (Shokri et al., 2017), property
inference attack (Melis et al., 2019), etc. The numerous con*

1

Work done during internship at Sony AI. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh 3 Sony AI.
Correspondence to: Lingjuan Lyu <Lingjuan.Lv@sony.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Train
Original
dataset

DC

Data holder

Synthetic
dataset Analyse

MIA

Compare

?
Not similar

Server

Figure 1. DC-synthesized data can be used for privacy-preserving
model training and cannot be recovered through MIA and visual
comparison analysis.

cerns on data privacy make it impractical for data curators to
directly distribute their private data for purpose of interest.
Previously, generative models, e.g., generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), was supposed
to be an alternative of data sharing. Unfortunately, the aforementioned privacy risks exist not only in training with raw
data but also in training with synthetic data produced by
generative models (Chen et al., 2020b). For example, it is
easy to match the fake facial images synthesized by GANs
with the real training samples from the same identity (Webster et al., 2021). To counter this issue, existing efforts (Xie
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021; Cao et al., 2021; Harder et al.,
2021) applied differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006)
to develop differentially private data generators (called DPgenerators), because DP is the de facto privacy standard
which provides theoretical guarantees of privacy leakage.
Data produced by DP-generators can then be applied to
various downstream tasks, e.g., data analysis, visualization,
training privacy-preserving classifier, etc.
However, due to the noise introduced by DP, the data produced by DP-generators are of low quality, which impedes
the utility as training data, i.e., accuracy of the models
trained on these data. Thus, more data generated by DPgenerators are needed to obtain good generalization performance, which inevitably decreases the training efficiency.
Recently, the research of dataset condensation (DC) (Wang
et al., 2018; Sucholutsky & Schonlau, 2019; Such et al.,
2020; Bohdal et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021; Zhao &
Bilen, 2021b;a; Nguyen et al., 2021a;b; Jin et al., 2022;
Cazenavette et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022) emerges, which
aims to condense a large training set into a small synthetic
set that is comparable to the original one in terms of training
deep neural networks (DNNs). Different from traditional

