Toward Compositional Generalization in Object-Oriented World Modeling

Linfeng Zhao 1 Lingzhi Kong 1 Robin Walters 1 Lawson L.S. Wong 1

Abstract
Compositional generalization is a critical ability
in learning and decision-making. We focus on
the setting of reinforcement learning in objectoriented environments to study compositional generalization in world modeling. We (1) formalize
the compositional generalization problem with an
algebraic approach and (2) study how a world
model can achieve that. We introduce a conceptual environment, Object Library, and two instances, and deploy a principled pipeline to measure the generalization ability. Motivated by the
formulation, we analyze several methods with
exact or no compositional generalization ability
using our framework, and design a differentiable
approach, Homomorphic Object-oriented World
Model (HOWM), that achieves soft but more efficient compositional generalization.

1. Introduction
In learning and decision-making, the goal is to train models
and agents that generalize to new data, tasks, and environments. Recently, there has been significant interest in
learning transition models for object-based environments in
computer vision and reinforcement learning, in particular
from images (Burgess et al., 2019; Watters et al., 2019; Kipf
et al., 2019; Kossen et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2020; Veerapaneni et al., 2020; Locatello et al., 2020). These environments
are naturally factorized by their objects.
In this paper, we aim to study one widely existing form of
generalization that has not been formally studied in objectoriented world modeling: compositional generalization.
That is, if we have seen various combinations of objects
during training, but are presented with a novel combination
at evaluation, we should still expect our agents to recognize
familiar objects seen during training and predict their effects
1

Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, MA. Correspondence to: Linfeng Zhao
<zhao.linf@northeastern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

appropriately. While compositional generalization has been
previously studied in natural language (Johnson et al., 2017;
Lake & Baroni, 2018; Bahdanau et al., 2019; Gordon et al.,
2019; Keysers et al., 2020), such work does not yet exist for
(action-conditioned) world modeling.
To study compositional generalization, we design a class of
object-oriented environments called Object Library, illustrated in Figure 1 left. Such environments feature K objects,
drawn from a library of N objects; the K objects remain
the same during each episode. Although visually distinct,
these environments are isomorphic to each other (Figure 1
center). Furthermore, the isomorphism is factorized by
the constituent objects, so we should expect our models
to generalize to new scenes (combinations of objects), as
long as the constituent objects have been observed in some
scenes during training. For example, if during training we
have observed scenes containing {N, H} and {J, I}, then
our models should also make accurate predictions in novel
scenes {N, J} and {H, I}.
We formally define compositional generalization as the ability to generalize from a scene (with a combination of object)
to another scene with replaced objects, or equivariance to
object-replacement operation. This bridges the behavioral
perspective (generalizing to replaced object) with functional
implementation (equivariant model). The proposed framework illustrates two paths for compositional generalization
in world modeling: (1) exact compositional generalization
with potentially more intensive resource usage, (2) learning
soft object and action binding in latent space. Specifically,
for the latter path, one primary challenge comes from the
lack of canonical ordering of objects in images. We prove
that, if it learns to correctly bind actions with latent object
slots, this learned path can still achieve perfect compositional generalization, with far less resources needed.
Based on this analysis, we propose an soft approach for
learning compositional generalizable world models, called
Homomorphic Object-oriented World Model (HOWM),
which deploys an Action Attention module to bind actions and can be trained differentiably with the Aligned
Loss. We analyze the compositional generalization ability
of existing methods and HOWM using instances of Object Library, and demonstrate that HOWM generalizes well
with fewer resources. The idea of learning action bind-

