C ∗ -algebra Net: A New Approach Generalizing
Neural Network Parameters to C ∗ -algebra

Yuka Hashimoto 1 Zhao Wang 1 2 Tomoko Matsui 3

Abstract
We propose a new framework that generalizes
the parameters of neural network models to C ∗ algebra-valued ones. C ∗ -algebra is a generalization of the space of complex numbers. A typical
example is the space of continuous functions on
a compact space. This generalization enables us
to combine multiple models continuously and use
tools for functions such as regression and integration. Consequently, we can learn features of data
efficiently and adapt the models to problems continuously. We apply our framework to practical
problems such as density estimation and few-shot
learning and show that our framework enables us
to learn features of data even with a limited number of samples. Our new framework highlights
the potential possibility of applying the theory of
C ∗ -algebra to general neural network models.

1. Introduction
Continuation of neural network models has been discussed
and successfully applied to practical problems and theoretical analyses. Chen et al. (2018) proposed to regard the
transformation of input variables as a continuous dynamical
system, which is called the neural ODE. While the neural
ODE focus on the continuation of layers (vertical direction),
continuation of units (horizontal direction) is also discussed.
By regarding the action of a weight matrix to variables as integrations and using an integral representation of the model,
we can use the theory of harmonic analysis to analyze the
model theoretically (Candès, 1999; Sonoda & Murata, 2017;
Sonoda et al., 2021). In these frameworks, we regard the
1
NTT Network Service Systems Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Tokyo, Japan 2 Institute for Disaster Response
Robotics, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan 3 Department of
Statistical Modeling, the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Yuka Hashimoto
<yuka.hashimoto.rw@hco.ntt.co.jp>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

parameters of a classical model being obtained by a discretization of functions, which enables us to use tools for
functions such as derivative and integration for practical
applications and theoretical analyses of the model.
In this paper, we propose a brand new framework that generalizes the parameters (weights) of models. Unlike previous
works regarding the continuation of neural network models,
we do not consider the continuation of the parameters of
a single classical model to functions. Instead, we generalize each R-valued parameter to a C ∗ -algebra-valued one,
which corresponds to an aggregation of multiple classical
models and a continuation of the parameters of the multiple models to functions. C ∗ -algebra is a generalization
of the space of complex numbers. Typical examples are
the space of continuous functions on a compact space, the
space of L∞ functions on a σ-finite measure space, and
the space of bounded linear operators on a Hilbert space.
In this paper, we focus on the C ∗ -algebra of the space of
continuous functions on a compact space. Practically, we
can use tools for functions such as regression and integration to learn multiple models efficiently and to adapt the
models to problems continuously. Theoretically, our new
framework highlights the potential possibility of applying
the theory of C ∗ -algebra to general neural network models.
Fig. 1 shows an overview of our framework schematically.
The application of C ∗ -algebra to data analysis is discussed
by Hashimoto et al. (2021). We focus on the practical applications to neural network in this paper. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first paper that applies the theory of
C ∗ -algebra to neural network models.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a generic framework of neural network with
C ∗ -algebra-valued parameters.
• We propose a gradient descent method to learn the model
on C ∗ -algebra.
• We apply our framework to practical problems such as
density estimation and few-shot learning.
Regarding the second one, since C ∗ -algebra admits a generalization of Hilbert space, which is called Hilbert C ∗ module, we can generalize the classical gradient descent
method on the Hilbert space associated with the parameters

