GALAXY: Graph-based Active Learning at the Extreme

Jifan Zhang 1 Julian Katz-Samuels 1 Robert Nowak 1

Abstract
Active learning is a label-efficient approach to
train highly effective models while interactively
selecting only small subsets of unlabeled data
for labelling and training. In “open world” settings, the classes of interest can make up a small
fraction of the overall dataset – most of the data
may be viewed as an out-of-distribution or irrelevant class. This leads to extreme class-imbalance,
and our theory and methods focus on this core
issue. We propose a new strategy for active
learning called GALAXY (Graph-based Active
Learning At the eXtrEme), which blends ideas
from graph-based active learning and deep learning. GALAXY automatically and adaptively selects more class-balanced examples for labeling
than most other methods for active learning. Our
theory shows that GALAXY performs a refined
form of uncertainty sampling that gathers a much
more class-balanced dataset than vanilla uncertainty sampling. Experimentally, we demonstrate
GALAXY’s superiority over existing state-of-art
deep active learning algorithms in unbalanced vision classification settings generated from popular
datasets.

1. Introduction
Training deep learning systems can require enormous
amounts of labeled data. Active learning aims to reduce
this burden by sequentially and adaptively selecting examples for labeling, with the goal of obtaining a relatively
small dataset of especially informative examples. The most
common approach to active learning is uncertainty sampling. The idea is to train a model based on an initial set
of labeled data and then to select unlabeled examples that
the model cannot classify with certainty. These examples
are then labeled, the model is re-trained using them, and the
1
University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA. Correspondence to:
Jifan Zhang <jifan@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

process is repeated. Uncertainty sampling and its variants
can work well when the classes are balanced. However, in
many applications datasets may be very unbalanced, containing very rare classes or one very large majority class.
As an example, suppose an insurance company would like
to train an image-based machine learning system to classify
various types of damage to the roofs of buildings (Conathan
et al., 2018). It has a large corpus of unlabeled roof images,
but the vast majority contain no damage of any sort.
Unfortunately, under extreme class imbalance, uncertainty
sampling tends to select examples mostly from the dominant
class(es), often leading to very slow learning. In this paper,
we take a novel approach specifically targeting the class
imbalance problem. Our method is guaranteed to select
examples that are both uncertain and class-diverse; i.e., the
selected examples are relatively balanced across the classes
even if the overall dataset is extremely unbalanced. In a
nutshell, our algorithm sorts the examples by their softmax
uncertainty scores and applies a bisection procedure to find
consecutive pairs of points with differing labels. This procedure encourages finding uncertain points from a diverse set
of classes. In contrast, uncertainty sampling focuses on sampling around the model’s decision boundary and therefore
will collect a biased sample if this model decision boundary
is strongly skewed towards one class. Figure 1 displays
the results of one of our experiments, showing that our proposed GALAXY algorithm learns much more rapidly and
collects a significantly more diverse dataset than uncertainty
sampling.
We make the following contributions in this paper:
• we develop a novel, scalable algorithm GALAXY, tailored to the extreme class imbalance setting, which is
frequently encountered in practice,
• GALAXY is easy to implement, requiring relatively simple modifications to commonplace uncertainty sampling
approaches,
• we conduct extensive experiments showing that GALAXY
outperforms a wide collection of deep active learning
algorithms in the imbalanced settings, and
• we give a theoretical analysis showing that GALAXY selects much more class-balanced batches of uncertain examples than traditional uncertainty sampling strategies.

