Proving Theorems using Incremental Learning and Hindsight Experience
Replay

Eser Aygün * 1 Ankit Anand * 1 Laurent Orseau * 1 Xavier Glorot 1 Stephen McAleer 1 2 Vlad Firoiu 1
Lei Zhang 1 Doina Precup 1 3 4 Shibl Mourad * 1

Abstract
Traditional automated theorem proving systems
for first-order logic depend on speed-optimized
search and many handcrafted heuristics designed
to work over a wide range of domains. Machine
learning approaches in the literature either depend
on these traditional provers to bootstrap themselves, by leveraging these heuristics, or can struggle due to limited existing proof data. The latter
issue can be explained by the lack of a smooth
difficulty gradient in theorem proving datasets;
large gaps in difficulty between different theorems can make training harder or even impossible.
In this paper, we adapt the idea of hindsight experience replay from reinforcement learning to the
automated theorem proving domain, so as to use
the intermediate data generated during unsuccessful proof attempts. We build a first-order logic
prover by disabling all the smart clause-scoring
heuristics of the state-of-the-art E prover and replacing them with a clause-scoring neural network
learned by using hindsight experience replay in
an incremental learning setting. Clauses are represented as graphs and presented to transformer
networks with spectral features. We show that
provers trained in this way can outperform previous machine learning approaches and compete
with the state of the art heuristic-based theorem
prover E in its best configuration, on the popular
benchmarks MPTP2078, M2k and Mizar40. The
proofs generated by our algorithm are also almost
always significantly shorter than E’s proofs.
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK 2 Department
of Information and Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA 3 Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Montreal,
QC, Canada 4 McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. Correspondence to: Eser Aygün <eser@deepmind.com>, Laurent Orseau <lorseau@deepmind.com>, Ankit Anand <anandank@deepmind.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
I believe that to achieve human-level performance
on hard problems, theorem provers likewise must
be equipped with soft knowledge, in particular
soft knowledge automatically gained from previous proof experiences. I also suspect that this
will be one of the most fruitful areas of research
in automated theorem proving. And one of the
hardest. Schulz (2017, E’s author)
Automated theorem proving (ATP) is an important tool both
for assisting mathematicians in proving complex theorems
as well as for areas such as integrated circuit design, and
software and hardware verification (Leroy, 2009; Klein,
2009). Initial research on ATP dates back to the 1960s (e.g.,
Robinson (1965); Knuth & Bendix (1970)) and was motivated partly by the fact that mathematics is a hallmark of
human intelligence. However, despite significant research
effort and progress, ATP systems are still far from human
capabilities (Loos et al., 2017). The highest performing ATP
systems (e.g., Cruanes et al. (2019); Kovács & Voronkov
(2013)) have been evolving for decades and have grown
to use an increasing number of manually designed heuristics, mixed with some machine learning, to obtain a large
number of search strategies that are tried sequentially or
in parallel. Some recent works (Chvalovskỳ et al., 2019;
Jakubův et al., 2020; Loos et al., 2017) build on top of these
provers, using modern machine learning techniques to augment, select or prioritize their already existing heuristics,
with some success. However, these machine-learning based
provers usually require initial training data in the form of
proofs, or positive and negative examples (provided by the
high-performing existing provers) from which to bootstrap.
Other recent works do not build on top of other provers, but
still require existing proof examples as input (e.g., Goertzel
(2020); Polu & Sutskever (2020)). Such machine-learningbased ATP systems can struggle to solve difficult problems,
partly due to the lack of problems of intermediate difficulty,
which could provide training data of varying difficulty.
In this paper, we propose an approach which can build a
strong theorem prover without relying on existing domain-

