Extended Unconstrained Features Model for Exploring Deep Neural Collapse

Tom Tirer 1 Joan Bruna 1 2

Abstract
The modern strategy for training deep neural networks for classification tasks includes optimizing
the network’s weights even after the training error
vanishes to further push the training loss toward
zero. Recently, a phenomenon termed “neural
collapse” (NC) has been empirically observed
in this training procedure. Specifically, it has
been shown that the learned features (the output
of the penultimate layer) of within-class samples
converge to their mean, and the means of different classes exhibit a certain tight frame structure,
which is also aligned with the last layer’s weights.
Recent papers have shown that minimizers with
this structure emerge when optimizing a simplified “unconstrained features model” (UFM) with
a regularized cross-entropy loss. In this paper,
we further analyze and extend the UFM. First,
we study the UFM for the regularized MSE loss,
and show that the minimizers’ features can have a
more delicate structure than in the cross-entropy
case. This affects also the structure of the weights.
Then, we extend the UFM by adding another layer
of weights as well as ReLU nonlinearity to the
model and generalize our previous results. Finally,
we empirically demonstrate the usefulness of our
nonlinear extended UFM in modeling the NC phenomenon that occurs with practical networks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have led to a major improvement in classification tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016; Huang et al.,
2017). The modern strategy for training these networks
includes optimizing the network’s weights even after the
training error vanishes to further push the training loss to1
Center for Data Science, New York University, New
York 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York
University, New York.
Correspondence to: Tom Tirer
<tirer.tom@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ward zero (Hoffer et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2018; Belkin et al.,
2019).
Recently, a phenomenon termed “neural collapse” (NC)
has been empirically observed by Papyan et al. (2020) for
such training with cross-entropy loss. Specifically, via experiments on popular network architectures and datasets,
Papyan et al. (2020) showed four components of the NC:
(NC1) The learned features (the output of the penultimate
layer) of within-class samples converge to their mean (i.e.,
the intraclass variance vanishes); (NC2) After centering by
their global mean, the limiting means of different classes exhibit a simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF) structure (see
Definition 2.2); (NC3) The last layer’s (classifier) weights
are aligned with this simplex ETF; (NC4) As a result, after
such a collapse, the classification is based on the nearest
class center in feature space.
The empirical work in (Papyan et al., 2020) has been followed by papers that theoretically examined the emergence
of collapse to simplex ETFs in simplified mathematical
frameworks. Starting from (Mixon et al., 2020), most of
these papers (e.g., (Lu & Steinerberger, 2022; Wojtowytsch
et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021)) consider the
“unconstrained features model” (UFM), where the features
of the training data after the penultimate layer are treated as
free optimization variables (disconnected from the samples).
The rationale behind this model is that modern deep networks are extremely overparameterized and expressive such
that their feature mapping can be adapted to any training
data (e.g., even to noise (Zhang et al., 2021)).
While most existing papers consider cross-entropy loss, in
this paper we focus on the mean squared error (MSE) loss,
which has been recently shown to be powerful also for
classification tasks (Hui & Belkin, 2020). (We note that the
occurrence of neural collapse when training practical DNNs
with MSE loss, and its positive effects on their performance,
have been shown empirically in a very recent paper (Han
et al., 2021)). We start with analyzing the (plain) UFM,
showing that for the regularized MSE loss the collapsed
features can have a more delicate structure than in the crossentropy case (e.g., they may possess also orthogonality),
which affects also the structure of the weights. Then, we
extend the UFM by adding another layer of weights as
well as ReLU nonlinearity to the model and generalize our

