Contrastive Learning with Boosted Memorization

Zhihan Zhou 1 Jiangchao Yao 1 Yanfeng Wang 1 2 Bo Han 3 Ya Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has achieved a great success in the representation learning of visual and
textual data. However, the current methods are
mainly validated on the well-curated datasets,
which do not exhibit the real-world long-tailed
distribution. Recent attempts to consider selfsupervised long-tailed learning are made by rebalancing in the loss perspective or the model
perspective, resembling the paradigms in the supervised long-tailed learning. Nevertheless, without the aid of labels, these explorations have
not shown the expected significant promise due
to the limitation in tail sample discovery or the
heuristic structure design. Different from previous works, we explore this direction from an
alternative perspective, i.e., the data perspective,
and propose a novel Boosted Contrastive Learning (BCL) method. Specifically, BCL leverages
the memorization effect of deep neural networks
to automatically drive the information discrepancy of the sample views in contrastive learning,
which is more efficient to enhance the long-tailed
learning in the label-unaware context. Extensive
experiments on a range of benchmark datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of BCL over several
state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/BCL.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (Doersch et al., 2015; Wang &
Gupta, 2015) that learns the robust representation for downstream tasks have achieved a significant success in the area
of computer vision (Chen et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020) and
natural language processing (Lan et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University. Correspondence
to: Jiangchao Yao <Sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn>, Yanfeng Wang
<wangyanfeng@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2020). Nevertheless, previous studies are mainly conducted
on the well-curated datasets like ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009), which is usually balanced among categorizes. In
comparison, the real-world natural sources usually follow
a long-tailed, even heavy-tailed distributions (Reed, 2001)
that is challenging to learn for the current machine learning
methods. Specially, recent attempts (Jiang et al., 2021b)
have shown that self-supervised learning under long-tailed
distribution still requires more explorations to achieve the
satisfying performance (Van Horn et al., 2018).
Existing works for self-supervised long-tailed learning are
mainly from the loss perspective or the model perspective.
The former relies on the loss reweighting, e.g., the focal
loss in hard example mining (Lin et al., 2017) or SAM
by means of the sharpness of the loss surface (Liu et al.,
2021), to draw more attention on tail samples during training.
However, the effectiveness of these methods is sensitive to
and limited by the accuracy of the tail sample discovery.
The latter mainly resorts to the specific model design like
the divide-and-contrast ensemble (Tian et al., 2021) or selfdamaged-contrast via pruning (Jiang et al., 2021b) to make
the model better capture the semantics of the tail samples.
These designs require the empirical heuristic and are usually
black-box to understand the potential working dynamics for
the further improvement (Zhang et al., 2021).
In this paper, we propose to study the self-supervised longtailed learning in the data perspective. Our framework is
motivated by the memorization effect (Zhang et al., 2017;
Arpit et al., 2017; Feldman, 2020) of deep neural networks
on data, where the easy patterns are usually memorized
prior to the hard patterns. As shown in the left panel of Figure 1, the memorization effect still holds under long-tailed
datasets, where the loss and accuracy of the tail samples
consistently fall behind those of head samples. This inspires
us to approximately distinguish the head and tail samples
by analyzing the memorization effect. Another important
motivation is except the loss reweighting or model re-design,
the data augmentation is very effective in self-supervised
long-tailed learning to achieve the improvement by introducing the information discrepancy of two views (Tian et al.,
2020). As illustrated in the right panel of Figure 1, we can
see that the heavier augmentation consistently boosts the
performance of the treatment tail samples. Besides, the data
augmentation does not directly modify the loss or the model

