A Theoretical Analysis on Independence-driven Importance Weighting for
Covariate-shift Generalization
Renzhe Xu 1 Xingxuan Zhang 1 Zheyan Shen 1 Tong Zhang 2 Peng Cui 1

Abstract
Covariate-shift generalization, a typical case
in out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization, requires a good performance on the unknown test
distribution, which varies from the accessible
training distribution in the form of covariate
shift. Recently, independence-driven importance
weighting algorithms in stable learning literature
have shown empirical effectiveness to deal with
covariate-shift generalization on several learning
models, including regression algorithms and deep
neural networks, while their theoretical analyses
are missing. In this paper, we theoretically prove
the effectiveness of such algorithms by explaining them as feature selection processes. We first
specify a set of variables, named minimal stable variable set, that is the minimal and optimal
set of variables to deal with covariate-shift generalization for common loss functions, such as
the mean squared loss and binary cross-entropy
loss. Afterward, we prove that under ideal conditions, independence-driven importance weighting algorithms could identify the variables in this
set. Analysis of asymptotic properties is also
provided. These theories are further validated
in several synthetic experiments. The source
code is available at https://github.com/
windxrz/independence-driven-IW.

1. Introduction
Although modern machine learning techniques have
achieved great success in various areas, many researchers
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Computer Science & Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China. Emails: xrz199721@gmail.com,
xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com, shenzy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn. Correspondence to: Peng Cui <cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

have demonstrated the vulnerability of machine learning
models under distribution shifts (Shen et al., 2021). This
issue arises from the violation of the i.i.d. assumption
(i.e., training and test data are independent and identically distributed) and stimulates recent research on outof-distribution (OOD) generalization (Shen et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2022a). Among different types of distribution
shifts considered in OOD literature, covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000; Sugiyama et al., 2007a; Ben-David et al.,
2007), where the marginal distribution of variables shifts
from the training data to the test data while the labeling
function keeps unchanged, is the most common one (Shen
et al., 2021). Further, covariate-shift generalization is much
more challenging, given that the test distribution remains
unknown in the training phase.
With the prior knowledge of the test distribution, importance weighting (IW) is common in dealing with covariate
shift (Shimodaira, 2000; Sugiyama et al., 2007a;b; 2008;
Fang et al., 2020). In detail, IW methods consist of two steps,
namely weight estimation and weighted regression (Fang
et al., 2020). The weight estimation step estimates sample
weights that characterize the density ratio between the training and test distribution. The weighted regression step trains
predictors after plugging the sample weights into loss functions. However, IW methods can not adapt to covariate-shift
generalization problems directly because the test distribution is unknown.
Recently, independence-driven importance weighting methods (Shen et al., 2020; Kuang et al., 2020b; Zhang et al.,
2021; 2022b) in stable learning literature (Cui & Athey,
2022) have shown empirical effectiveness to deal with
covariate-shift generalization on several learning tasks involving regression algorithms and deep models. Without the
knowledge of the test distribution, in the weight estimation
step, they propose to learn sample weights that guarantee the
statistical independence between features in the weighted
distribution. Although the advantages of these algorithms
have been proved empirically, the theoretical explanations
for these methods are missing. In this paper, we take a
step towards the theoretical analysis of independence-driven
IW methods on covariate-shift generalization problems by
explaining them as feature selection processes.

