Fishr: Invariant Gradient Variances for Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Alexandre Ramé 1 Corentin Dancette 1 Matthieu Cord 1 2

Abstract
Learning robust models that generalize well under
changes in the data distribution is critical for realworld applications. To this end, there has been a
growing surge of interest to learn simultaneously
from multiple training domains — while enforcing different types of invariance across those domains. Yet, all existing approaches fail to show
systematic benefits under controlled evaluation
protocols. In this paper, we introduce a new
regularization — named Fishr — that enforces
domain invariance in the space of the gradients
of the loss: specifically, the domain-level variances of gradients are matched across training
domains. Our approach is based on the close relations between the gradient covariance, the Fisher
Information and the Hessian of the loss: in particular, we show that Fishr eventually aligns the
domain-level loss landscapes locally around the
final weights. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of Fishr for out-of-distribution
generalization. Notably, Fishr improves the state
of the art on the DomainBed benchmark and
performs consistently better than Empirical Risk
Minimization. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/alexrame/fishr.

1. Introduction
The success of deep neural networks in supervised learning
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) relies on the crucial assumption
that the train and test data distributions are identical. In particular, the tendency of networks to rely on simple features
(Valle-Perez et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2020) is generally
a desirable behavior reflecting Occam’s razor. However,
in case of distribution shift, this simplicity bias deteriorates performance when more complex features are needed
(Tenenbaum, 2018; Shah et al., 2020). For example, in the
1

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, Paris, France 2 Valeo.ai.
Correspondence to: Alexandre Ramé <alexandre.rame@sorbonneuniversite.fr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Fishr principle. Fishr considers the individual
(per-sample) gradients of the loss in the network weights θ.
Specifically, Fishr matches the domain-level gradient variances of the distributions across the two training domains:
i nA
i nB
A ({gA
}i=1 in orange) and B ({gB
}i=1 in blue). We will
show how this regularization during the learning of θ improves the out-of-distribution generalization properties by
aligning the domain-level loss landscapes at convergence.

recent fight against Covid-19, most of the deep learning
methods developed to detect coronavirus from chest scans
were shown useless for clinical use (DeGrave et al., 2021;
Roberts et al., 2021): indeed, networks exploited simple
bias in the training datasets such as patients’ age or body
position rather than ‘truly’ analyzing medical pathologies.
To better generalize under distribution shifts, most works
(Blanchard et al., 2011; Muandet et al., 2013) assume that
the training data is divided into different training domains
in which there is a constant underlying causal mechanism
(Peters et al., 2016). To remove the domain-dependent explanations, different invariance criteria across those training
domains have been proposed. Ganin et al. (2016); Sun et al.
(2016); Sun & Saenko (2016) enforce similar feature distributions, others (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Krueger et al., 2021)
force the classifier to be simultaneously optimal across all
domains. Yet, despite the popularity of this research topic,
none of these methods perform significantly better than the
classical Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) when applied
with controlled model selection and restricted hyperparameter search (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021; Ye et al., 2021).

