Generalized Leverage Scores: Geometric Interpretation and Applications

Bruno Ordozgoiti 1 Antonis Matakos 2 Aristides Gionis 3

Abstract
In problems involving matrix computations, the
concept of leverage has found a large number of
applications. In particular, leverage scores, which
relate the columns of a matrix to the subspaces
spanned by its leading singular vectors, are helpful in revealing column subsets to approximately
factorize a matrix with quality guarantees. As
such, they provide a solid foundation for a variety
of machine-learning methods. In this paper we
extend the definition of leverage scores to relate
the columns of a matrix to arbitrary subsets of singular vectors. We establish a precise connection
between column and singular-vector subsets, by
relating the concepts of leverage scores and principal angles between subspaces. We employ this
result to design approximation algorithms with
provable guarantees for two well-known problems: generalized column subset selection and
sparse canonical correlation analysis. We run
numerical experiments to provide further insight
on the proposed methods. The novel bounds we
derive improve our understanding of fundamental
concepts in matrix approximations. In addition,
our insights may serve as building blocks for further contributions.

1. Introduction
When dealing with data in matrix form, it is often useful to
find compact low-dimensional approximations. One way
to find such an approximation is by computing a singular
value decomposition (SVD), which offers a representation
of a matrix in terms of a set of linearly-independent factors,
conveniently sorted in order of importance. The SVD is
1
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science,
Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom 2 Deparment
of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland 3 Division
of Theoretical Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, Sweden. Correspondence to: Bruno Ordozgoiti
<b.[lastname]@qmul.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

optimal the following sense: for any constant k, it reveals
the best rank-k approximation of a matrix, as measured by
a family of matrix norms.
A drawback of SVD is that the resulting factors do not correspond directly to the rows or columns of the input matrix
and lack an intuitive interpretation. To address this issue,
many works in the literature seek approximate factorizations
in terms of elements of the matrix: instead of settling for
a set of abstract factors, like those offered by the SVD, we
aim to find a subset of rows or columns that are particularly
representative of the whole matrix.
Computing an SVD is a tractable problem and has been the
subject of extensive research. Thus, efficient methods exist
to obtain an SVD to any desired level of precision (Golub
& Van Loan, 1996). When we wish to select a subset of
matrix elements instead, the task often becomes computationally hard under various natural objectives (Civril, 2014;
Shitov, 2017). Therefore, research in this area has focused
on finding efficient approximation algorithms.
An example of a more intuitive matrix approximation is the
column subset selection problem (Deshpande et al., 2006;
Boutsidis et al., 2009), which, given a matrix and a number k, asks for the k best columns, in the following sense:
Problem 1. Column subset selection (CSS). Given a matrix A ∈ Rm×n and a positive integer k smaller than the
rank of A, find a matrix C comprised of k columns of A to
minimize
kA − CC + Ak2F ,
(1)
where C + is the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of C.
The matrix CC + A is the best Frobenius-norm approximation of A in the column-space of C and is efficiently computable. It is easy to verify that the problem of maximizing
kCC + Ak2F is equivalent to Problem 1, meaning that the set
of optimal solutions remain the same.
Leverage scores and good column subsets. In finding
good column subsets for the CSS problem, leverage scores
have proved very useful. These scores — to be precisely
defined later — relate the columns of a matrix to the subspace spanned by its top singular vectors. Thus, they might
reveal whether a column subset is particularly representative.
Leverage scores, and variants thereof, have been employed
to design approximation algorithms for CSS and related

