Optimal Algorithms for Stochastic Multi-Level Compositional Optimization

Wei Jiang 1 Bokun Wang 2 Yibo Wang 1 Lijun Zhang 1 Tianbao Yang 2
fi (·; ξ) and its gradient ∇fi (·; ξ) can be accessed, where ξ
denotes a sample drawn from the oracle such that:

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the problem of
stochastic multi-level compositional optimization,
where the objective function is a composition of
multiple smooth but possibly non-convex functions. Existing methods for solving this problem either suffer from sub-optimal sample complexities or need a huge batch size. To address these limitations, we propose a Stochastic
Multi-level Variance Reduction method (SMVR),
which achieves
the optimal sample complexity

of O 1/ϵ3 to find an ϵ-stationary point for nonconvex objectives. Furthermore, when the objective function satisfies the convexity or PolyakŁojasiewicz (PL) condition, we propose a stagewise variant of SMVRand improve the sample
complexity to O 1/ϵ2 for convex functions or
O (1/ (µϵ)) for non-convex functions satisfying
the µ-PL condition. The latter result implies the
same complexity for µ-strongly convex functions.
To make use of adaptive learning rates, we also develop Adaptive SMVR, which achieves the same
complexities but converges faster in practice. All
our complexities match the lower bounds not only
in terms of ϵ but also in terms of µ (for PL or
strongly convex functions), without using a large
batch size in each iteration.

Eξ [fi (·; ξ)] = fi (·),

In machine learning, w often represents the parameter of a
predictive model, and F denotes the loss of that model, with
ξ representing a training sample (or a batch of samples).
Problem (1) finds its application in many tasks, such as reinforcement learning (Dann et al., 2014), robust learning (Li
et al., 2021b), multi-step model-agnostic meta-learning (Ji
et al., 2020), risk-averse portfolio optimization (Bruno et al.,
2016; Shapiro et al., 2021) and risk management (Cole et al.,
2017; Dentcheva et al., 2017).
Our goal is to solve problem (1) with the optimal sample
complexity, which is a commonly-used measure in stochastic optimization. Sample complexity characterizes the number of samples needed to find an ϵ-stationary point for nonconvex functions, i.e., ∥∇F (w)∥ ≤ ϵ1 , or an ϵ-optimal
point for convex functions, i.e., F (w) − inf w F (w) ≤ ϵ.
Problem (1) reduces to the classic one-level stochastic optimization problem when K = 1, and it is also known as the
two-level compositional optimization for K = 2.

1. Introduction
We consider the stochastic multi-level compositional optimization problem:
min F (w) = fK ◦ fK−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1 (w),

w∈Rd

Eξ [∇fi (·; ξ)] = ∇fi (·).

(1)

where fi : Rdi−1 7→ Rdi , i = 1, . . . , K (with dK = 1 and
d0 = d). Only noisy evaluations of each layer function
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Department of Computer Science,
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA. Correspondence to: Lijun Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Tianbao Yang <tianbaoyang@uiowa.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

For one-level and two-level non-convex problems, there
exist single-loop algorithms, such as STORM (Cutkosky
& Orabona, 2019) and RECOVER
 (Qi et al., 2021), that
can achieve the optimal O 1/ϵ3 sample complexity for
finding an ϵ-stationary solution without using large batches.
However, for multi-level problems, the errors of Jacobian
and function value estimators accumulate with the level becoming deeper, making the problem much harder. Existing
multi-level methods either suffer from sub-optimal complexities (Yang et al., 2019; Balasubramanian et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2021) or require a huge and increasing batch
size (Zhang & Xiao, 2021). When the objective function
is convex or strongly convex, Zhang
& Lan (2021) prove a

sample complexity of O 1/ϵ2 or O(1/(µ2 ϵ)). However,
their analysis requires that each layer function fi is monotone and convex, and their complexity for µ-strongly convex
1

In some literature, the measure ∥∇F (w)∥2 ≤ ϵ is used instead. Note that the complexity O (1/ϵα ) for ∥∇F (w)∥2 ≤ ϵ
implies a complexity O 1/ϵ2α for ∥∇F (w)∥ ≤ ϵ (Zhang &
Xiao, 2021). For fair comparison, we would align the complexity
measure of each method under the same criteria ∥∇F (w)∥ ≤ ϵ,
when discussing related algorithms.

