Supervised Off-Policy Ranking

Yue Jin 1 Yue Zhang 2 Tao Qin 3 Xudong Zhang 1 Jian Yuan 1 Houqiang Li 2 Tie-Yan Liu 3

Abstract

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is to evaluate a target policy with data generated by other policies.
Most previous OPE methods focus on precisely
estimating the true performance of a policy. We
observe that in many applications, (1) the end goal
of OPE is to compare two or multiple candidate
policies and choose a good one, which is a much
simpler task than precisely evaluating their true
performance; and (2) there are usually multiple
policies that have been deployed to serve users in
real-world systems and thus the true performance
of these policies can be known. Inspired by the
two observations, in this work, we study a new
problem, supervised off-policy ranking (SOPR),
which aims to rank a set of target policies based
on supervised learning by leveraging off-policy
data and policies with known performance. We
propose a method to solve SOPR, which learns
a policy scoring model by minimizing a ranking
loss of the training policies rather than estimating the precise policy performance. The scoring
model in our method, a hierarchical Transformer
based model, maps a set of state-action pairs to a
score, where the state of each pair comes from the
off-policy data and the action is taken by a target
policy on the state in an offline manner. Extensive experiments on public datasets show that our
method outperforms baseline methods in terms of
rank correlation, regret value, and stability. Our
code is publicly available at GitHub 1 .

1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China 2 Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China 3 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Tao Qin <taoqin@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/SOPR-T/SOPR-T

1. Introduction
Off-policy evaluation (OPE), which aims to estimate the online/true performance 2 of a policy using only pre-collected
historical data generated by other policies, is critical to many
real-world applications, in which evaluating or deploying
a poorly performed policy online might be prohibitively
expensive (e.g., in trading, advertising, traffic control) or
even dangerous (e.g., in robotics, autonomous vehicles, drug
trials).
Existing OPE methods can be roughly categorized into three
classes: distribution correction based methods (Thomas
et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2018; Hanna et al., 2019; Xie et al.,
2019; Nachum et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Nachum
& Dai, 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Kostrikov & Nachum,
2020), model estimation based methods (Mannor et al.,
2004; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Hanna et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2021), and Q-estimation based methods (Le et al.,
2019; Munos et al., 2016; Harutyunyan et al., 2016; Precup,
2000; Farajtabar et al., 2018). While those methods are
based on different assumptions and with different formulations, most of them (1) focus on precisely estimating the
expected return of a target policy using pre-collected historical data, and (2) perform unsupervised estimation without
directly leveraging the online performance of previously
deployed policies.
We notice that there are some mismatches between the settings of those OPE methods and the OPE problem in realworld applications. First, in many applications, we do not
need to estimate the exact true performance of a target policy.
Instead, what we need is to compare the true performance
of a set of candidate policies and identify the best one which
will then be deployed into real-world systems. That is, correct ranking of policies rather than precise return estimation
is the end goal of off-policy evaluation. Second, in realworld applications, we usually know the true performance
of some polices that have been deployed into real-world systems and interacted with real-world users. Such information
is not well exploited in today’s OPE methods.
Based on these observations, in this work, we define a new
problem, supervised off-policy ranking (SOPR), which is
2

We use online performance and true performance interchangeably in this paper.

