Plan Your Target and Learn Your Skills: Transferable State-Only
Imitation Learning via Decoupled Policy Optimization

Minghuan Liu 1 Zhengbang Zhu 1 Yuzheng Zhuang 2 Weinan Zhang 1 Jianye Hao 2 3 Yong Yu 1 Jun Wang 2

Abstract
Recent progress in state-only imitation learning
extends the scope of applicability of imitation
learning to real-world settings by relieving the
need for observing expert actions. However, existing solutions only learn to extract a state-to-action
mapping policy from the data, without considering how the expert plans to the target. This hinders the ability to leverage demonstrations and
limits the flexibility of the policy. In this paper, we introduce Decoupled Policy Optimization
(DePO), which explicitly decouples the policy as
a high-level state planner and an inverse dynamics
model. With embedded decoupled policy gradient and generative adversarial training, DePO enables knowledge transfer to different action spaces
or state transition dynamics, and can generalize
the planner to out-of-demonstration state regions.
Our in-depth experimental analysis shows the effectiveness of DePO on learning a generalized
target state planner while achieving the best imitation performance. We demonstrate the appealing
usage of DePO for transferring across different
tasks by pre-training, and the potential for cotraining agents with various skills.

1. Introduction
Imitation Learning (IL) offers a way to train an agent from
demonstrations by mimicking the expert’s behaviors without constructing hand-crafted reward functions (Hussein
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2021), which requires the expert
demonstrations to include information of not only states
but also actions. Unfortunately, the action information is
absent from many real-world demonstration resources, e.g.,
traffic surveillance and sport records. To tackle this chal1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Tianjin University.
Correspondence to: Weinan Zhang
<wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lenge, one of the potential solutions is state-only imitation
learning (SOIL), also known as learning from observations
(LfO) (Torabi et al., 2019b), which extends the scope of
applicability of IL by relieving the memorization of lowlevel actions. However, existing SOIL methods (Torabi
et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019) only attempt to match the
expert state sequences implicitly by determining feasible actions for each pair of consecutive states, which is an ad-hoc
solution for a specific task and ignores understanding the
high-level target planning strategy of the expert.
Evidence from humans’ cognition and learning in the physical world suggests that human intelligence is effective at
transferring high-level knowledge via observations by extracting invariant characteristics across tasks and performing
long-term planning that requires different skills. For example, a courier can learn from peers about the optimal delivery
path while inheriting his own skills and habits for driving
an electric vehicle or riding a bike. Inspired by this insight,
to model a generalized target planner and allow transferring
to various action spaces and dynamics, we propose Decoupled Policy Optimization (DePO), a novel architecture that
decouples a state-to-action policy as two modules – a state
planner that generates the consecutive target state, followed
by an inverse dynamics model that delivers action to achieve
the target state. Intuitively, the state planner is prompted to
perform action-aware planning with respect to the inverse
dynamics modelling. Furthermore, to prevent the state planner from compounding error by vanilla supervised learning
the state transitions from demonstrations, DePO combines
the two modules as an integral policy function and incorporates generative adversarial trainining with the induced
decoupled policy gradient.
As such, DePO provides generalized plannable state predictions on out-of-demonstration state regions, guiding the
agent to match the expert state sequences. The flexibility
of DePO supports transferring the planner over homogeneous tasks with different skills. In experiments, we conduct in-depth analysis showing that DePO enjoys several
advantages:
• DePO has a generalized ability of state planning on
out-of-demonstration states.
• DePO learns accurate state predictions while keeping

