Double Sampling Randomized Smoothing

Linyi Li 1 Jiawei Zhang 1 Tao Xie 2 Bo Li 1

Abstract

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Given model and
smoothing
distribution 𝒫

Get 𝑃! from
sampling

c

Get 𝑄! from
sampling

𝑥
c

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA
2
Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Linyi
Li <linyi2@illinois.edu>.

• Construct worst-case classifier with 𝑃!
• Derive certified radius 𝑟"#

c

1

𝑟"#

Smooth the model
with another
distribution 𝒬

c

c

𝑥 𝑟$%&%

Our DSRS
Certification
c

Neural networks (NNs) have achieved great advances on
a wide range of tasks, but have been shown vulnerable
against adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Eykholt et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021;

𝑥

c

1. Introduction

𝑥
c

Neural networks (NNs) are known to be vulnerable against adversarial perturbations, and thus
there is a line of work aiming to provide robustness certification for NNs, such as randomized
smoothing, which samples smoothing noises from
a certain distribution to certify the robustness
for a smoothed classifier. However, as previous
work shows, the certified robust radius in randomized smoothing suffers from scaling to large
datasets (“curse of dimensionality”). To overcome this hurdle, we propose a Double Sampling
Randomized Smoothing (DSRS) framework,
which exploits the sampled probability from an
additional smoothing distribution to tighten the
robustness certification of the previous smoothed
classifier. Theoretically, under mild assumptions,
√
we prove that DSRS can certify Θ( d) robust
radius under `2 norm where d is the input dimension, which implies that DSRS may be able
to break the curse of dimensionality of randomized smoothing. We instantiate DSRS for a generalized family of Gaussian smoothing and propose an efficient and sound computing method
based on customized dual optimization considering sampling error. Extensive experiments on
MNIST, CIFAR-10, and ImageNet verify our theory and show that DSRS certifies larger robust
radii than existing baselines consistently under
different settings. Code is available at https:
//github.com/llylly/DSRS.

Standard
Certification

Get 𝑃! from sampling

c

c
• Construct worst-case
classifier with both
𝑃! and 𝑄!
• Derive tighter certified radius 𝑟$%&% > 𝑟"#

Figure 1. Upper: Standard certification for randomized smoothing
leverages information from only one distribution (PA ) to compute
robustness certification. Lower: DSRS leverages information from
two distributions (PA and QA ) to compute certification for the
smoothed classifier, yielding significantly larger certified radius.

Qiu et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2021). A
plethora of empirical defenses are proposed to improve the
robustness; however, most of these are broken by strong
adversaries again (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye et al.,
2018; Tramèr et al., 2020). Recently, there are great efforts
in developing certified defenses for NNs under certain adversarial constraints (Wong & Kolter, 2018; Raghunathan et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2020b; Xu et al., 2020; Li et al., 2019b).
Randomized smoothing (Cohen et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019a)
has emerged as a popular technique to provide certified
robustness for large-scale datasets. Concretely, it samples noise from a certain smoothing distribution to construct a smoothed classifier, and thus certifies the robust
radius for the smoothed classifier. Compared to other techniques (Wong & Kolter, 2018; Mirman et al., 2018; Gowal
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020b), randomized smoothing is
efficient and agnostic to the model, and is applicable to a
wide range of ML models, including large ResNet (He et al.,
2016) on the ImageNet dataset.
To improve the certified robust radius, existing studies (Cohen et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019a; Yang
et al., 2020) have explored different smoothing distributions. However, the improvement is limited. For example, `2 certified robust radius does not increase on large
datasets despite that the input dimension d increases (Cohen
et al., 2019), resulting in a low `∞ certified radius on large

