How to Train Your Wide Neural Network Without Backprop: An Input-Weight
Alignment Perspective

Akhilan Boopathy 1 Ila Fiete 1

Abstract
Recent works have examined theoretical and empirical properties of wide neural networks trained
in the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) regime.
Given that biological neural networks are much
wider than their artificial counterparts, we consider NTK regime wide neural networks as a possible model of biological neural networks. Leveraging NTK theory, we show theoretically that
gradient descent drives layerwise weight updates
that are aligned with their input activity correlations weighted by error, and demonstrate empirically that the result also holds in finite-width
wide networks. The alignment result allows us
to formulate a family of biologically-motivated,
backpropagation-free learning rules that are theoretically equivalent to backpropagation in infinitewidth networks. We test these learning rules on
benchmark problems in feedforward and recurrent neural networks and demonstrate, in wide
networks, comparable performance to backpropagation. The proposed rules are particularly effective in low data regimes, which are common in
biological learning settings.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks trained with gradient descent are surprisingly successful in solving a variety of tasks and exhibit
a moderate degree of generalization (Zhang et al., 2017)
and transferability (Yosinski et al., 2014). However, it has
remained theoretically difficult to understand what aspects
of the training data the networks use – and how – to achieve
their success. Recent theoretical work has established a
number of convergence and generalization results for wide
networks under the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) training
regime because its analytical tractability (Jacot et al., 2018;
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Akhilan Boopathy <akhilan@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Arora et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019; 2020). Wide neural
networks are also important models of biological neural
networks. Indeed, the evidence seems to suggest that neural
circuits in the brain are substantially wider and shallower
than current deep learning models (M Colonnier, 1981).
Thus, wide (artificial) neural networks may more accurately
model the brain.
In this work, we leverage the tractability of the NTK regime
of wide neural networks together with the suitability of
wide neural networks as a model of biological systems to
make progress in two directions: First, we investigate the
learned representations of wide neural networks through
the perspective of alignment between the weights of a neural network and statistics of input data. Prior work has
shown such alignment effects in the specialized settings
of deep linear networks (Saxe et al., 2019) and training
with random labels (Maennel et al., 2020); we extend these
works by investigating alignment in nonlinear, wide neural
networks. Our analysis indicates that even though neural
network functions and training dynamics are complex and
nonlinear, under an NTK training regime, intermediate layer
weights of neural networks trained with gradient descent
collect simple layerwise statistics of their inputs, weighted
by errors on the output.
Second, the locality of the weights’ dependence on the data
propagated through the network prompts us to consider
whether wide neural networks can be trained with simplified
learning rules that reproduce the alignment effect without
using backpropagation, the most common implementation
of gradient descent in neural networks. Backpropagation
is difficult to implement biologically, and alternative learning rules may yield better understanding of how the brain
learns (Seung, 2003; Fiete & Seung, 2006; Bengio et al.,
2016; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Liao et al., 2016; Nøkland, 2016;
Bellec et al., 2020; Bartunov et al., 2018; Richards et al.,
2019; Roth et al., 2019). Biologically-plausible learning
rules also can have practical advantages including easier implementation on neuromorphic hardware and reduced computational cost. In this work, we focus on data efficiency,
which is practically relevant to many low data, real-world
tasks. This advantage is also highly relevant to modeling
learning in the brain; massive amounts of training data are

