Understanding Gradual Domain Adaptation:
Improved Analysis, Optimal Path and Beyond

Haoxiang Wang 1 Bo Li 1 Han Zhao 1
1905
Source Domain

Abstract
The vast majority of existing algorithms for unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) focus on
adapting from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain directly in a one-off way.
Gradual domain adaptation (GDA), on the other
hand, assumes a path of (T −1) unlabeled intermediate domains bridging the source and target, and
aims to provide better generalization in the target
domain by leveraging the intermediate ones. Under certain assumptions, Kumar et al. (2020) proposed a simple algorithm, gradual self-training,
along with a generalization
bound in the order
q

log T
O(T )
of e
(ε0 +O
for the target domain
n
error, where ε0 is the source domain error and
n is the data size of each domain. Due to the
exponential factor, this upper bound becomes
vacuous when T is only moderately large. In
this work, we analyze gradual self-training under
more general and relaxed assumptions, and prove
a significantly improved generalization bound as
e T ∆+ √T + √1 , where ∆ is the average
ε0 +O
n
nT
distributional distance between consecutive domains. Compared with the existing bound with
an exponential dependency on T as a multiplicative factor, our bound only depends on T linearly
and additively. Perhaps more interestingly, our
result implies the existence of an optimal choice
of T that minimizes the generalization error, and
it also naturally suggests an optimal way to construct the path of intermediate domains so as to
minimize the accumulative path length T ∆ between the source and target. To corroborate the
implications of our theory, we examine gradual
self-training on multiple semi-synthetic and real
datasets, which confirms our findings. We believe
our insights provide a path forward toward the
design of future GDA algorithms.
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.
Correspondence to: Haoxiang Wang <hwang264@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Intermediate Domains

2013
Target Domain

Unlabeled

Unlabeled

Female

Male

Figure 1. An example of gradual domain adaptation on Portraits
(Ginosar et al., 2015), a historical image dataset of US high school
yearbook. Given labeled data from a source domain, models are
adapted to the target domain, with the help of unlabeled data from
intermediate domains gradually shifting from the source to target.

1

Introduction

It is well known that machine learning models are generally
not robust to distribution shifts (Sagawa et al., 2021; Koh
et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz,
2021). As a result, models trained on one data distribution
may have a severe performance drop on test data with a
large distribution shift. Unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) aims to tackle this challenge by adapting models to
the test distribution with the help of unlabelled data from the
target domain (Ganin et al., 2016; Long et al., 2015; Tzeng
et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2018).
In general, UDA considers a source domain and a target
domain, in which the model is trained and tested, respectively. There is a discrepancy between the two domains,
while they share certain similarities. Prior theoretical results
show that the generalization error of UDA increases with
the larger discrepancy between two domains (Ben-David
et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2019). However, empirically, due
to the potentially large shift between these two domains,
it may be hard to adapt to the target domain in a one-off
fashion, and it is observed that existing UDA algorithms do
not perform well (Kumar et al., 2020; Sagawa et al., 2021;
Abnar et al., 2021) under large shifts.
Intuitively, one can expect that existing adaptation algorithms perform better under smaller shifts. Thus, one natural idea is to divide a large shift into multiple smaller shifts
to mitigate the distribution shift issue. This “divide-andconquer” idea has brought up to a setting known as gradual
domain adaptation (GDA) (Hoffman et al., 2014; Gadermayr et al., 2018; Bobu et al., 2018; Wulfmeier et al., 2018;

