On the Practicality of Deterministic Epistemic Uncertainty

Janis Postels * 1 Mattia Segu * 1 Tao Sun 1 Luca Sieber 1 Luc Van Gool 1 Fisher Yu 1 Federico Tombari 2 3

Abstract
A set of novel approaches for estimating epistemic uncertainty in deep neural networks with
a single forward pass has recently emerged as
a valid alternative to Bayesian Neural Networks.
On the premise of informative representations,
these deterministic uncertainty methods (DUMs)
achieve strong performance on detecting out-ofdistribution (OOD) data while adding negligible
computational costs at inference time. However,
it remains unclear whether DUMs are well calibrated and can seamlessly scale to real-world
applications - both prerequisites for their practical
deployment. To this end, we first provide a taxonomy of DUMs, and evaluate their calibration
under continuous distributional shifts. Then, we
extend them to semantic segmentation. We find
that, while DUMs scale to realistic vision tasks
and perform well on OOD detection, the practicality of current methods is undermined by poor
calibration under distributional shifts.

1. Introduction
Despite the dramatic enhancement of predictive performance of deep learning (DL), its adoption remains limited
due to unpredictable failure on out-of-distribution (OOD)
samples (Blanchard et al., 2011; Muandet et al., 2013) and
adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2013). Uncertainty estimation techniques aim at bridging this gap by providing accurate confidence levels on a model’s output, allowing for a
safe deployment of neural networks (NNs) in safety-critical
tasks, e.g. autonomous driving or medical applications.
While Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) represent the predominant holistic solution for quantifying uncertainty (Hinton & Van Camp, 1993; Neal, 2012), exactly modelling their
full posterior is often intractable, and scalable versions usu*

Equal contribution 1 ETH Zurich 2 Technical University Munich
Google. Correspondence to: Janis, Postels <jpostels@ethz.ch>,
Mattia, Segu <segum@ethz.ch>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ally require expensive variational approximations (Kingma
et al., 2015; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Zhang et al., 2018;
Postels et al., 2019; Loquercio et al., 2020). Moreover, it has
recently been shown that true Bayes posterior can also lead
to poor uncertainty (Wenzel et al., 2020). Thus, efficient
approaches to uncertainty estimation largely remain an open
problem, limiting the adoption within real-time applications
under strict memory, time and safety requirements.
Recently, a promising line of work emerged for estimating
epistemic uncertainty of a NN with a single forward pass
while treating its weights deterministically. By regularizing the hidden representations of a model, these methods
represent an efficient and scalable solution to epistemic
uncertainty estimation and to the related OOD detection
problem. In contrast to BNNs, Deterministic Uncertainty
Methods (DUMs) quantify epistemic uncertainty using the
distribution of latent representations (Alemi et al., 2018; Wu
& Goodman, 2020; Charpentier et al., 2020; Mukhoti et al.,
2021; Postels et al., 2020; Charpentier et al., 2021) or by
replacing the final softmax layer with a distance-sensitive
function (Mandelbaum & Weinshall, 2017; Van Amersfoort
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; van Amersfoort et al., 2021).
While OOD detection is a prerequisite for a safe deployment
of DL in previously unseen scenarios, the calibration - i.e.
how well uncertainty correlates with model performance of such methods under continuous distributional shifts is
equally important. Measuring the calibration of an epistemic
uncertainty estimate on shifted data investigates whether it
entails information about the predictive performance of the
model. This an essential requirement for uncertainty and, unlike OOD detection, an evaluation that is not model-agnostic
- i.e. one cannot perform well without taking the predictive
model into account. Nonetheless, previous work falls short
of investigating calibration, and solely focuses on OOD detection (Mandelbaum & Weinshall, 2017; Van Amersfoort
et al., 2020; Wu & Goodman, 2020; van Amersfoort et al.,
2021; Mukhoti et al., 2021). Further, DUMs have thus far
only been evaluated on toy datasets for binary classification,
small-scale image classification tasks (Van Amersfoort et al.,
2020; Mukhoti et al., 2021) and toy prediction problems
in natural language processing (Liu et al., 2020). Despite
claiming to solve practical issues of traditional uncertainty
estimation approaches, the practicality of DUMs remains to
be assessed on more challenging tasks.

