A new similarity measure for covariate shift
with applications to nonparametric regression

Reese Pathak * 1 Cong Ma * 2 Martin J. Wainwright 1 3

Abstract
We study covariate shift in the context of nonparametric regression. We introduce a new measure
of distribution mismatch between the source and
target distributions that is based on the integrated
ratio of probabilities of balls at a given radius. We
use the scaling of this measure with respect to the
radius to characterize the minimax rate of estimation over a family of Hölder continuous functions
under covariate shift. In comparison to the recently proposed notion of transfer exponent, this
measure leads to a sharper rate of convergence
and is more fine-grained. We accompany our theory with concrete instances of covariate shift that
illustrate this sharp difference.

1. Introduction
In the standard formulation of prediction or classification,
the future data (as represented by a test set) is assumed to be
drawn from the same distribution as the training data. This
assumption, while theoretically convenient, may fail to hold
in many real-world scenarios. For instance, training data
might be collected only from a sub-population of a broader
population (such as in medical trials), or the environment
might change over time as data are collected. Such scenarios
result in a distribution mismatch between the training and
test data.
In this paper, we study an important case of such distribution mismatch—namely, the covariate shift problem (Shimodaira, 2000; Quionero-Candela et al., 2009). Suppose
that a statistician observes covariate-response pairs (X, Y ),
and wishes to build a prediction rule. In the problem of
covariate shift, the distribution of the covariates X is al1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley 2 Department of Statistics, University of Chicago 3 Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Reese Pathak
<pathakr@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lowed to change between the training and test data, while
the posterior distribution of the responses (namely, Y | X)
remains fixed. Compared to the usual i.i.d. setting, this
serves as a more accurate model for a variety of real-world
applications, including image classification (Saenko et al.,
2010), biomedical engineering (Li et al., 2010), sentiment
analysis (Blitzer et al., 2007), and audio processing (Hassan
et al., 2013).
More formally, suppose that the statistician observes nP coP
variates {Xi }ni=1
from a source distribution P , and nQ conP +nQ
variates {Xi }i=nP +1 from a target distribution Q. For each
observed Xi , she also observes a response Yi drawn from
the same conditional distribution. The regression function
f ? (x) = E[Y | x] defined by this conditional distribution
is assumed to lie in some function class F. The statistician
uses these samples to produce an estimate fb, which will
be evaluated on the target distribution, with a fresh sample
X ∼ Q, yielding the mean-squared error
h
2 i
kfb − f ? k2L2 (Q) ··= E fb(X) − f ? (X) .

When there is no covariate shift, the fundamental (minimax)
risks for this problem are well-understood (Halász, 1972;
Ibragimov & Khas0 minskiı̆, 1980; Stone, 1982; Tsybakov,
2009). The goal of this paper is to understand how, for nonparametric function classes F, this minimax risk changes
as a function of the “amount” of covariate shift between P
and Q.
1.1. Our contributions and related work
Let us summarize the main contributions of this paper, and
put them in the context of related work.

Our contributions. We introduce a new similarity measure1 ρh between two probability measures P, Q on a common metric space (X , d). For any level h > 0, it is defined
as
Z
1
 dQ(x),
ρh (P, Q) ··=
(1)
B(x,
h)
P
X
1

We note that this quantity will actually serve as a dis-similarity
measure in the sequel. When it is larger, we obtain worse rates of
estimation over the nonparametric classes considered in this paper.

