Improved Regret for Differentially Private Exploration in Linear MDP

Dung Daniel Ngo * 1 Giuseppe Vietri * 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 2

Abstract
We study privacy-preserving exploration in sequential decision-making for environments that
rely on sensitive data such as medical records. In
particular, we focus on solving the problem of
reinforcement learning (RL) subject to the constraint of (joint) differential privacy in the linear
MDP setting, where both dynamics and rewards
are given by linear functions. Prior work on this
problem due to (Luyo et al., 2021) achieves a regret rate that has a dependence of O(K 3/5 ) on
the number of episodes K. We provide a private algorithm with an improved
√ regret rate with
an optimal dependence of O( K) on the number of episodes. The key recipe for our stronger
regret guarantee is the adaptivity in the policy
update schedule, in which an update only occurs when sufficient changes in the data are detected. As a result, our algorithm benefits from
low switching cost and only performs O(log(K))
updates, which greatly reduces the amount of privacy noise. Finally, in the most prevalent privacy regimes where the privacy parameter  is a
constant, our algorithm incurs negligible privacy
cost—in comparison with the existing non-private
regret bounds, the additional regret due to privacy
appears in lower-order terms.

1. Introduction
Many real world machine learning (ML) systems operate
under the setting of interactive learning, where learning
algorithms interact with users and collect feedback from
them over time. In domains such as personalized medicine
where ML algorithms rely on sensitive data, the ability to
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
2
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. Correspondence to: Dung Daniel Ngo
<ngo00054@umn.edu>, Giuseppe Vietri <vietr002@umn.edu>,
Zhiwei Steven Wu <zstevenwu@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

protect users’ data privacy has become increasingly critical.
In order to provide rigorous and formal privacy guarantees,
there has been a growing and longstanding literature on
designing ML algorithms subject to the constraint of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006). While the vast
majority of the DP ML literature has focused on the setting
of supervised learning, there has been significantly less development on interactive learning, especially reinforcement
learning (RL).
In this paper, we advance a recent line of work starting
from Vietri et al. (2020) that provides RL algorithms with
provable privacy guarantees and performance bounds. Concretely, we consider a setting of episodic RL where an
agent interacts with K users that arrive sequentially over K
episodes. In each episode k, the agent interacts with user k
over a fixed horizon of H time steps. At each time step in
the episode, the current user reveals their state to the agent,
then the agent provides the user with a recommended action
to take, which subsequently generates a reward received by
the user. The goal of the agent is to maximize the cumulative reward over all users, or equivalently, minimize the
regret with respect to the optimal policy. In this model, the
sequence of states and rewards of each user is considered
sensitive information. While each user may be willing to
share such information to the agent in exchange for services
or recommendations, there is still a risk that the agent inadvertently leaks the user’s private information through the
interactions with other users.
In order to prevent such privacy risks, existing work on
private contextual bandits (Shariff & Sheffet, 2018) and
private RL (Vietri et al., 2020) have adopted the notion of
joint differential privacy (JDP) (Kearns et al., 2014a), a
variant of DP that is suitable for sequential learning settings.
Informally, JDP requires that for any user k, the output
information to all other users except k cannot reveal much
about k’s private data. As a consequence, even if all other
users collude (e.g., collectively probing the agent’s policies)
against k, the private information of k is still protected.
Under the constraint of JDP, earlier work by Vietri et al.
(2020); Garcelon et al. (2020) focuses on the tabular MDP
setting, where the states and actions are discrete and the
value functions can be stored in a table. More recent work
has considered function approximation for DP RL. In par-

