Improve Single-Point Zeroth-Order Optimization
Using High-Pass and Low-Pass Filters

Xin Chen 1 Yujie Tang 1 Na Li 1

Abstract

information, i.e., function evaluations. To this end, zerothorder (or derivative-free) methods (Nesterov & Spokoiny,
2017) are developed to solve black-box optimization and
control problems, which essentially estimate the gradients
using perturbed function evaluations. Zeroth-order optimization (ZO) has attracted a great deal of recent attention and
has been used for a broad spectrum of applications, such as
reinforcement learning (Malik et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019),
adversarial training (Chen et al., 2017), physical system control (Chen et al., 2021b; 2020), online sensor management
(Liu et al., 2020), etc.

Single-point zeroth-order optimization (SZO) is
useful in solving online black-box optimization
and control problems in time-varying environments, as it queries the function value only once at
each time step. However, the vanilla SZO method
is known to suffer from a large estimation variance and slow convergence, which seriously limits
its practical application. In this work, we borrow
the idea of high-pass and low-pass filters from extremum seeking control (continuous-time version
of SZO) and develop a novel SZO method called
HLF-SZO by integrating these filters. It turns out
that the high-pass filter coincides with the residual
feedback method, and the low-pass filter can be
interpreted as the momentum method. As a result,
the proposed HLF-SZO achieves a much smaller
variance and much faster convergence than the
vanilla SZO method, and empirically outperforms
the residual-feedback SZO method, which are verified via extensive numerical experiments.

1. Introduction
This paper considers solving the generic unconstrained optimization problem:
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where x ∈ Rd is the decision variable and f : Rd → R is
the objective function. A straightforward solution scheme
is to apply the gradient descent method (Ruder, 2016), e.g.,
x ← x − η∇f (x) with the step size η. However, in many
practical applications, the first-order information of function
f , i.e., the gradient ∇f (x), may be unavailable or too expensive to procure, and one can only access the zeroth-order
1

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, MA, US. Correspondence to: Xin Chen
<chenxin2336@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

According to the number of queried function evaluations
at each iteration, ZO methods can be categorized into two
types: single-point and multi-point (Liu et al., 2020). As
suggested by the name, single-point ZO (SZO) (Flaxman
et al., 2005) only needs to query the function value once
at each iteration, making it particularly suitable for online
optimization and control problems. In contrast, multi-point
ZO, such as two-point ZO (Shamir, 2017), requires two or
more function evaluations in the same instantaneous time;
this may not be practical when the environment is nonstationary or changed by the implementation of a function
evaluation. For example, two-point ZO can not be applied
to non-stationary reinforcement learning problems, because
it needs two different policy evaluations in the same environment, which is impossible since the environment changes
after each policy evaluation (Zhang et al., 2021). Nevertheless, it is known that the vanilla SZO method (Flaxman
et al., 2005) suffers from a large estimation variance and
slow convergence, which seriously jeopardizes its practical application. There have been multiple studies (Saha
& Tewari, 2011; Dekel et al., 2015; Gasnikov et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2021) on improving the convergence rate of
SZO. In particular, the residual-feedback SZO method proposed in the recent work Zhang et al. (2021) achieves the
state-of-the-art performance to date.
In the field of control, there is a continuous-time version
of SZO known as extremum seeking (ES) control (Ariyur
& Krstic, 2003; Tan et al., 2010). ES control is a classic
adaptive control technique that uses only output feedback to
steer a dynamical system to a state where the objective function attains an extremum. ES control can also be adopted

