Secure Quantized Training for Deep Learning

Marcel Keller 1 Ke Sun 1 2

Abstract
We implement training of neural networks in secure multi-party computation (MPC) using quantization commonly used in said setting. We are
the first to present an MNIST classifier purely
trained in MPC that comes within 0.2 percent
of the accuracy of the same convolutional neural
network trained via plaintext computation. More
concretely, we have trained a network with two
convolutional and two dense layers to 99.2% accuracy in 3.5 hours (under one hour for 99% accuracy). We have also implemented AlexNet for
CIFAR-10, which converges in a few hours. We
develop novel protocols for exponentiation and inverse square root. Finally, we present experiments
in a range of MPC security models for up to ten
parties, both with honest and dishonest majority
as well as semi-honest and malicious security.

1. Introduction
Secure multi-party computation (MPC) is a cryptographic
technique that allows a set of parties to compute a public
output on private inputs without revealing the inputs or any
intermediate results. This makes it a potential solution to
federated learning where the sample data stays private and
only the model or even only inference results are revealed.
Imagine a set of healthcare providers holding sensitive patient data. MPC allows them to collaboratively train a model.
This model could then either be released or even kept private for inference using MPC again. See Figure 1 for an
illustration. Note that MPC is oblivious to how the input
data is split among participants, that is, it can be used for
the horizontal as well as the vertical case.

between the one bit of information desired and the full
figures.
There has been a sustained interest in applying secure computation to machine learning and neural networks going
back to at least Barni et al. (2006). More recent advances in
practical MPC have led to an increased effort in implementing both inference and training.
A number of works such as Mohassel & Zhang (2017),
Mohassel & Rindal (2018), Wagh et al. (2019), Wagh et al.
(2021) implement neural network training with MPC at least
in parts. However, for the task of classifying MNIST digits,
they either give accuracy figures below 95% or figures obtained using plaintext training. For the latter case, the works
do not clarify how close the computation for plaintext training matches the lower precision and other differences in the
MPC setting. Agrawal et al. (2019) achieved an accuracy of
99.38% in a comparable setting for a convolutional neural
network with more channels than we use. However, their actual implementation only uses dense layers, and we achieve
comparable accuracy in this model. All works use quantization in the sense that a fractional number x is represented as
bx · 2f e where b·e denotes rounding to the nearest integer,
and f ∈ Z (Z: the set of integers) is a precision parameter. This makes addition considerably faster in the secure
computation setting because it reduces to integer addition
(at the cost of compounding rounding errors). Furthermore,
some of the works suggest replacing the softmax function
that uses exponentiation with a ReLU-based replacement.
Keller & Sun (2020) discovered that this softmax replace-

A more conceptual example is the well-known millionaires’
problem where two people want to find out who is richer
without revealing their wealth. There is clearly a difference
1

CSIRO’s Data61, Sydney, Australia 2 The Australian National University. Correspondence to: Marcel Keller <marcel.keller@data61.csiro.au>, Ke Sun <ke.sun@data61.csiro.au>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Outsourced computation: Data holders (on the
left) secret-share their data to a number of computing
parties (on the right), who then return the desired result
(e.g., a model or inference results on further queries). All
communication except the outputs is secret-shared and
thus secure if no two computing parties collude.

