Frustratingly Easy Transferability Estimation

Long-Kai Huang 1 Junzhou Huang 1 Yu Rong 1 Qiang Yang 2 Ying Wei 3

Abstract
Transferability estimation has been an essential
tool in selecting a pre-trained model and the layers in it for transfer learning, so as to maximize
the performance on a target task and prevent negative transfer. Existing estimation algorithms either require intensive training on target tasks or
have difficulties in evaluating the transferability
between layers. To this end, we propose a simple, efficient, and effective transferability measure
named TransRate. Through a single pass over
examples of a target task, TransRate measures
the transferability as the mutual information between features of target examples extracted by a
pre-trained model and their labels. We overcome
the challenge of efficient mutual information estimation by resorting to coding rate that serves
as an effective alternative to entropy. From the
perspective of feature representation, the resulting
TransRate evaluates both completeness (whether
features contain sufficient information of a target task) and compactness (whether features of
each class are compact enough for good generalization) of pre-trained features. Theoretically,
we have analyzed the close connection of TransRate to the performance after transfer learning.
Despite its extraordinary simplicity in 10 lines
of codes, TransRate performs remarkably well in
extensive evaluations on 32 pre-trained models
and 16 downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning from standard large datasets (e.g., ImageNet) and corresponding pre-trained models (e.g., ResNet50) has become a de-facto method for real-world deep learning applications where limited annotated data is accessible.
Unfortunately, the performance gain by transfer learning
1

Tencent AI Lab 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 City University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Ying
Wei <yingwei@cityu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

could vary a lot, even with the possibility of negative transfer (Pan & Yang, 2009; Wang et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2020). First, the relatedness of the source task where a pretrained model is trained on to the target task largely dictates
the performance gain. Second, using pre-trained models
in different architectures also leads to uneven performance
gain, even for the same pair of source and target tasks. Figure 1(a) tells that ResNet-50 pre-trained on ImageNet contributes the most to the target task CIFAR-100, compared
to the other architectures. Finally, the optimal layers to
transfer vary from pair to pair. While higher layers encode
more semantic patterns that are specific to source tasks,
lower-layer features are more generic (Yosinski et al., 2014).
Especially if a pair of tasks are not sufficiently similar, determining the optimal layers is expected to strike the balance
between transferring only lower-layer features (as higher
layers specific to a source task may hurt the performance of
a target task) and transferring more higher-layer features (as
training more higher-layers from scratch requires extensive
labeled data). As shown in Figure 1(b), not transferring
the three highest layers is preferred for training with full
target data, though transferring all but the two highest layers
achieves the highest test accuracy with scarce target data.
This suggests the following
Question: Which pre-trained model (possibly trained on
different source tasks in a supervised or unsupervised manner) and which layers of it should be transferred to benefit
the target task the most?
This research question drives the design of transferability estimation methods, including computation-intensive (Achille
et al., 2019; Dwivedi & Roig, 2019; Song et al., 2020; Zamir et al., 2018) and computation-efficient ones (Bao et al.,
2019; Cui et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2020; Tran et al., 2019;
You et al., 2021). The pioneering works (Achille et al., 2019;
Zamir et al., 2018) directly follow the definition of transfer
learning to measure the transferability, and thereby require
fine-tuning on a target task with expensive parameter optimization. Though their follow-ups (Dwivedi & Roig, 2019;
Song et al., 2020) alleviate the need of fine-tuning, their
prerequisites still include an encoder pre-trained on target
tasks. Keeping in mind that the primary goal of a transferability measure is to select a pre-trained model prior to
training on a target task, researchers recently turned towards
computation-efficient ways. The transferability is estimated

