Stable Conformal Prediction Sets
Eugene Ndiaye 1

Abstract
When one observes a sequence of variables
(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn ), Conformal Prediction
(CP) is a methodology that allows to estimate
a confidence set for yn+1 given xn+1 by merely
assuming that the distribution of the data is
exchangeable. CP sets have guaranteed coverage
for any finite population size n. While appealing,
the computation of such a set turns out to be infeasible in general, e.g., when the unknown variable
yn+1 is continuous. The bottleneck is that it is
based on a procedure that readjusts a prediction
model on data where we replace the unknown
target by all its possible values in order to select
the most probable one. This requires computing
an infinite number of models, which often makes
it intractable. In this paper, we combine CP techniques with classical algorithmic stability bounds
to derive a prediction set computable with a single
model fit. We demonstrate that our proposed
confidence set does not lose any coverage guarantees while avoiding the need for data splitting as
currently done in the literature. We provide some
numerical experiments to illustrate the tightness
of our estimation when the sample size is sufficiently large, on both synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning algorithms can predict the label of
an object based on its observed characteristics with impressive accuracy. They are often trained on historical datasets
sampled from the same distribution and it is important to
quantify the uncertainty of their predictions. Conformal prediction is a versatile and simple method introduced in (Vovk
et al., 2005; Shafer & Vovk, 2008) that provides a finite
sample and distribution free 100(1 − α)% confidence region
on the predicted object based on past observations. The
1

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Eugene Ndiaye <endiaye3@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

main idea can be subsumed as a hypothesis testing between
H0 : yn+1 = z

and

H1 : yn+1 6= z ,

where z is any replacement candidate for the unknown
response yn+1 .
The conformal prediction set will
consist of the collection of candidates whose tests are
not rejected. The construction of a p-value function is
simple. We start by fitting a model with training set
{(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn ), (xn+1 , z)} and sort the prediction
scores/errors for each instance in ascending order. A
candidate z will be considered as conformal or typical
if the rank of its score is sufficiently small compared
to the others. The key assumption is that the predictive
model and the joint probability distribution of the sequence
{(xi , yi )}n+1
i=1 are invariant w.r.t. permutation of the data. As
a consequence, the ranks of the scores are equally likely and
thus follow a uniform distribution which allow to calibrate a
threshold on the rank statistics leading to a valid confidence
set. This method has a strong coverage guarantee without
any further assumptions on the distribution and is valid for
any finite sample size n; see more details in Section 2.
Conformal prediction technique has been applied for designing uncertainty sets in active learning (Ho & Wechsler,
2008), anomaly detection (Laxhammar & Falkman, 2015;
Bates et al., 2021), few shot learning (Fisch et al., 2021),
time series (Chernozhukov et al., 2018; Xu & Xie, 2021;
Chernozhukov et al., 2021), robust optimization (Johnstone
& Cox, 2021) or to infer the performance guarantee for statistical learning algorithms (Holland, 2020; Cella & Ryan,
2020). Currently, we are seeing a growing interest in these
approaches due to their flexibility and ease of deployment
even for very complex problems where classical approaches
offer limited performance (Efron, 2021). We refer to
(Balasubramanian et al., 2014) for other AI applications.
Despite its nice properties, the computation of conformal
prediction sets requires fitting a model on a new augmented
dataset where the unknown quantity yn+1 is replaced by
a set of candidates. In a regression setting where an object
can take an uncountable possible value, the set of candidates
is infinite. Therefore, computing the conformal prediction
is infeasible without additional structural assumptions
about the underlying model fit, and even so, the current
computational costs remain very high. Hence the prevailing
recommendation to use less efficient data splitting methods.

