Co-training Improves Prompt-based Learning for Large Language Models

Hunter Lang 1 Monica Agrawal 1 Yoon Kim 1 David Sontag 1

Abstract
We demonstrate that co-training (Blum &
Mitchell, 1998) can improve the performance of
prompt-based learning by using unlabeled data.
While prompting has emerged as a promising
paradigm for few-shot and zero-shot learning, it
is often brittle and requires much larger models
compared to the standard supervised setup. We
find that co-training makes it possible to improve
the original prompt model and at the same time
learn a smaller, downstream task-specific model.
In the case where we only have partial access to
a prompt model (e.g., output probabilities from
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)) we learn a calibration model over the prompt outputs. When we
have full access to the prompt model’s gradients
but full finetuning remains prohibitively expensive (e.g., T0 (Sanh et al., 2022)), we learn a set
of soft prompt continuous vectors to iteratively
update the prompt model. We find that models
trained in this manner can significantly improve
performance on challenging datasets where there
is currently a large gap between prompt-based
learning and fully-supervised models.

1. Introduction
Prompt-based learning, in which a pretrained language
model is adapted to various tasks by priming on natural
language prompts, has emerged as a promising framework
for few-shot and zero-shot learning (Brown et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2021a; Wei et al., 2021; Sanh et al., 2022). While
intriguing, these methods can be sensitive to trivial cosmetic
artifacts, including variations in prompt wording and the
ordering of examples (Lu et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021;
Kumar & Talukdar, 2021). Further, the models used in
prompt-based learning (e.g., GPT-3, T0) are much larger
than those typically used for standard fine-tuning. These factors make prompt-based learning difficult to use in practice.
Given a small amount of labeled data, one could evaluate
1

MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to: <hjl@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the performance of each prompt and re-calibrate the prompt
outputs to improve performance. However, (i) this reliance
on labeled data goes against the goal of few-shot learning,
and (ii) even with oracle calibration, some prompts have
sub-par accuracy. Recently, to address issue (i), Zhao et al.
(2021) developed a data-free calibration method that can
dramatically improve the accuracy of few-shot prompts for
GPT-3. We build on their work by showing how to use
unlabeled data to further improve performance.
To leverage unlabeled data, we use co-training (Blum &
Mitchell, 1998), which operates on two views of each data
point X: ϕ0 (X) and ϕ1 (X). For example, in a clinical
diagnosis system, ϕ0 (X) could be laboratory test results
and ϕ1 (X) an X-ray image. A pair of models (h0 and h1
respectively) takes turns labeling a large unlabeled training
set, and each model is trained on the confident pseudo-labels
from the other. Model h0 only uses ϕ0 (X), and model h1
uses ϕ1 (X). By using complementary information in the
views ϕ0 , ϕ1 and the different inductive biases from models
h0 , h1 , co-training allows each model to learn from the
other without labeled data. The initial signal to start the
co-training process is provided by a “guess” at a model h0 .
To combine co-training and prompt-based learning, we use
outputs from a large prompt-based model as ϕ0 (X) and the
pre-trained representation from a much smaller language
model (e.g., DeBERTa (He et al., 2021)) as ϕ1 (X). We
specify the models h0 and h1 based on whether we have
partial access to the prompt model (querying GPT-3) or full
access (locally training T0).
In partial access, we only have access to the large model’s
output probabilities. In this case, we use unlabeled data to
learn a model h0 that both calibrates individual prompts and
ensembles multiple prompts. We refer to this as the label
model. We use Calibrate-Before-Use (Zhao et al., 2021) to
initialize the calibration parameters of this model for each
prompt, and we initialize the ensembling parameters to approximate majority vote. We then refine this initial guess for
h0 with co-training. We use the pre-trained representation
from DeBERTa (He et al., 2021) for ϕ1 (X) and train the last
few layers of that model as h1 . The only labeled data used
is the set of k examples used in the input prompts. Figure 1
(left) shows the co-training process for partial access.
We also study a full access setting using T0 (Sanh et al.,

