Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale

Eric Mitchell 1 Charles Lin 1 Antoine Bosselut 2 Christopher D Manning 1 Chelsea Finn 1
1
2
xtest
= Is Messi xtest
= Why is

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large neural networks, notably language models, are typically deployed as static artifacts, whose behavior is difficult
to modify during deployment without re-training (Lazaridou
et al., 2021). While prepending either manually-written or
automatically-retrieved prompts to the input can sometimes
be effective for modulating behavior (Brown et al., 2020),
1

Stanford University Department of Computer Science 2 EPFL
School of Computer and Communication Sciences. Correspondence to: Eric Mitchell <eric.mitchell@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

at Barça?

the sky blue?

SERAC
Edit Memory

xe1 = Who is the UK PM?
ye1 = Boris Johnson
xe2 = Is HCN poisonous?
ye2 = Yes
xe3 = Where does Messi play?
ye3 = Paris Saint-Germain
…

Even the largest neural networks make errors, and
once-correct predictions can become invalid as
the world changes. Model editors make local
updates to the behavior of base (pre-trained) models to inject updated knowledge or correct undesirable behaviors. Existing model editors have
shown promise, but also suffer from insufficient
expressiveness: they struggle to accurately model
an edit’s intended scope (examples affected by
the edit), leading to inaccurate predictions for
test inputs loosely related to the edit, and they
often fail altogether after many edits. As a highercapacity alternative, we propose Semi-Parametric
Editing with a Retrieval-Augmented Counterfactual Model (SERAC), which stores edits in an
explicit memory and learns to reason over them to
modulate the base model’s predictions as needed.
To enable more rigorous evaluation of model editors, we introduce three challenging language
model editing problems based on question answering, fact-checking, and dialogue generation.
We find that only SERAC achieves high performance on all three problems, consistently outperforming existing approaches to model editing
by a significant margin. Code, data, and additional project information will be made available
at https://sites.google.com/view/serac-editing.

Scope classifier
2
xtest

1
[xe3; ye3; xtest
]

Counterfactual model

Base model (frozen)

No

Rayleigh scattering

Figure 1. SERAC comprises an edit memory, classifier, and counterfactual model. User-supplied edits are stored directly in the
memory. Post-edit inputs x1test and x2test are classified by whether
the memory contains inputs relevant to processing them. If the
classifier determines a relevant edit example exists, the input and
edit example are passed to the counterfactual model. Otherwise,
the input is simply passed to the base model.

model predictions do not always update to reflect the content of the prompts (Lewis et al., 2020; Paranjape et al.,
2021). However, in order to respond to changes in the world
(e.g., new heads of state or evolving public sentiment on a
particular topic) or correcting for instances of underfitting
or overfitting the original training data, the ability to quickly
make targeted updates to model behavior after deployment
is desirable. To address this need, model editing is an emerging area of research that aims to enable fast, data-efficient
updates to a pre-trained base model’s behavior for only a
small region of the domain, without damaging model performance on other inputs of interest (Sinitsin et al., 2020; Zhu
et al., 2020; Sotoudeh & Thakur, 2019; De Cao et al., 2021;
Dai et al., 2021; Mitchell et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2021;
Meng et al., 2022).

