Markov Chain Monte Carlo for Continuous-Time Switching Dynamical Systems

Lukas Köhs 1 Bastian Alt 1 Heinz Koeppl 1

Abstract
Switching dynamical systems are an expressive
model class for the analysis of time-series data.
As in many fields within the natural and engineering sciences, the systems under study typically
evolve continuously in time, it is natural to consider continuous-time model formulations consisting of switching stochastic differential equations governed by an underlying Markov jump
process. Inference in these types of models is
however notoriously difficult, and tractable computational schemes are rare. In this work, we
propose a novel inference algorithm utilizing a
Markov Chain Monte Carlo approach. The presented Gibbs sampler allows to efficiently obtain
samples from the exact continuous-time posterior processes. Our framework naturally enables
Bayesian parameter estimation, and we also include an estimate for the diffusion covariance,
which is oftentimes assumed fixed in stochastic
differential equations models. We evaluate our
framework under the modeling assumption and
compare it against an existing variational inference approach.

1. Introduction
A wide range of natural and engineered systems are naturally modeled as continuous-time stochastic processes. The
model state space depends on the system at hand; while
modeling approaches often focus on either a discrete or continuous state description, a great variety of systems involve
both discrete and continuous components, where a discrete,
switching process influences the dynamics of some continuous quantity. In the biological sciences in particular, one
is often dealing with systems with hybrid state space structure: In neuroscience, for instance, the brain is commonly
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Information
Technology, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany. Correspondence to: Heinz Koeppl <heinz.koeppl@tudarmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

assumed to adopt different states, e.g., depending on the environment or own actions, such as eyes opened versus eyes
closed, eliciting qualitatively different electrophysiological
dynamics (Weng et al., 2020). Likewise, in cellular biology,
the state of genetic toggle switches drives continuous measurable quantities such as a protein concentrations (Tian &
Burrage, 2006), and the stochastic conformational gating of
ion channels (Bressloff, 2020) determines the ion current
passing through (Anderson et al., 2015). Further examples
include engineering applications, such as the safety of air
traffic under potential system failures (Lygeros & Prandini,
2010); the control of the power distribution in an electrical
grid in different connectivity modes (Střelec et al., 2012);
and analyses of exchange rates or stock returns depending on market states in econometrics (Azzouzi & Nabney,
1999).
A versatile framework to analyze systems of this kind are
stochastic hybrid systems (SHS), which have a long history
in control, statistics and machine learning (Davis, 1984; Hu
et al., 2000; Engell et al., 2003; Davis, 2018; Cassandras
& Lygeros, 2018). SHS can be defined in various ways;
In this paper, we focus on fully stochastic, continuoustime systems described as switching stochastic differential equations (SSDEs), in which a discrete Markov jump
process (MJP) drives a subordinate stochastic differential
equation (SDE) (Mao & Yuan, 2006).
The problem of inference has been treated extensively in
both SDEs and MJPs. Classical exact results include the
well-known Kalman and Wonham filters (Bain & Crisan,
2008), as well as respective smoothing extensions, such as
the Rauch-Tung-Striebel (RTS) smoother (Särkkä, 2013;
Van Handel, 2007). Also, a great variety of approximate
solutions have been worked out, building both on sampling
schemes (Doucet et al., 2000; Rao & Teh, 2013) and variational inference approaches (Opper & Sanguinetti, 2007;
Wildner & Koeppl, 2021).
Inference frameworks for SSDEs are scarce, however. In
switching linear dynamical system (SLDS), a discrete-time
analog of SSDEs, inference methods exist utilizing exact
sampling (Oh et al., 2005; Fox et al., 2008; Linderman
et al., 2017); likewise, due to the computational intractability of the full posteriors (Murphy, 2012), approximate solutions such as the Gaussian sum filter (Alspach & Sorenson,

