Correct-N-Contrast: A Contrastive Approach for Improving
Robustness to Spurious Correlations
Michael Zhang 1 Nimit S. Sohoni 1 Hongyang R. Zhang 2 Chelsea Finn 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
Spurious correlations pose a major challenge for
robust machine learning. Models trained with
empirical risk minimization (ERM) may learn to
rely on correlations between class labels and spurious attributes, leading to poor performance on
data groups without these correlations. This is
challenging to address when the spurious attribute
labels are unavailable. To improve worst-group
performance on spuriously correlated data without training attribute labels, we propose CorrectN -Contrast (C N C), a contrastive approach to directly learn representations robust to spurious correlations. As ERM models can be good spurious
attribute predictors, C N C works by (1) using a
trained ERM model’s outputs to identify samples
with the same class but dissimilar spurious features, and (2) training a robust model with contrastive learning to learn similar representations
for these samples. To support C N C, we introduce
new connections between worst-group error and
a representation alignment loss that C N C aims
to minimize. We empirically observe that worstgroup error closely tracks with alignment loss,
and prove that the alignment loss over a class
helps upper-bound the class’s worst-group vs. average error gap. On popular benchmarks, C N C
reduces alignment loss drastically, and achieves
state-of-the-art worst-group accuracy by 3.6% average absolute lift. C N C is also competitive with
oracle methods that require group labels.

1. Introduction
For many tasks, deep neural networks (NNs) are negatively
affected by spurious correlations—dependencies between
observed features and class labels that only hold for certain
1

Stanford University. Stanford, CA, USA 2 Northeastern University. Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Michael Zhang
<mzhang@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

groups of data. For example, consider classifying cows
versus camels in natural images. 90% of cows may appear
on grass, and 90% of camels on sand. A model trained
with standard ERM may learn to minimize average training
error by relying on the spurious background attribute instead of the desired animal, performing well on average yet
obtaining high worst-group test error (e.g., misclassifying
cows on sand as camels) (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Beery et al.,
2018). This illustrates a widespread issue where models
are systematically biased due to the presence of spurious
attributes. This issue is critical to address in fields ranging
from algorithmic fairness to medical ML (Blodgett et al.,
2016; Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Hashimoto et al., 2018).
How can we improve robustness to spurious correlations
and reduce worst-group error? If group or spurious attribute
labels are available, one option is to reweight groups during
training to directly minimize worst-group error, e.g. via
group distributionally robust optimization (GDRO) (Sagawa
et al., 2019). However, such group labels may be expensive to obtain or unknown a priori (Oakden-Rayner et al.,
2020), limiting the applicability of these “oracle” methods.
To tackle spurious correlations without these labels, many
prior works recognize that because ERM models can learn
spurious correlations, such models can help infer the groups
or spurious attributes. These methods thus first infer data
groups with a trained ERM model, before using these inferred groups to train a more robust model. For example,
Sohoni et al. (2020) cluster an ERM model’s feature representations to infer groups, before running GDRO using
these clusters as groups. Nam et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2021)
treat an ERM model’s misclassifications as minority group
samples, and upweight these groups to train a robust model.
Ahmed et al. (2021); Creager et al. (2021) use invariance
objectives to both infer groups with an ERM model and
train a more robust model. However, while these methods
significantly improve worst-group error over ERM without
training group labels, they still perform worse than methods
that use group labels (e.g., GDRO).
In this work, we thus aim to further improve worst-group
accuracy without requiring group labels. We start with the
motivating observation that across spurious correlation settings, a neural network’s worst-group accuracy strongly

