Quant-BnB: A Scalable Branch-and-Bound Method for Optimal Decision Trees
with Continuous Features
Rahul Mazumder 1 2 Xiang Meng 1 Haoyue Wang 1

Abstract
Decision trees are one of the most useful and
popular methods in the machine learning toolbox. In this paper, we consider the problem of
learning optimal decision trees, a combinatorial
optimization problem that is challenging to solve
at scale. A common approach in the literature
is to use greedy heuristics, which may not be
optimal. Recently there has been significant interest in learning optimal decision trees using various approaches (e.g., based on integer programming, dynamic programming)—to achieve computational scalability, most of these approaches
focus on classification tasks with binary features.
In this paper, we present a new discrete optimization method based on branch-and-bound (BnB)
to obtain optimal decision trees. Different from
existing customized approaches, we consider both
regression and classification tasks with continuous features. The basic idea underlying our approach is to split the search space based on the
quantiles of the feature distribution—leading to
upper and lower bounds for the underlying optimization problem along the BnB iterations. Our
proposed algorithm Quant-BnB shows significant speedups compared to existing approaches
for shallow optimal trees on various real datasets.

1. Introduction
A decision tree is a classic machine learning predictive tool
with a flowchart-like structure that allows users to derive
interpretable decisions. Combined with its effectiveness
in solving classification and regression tasks, it is an immensely useful tool in domains where interpretability is of
great importance. Despite its appeal, the task of learning
1

Operations Research Center, MIT, Cambridge, USA 2 Sloan
School of Management and Center for Statistics, MIT, Cambridge,
USA. Correspondence to: Xiang Meng <mengx@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

an optimal decision tree (with smallest training error) is
N P-hard (Laurent & Rivest, 1976) and thus computationally challenging. Therefore, greedy methods such as CART
(Breiman et al., 1984) and ID3 (Quinlan, 1986) are popular
choices. They construct decision trees through a top-down
approach. Starting from the root node, data is iteratively
split into subsets according to local objectives. In spite of
high efficiency, greedy heuristics may not lead to an optimal solution, possibly resulting in suboptimal predictive
performance (Bertsimas & Dunn, 2017).
In recent years, there have been major advances in exploring
optimization methods to construct optimal1 decision trees.
Verwer & Zhang (2019); Günlük et al. (2021) explore mixed
integer programming (MIP) approaches to learn optimal
trees with a fixed depth. Aglin et al. (2020); Demirović
et al. (2020) propose interesting dynamic programming (DP)
approaches for optimal decision trees. Despite impressive
methodological advances, optimal tree-learning approaches
face the following challenges: (i) MIP formulations appear
to have limited scalability. Verwer & Zhang (2019) report
that a MIP solver cannot solve an optimal tree of depth
2 with less than 1000 observations and 10 features in 10
minutes. (ii) Most state-of-the-art algorithms (Demirović
et al., 2020; Aghaei et al., 2021; McTavish et al., 2021)
consider datasets with binary features (i.e, every feature is
{0, 1}) rather than continuous ones. Algorithms for optimal
trees with continuous features are much less developed2 —
our goal in this paper is to bridge this gap in the literature.
In this work we take a step towards addressing the aforementioned shortcomings by developing a novel branch-andbound (BnB) algorithm for the computation of shallow optimal trees (e.g. depth=2, 3). In contrast to earlier approaches,
our algorithm can handle both classification and regression
tasks and is designed to directly handle continuous features
(including a mix of continuous and binary features). In
a nutshell, our proposed algorithm Quant-BnB utilizes
1
In this paper, optimal refers to a global optimal solution to the
optimization problem associated with learning a decision tree.
2
While it is possible to convert continuous features to binary
features, this may result in a large number of features, which
leads to large computation times—see our experiments for details.
To achieve scalability, it may be more beneficial to have tailored
approaches for continuous features.

