Conformal Prediction Sets with Limited False Positives
Adam Fisch 1 Tal Schuster 2 Tommi Jaakkola 1 Regina Barzilay 1

Abstract
We develop a new approach to multi-label conformal prediction in which we aim to output a precise set of promising prediction candidates with a
bounded number of incorrect answers. Standard
conformal prediction provides the ability to adapt
to model uncertainty by constructing a calibrated
candidate set in place of a single prediction, with
guarantees that the set contains the correct answer with high probability. In order to obey this
coverage property, however, conformal sets can
become inundated with noisy candidates—which
can render them unhelpful in practice. This is particularly relevant to practical applications where
there is a limited budget, and the cost (monetary or
otherwise) associated with false positives is nonnegligible. We propose to trade coverage for a
notion of precision by enforcing that the presence
of incorrect candidates in the predicted conformal
sets (i.e., the total number of false positives) is
bounded according to a user-specified tolerance.
Subject to this constraint, our algorithm then optimizes for a generalized notion of set coverage
(i.e., the true positive rate) that allows for any
number of true answers for a given query (including zero). We demonstrate the effectiveness of
this approach across a number of classification
tasks in natural language processing, computer
vision, and computational chemistry.

1

Introduction

For many classification problems, returning a set of plausible responses instead of a single prediction is a useful way of
representing uncertainty (Gammerman and Vovk, 2007; Lei,
2014; Romano et al., 2020). Conformal prediction (Vovk
et al., 2005) is an increasingly popular method for creating
confident prediction sets that provably contain the correct answer with high probability. Unfortunately, these guarantees
1
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Adam Fisch <fisch@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

do not come for free; in order to achieve proper coverage on
difficult tasks, conformal prediction can often be unable to
rule out an overwhelming number of candidates—making
their prediction sets large and inefficient. This can make
conformal predictors unusable in settings in which the cost
of returning false positive predictions is substantial.
As an example, consider in-silico screening for drug discovery (see Figure 1). In-silico screening uses computational
tools to search over millions of molecular compounds to
identify candidates with desired properties. Any identified
candidates are then verified experimentally. While it is often
not necessary to return all possible viable candidates (e.g.,
even identifying just one effective drug can suffice), it is
important to respect budgetary constraints by avoiding false
positive predictions. Too many false positives can quickly
consume available resources (e.g., time, materials, funding,
or other assets). This is especially relevant when a valid
answer, in this case, an effective drug, might not even exist.
In this work, we develop an approach to creating confident
prediction sets that trades off standard coverage guarantees
for practical, provable constraints on the total number of
false positives (FP). In other words, we shift the focus of
our conformal guarantees to be on limiting the number of
incorrect answers in our outputs, with the understanding that
we can potentially fail to recover some proportion of the
true answers—i.e., we may obtain a lower true positive rate
(TPR), which we assume is acceptable for the application.
Concretely, we are interested in a set prediction setting
where we have been given n multi-label classification examples (Xi , Zi ) ∈ X × 2Y , i = 1, . . . n as calibration data,
that have been drawn exchangeably from some underlying
distribution PXZ . Under our assumptions, each observation
Xi can be associated with any number of correct labels (including zero, in the case of having no answer at all, or one,
like standard classification). That is, the response variable
Zi is a subset of the full label space Y. For example, in
the above in-silico screening task, Xi would be the current
property being screened for, Y the space of all molecular
candidates that might have this property, and Zi ⊆ Y the set
of molecules that do have it. Let Xn+1 ∈ X be a new exchangeable test example for which we would like to predict
the set of correct labels, Zn+1 ⊆ Y. Our goal is to construct
a set predictor Ck (Xn+1 ) that maximizes recall of Zn+1
(i.e., TPR), while limiting the expected number of false

