A Single-Loop Gradient Descent and Perturbed Ascent Algorithm for
Nonconvex Functional Constrained Optimization

Songtao Lu 1

Abstract
Nonconvex constrained optimization problems can be used to model a number of machine
learning problems, such as multi-class NeymanPearson classification and constrained Markov
decision processes. However, such kinds of problems are challenging because both the objective
and constraints are possibly nonconvex, so it is
difficult to balance the reduction of the loss value
and reduction of constraint violation. Although
there are a few methods that solve this class of
problems, all of them are double-loop or tripleloop algorithms, and they require oracles to solve
some subproblems up to certain accuracy by tuning multiple hyperparameters at each iteration. In
this paper, we propose a novel gradient descent
and perturbed ascent (GDPA) algorithm to solve a
class of smooth nonconvex inequality constrained
problems. The GDPA is a primal-dual algorithm, which only exploits the first-order information
of both the objective and constraint functions to
update the primal and dual variables in an alternating way. The key feature of the proposed algorithm is that it is a single-loop algorithm, where
only two step-sizes need to be tuned. We show
that under a mild regularity condition GDPA is
able to find Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) points
of nonconvex functional constrained problems
with convergence rate guarantees. To the best of
our knowledge, it is the first single-loop algorithm that can solve the general nonconvex smooth
problems with nonconvex inequality constraints.
Numerical results also showcase the superiority
of GDPA compared with the best-known algorithms (in terms of both stationarity measure and
feasibility of the obtained solutions).
1

IBM Research AI, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center,
Yorktown Heights, New York 10598, USA. Correspondence to:
Songtao Lu <songtao@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider the following class of nonconvex
optimization problems under smooth nonconvex constraints
P1

min

x∈X ⊆Rd

f (x) subject to g(x) ≤ 0

(1)

where functions f (x) : Rd → R and g(x) : Rd → Rm are
smooth (possibly) nonconvex, X denotes the feasible set,
and m is the total number of constraints. This class of constrained optimization problems has been found very useful
in formulating practical learning tasks, as the requirements
of enhancing the interpretability of neural nets or safety and
fairness guarantees raise. When the machine learning models are applied in different domains, functional constraint
g(x) can be specialized to particular forms. For example, if
the first-order logic is considered in modeling the reasoning
behaviors among the inputs, logical constraints will be incorporated in the optimization process (Bach et al., 2017;
Fischer et al., 2019). Also, in a safe reinforcement learning
problem, safety-aware constraints, e.g., cumulative longterm rewards (Yu et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020) or expected
probability of failures (Bharadhwaj et al., 2021), will be
included in the policy improvement step. Besides, in the
design of deep neural nets (DNN) architectures, the energy
consumption budget will be formulated as constraints in the
DNN compression models (Yang et al., 2019). Different
from the projection-friendly constraints, these constraints
are (possibly) functional ones.
1.1. Motivating Examples
To be more specific, we give the following problems that
can be formulated by (1) as the motivating examples of this
work.
Multi-class Neyman-Pearson Classification (mNPC). mNPC is a classic multi-class pattern recognition problem.
The previous works (Weston and Watkins, 1998; Crammer
and Singer, 2002) propose to formulate this problem as a
constrained optimization problem and adopt the support
vector machine method to find m classifiers. To be specific,
it considers that there are m classes of data, where each of
them contains a data set, denoted by ξi , i ∈ [m]. The goal
of the problem is to learn m classifiers, denoted by {x(i) },

