Achieving Minimax Rates in Pool-Based Batch Active Learning

Claudio Gentile 1 Zhilei Wang 2 Tong Zhang 1 3

Abstract
We consider a batch active learning scenario
where the learner adaptively issues batches of
points to a labeling oracle. Sampling labels in
batches is highly desirable in practice due to the
smaller number of interactive rounds with the labeling oracle (often human beings). However,
batch active learning typically pays the price of a
reduced adaptivity, leading to suboptimal results.
In this paper we propose a solution which requires
a careful trade off between the informativeness
of the queried points and their diversity. We theoretically investigate batch active learning in the
practically relevant scenario where the unlabeled
pool of data is available beforehand (pool-based
active learning). We analyze a novel stage-wise
greedy algorithm and show that, as a function
of the label complexity, the excess risk of this
algorithm matches the known minimax rates in
standard statistical learning settings. Our results
also exhibit a mild dependence on the batch size.
These are the first theoretical results that employ
careful trade offs between informativeness and diversity to rigorously quantify the statistical performance of batch active learning in the pool-based
scenario.

1. Introduction
The aim of Active Learning is to reduce the data requirement of training processes through the careful selection
of informative subsets of the data across several interactive rounds. This increased interactive power enables the
adaptation of the sampling process to the actual state of
the learning algorithm at hand, yet this benefit comes at
the price of frequent re-training of the model and increased
interactions with the labeling oracle (which is often just a
1
Google Research, New York 2 Citadel Securities, New
York 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Zhilei Wang <zhileiwang92@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

pool of human labelers).
The batch mode of active learning is one where labels
are queried in batches of suitable size, and the models
are re-trained/updated either after each batch or even less
frequently. This sampling mode often corresponds to the
way labels are gathered in practical large-scale processing
pipelines.
Batch active learning tries to strike a reasonable balance
between the benefits of adaptivity and the costs associated
with interaction and re-training. Yet, since the sampling is
split into batches, and model updates can only be performed
at the end of each batch, a batch active learning algorithm
has to prevent to the extent possible the sampling of redundant points. The standard trade-off that arises is then to
ensure that the sampled points are informative enough for
the model, if taken in isolation, while at the same time being
diverse enough so as to avoid sampling redundant labels.
We study batch active learning in the pool-based model,
where an unlabeled pool of data is made available to the
algorithm beforehand, and the goal is to single out a subset
of the data so as to achieve the same statistical performance
as if training were carried out on the entire pool. In this
setting, we describe and analyze novel algorithms that obtain minimax rates of convergence of their excess risk as
a function of the number of requested labels. Interestingly
enough, these optimal rates are retained even if we allow
the batch size to grow with the pool size, the actual trade-off
being ruled by the amount of noise in the data. Another
appealing aspect is that our algorithms guarantee a number
of re-training rounds which is at worst logarithmic, while
being able to automatically adapt to the level of noise.
We operate in specific realizable settings, starting with linear or generalized linear models, and then extending our
results to the more general non-linear setting. Unlike what
is traditionally done by many algorithmic solutions to active learning available in the literature (e.g., (Balcan et al.,
2007; Balcan & Long, 2013; Zhang & Li, 2021)), we do
not formulate strong assumptions on the input distribution.
We establish careful trade-offs between the informativeness
and the diversity of the queried labels, and rigorously quantify the statistical performance on batch active learning in
a noisy pool-based setting. To our knowledge, these are
the first guarantees of this kind that apply to a noisy (hence

