Secure Distributed Training at Scale

Eduard Gorbunov * 1 2 3 Alexander Borzunov * 4 3 Michael Diskin 4 3 Max Ryabinin 4 3

Abstract
Many areas of deep learning benefit from using increasingly larger neural networks trained on public data, as is the case for pre-trained models for
NLP and computer vision. Training such models requires a lot of computational resources (e.g.,
HPC clusters) that are not available to small research groups and independent researchers. One
way to address it is for several smaller groups to
pool their computational resources together and
train a model that benefits all participants. Unfortunately, in this case, any participant can jeopardize the entire training run by sending incorrect
updates, deliberately or by mistake. Training in
presence of such peers requires specialized distributed training algorithms with Byzantine tolerance. These algorithms often sacrifice efficiency
by introducing redundant communication or passing all updates through a trusted server, making it
infeasible to apply them to large-scale deep learning, where models can have billions of parameters.
In this work, we propose a novel protocol for secure (Byzantine-tolerant) decentralized training
that emphasizes communication efficiency.

1. Introduction
Many hard scientific problems were solved through collaboration between many nations, groups and individuals. This
is especially evident in natural sciences, where researchers
formed multinational collaborations to run large-scale experiments and share compute infrastructure (Aad et al., 2012;
Ruttley et al., 2017; Abbott et al., 2016). Projects like Folding@home (Beberg et al., 2009) and BOINC (Anderson,
2004) push this trend even further by recruiting volunteers
that donate their compute to collectively run computational
experiments at an unprecedented scale (Merritt, 2020).
*
Equal contribution 1 MIPT 2 Mila – Quebec AI Institute
Yandex 4 HSE University. Correspondence to: Eduard Gorbunov <eduard.gorbunov@phystech.edu>, Alexander Borzunov
<borzunov.alexander@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Recently, similar techniques were proposed for deep learning. They aim to solve the challenges caused by the sheer
computational complexity of many machine learning tasks,
such as pretraining transformers for NLP (Devlin et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019) or learning on
huge datasets in vision (Sun et al., 2017; Kolesnikov et al.,
2020; Goyal et al., 2021). Recent works (Kijsipongse et al.,
2018; Ryabinin & Gusev, 2020; Atre et al., 2021; Diskin
et al., 2021) propose several systems sharing the computation across many volunteers that donate the idle time of their
computers to train large models on public datasets.
Despite their strengths, volunteer computing systems have
so far seen limited practical applications (Kijsipongse et al.,
2018). A major roadblock towards the global adoption of
these techniques is trust in reliability of each participant. For
distributed training, all progress made by the collaboration
can be undermined if a single peer sends incorrect outputs
due to an error in computation (Smith, 2019) or malicious
intent (Tolpegin et al., 2020).
Prior art in decentralized optimization proposed several optimization algorithms that are resistant to such “Byzantine”
faults. However, most Byzantine-tolerant training protocols require either passing all updates through a trusted
central server or exchanging additional messages that increase the network load by several times (Chen et al., 2018;
Rajput et al., 2019). This is a major problem for large-scale
distributed deep learning, where hundreds of peers must
exchange updates for millions of parameters at regular intervals (Li et al., 2020; Sergeev & Balso, 2018; Shoeybi et al.,
2019). Thus, in many practical scenarios, the computation
and communication overhead of Byzantine-tolerant algorithms outweighs the benefits of collaborating with others.
In this work, we set out to solve this problem by proposing a novel Byzantine-tolerant distributed training protocol designed for large-scale deep learning workloads. Our
approach combines the scalability and communication efficiency of modern distributed training techniques such as
All-Reduce SGD (Sergeev & Balso, 2018) with resilience
against Byzantine and Sybil attackers. To achieve this, we
leverage cryptographic techniques to verify the integrity of
training with minimal overhead that does not depend on the
model size. Our protocol does not require any specific peers
to be trusted.

