Investigating Generalization by Controlling Normalized Margin

Alexander R. Farhang 1 Jeremy Bernstein 1 Kushal Tirumala 1 Yang Liu 2 Yisong Yue 1 2

Abstract
Weight norm ∥w∥ and margin γ participate in
learning theory via the normalized margin γ/∥w∥.
Since standard neural net optimizers do not control normalized margin, it is hard to test whether
this quantity causally relates to generalization.
This paper designs a series of experimental studies that explicitly control normalized margin and
thereby tackle two central questions. First: does
normalized margin always have a causal effect
on generalization? The paper finds that no—
networks can be produced where normalized margin has seemingly no relationship with generalization, counter to the theory of Bartlett et al.
(2017). Second: does normalized margin ever
have a causal effect on generalization? The paper
finds that yes—in a standard training setup, test
performance closely tracks normalized margin.
The paper suggests a Gaussian process model as
a promising explanation for this behavior.

1. Introduction
Despite significant progress, a complete explanation of the
remarkable generalization capabilities of neural networks
remains an open problem. Experimental studies often seek
complexity measures (Pérez & Louis, 2020) or optimization
and architectural hyperparameters (Keskar et al., 2017) with
explanatory power. But due to both the number of moving
parts in a deep learning system and the cost of experimentation, unpacking the underlying effects is challenging.
One significant hurdle to a full scientific understanding of
generalization is the presence of numerous potential confounders. Even if a complexity measure, say, is strongly correlated with generalization, this does not imply a causal link
(Jiang et al., 2020). Inspired by this observation, this paper
1
Caltech 2 Argo AI. Correspondence to: Alexander R.
Farhang <afarhang@caltech.edu>, Jeremy Bernstein <bernstein@caltech.edu>, Yisong Yue <yyue@caltech.edu>. Code
available at: https://github.com/alexfarhang/margin.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the authors.

singles out a quantity that is implicated by many theories as
an important factor in generalization—normalized margin—
and attempts to pin down its causal link to generalization.
This quest is broken up into two separate sub-questions.
First, some theories suggest that normalized margin may
have a very broad controlling effect on generalization
(Bartlett et al., 2017). To study that idea, this paper asks:
〈Q1〉 Does normalized margin always have a causal effect
on generalization?
In other words: is a notion of normalized margin sufficient
to explain generalization? Is it the dominant factor? Or are
there counterexamples: settings where normalized margin
is uninformative?
Second, some theories address the typical behavior of function spaces rather than the worst case (McAllester, 1999).
Perhaps normalized margin has a causal effect in these more
typical settings. Consequently, this paper asks:
〈Q2〉 Does normalized margin ever have a causal effect
on generalization?
In other words: is a notion of normalized margin necessary
to build a complete picture of generalization? As posed, this
question can be answered by finding positive examples of
settings where normalized margin has a causal effect.
To tackle these questions, this paper designs a series of
experimental studies that take care to control both weight
norms and margins of the learned predictors, resulting in
the ability to target specific normalized margin distributions during training. The studies consider both spectrallynormalized and Frobenius-normalized margin distributions.
In answer to 〈Q1〉, this paper finds that:
§ 4.1 The effect that harder learning tasks correlate with
smaller spectrally-normalized margin distributions—
observed by Bartlett et al. (2017)—can be reversed
by controlling normalized margin distributions.
§ 4.2 Pairs of networks can be found with very similar
Frobenius-normalized margin distributions but significantly different generalization behavior.
In answer to 〈Q2〉, this paper finds that:
§ 5.1 In a standard learning setting, controlling normalized

