Fast and Provable Nonconvex Tensor RPCA
Haiquan Qiu 1 2 3 Yao Wang 1 Shaojie Tang 4 Deyu Meng 1 5 Quanming Yao 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study nonconvex tensor robust
principal component analysis (RPCA) based on
the t-SVD. We first propose an alternating projection method, i.e., APT, which converges linearly to the ground-truth under the incoherence
conditions of tensors. However, as the projection to the low-rank tensor space in APT can be
slow, we further propose to speedup such a process by utilizing the property of the tangent space
of low-rank. The resulting algorithm, i.e., EAPT,
is not only more efficient than APT but also keeps
the linear convergence. Compared with existing
tensor RPCA works, the proposed method, especially EAPT, is not only more effective due to
the recovery guarantee and adaption in the transformed (frequency) domain but also more efficient
due to faster convergence rate and lower iteration
complexity. These benefits are also empirically
verified both on synthetic data, and real applications, e.g., hyperspectral image denoising and
video background subtraction.

1. Introduction
A tensor is a multidimensional array that can model the
linear and multilinear relationships in the data. Tensor related methods have been widely used in many areas such as
recommender systems (Candès & Recht, 2009), computer
vision (Zhang et al., 2014), and signal processing (Cichocki
et al., 2015). For example, a hyperspectral image with multiple bands can be naturally represented as a three-way tensor
with the column, row, and spectral bands; a grayscale video
is indexed by two spatial variables and one temporal variable. All these examples are the three-way tensors, which
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China 2 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 4Paradigm Inc., Beijing, China 4 The
University of Texas at Dallas, Texas, USA 5 Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China. Correspondence to: Yao Wang <yao.s.wang@gmail.com>, Quanming Yao
<qyaoaa@connect.ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

are the focus of this paper.
Analogous to robust PCA (Candès et al., 2011), tensor robust PCA (Huang et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2016; Anandkumar
et al., 2016; Lu et al., 2019) attempts to recover a low-rank
tensor that best approximates grossly corrupted observations. While there are many works for matrix RPCA (Wright
et al., 2009; Netrapalli et al., 2014; Yi et al., 2016; Xu
et al., 2010), these matrix techniques cannot be directly
adopted for tensors as the tensor rank is more complicated
than matrices. Typically, to impose a low-rank structure in
the tensor RPCA, CP and Tucker decompositions (Kolda
& Bader, 2009) factorize a tensor into low-rank matrices
and are used in methods such as RTD (Anandkumar et al.,
2016). Besides, Tensor-Train decomposition (Oseledets,
2011), which approximates a higher order tensor with a
collection of small three-way tensors, has been applied to
tensor RPCA in TTNN (Yang et al., 2020). Furthermore, a
convex-optimization-based tensor decomposition approach,
called overlapped approach (Gandy et al., 2011; Liu et al.,
2012; Tomioka et al., 2010), which penalizes each unfolding
matrices from the original tensor using the nuclear norm, is
considered in SNN (Huang et al., 2015).
All the above decompositions consider low-rank structure
in the time domain. However, many applications (Chang,
1966; Rao et al., 2010) show that the structures in the frequency domain is important as well. For example, both
SVD truncation and high-frequency filtering can remove
noise from an image. For tensor decomposition, there exists
a method called t-SVD (Kilmer & Martin, 2011) that can
take advantage of structures in both the time domain and frequency domain. t-SVD first conducts fast Fourier transformation (FFT) on the tube fibers of a tensor. This operation
converts the tensor from the time domain to the frequency
domain. In this way, the high- and low-frequency information of a tensor is separated, while the low-rank structure of
a tensor is preserved in this process. Recently, transformed
t-SVD (Kernfeld et al., 2015; Kilmer et al., 2021) extends
the FFT in t-SVD to a general unitary transformation, where
the main superiority is that the transformed tensor may have
lower multi-rank by using suitable unitary transformation.
Extensive numerical examples have shown its effectiveness
in many applications (Zhang & Ng, 2021; Lu, 2021; Song
et al., 2020a).
Because of the aforementioned benefits, there emerges

