Robust Training under Label Noise by Over-parameterization

Sheng Liu 1 Zhihui Zhu 2 Qing Qu 3 Chong You 4

Abstract
Recently, over-parameterized deep networks, with
increasingly more network parameters than training samples, have dominated the performances
of modern machine learning. However, when
the training data is corrupted, it has been wellknown that over-parameterized networks tend to
overfit and do not generalize. In this work, we
propose a principled approach for robust training
of over-parameterized deep networks in classification tasks where a proportion of training labels
are corrupted. The main idea is yet very simple: label noise is sparse and incoherent with the
network learned from clean data, so we model
the noise and learn to separate it from the data.
Specifically, we model the label noise via another
sparse over-parameterization term, and exploit
implicit algorithmic regularizations to recover and
separate the underlying corruptions. Remarkably,
when trained using such a simple method in practice, we demonstrate state-of-the-art test accuracy
against label noise on a variety of real datasets.
Furthermore, our experimental results are corroborated by theory on simplified linear models, showing that exact separation between sparse noise
and low-rank data can be achieved under incoherent conditions. The work opens many interesting
directions for improving over-parameterized models by using sparse over-parameterization and implicit regularization. Code is available at https:
//github.com/shengliu66/SOP.

1. Introduction
One of the most important factors for the success of deep
models is their large model size and high expressive power,
which enable them to learn complicated input-output rela1
Center for Data Science, New York University 2 Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Denver 3 Department of
EECS, University of Michigan 4 Google Research, New York City.
Correspondence to: Chong You <cyou@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tions. As such, over-parametrized deep networks or large
models, with more parameters than the size of training data,
have dominated the performance in computer vision, natural language processing, and so on. The adoption of large
models is justified by the recent discovery that deep models
exhibit a “double descent” (Belkin et al., 2019) and “unimodal variance” (Yang et al., 2020) generalization behavior,
where their performance continues to improve beyond the
interpolation point, extending the classical learning theory
of bias-variance trade-off. While there are infinitely many
global solutions that overfit to training data, the choice of optimization algorithm imposes certain implicit regularization
(Neyshabur et al., 2014) so that over-parameterized models
converge to those that are generalizable.
Nonetheless, the success of over-parameterization of deep
networks critically depends on the availability of clean training data, while overfitting inevitably occurs when training
data is corrupted. Consider the task of image classification
with a training dataset {(xi , y i )}N
i=1 , with xi being an input
image and y i being the corresponding one-hot label. With
an over-parameterized deep network f (·; θ), model training
is achieved by solving an optimization problem with respect
to (w.r.t.) the network parameter θ as follows:
N

1 X 
` f (xi ; θ), y i ,
(1)
min L(θ) =
θ
N i=1
where `(·, ·) is a loss function that measures the distance
between network prediction f (xi ; θ) and the label y i . If a
proportion of the images in the training set is mislabelled
(Song et al., 2020), it is well-known that the network will be
optimized to zero training error hence produce f (xi ; θ) ≈
y i for all i ∈ {1, · · · , N }, even for y i ’s that are incorrect
(Zhang et al., 2021a). Overfitting to wrong labels inevitably
leads to poor generalization performance (see Fig. 1).
In this paper, we introduce a principled method to address
the challenges of overfitting over-parameterized deep networks in the presence of training data corruptions. We focus
on the task of classification trained with noisy label, a ubiquitous problem in practice due to the extreme complexity
of data annotation even for experienced domain experts
(Frénay & Verleysen, 2013). Our idea leverages the property that the label noise is sparse, namely only a fraction
of the labels are corrupted and the rest are intact. Principled methods for dealing with sparse corruption have a rich

