Nyström Kernel Mean Embeddings

Antoine Chatalic 1 Nicolas Schreuder 1 Alessandro Rudi 2 Lorenzo Rosasco 1 3

Abstract
Kernel mean embeddings are a powerful tool to
represent probability distributions over arbitrary
spaces as single points in a Hilbert space. Yet, the
cost of computing and storing such embeddings
prohibits their direct use in large-scale settings.
We propose an efficient approximation procedure
based on the Nyström method, which exploits a
small random subset of the dataset. Our main
result is an upper bound on the approximation
error of this procedure. It yields sufficient conditions on the subsample size to obtain the standard
n−1/2 rate while reducing computational costs.
We discuss applications of this result for the approximation of the maximum mean discrepancy
and quadrature rules, and illustrate our theoretical
findings with numerical experiments.

1. Introduction
Owing to the increasing complexity of modern datasets,
designing compact and meaningful representations of data
collections and probability distributions is a key problem
in machine learning. Kernel methods, which have proven
in the last decades to be a convenient and powerful tool to
design feature spaces capturing complex relations between
data points, via the choice of a single kernel function, can
be used towards this goal. Initially introduced by Smola
et al. (2007), kernel mean embeddings (KME) indeed allow
to represent a probability distribution via a single mean element in such feature spaces (Muandet et al. 2017). They
have found applications in various areas such as anomaly
detection (Zou et al. 2014), approximate Bayesian computation (Park et al. 2016), domain adaptation (Zhang et al.
2013), imitation learning (Kim et al. 2018), nonparametric
inference in graphical models (Song et al. 2013), functional
data analysis (Hayati et al. 2020), discriminative learning for
probability measures (Muandet et al. 2012) and differential
privacy (Balog et al. 2018; Chatalic et al. 2021).
1
MaLGA & DIBRIS, Università di Genova 2 Inria, École normale supérieure, PSL Research University 3 CBMM, MIT, IIT.
Correspondence to: Antoine Chatalic <first.last@dibris.unige.it>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In machine learning applications, one is typically interested
in computing the kernel mean embedding of the data distribution, which is most often unknown and approximated
using empirical data. Yet, in its basic form, the empirical
estimator still requires to store and manipulate the whole
dataset, which can be impractical or even, in the worst case,
impossible.
Finite-dimensional approximations of the feature map can
be used to reduce the memory requirement of this approach
(Liu et al. 2021; Rahimi et al. 2008). However, these methods are either generic and thus fail to capture the complexity
of the data distribution with a low-dimensional representation, or adaptive, in which case costly data-dependent
quantities need to be computed and/or stored (e.g., leverage scores (Shahrampour et al. 2019)). Furthermore, the
resulting embeddings belong to a different space than the
kernel mean embeddings and thus these approaches cannot
be compared directly.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of efficiently approximating the kernel mean embedding of an unknown probability distribution for which samples are available. We
introduce an estimator based on Nyström approximation,
which can be computed efficiently using a random subset
of the data, and provide an upper bound on its approximation error. Under mild assumptions on the kernel and data
distribution, we show that the size of this random subset
is much smaller than the number of available samples and
yields an optimal error rate. We characterize this fact using
the spectral properties of the covariance operator associated to the considered kernel. For instance, assuming an
exponential decay of this√spectrum,
√ we show that a subsample size of the order of√ n log( n) is sufficient to obtain
an error of order O(1/ n), that is the same as that of the
empirical estimator, and thus demonstrating that it is possible to preserve statistical performance while drastically
reducing computational costs. We then show that our main
result can be used to derive bounds on the approximation
of the maximum mean discrepancy, which is the standard
metric between probability distributions in the context of
kernel methods. Finally we present numerical experiments
supporting our theory both on synthetic and real datasets.
The paper is organized as follows. We begin by formalizing
the problem of mean embeddings estimation and presenting

