Improved No-Regret Algorithms for Stochastic Shortest Path with Linear MDP

Liyu Chen 1 Rahul Jain 1 Haipeng Luo 1

Abstract
We introduce two new no-regret algorithms for
the stochastic shortest path (SSP) problem with
a linear MDP that significantly improve over the
only existing results of (Vial et al., 2021). Our
first algorithm is computationally
efficient and
p
achieves a regret bound Õ( d3 B?2 T? K), where
d is the dimension of the feature space, B? and T?
are upper bounds of the expected costs and hitting
time of the optimal policy respectively, and K is
the number of episodes. The same algorithm with
a slight modification
achieves logarithmic
 also

d3 B?4
?K
regret of order O c2 gap ln5 dB
, where
cmin
min
min
gapmin is the minimum sub-optimality gap and
cmin is the minimum cost over all state-action
pairs. Our result is obtained by developing a simpler and improved analysis for the finite-horizon
approximation of (Cohen et al., 2021) with a
smaller approximation error, which might be of
independent interest. On the other hand, using variance-aware confidence sets in a global
optimization problem, our second algorithm is
computationally inefficient but achieves
√ the first
“horizon-free” regret bound Õ(d3.5 B? K) with
no polynomial dependency √on T? or 1/cmin ,
almost matching the Ω(dB? K) lower bound
from (Min et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
We study the stochastic shortest path (SSP) model, where
a learner attempts to reach a goal state while minimizing
her costs in a stochastic environment. SSP is a suitable
model for many real-world applications, such as games, car
navigation, robotic manipulation, etc. Online reinforcement
learning in SSP has received great attention recently. In
this setting, learning proceeds in K episodes over a Markov
Decision Process (MDP). In each episode, starting from a
1
University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Liyu
Chen <liyuc@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

fixed initial state, the learner sequentially takes an action,
incurs a cost, and transits to the next state until reaching
the goal state. The performance of the learner is measured
by her regret, the difference between her total costs and
that of the optimal policy. SSP is a strict generalization of
the heavily-studied finite-horizon reinforcement learning
problem, where the learner is guaranteed to reach the goal
state after a fixed number of steps.
Modern reinforcement learning applications often need to
handle a massive state space, in which function approximation is necessary. There is huge progress in the study of
linear function approximation, for both the finite-horizon
setting (Ayoub et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020b; Yang &
Wang, 2020; Zanette et al., 2020a;b; Zhou et al., 2021a)
and the infinite-horizon setting (Wei et al., 2021b; Zhou
et al., 2021a;b). Recently, Vial et al. (2021) took the
first step in considering linear function approximation for
SSP. They study SSP defined over a linear MDP, and proposed
p a computationally inefficient algorithm with regret
Õ( d3 B?3 K/cmin ), as well as another efficient algorithm
with regret Õ(K 5/6 ) (omitting other dependency). Here,
d is the dimension of the feature space, B? is an upper
bound on the expected costs of the optimal policy, and cmin
is the minimum cost across all state-action pairs. Later,
Min et al. (2021) study a related but different SSP problem defined
p over a linear mixture MDP and achieve a
Õ(dB?1.5 K/cmin ) regret bound. Despite leveraging the
advances from both the finite-horizon and infinite-horizon
settings, results above are still far from optimal in terms of
regret guarantee or computational efficiency, demonstrating
the unique challenge of SSP problems.
In this work, we further extend our understanding of SSP
with linear function approximation (more specifically, with
linear MDPs). Our contributions are as follows:
• In Section 3, we first propose a new analysis for the
finite-horizon approximation of SSP introduced in (Cohen et al., 2021), which is much simpler and achieves
a smaller approximation error. Our analysis is also
model agnostic, meaning that it does not make use
of the modeling assumption and can be applied to
both the tabular setting and function approximation
settings. Combining this new analysis with a simple
finite-horizon algorithm similar to that of (Jin et al.,

