A Simple Reward-free Approach to Constrained Reinforcement Learning

Sobhan Miryoosefi 1 Chi Jin 1

Abstract
In constrained reinforcement learning (RL), a
learning agent seeks to not only optimize the overall reward but also satisfy the additional safety,
diversity, or budget constraints. Consequently,
existing constrained RL solutions require several new algorithmic ingredients that are notably
different from standard RL. On the other hand,
reward-free RL is independently developed in the
unconstrained literature, which learns the transition dynamics without using the reward information, and thus naturally capable of addressing RL
with multiple objectives under the common dynamics. This paper bridges reward-free RL and
constrained RL. Particularly, we propose a simple
meta-algorithm such that given any reward-free
RL oracle, the approachability and constrained
RL problems can be directly solved with negligible overheads in sample complexity. Utilizing the
existing reward-free RL solvers, our framework
provides sharp sample complexity results for constrained RL in the tabular MDP setting, matching
the best existing results up to a factor of horizon
dependence; our framework directly extends to a
setting of tabular two-player Markov games, and
gives a new result for constrained RL with linear
function approximation.

1. Introduction
In a wide range of modern reinforcement learning (RL)
applications, it is not sufficient for the learning agents to
only maximize a scalar reward. More importantly, they
must satisfy various constraints. For instance, such constraints can be the physical limit of power consumption or
torque in motors for robotics tasks (Tessler et al., 2019);
the budget for computation and the frequency of actions
for real-time strategy games (Vinyals et al., 2019); and the
1
Princeton University. Correspondence to: Sobhan Miryoosefi
<miryoosefi@cs.princeton.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

requirement for safety, fuel efficiency and human comfort
for autonomous drive (Le et al., 2019). In addition, constraints are also crucial in tasks such as dynamic pricing
with limited supply (Besbes & Zeevi, 2009; Babaioff et al.,
2015), scheduling of resources on a computer cluster (Mao
et al., 2016), imitation learning (Syed & Schapire, 2007;
Ziebart et al., 2008; Sun et al., 2019), as well as RL with
fairness (Jabbari et al., 2017).
These huge demand in practice gives rise to a subfield—
constrained RL, which focuses on designing efficient algorithms to find near-optimal policies for RL problems under
linear or general convex constraints. Most constrained RL
works directly combine the existing techniques such as value
iteration and optimism from unconstrained literature, with
new techniques specifically designed to deal with linear constraints (Efroni et al., 2020; Ding et al., 2021; Qiu et al.,
2020) or general convex constraints (Brantley et al., 2020;
Yu et al., 2021). The end product is a single new complex
algorithm which is tasked to solve all the challenges of learning dynamics, exploration, planning as well as constraints
satisfaction simultaneously. Thus, these algorithms need
to be re-analyzed from scratch, and it is highly nontrivial
to translate the progress in the unconstrained RL to the
constrained setting.
On the other hand, reward-free RL—proposed in Jin et al.
(2020a)—is a framework for the unconstrained setting,
which learns the transition dynamics without using the reward. The framework has two phases: in the exploration
phase, the agent first collects trajectories from a Markov
decision process (MDP) and learns the dynamics without a
pre-specified reward function. After exploration, the agent
is tasked with computing near-optimal policies under the
MDP for a collection of given reward functions. This framework is particularly suitable when there are multiple reward
functions of interest, and has been developed recently to
attack various settings including tabular MDPs (Jin et al.,
2020a; Zhang et al., 2020), linear MDPs (Wang et al., 2020;
Zanette et al., 2020), and tabular Markov games (Liu et al.,
2020).
Contribution. In this paper, we propose a simple approach to solve constrained RL problems by bridging the
reward-free RL literature and constrained RL literature. Our
approach isolates the challenges of constraint satisfaction,

