Nonparametric Sparse Tensor Factorization with Hierarchical Gamma
Processes
Conor Tillinghast 1 Zheng Wang 2 Shandian Zhe 2

Abstract
We propose a nonparametric factorization approach for sparsely observed tensors. The sparsity
does not mean zero-valued entries are massive or
dominated. Rather, it implies the observed entries
are very few, and even fewer with the growth of
the tensor; this is ubiquitous in practice. Compared with the existent works, our model not only
leverages the structural information underlying
the observed entry indices, but also provides extra
interpretability and flexibility — it can simultaneously estimate a set of location factors about
the intrinsic properties of the tensor nodes, and
another set of sociability factors reflecting their
extrovert activity in interacting with others; users
are free to choose a trade-off between the two
types of factors. Specifically, we use hierarchical
Gamma processes and Poisson random measures
to construct a tensor-valued process, which can
freely sample the two types of factors to generate tensors and always guarantees an asymptotic
sparsity. We then normalize the tensor process
to obtain hierarchical Dirichlet processes to sample each observed entry index, and use a Gaussian process to sample the entry value as a nonlinear function of the factors, so as to capture
both the sparse structure properties and complex
node relationships. For efficient inference, we
use Dirichlet process properties over finite sample
partitions, density transformations, and random
features to develop a stochastic variational estimation algorithm. We demonstrate the advantage of
our method in several benchmark datasets.

1

Department of Mathematics, University of Utah 2 School of
Computing, University of Utah. Correspondence to: Shandian Zhe
<zhe@cs.utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1

Introduction

Tensor factorization is a popular tool to analyze multiway
data, such as purchase records among (users, products, sellers) in online shopping. While numerous algorithms have
been proposed, e.g., (Tucker, 1966; Harshman, 1970; Chu &
Ghahramani, 2009; Kang et al., 2012), most of these methods are essentially modeling dense tensors. For instance,
many of them (Kolda & Bader, 2009; Kang et al., 2012;
Choi & Vishwanathan, 2014; Xu et al., 2012) use tensor
and matrix algebras (Kolda, 2006) to update the latent factors and hence demand all the tensor entries be observed
(although the majority are often assumed to be zero-valued).
While other methods (Rai et al., 2014; Zhe et al., 2016b; Du
et al., 2018), especially with a Bayesian formulation, can
perform element-wise factorization to handle a small subset
of observed entries, from modeling perspective, they are
equivalent to sampling a full tensor first and then marginalizing out the unobserved entry values. One might consider
adding a Bernoulli likelihood (or a thresholding function)
to model the presence of each entry. However, this still
leads to dense tensors. In theory, these models are random
function prior models (Lloyd et al., 2012), and the generated mask tensors are exchangeable arrays. According to
the Aldous-Hoover theorem (Aldous, 1981; Hoover, 1979),
such exchangeability can make the sampled tensors “either
trivially empty or dense”. That is, the present entries (i.e.,
with mask one) increases linearly with the size of the tensor.
However, in practice, tensors are often sparsely observed.
The ratio of observed entries is very small, e.g., 0.01%.
This ratio can even decrease with more nodes added. For
example, in online shopping, with the growth of users, products and sellers, the number of actual purchases — i.e., the
present entries — while growing, can take an even smaller
percentage of all possible purchases (entries), i.e., all (user,
product, seller) combinations, because the latter grows much
faster. Hence, the (asymptotic) sparse nature in these realworld applications implies that the existent dense models
are misspecified. Note that the sparsity here does not refer to
that the zero-valued entries are massive or dominated (Choi
& Vishwanathan, 2014; Hu et al., 2015)
To address the model misspecification, Tillinghast & Zhe
(2021) recently used Dirichlet processes (DPs) (normalized

