Predicting Out-of-Distribution Error with the Projection Norm

Yaodong Yu 1 * Zitong Yang 1 * Alexander Wei 1 Yi Ma 1 Jacob Steinhardt 1

Abstract
We propose a metric—Projection Norm—to predict a model’s performance on out-of-distribution
(OOD) data without access to ground truth labels. Projection Norm first uses model predictions to pseudo-label test samples and then trains
a new model on the pseudo-labels. The more
the new model’s parameters differ from an indistribution model, the greater the predicted OOD
error. Empirically, our approach outperforms existing methods on both image and text classification tasks and across different network architectures. Theoretically, we connect our approach to
a bound on the test error for overparameterized
linear models. Furthermore, we find that Projection Norm is the only approach that achieves
non-trivial detection performance on adversarial examples. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/yaodongyu/ProjNorm.

1. Introduction
To reliably deploy machine learning models in practice, we
must understand the model’s performance on unseen test
samples. Conventional machine learning wisdom suggests
using a held-out validation set to estimate the model’s testtime performance (Hastie et al., 2001). However, this fails
to account for distribution shift. For deep neural networks,
even simple distribution shifts can lead to large drops in
performance (Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2008; Koh et al.,
2021). Thus, it is crucial to understand, especially in safetycritical applications, how a model might perform on outof-distribution (OOD) data. Finally, understanding OOD
performance helps shed light on the structure of natural
covariate shifts, which remain poorly understood from a
conceptual standpoint (Hendrycks et al., 2021a).
To this end, we propose Projection Norm, which uses unla*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Yaodong Yu <yyu@eecs.berkeley.edu>, Zitong
Yang <zitong@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

b
beled test samples to help predict the OOD test error. Let θ
be the model whose test error we aim to predict. At a high
level, the Projection Norm algorithm pseudo-labels the test
b and then uses these pseudo-labels to train
samples using θ
e
a new model θ. Finally, it compares the distance between
b and θ,
e with a larger distance corresponding to higher test
θ
error. We formally present this algorithm in Section 2.
Empirically, we demonstrate that Projection Norm predicts
test error more accurately than existing methods (Deng et al.,
2021; Guillory et al., 2021; Garg et al., 2022), across several
vision and language benchmarks and for different neural
network architectures (Section 3.1). Moreover, while the
errors of existing methods are highly correlated with each
other, the errors of Projection Norm are nearly uncorrelated
with those of existing methods (Section 3.3), so combining
Projection Norm with these methods results in even better
prediction performance. Finally, we stress test our method
against adversarial examples, an extreme type of distribution
shift, and we find that Projection Norm is the only method
that achieves non-trivial performance (Section 5).
Projection Norm also has a natural theoretical motivation.
We show for overparameterized linear models that Projection Norm measures the projection (hence the name) of a
“ground truth model” onto the overlap of the training and
test data (Section 4). In this linear setting, many common
methods focus only on the logits and thus cannot capture
information that is orthogonal to the training manifold. In
contrast, Projection Norm can, which explains why it provides information complementary to that of other methods.
We also connect Projection Norm to a mathematical bound
on the test loss, based on assumptions backed by empirical
studies on vision data (Section 4.3).
In summary, we propose a new metric for predicting OOD
error that provides a more accurate and orthogonal signal in
comparison to existing approaches. Our method is easy to
implement and is applicable to a wide range of prediction
tasks. In addition, our method connects naturally to the
theory of high-dimensional linear models and attains nontrivial performance even for adversarial examples.

2. Our Method: Projection Norm
In this section, we formulate the problem of predicting OOD
performance at test time and then present the Projection
Norm algorithm.

