Spectral Representation of Robustness Measures for Optimization Under Input
Uncertainty

Jixiang Qing

1

Tom Dhaene

Abstract
We study the inference of mean-variance robustness measures to quantify input uncertainty under
the Gaussian Process (GP) framework. These
measures are widely used in applications where
the robustness of the solution is of interest, for
example, in engineering design. While the variance is commonly used to characterize the robustness, Bayesian inference of the variance using
GPs is known to be challenging. In this paper, we
propose a Spectral Representation of Robustness
Measures based on the GP’s spectral representation, i.e., an analytical approach to approximately
infer both robustness measures for normal and uniform input uncertainty distributions. We present
two approximations based on different Fourier
features and compare their accuracy numerically.
To demonstrate their utility and efficacy in robust
Bayesian Optimization, we integrate the analytical robustness measures in three standard acquisition functions for various robust optimization
formulations. We show their competitive performance on numerical benchmarks and real-life applications.

1. Introduction
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a well-established approach
for solving expensive non-convex black-box optimization
problems efficiently (Frazier, 2018; Shahriari et al., 2015).
Its agnostic treatment of black-box functions has made it
applicable in many real-life application domains. Starting with a limited number of training data, BO constructs
a probabilistic surrogate model, with a Gaussian Process
(GP) as the common choice (Rasmussen, 2003), to provide

1

Living in a chaotic world full of undetermined events, we
strive for, yet are far from, obtaining an exact representation
of the world. When ignored, uncertainties can degrade the
performance of the chosen optimal solutions significantly.
Among different types of uncertainties, input uncertainties,
for instance, robotics position error (Nogueira et al., 2016),
manufacturing tolerances (Cui et al., 2021), and imprecise
measurements (Wu et al., 2021), are of practical interest
in this work. To mitigate the side effects of uncertainties
and aim for providing a robust solution, a sensible approach
is robust optimization. In robust optimization, the goal
is to maximize an objective function which is formulated
upon robustness measure(s), and, thus, that is able to take
uncertainty into account (Beyer & Sendhoff, 2007).
Two common robustness measures (Manfredi & Trinchero,
2021; Wauters et al., 2020; Hoque & Low, 2020; Markowitz
& Todd, 2000) are the mean (a.k.a., Bayes risk, expected
regret (Beland & Nair, 2017; Oliveira et al., 2019)) and
the variance, representing the first raw moment and second central moment of the objective function distribution
induced by input uncertainty, respectively. Without loss of
1
generality, they can be defined as :

Jξ (f ) = Eξ (f (x + ξ))
2

Vξ (f ) = Eξ (f (x + ξ)) − [Eξ (f (x + ξ))]

Ghent University, – imec, IDLab, Department of Information Technology (INTEC), Tech Lane – Zwijnaarde 126,
9052 Ghent, Belgium. Correspondence to: Jixiang Qing <Jixiang.Qing@UGent.be>.
th

1

a computationally efficient approximation to the problem.
By leveraging an acquisition function based on the model
posterior, BO is able to efficiently quantify the potential of
candidate solutions and will only query the most interesting
candidate(s) using the expensive black-box function. After querying the new data, BO updates the posterior of the
surrogate model and searches for the next most interesting
candidate(s). Eventually, the deemed optimal solution is
recommended to the practitioners.

1

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Ivo Couckuyt

2

(1)

where the random variable ξ denotes a pre-defined additive
1

Unless needed for clarity, we drop the subscript ξ for robustness measure notation hereafter.

