Versatile Dueling Bandits: Best-of-both World Analyses
for Online Learning from Relative Preferences

Aadirupa Saha 1 Pierre Gaillard 2

Abstract
We study the problem of K-armed dueling bandit
for both stochastic and adversarial environments,
where the goal of the learner is to aggregate information through relative preferences of pair of
decision points queried in an online sequential
manner. We first propose a novel reduction from
any (general) dueling bandits to multi-armed bandits which allows us to improve many existing
results in dueling bandits. In particular, we give
the first best-of-both world result for the dueling
bandits regret minimization problem—a unified
framework that is guaranteed to perform optimally
for both stochastic and adversarial preferences simultaneously. Moreover, our algorithm
is also
PK
T
the first to achieve an optimal O( i=1 log
∆i ) regret bound against the Condorcet-winner benchmark, which scales optimally both in terms of
the arm-size K and the instance-specific suboptimality gaps {∆i }K
i=1 . This resolves the long
standing problem of designing an instancewise
gap-dependent order optimal regret algorithm for
dueling bandits (with matching lower bounds up
to small constant factors). We further justify the
robustness of our proposed algorithm by proving its optimal regret rate under adversarially corrupted preferences—this outperforms the existing state-of-the-art corrupted dueling results by
a large margin. In summary, we believe our reduction idea will find a broader scope in solving a
diverse class of dueling bandits setting, which are
otherwise studied separately from multi-armed
bandits with often more complex solutions and
worse guarantees. The efficacy of our proposed
algorithms are empirically corroborated against
state-of-the-art dueling bandit methods.
1

Microsoft Research, NYC, US 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria,
CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France.. Correspondence to: Aadirupa Saha <aadirupa.saha@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Studies have shown that it is often easier, faster and less
expensive to collect feedback on a relative scale rather than
asking ratings on an absolute scale. E.g., to understand the
liking for a given pair of items, say (A,B), it is easier for
the users to answer preference-based queries like: “Do you
prefer Item A over B?”, rather than their absolute counterparts: “How much do you score items A and B in a scale of
[0-10]?”. From a system designer’s point of view, exploiting such user preference information could greatly aid in
improving systems performances, especially when data can
be collected on a relative scale and online fashion; such as
recommendation systems, crowd-sourcing platforms, training bots, multi-player games, search-engine optimization,
online retail, just to name a few. In many real world problems, especially where human preferences are elicited in an
online fashion, e.g., design of surveys and expert reviews,
assortment selection, search engine optimization, recommender systems, ranking in multiplayer games, etc, or even
more general reinforcement learning problems where rewards shaping is often a challenging problem (e.g. if multiobjective rewards etc.), and instead, a preference feedback
is much easier to elicit.
Due to the widespread applicability and ease of data collection with relative feedback, learning from preferences has
gained much popularity in the machine learning community and widely studied as the problem of Dueling-Bandits
(DB) over last decade (Yue et al., 2012; Ailon et al., 2014;
Zoghi et al., 2014a;b; 2015a), which is an online learning
framework that generalizes the standard multiarmed bandit
(MAB) (Auer et al., 2002a) setting for identifying a set of
‘good’ arms from a fixed decision-space (set of items) by
querying preference feedback of actively chosen item-pairs.
Dueling Bandits Problem (DB) More formally, in classical dueling bandits with K arms, the learning proceeds
in rounds, where at each time step t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }, the
learner selects a pair of arms (k+1,t , k−1,t ) and receives the
winner of the duel in terms of a binary preference feedback
ot (k+1,t , k−1,t ) ∼ Ber(Pt (k+1,t , k−1,t )), sampled according to an underlying preference matrix Pt ∈ [0, 1]K×K
(chosen adversarially in the most general setup). The objec-

