Feature and Parameter Selection in Stochastic Linear Bandits
Ahmadreza Moradipari 1 Berkay Turan 1 Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori 2 Mahnoosh Alizadeh 1
Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 3

Abstract
We study two model selection settings in stochastic linear bandits (LB). In the first setting, which
we refer to as feature selection, the expected reward of the LB problem is in the linear span of at
least one of M feature maps (models). In the second setting, the reward parameter of the LB problem is arbitrarily selected from M models represented as (possibly) overlapping balls in Rd . However, the agent only has access to misspecified
models, i.e., estimates of the centers and radii of
the balls. We refer to this setting as parameter selection. For each setting, we develop and analyze
a computationally efficient algorithm that is based
on a reduction from bandits to full-information
problems. This allows us to √
obtain regret bounds
that are not worse (up to a log M factor) than
the case where the true model is known. This is
the best reported dependence on the number of
models M in these settings. Finally, we empirically show the effectiveness of our algorithms
using synthetic and real-world experiments.

1. Introduction
Learning under bandit feedback is a class of online learning
problems in which an agent interacts with the environment
through a set of actions (arms), and receives rewards only
from the arms that it has pulled. The goal of the agent is to
maximize its expected cumulative reward without knowledge of the reward distributions of the arms. Multi-armed
bandit (MAB) is the simplest form of this problem (Lai
& Robbins, 1985; Auer et al., 2002a; Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2020; Moradipari et al., 2018). Linear bandit (Dani
et al., 2008; Rusmevichientong & Tsitsiklis, 2010; AbbasiYadkori et al., 2011) is a generalization of MAB to (possibly)
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA 2 DeepMind, London,
UK 3 Google Research, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to:
Ahamdreza Moradipari <ahmadreza moradipari@ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

infinitely many arms, each associated with a feature vector. The mean reward of each arm is assumed to be the
dot product of its feature vector and an unknown parameter vector. This setting contains contextual linear bandit
in which action sets and feature vectors change at every
round. The main component of bandit algorithms is to balance exploration and exploitation: to decide when to explore
and learn about the arms, and when to exploit and select
the action with the highest estimated reward. The most
common exploration strategies are optimism in the face of
uncertainty (OFU) or upper confidence bound (UCB) (Auer
et al., 2002a; Dani et al., 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011;
Moradipari et al., 2020b; 2022a), and Thompson sampling
(TS) (Thompson, 1933; Agrawal & Goyal, 2013; Russo
& Van Roy, 2014; Abeille et al., 2017; Moradipari et al.,
2020a; 2021).
In this paper, we study model selection in stochastic linear
bandits (LB), where the LB problem at hand is selected
from a set of M models. The agent has information about
the models but does not know the identity of the one(s) that
the new LB problem has been selected from. The goal of
the agent is to identify the true model(s) and transfer its
(their) collected experience to speedup the learning of the
task at hand. It is a common scenario in many application
domains that the new task belongs to a family of models that
are either known accurately or with misspecification. For
example, it is reasonable to assume that the customers of an
online marketing website, the users of an app, or the patients
in a medical trial belong to a certain number of categories
based on their shopping and browsing habits or their genetic
signatures. It is also common these days that websites, apps,
and clinics have a large amount of information from each of
these categories that can be used to build a model.
Model selection is particularly challenging with bandit information. A common approach is to consider each model
as a black-box that runs a bandit algorithm with its own
information, and then a meta algorithm plays a form of
bandit-over-bandits strategy with their√outcomes. These algorithms often achieve a regret of e
O( M T ), and thus, are
not desirable when the number of models M is large. In this
paper, we consider two bandit model selection settings and
show that √
it is possible to improve this rate so that the regret
scales as log M with the number of models. The main

