Forward Operator Estimation in Generative Models
with Kernel Transfer Operators

Zhichun Huang 1 Rudrasis Chakraborty 2 Vikas Singh 3

Abstract
Generative models (e.g., variational autoencoders,
flow-based generative models, GANs) usually involve finding a mapping from a known distribution, e.g. Gaussian, to an estimate of the unknown
data-generating distribution. This process is often
carried out by searching over a class of non-linear
functions (e.g., representable by a deep neural
network). While effective in practice, the associated runtime/memory costs can increase rapidly,
and will depend on the performance desired in
an application. We propose a much cheaper (and
simpler) strategy to estimate this mapping based
on adapting known results in kernel transfer operators. We show that if some compromise in
functionality (and scalability) is acceptable, our
proposed formulation enables highly efficient distribution approximation and sampling, and offers
surprisingly good empirical performance which
compares favorably with powerful baselines.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling, in its unconditional form, refers to
the problem of estimating the data generating distribution:
given i.i.d. samples X from an unknown distribution PX , a
generative model seeks to find a parametric distribution that
closely resembles PX . In modern deep generative model
formulations, we often approach this problem via the use
of a latent variable – i.e., we assume that there is some
variable Z ∈ Z associated with the observed data X ∈ X
that follows a known distribution PZ (also referred to as the
prior in generative models). So, we can learn a mapping
f : Z → X such that the distribution after transformation,
denoted by Pf (Z) , aligns well with the data generating dis1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA 2 Butlr
Inc., Burlingame CA, USA 3 University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison WI, USA. Correspondence to: Zhichun Huang
<zhichunh@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tribution PX . Consequently, sampling from PX becomes
convenient since PZ can be efficiently sampled. Frequently,
f is parameterized by deep neural networks and optimized
with stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
Existing generative modeling methods variously optimize
the transformation f , most commonly modeling it as a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) or a distribution matching problem. For instance, given data X = {x1 , . . . , xn }, a
variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013)
first constructs Z through the approximate posterior qZ|X
and maximizes a lower bound of likelihood pf (Z) (X). Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) rely on a simultaneously learned discriminator such
that samples of Pf (Z) are indistinguishable from X. Results
in (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017) suggest that GANs
minimize the distributional discrepancy between Pf (Z) and
PX . Flow-based generative models optimize pf (Z) (X) explicitly through the change of variable rule and efficiently
calculate the Jacobian determinant of the inverse mapping
f −1 . In all the examples above, the architecture or objective
notwithstanding, a common goal is to find a suitable function f that reduces some form of the difference between
Pf (Z) and PX . Thus, a key component in many deep generative models is to learn a forward operator as defined
below.
Definition 1.1 (Forward operator). A forward operator
f ⋆ ∈ C : Z → X is defined to be a mapping associated with some latent variable Z ∼ PZ such that
f ⋆ = arg minf ∈C d(Pf (Z) , PX ) for some function class
C and a distance measure d(·, ·).
Motivation: The specifics of the forward operator may differ from one case to the next. But its properties and how
it is estimated numerically greatly influences the empirical
performance of the model. For instance, mode collapse
issues in GANs are well known and solutions continue to
emerge (Srivastava et al., 2017). To learn the forward operator, VAEs use an approximate posterior qZ|X that may
sometimes fail to align with true posteriors (Kingma et al.,
2016; Dai & Wipf, 2019). Flow-based generative models
enable direct access to the posterior likelihood, yet in order
to tractably evaluate the Jacobian of the transformation during training, one must either restrict the expressiveness at

