Statistical inference with implicit SGD:
proximal Robbins-Monro vs. Polyak-Ruppert

Yoonhyung Lee * 1 Sungdong Lee * 2 Joong-Ho Won 2

Abstract

A popular method for solving problem (1) is the stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) method

The implicit stochastic gradient descent (ISGD),
a proximal version of SGD, is gaining interest
in the literature due to its stability over (explicit)
SGD. In this paper, we conduct an in-depth analysis of the two modes of ISGD for smooth convex functions, namely proximal Robbins-Monro
(proxRM) and proximal Poylak-Ruppert (proxPR)
procedures, for their use in statistical inference
on model parameters. Specifically, we derive nonasymptotic point estimation error bounds of both
proxRM and proxPR iterates and their limiting
distributions, and propose on-line estimators of
their asymptotic covariance matrices that require
only a single run of ISGD. The latter estimators
are used to construct valid confidence intervals
for the model parameters. Our analysis is free of
the generalized linear model assumption that has
limited the preceding analyses, and employs feasible procedures. Our on-line covariance matrix
estimators appear to be the first of this kind in the
ISGD literature.

θn = θn−1 − γn ∇ℓ(Zn , θn−1 ),

where the gradient is with respect to the second argument
of ℓ. The γn is the algorithm parameter called either step
size or learning rate. Assuming ∇L(θ) = E[∇ℓ(Z, θ)],
∇ℓ(Zn , θ) is an unbiased estimator of ∇L(θ), and SGD
(2) is an instance of stochastic approximation due to Robbins & Monro (1951) for finding the root of ∇L. The past
decade witnessed a renewed interest in the Robbins-Monro
procedure, mainly due to its adaptivity to large-scale data in
machine learning problems (Nemirovski et al., 2009; Bottou, 2010; Bach & Moulines, 2011; Bottou et al., 2018).
In particular, SGD and its variants are among the major
driving forces of deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015; Abadi
et al., 2016). Its convergence property has been extensively
studied (Zinkevich, 2003; Nemirovski et al., 2009; Bach &
Moulines, 2011). More recently, SGD has been studied as
a tool for statistical inference from large datasets (Li et al.,
2018; Liang & Su, 2019; Chen et al., 2020).
A notable issue with SGD is its sensitivity to the step size
selection. If it is too small, the convergence can be arbitrarily
slow; if it is too large, then the iterate {θn } can diverge
(Bach & Moulines, 2011; Ryu & Boyd, 2014).

1. Introduction
Consider the optimization problem of the form
min L(θ) := E[ℓ(Z, θ)]
θ

(2)

(1)

p

where θ ∈ R is the variable (parameter) of interest, Z is
a random variable, and E[·] denotes the expectation over
the distribution of Z. Function ℓ is a real-valued sample
function, information on which can only be obtained by
observing independent copies of Z. For example, if ℓ refers
to the negative log-likelihood of the model parameter θ
given data Z, then problem (1) reduces to finding the “true
parameter” θ⋆ of the model.
*

Equal contribution 1 Kakao Entertainment Corp. 2 Department
of Statistics, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: JoongHo Won <wonj@stats.snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

As an alternative to SGD, consider the following iteration.
θn = proxγn ℓ(Zn ,·) (θn−1 ),

(3)

n
o
2
1
where proxγf (θ) = argminθ′ ∈Rp f (θ′ ) + 2γ
∥θ′ − θ∥
is the proximity operator of f . Here the norm ∥·∥ is the
Euclidean (ℓ2 ) norm. Using the optimality condition of the
minimand in the definition of the operator, iteration (3) can
be written as an implicit equation
θn = θn−1 − γn ∇ℓ(Zn , θn ).

(3′ )

Iteration (3) can be considered as a noisy version of the
proximal point algorithm due to Rockafellar (1976), introduced to alleviate the sensitivity to the step size in the
(noiseless) gradient descent method. Being relatively new in
the literature, iteration (3) has been called in various names:

