Reverse Engineering the Neural Tangent Kernel

James B. Simon 1 2

Sajant Anand 1

Abstract
The development of methods to guide the design
of neural networks is an important open challenge for deep learning theory. As a paradigm
for principled neural architecture design, we propose the translation of high-performing kernels,
which are better-understood and amenable to firstprinciples design, into equivalent network architectures, which have superior efficiency, flexibility, and feature learning. To this end, we
constructively prove that, with just an appropriate choice of activation function, any positivesemidefinite dot-product kernel can be realized
as either the NNGP or neural tangent kernel of
a fully-connected neural network with only one
hidden layer. We verify our construction numerically and demonstrate its utility as a design tool
for finite fully-connected networks in several experiments.

1. Introduction
The field of deep learning theory has recently been transformed by the discovery that, as network widths approach
infinity, models take simple analytical forms amenable to
theoretical analysis. These limiting forms are described by
kernel functions, the most important of which is the neural
tangent kernel (NTK), which describes the training of an
infinite-width model via gradient descent (Jacot et al., 2018;
Lee et al., 2019). Limiting kernels are now known for fullyconnected networks (Daniely et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2018;
Matthews et al., 2018; Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019),
convolutional networks (Novak et al., 2019a; Arora et al.,
1
Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720 2 Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience and Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720. Correspondence to:
James B. Simon <james.simon@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
Code to reproduce experiments is available at https://
github.com/james-simon/reverse-engineering.

Michael R. DeWeese 1 2

2019b), transformers (Hron et al., 2020), and more (Yang,
2019), giving unprecedented insight into commonly-used
network architectures.
However, deep learning theory must ultimately aim not
merely to understand existing architectures but to design
better architectures. Neural network design is famously
unscientific, proceeding via an artful combination of intuition, trial-and-error, and brute-force search that yields little
understanding of why certain architectures perform well or
how we might do better. We argue that theorists should
endeavor to use the many insights gained from the study
of wide networks to develop well-understood methods and
principles to illuminate this process.
We propose that one potential avenue for principled architecture design is reverse engineering the network-kernel
correspondence: first design a kernel well-suited to the
task at hand, then choose network hyperparameters to (approximately) realize that kernel as a finite network. This
paradigm promises the best of both model types: kernels
are analytically simple and thus far more amenable to firstprinciples design, while neural networks have the advantages of cheaper training/inference, flexibility in training
schemes and regularization, and the ability to learn useful
features and transfer to new tasks.
Despite clear implications for architecture design as well
as fundamental interest, very little work has studied the
problem of achieving a desired kernel with a network architecture. Here we fully solve this problem for fully-connected
networks (FCNs) on normalized data: we specify the full
set of achievable FCN kernels and provide a construction to
realize any achievable NNGP kernel or NTK with a shallow
(i.e., single-hidden-layer) FCN. We then confirm our results
experimentally and describe two cases in which, by reverseengineering a desired NTK, we can design high-performing
FCNs in a principled way.
Our main contributions are as follows:

• We constructively prove that, with just an appropriate
choice of activation function, any positive-semidefinite
dot-product kernel can be realized as the NNGP kernel
or NTK of an FCN with no biases and just one hidden
layer.

