Pessimistic Q-Learning for Offline Reinforcement Learning:
Towards Optimal Sample Complexity

Laixi Shi 1 Gen Li 2 Yuting Wei 2 Yuxin Chen 2 Yuejie Chi 1

Abstract
Offline or batch reinforcement learning seeks to
learn a near-optimal policy using history data
without active exploration of the environment.
To counter the insufficient coverage and sample
scarcity of many offline datasets, the principle of
pessimism has been recently introduced to mitigate high bias of the estimated values. While pessimistic variants of model-based algorithms (e.g.,
value iteration with lower confidence bounds)
have been theoretically investigated, their modelfree counterparts — which do not require explicit
model estimation — have not been adequately
studied, especially in terms of sample efficiency.
To address this inadequacy, we study a pessimistic
variant of Q-learning in the context of finitehorizon Markov decision processes, and characterize its sample complexity under the single-policy
concentrability assumption which does not require the full coverage of the state-action space.
In addition, a variance-reduced pessimistic Qlearning algorithm is proposed to achieve nearoptimal sample complexity. Altogether, this work
highlights the efficiency of model-free algorithms
in offline RL when used in conjunction with pessimism and variance reduction.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in recent years, including matching or surpassing human performance in robotics control and strategy games (Silver et al., 2017; Mnih et al., 2015). Nevertheless, these success stories often come with nearly prohibitive cost, where
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 2 Department of
Statistics and Data Science, The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Correspondence to:
Laixi Shi <laixishi@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

an astronomical number of samples are required to train the
learning algorithm to a satisfactory level. Scaling up and
replicating the RL success in many real-world problems face
considerable challenges, due to limited access to large-scale
simulation data. In applications such as online advertising
and clinical trials, real-time data collection could be expensive, time-consuming, or constrained in sample sizes as a
result of experimental limitations.
On the other hand, it is worth noting that tons of samples
might have already been accumulated and stored — albeit
not necessarily with the desired quality — during previous
data acquisition attempts. It is therefore natural to wonder
whether such history data can be leveraged to improve performance in future deployments. In reality, the history data
was often obtained by executing some (possibly unknown)
behavior policy, which is typically not the desired policy.
This gives rise to the problem of offline RL or batch RL
(Lange et al., 2012; Levine et al., 2020),1 namely, how to
make the best use of history data to learn an improved or
even optimal policy, without further exploring the environment. In stark contrast to online RL that relies on active
interaction with the environment, the performance of offline
RL depends critically not only on the quantity, but also the
quality of history data (e.g., coverage over the space-action
space), given that the agent is no longer collecting new samples for the purpose of exploring the unknown environment.
Recently, the principle of pessimism (or conservatism) —
namely, being conservative in Q-function estimation when
there are not enough samples — has been put forward as
an effective way to solve offline RL (Buckman et al., 2020;
Kumar et al., 2020). This principle has been implemented in,
for instance, a model-based offline value iteration algorithm,
which modifies classical value iteration (Azar et al., 2017)
by subtracting a penalty term in the estimated Q-values and
has been shown to achieve appealing sample efficiency (Jin
et al., 2021; Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021b). It
is noteworthy that the model-based approach is built upon
the construction of an empirical transition kernel, and therefore, requires specific representation of the environment
(see, e.g. Agarwal et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020). It remains
1
Throughout this paper, we will be using the term offline RL
(resp. dataset) or batch RL (resp. dataset) interchangeably.

