Differentially Private Approximate Quantiles

Haim Kaplan 1 2 Shachar Schnapp 3 Uri Stemmer 1 2

Abstract
In this work we study the problem of differentially
private (DP) quantiles, in which given dataset X
and quantiles q1 , ..., qm ∈ [0, 1], we want to output m quantile estimations which are as close as
possible to the true quantiles and preserve DP.
We describe a simple recursive DP algorithm,
which we call Approximate Quantiles (AQ), for
this task. We give a worst case upper bound on its
error, and show that its error is much lower than
of previous implementations on several different
datasets. Furthermore, it gets this low error while
running time two orders of magnitude faster that
the best previous implementation.

1. Introduction
Quantiles are the values that divide a sorted dataset in a
certain proportion. They are one of the most basic and important data statistics, with various usages, ranging from
computing the median to standardized test scores (GRE,
2021). Given sensitive data, publishing the quantiles can
expose information about the individuals that are part of the
dataset. For example, suppose that a company wants to publish the median of its users’ ages. Doing so means to reveal
the date of birth of a certain user, thus compromising the
user’s privacy. Differential privacy (DP) offers a solution
to this problem by requiring the output distribution of the
computation to be insensitive to the data of any single individual. This leads us to the definition of the DP-quantiles
problem:
Definition 1.1 (The DP-Quantiles Problem). Let a, b ∈ R.
Given a dataset X ⊆ (a, b) containing n points from (a, b),
and a set of m quantiles 0 < q1 ≤ · · · ≤ qm < 1, privately
identify quantile estimations v1 , ..., vm such that for every
j ∈ [m] we have Prx∼UX [x ≤ vj ] ≈ qj ,1 where UX is the
*
Equal contribution 1 Tel Aviv University 2 Google Research
Ben-Gurion University. Correspondence to: Shachar Schnapp
<schnapp@post.bgu.ac.il>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
We will make this precise later.

uniform distribution over the data X.2
On the theory side, the DP-quantiles problem is relatively
well-understood, with advanced constructions achieving
very small asymptotic error (Beimel et al., 2016; Bun et al.,
2015; Kaplan et al., 2020). However, as was recently observed by Gillenwater et al. (2021), due to the complexity
of these advanced constructions and their large hidden constants, their practicality is questionable. This led Gillenwater et al. (2021) to design a simple algorithm for the
DP-quantiles problem that performs well in practice. In this
work we revisit the DP-quantiles problem. We build on the
theoretical construction of Bun et al. (2015), and present
a new (and simple) practical algorithm that obtains better
utility and runtime than the state-of-the-art construction of
Gillenwater et al. (2021) (and all other existing implementations). When the number of quantiles is large, the error of
AQ algorithm reaches up to 7.14 time lower than the best
existing baseline.
1.1. Our Contributions
We provide Approximate Quantiles, an algorithm and implementation for the DP-quantiles problem (Section 3). We
prove a worst case bound on the error of the AQ algorithm for arbitrary m quantiles, and a tighter error bound for
the case of uniform quantiles qi = i/(m + 1), i = 1, . . . , m
(Section 3.2). We experimentally evaluated the AQ algorithm and conclude that it obtains higher accuracy and faster
runtime than the existing state-of-the-art implementations
(Section 4). In addition, we adapt our algorithm (and its
competitors) to the definition of Concentrated Differential
Privacy (zCDP) (Bun & Steinke, 2016). We show that its
dominance over other methods is even more significant with
this definition of privacy.
1.2. A Technical Overview of Our Construction:
Algorithm Approximate Quantiles
Our algorithm operates using a DP algorithm for estimating a single quantile. Specifically, we assume that we have
a DP algorithm A : R2 × Rn × (0, 1) → R that takes
a domain I = (a, b) ∈ R2 (an interval on the line), a
database X ∈ Rn (containing n points in I), and a sin2

We assume that there are no duplicate points in X.

