Removing Batch Normalization Boosts Adversarial Training

Haotao Wang 1 Aston Zhang 2 Shuai Zheng 2 Xingjian Shi 2 Mu Li 2 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract
Adversarial training (AT) defends deep neural networks against adversarial attacks. One challenge
that limits its practical application is the performance degradation on clean samples. A major bottleneck identified by previous works is the widely
used batch normalization (BN), which struggles to
model the different statistics of clean and adversarial training samples in AT. Although the dominant
approach is to extend BN to capture this mixture
of distribution, we propose to completely eliminate this bottleneck by removing all BN layers in
AT. Our normalizer-free robust training (NoFrost)
method extends recent advances in normalizerfree networks to AT for its unexplored advantage on handling the mixture distribution challenge. We show that NoFrost achieves adversarial
robustness with only a minor sacrifice on clean
sample accuracy. On ImageNet with ResNet50,
NoFrost achieves 74.06% clean accuracy, which
drops merely 2.00% from standard training. In
contrast, BN-based AT obtains 59.28% clean accuracy, suffering a significant 16.78% drop from
standard training. In addition, NoFrost achieves
a 23.56% adversarial robustness against PGD attack, which improves the 13.57% robustness in
BN-based AT. We observe better model smoothness and larger decision margins from NoFrost,
which make the models less sensitive to input
perturbations and thus more robust. Moreover,
when incorporating more data augmentations into
NoFrost, it achieves comprehensive robustness
against multiple distribution shifts. Code and pretrained models are public1 .
Work done during the first author’s internship at Amazon Web Services. 1 University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
USA 2 Amazon Web Services, Santa Clara, USA. Correspondence to: Haotao Wang <htwang@utexas.edu>, Aston Zhang <astonz@amazon.com>, Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/amazon-research/norma
lizer-free-robust-training

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks (Szegedy et al., 2013), which generate adversarial
images by adding slight manipulations on the original images to falsify model predictions. One of the most effective
methods to defend adversarial attacks is adversarial training
(AT) (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2019). It jointly
fits a model on clean (original) images and adversarial images to improve the model’s adversarial robustness (i.e., the
accuracy on adversarial images). An improved adversarial
robustness often comes at the cost of reducing accuracy on
clean samples (Madry et al., 2018; Tsipras et al., 2019; Ilyas
et al., 2019). However, for many real-world applications,
high clean accuracy is a basic requirement while adversarial
robustness is a favorable bonus. It is hence desirable to sustain high clean accuracy while achieving high adversarial
robustness.
Previous works (Xie & Yuille, 2020; Xie et al., 2020)
pointed out that the widely used batch normalization (BN)
layer (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) contributes to the undesirable
trade-off between clean accuracy and adversarial robustness.
In AT, clean and adversarial images are drawn from two different distributions. It is challenging for BN to capture those
two different normalization statistics. Xie & Yuille (2020)
proposed mixture BN (MBN) strategy for AT, which routes
clean and adversarial images through two separate BN paths.
MBN is adopted as the default option for many follow-up
works (Xie & Yuille, 2020; Xie et al., 2020; Merchant et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020b; 2021). But as
pointed out by the authors, it faces practical limitations: In
practice there is no oracle to tell which BN path to choose
during inference for each test sample.
We explore an alternative solution. Since BN has limited
capacity to estimate normalization statistics of samples from
heterogeneous distributions, can we better handle this mixture distribution challenge by removing all BN layers in
AT? Replacing BN with other normalization layers that
do not calculate statistics across samples, such as instance
normalization (IN) (Ulyanov et al., 2016), brings a small
amount of benefit, but the results are still unsatisfying as
shown in our experiments (Table 3). Instead, we focus on
recently proposed normalizer-free networks (Brock et al.,
2021a;b). Although these networks were proposed to match

