Communicating via Markov Decision Processes

Samuel Sokota * 1 Christian Schroeder de Witt * 2 Maximilian Igl 3 Luisa Zintgraf 2 Philip Torr 2
Martin Strohmeier 4 J. Zico Kolter 1 5 Shimon Whiteson 2 3 Jakob Foerster 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of communicating exogenous information by means of Markov decision process trajectories. This setting, which we
call a Markov coding game (MCG), generalizes
both source coding and a large class of referential
games. MCGs also isolate a problem that is important in decentralized control settings in which
cheap-talk is not available—namely, they require
balancing communication with the associated cost
of communicating. We contribute a theoretically
grounded approach to MCGs based on maximum
entropy reinforcement learning and minimum entropy coupling that we call MEME. Due to recent
breakthroughs in approximation algorithms for
minimum entropy coupling, MEME is not merely
a theoretical algorithm, but can be applied to practical settings. Empirically, we show both that
MEME is able to outperform a strong baseline on
small MCGs and that MEME is able to achieve
strong performance on extremely large MCGs.
To the latter point, we demonstrate that MEME is
able to losslessly communicate binary images via
trajectories of Cartpole and Pong, while simultaneously achieving the maximal or near maximal
expected returns, and that it is even capable of
performing well in the presence of actuator noise.

1. Introduction
This work introduces a novel problem setting called Markov
coding games (MCGs). MCGs are two-player decentralized Markov decision processes (Oliehoek et al., 2016) that
proceed in four steps. In the first step, one agent (called
the sender) receives a special private observation (called the
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Oxford
University 3 Waymo Research 4 armasuisse Science + Technology 5 Bosch Center for AI. Correspondence to: Samuel
Sokota <ssokota@andrew.cmu.edu>, Christian Schroeder de Witt
<schroederdewitt@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

message), which it is tasked with communicating. In the
second step, the sender plays out an episode of a Markov
decision process (MDP). In the third, the other agent (called
the receiver) receives the sender’s MDP trajectory as its observation. In the fourth, the receiver estimates the message.
The shared payoff to the sender and receiver is a weighted
sum of the cumulative reward yielded by the MDP and an
indicator specifying whether or not the receiver correctly
decoded the message.
Among the reasons that MCGs are of interest is the fact
that they generalize other important settings. The first of
these is referential games. In a referential game, a sender attempts to communicate a message to a receiver using cheap
talk actions—i.e., communicatory actions that do not have
externalities on the transition or reward functions. Referential games have been a subject of academic interest dating
back at least as far as Lewis’s seminal work Convention
(Lewis, 1969). Since then, various flavors of referential
games have been studied in game theory (Skyrms, 2010),
artificial life (Steels, 2013), evolutionary linguistics (Smith,
2002), cognitive science (Spike et al., 2017), and machine
learning (Lazaridou et al., 2018). MCGs can be viewed as a
generalization of referential games to a setting in which the
sender’s actions may incur costs.
A second problem setting generalized by MCGs is source
coding (MacKay, 2002) (also known as data compression).
In source coding, the objective is to construct an injective
mapping from a space of messages to the set of sequences
of symbols (for some finite set of symbols) such that the
expected output length is minimized. Source coding has a
myriad of real world applications involving the compression
of images, video, audio, and genetic data. MCGs can be
viewed as a generalization of the source coding problem
to a setting where the cost of an encoding may involve
complex considerations, rather than simply being equal to
the sequence length.
Yet another reason to be interested in MCGs is that they
isolate an important subproblem of decentralized control. In
particular, achieving good performance in an MCG requires
the sender’s actions to simultaneously perform control in
an MDP and communicate information (i.e., to communicate implicitly). This presents a challenge for approximate

