One-Pass Algorithms for MAP Inference of
Nonsymmetric Determinantal Point Processes

Aravind Reddy 1 Ryan A. Rossi 2 Zhao Song 2 Anup Rao 2 Tung Mai 2 Nedim Lipka 2 Gang Wu 2
Eunyee Koh 2 Nesreen K. Ahmed 3

Abstract
In this paper, we initiate the study of one-pass
algorithms for solving the maximum-a-posteriori
(MAP) inference problem for Non-symmetric Determinantal Point Processes (NDPPs). In particular, we formulate streaming and online versions
of the problem and provide one-pass algorithms
for solving these problems. In our streaming setting, data points arrive in an arbitrary order and
the algorithms are constrained to use a single-pass
over the data as well as sub-linear memory, and
only need to output a valid solution at the end of
the stream. Our online setting has an additional
requirement of maintaining a valid solution at any
point in time. We design new one-pass algorithms
for these problems and show that they perform
comparably to (or even better than) the offline
greedy algorithm while using substantially lower
memory.

1. Introduction
Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs) were first introduced
in the context of quantum mechanics (Macchi, 1975) and
have subsequently been extensively studied with applications in several areas of pure and applied mathematics like
graph theory, combinatorics, random matrix theory (Hough
et al., 2006; Borodin, 2009), and randomized numerical
linear algebra (Derezinski & Mahoney, 2021). Discrete
DPPs have gained widespread adoption in machine learning
following the seminal work of (Kulesza & Taskar, 2012)
and have also seen a recent explosion of interest in the machine learning community. For instance, some of the very
recent uses of DPPs include automation of deep neural network design (Nguyen et al., 2021), deep generative models
1

Northwestern University 2 Adobe Research 3 Intel
Labs.
Correspondence to:
Aravind Reddy <aravind.reddy@cs.northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Chen & Ahmed, 2021), document and video summarization (Perez-Beltrachini & Lapata, 2021), image processing
(Launay et al., 2021), and learning in games (Perez-Nieves
et al., 2021).
A DPP is a probability distribution over subsets of items and
is characterized by some kernel matrix such that the probability of sampling any particular subset is proportional to the
determinant of the submatrix corresponding to that subset
in the kernel. Until very recently, most prior work on DPPs
focused on the setting where the kernel matrix is symmetric. Due to this constraint, DPPs can only model negative
correlations between items. Recent work has shown that
allowing the kernel matrix to be nonsymmetric can greatly
increase the expressive power of DPPs and allows them to
model compatible sets of items (Gartrell et al., 2019; Brunel,
2018). To differentiate this line of work from prior literature on symmetric DPPs, the term Nonsymmetric DPPs
(NDPPs) has often been used. Modeling positive correlations can be useful in many practical scenarios. For instance,
an E-commerce company trying to build a product recommendation system would want the system to increase the
probability of suggesting a router if a customer adds a modem to a shopping cart.
State-of-the-art algorithms for MAP inference of NDPPs
(Gartrell et al., 2021; Anari & Vuong, 2022) require storing
the full data in memory and take multiple passes over the
complete dataset. Therefore, these algorithms take too much
memory to be useful for large scale data, where the size of
the entire dataset can be much larger than the random-access
memory available. These algorithms are also not practical
in settings where data is generated on the fly, for example,
in E-commerce applications where new items are added to
the store over time.
Technical contributions.
• We give the first problem formulations for streaming
and online versions of MAP Inference of low-rankNDPPs. Our formulations provide a good structure
on how to store NDPP models which are so large that
they cannot fit by themselves in the memory (RAM)
of any single machine (this is an extremely important

