Dynamic Topic Models for Temporal Document Networks

Delvin Ce Zhang 1 Hady W. Lauw 1

Abstract
Dynamic topic models explore the time evolution of topics in temporally accumulative corpora. While existing topic models focus on the
dynamics of individual documents, we propose
two neural topic models aimed at learning unified
topic distributions that incorporate both document
dynamics and network structure. For the first
model, by adding a time dimension, we propose
Time-Aware Optimal Transport, which measures
the probability of a link between two differently
timestamped documents using their semantic distance. Since the gradually evolving topological
structure of network may also influence the establishment of a new link, for the second model, we
further design a Temporal Point Process to capture
the impact of historical neighbors on the current
link formation at the network level. Experiments
on four dynamic document networks demonstrate
the advantage of our models in jointly modeling
document dynamics and network adjacency.

1. Introduction
Textual documents represent an important class of data,
including academic papers, Web pages, etc. Usually these
documents link to one another, forming a network structure,
such as paper citation network, Web page hyperlink network.
To derive latent semantics from such a corpus, we may
employ a topic model, such as RTM (Chang & Blei, 2009)
that leverages the interconnection between documents.
A document network does not emerge suddenly in its entirety. Rather, it is an accumulation of documents created
over time. The latent themes in a corpus may also evolve
over time, e.g., academic papers track the development of
research across years, news articles track the chronology
of events. Early attempts to capture document dynamics
1

School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore
Management University, 80 Stamford Road, Singapore. Correspondence to: Delvin Ce Zhang <cezhang.2018@smu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

F

G

F
E

D

C

A

D

C

B

B

A

E
D

C

B

A

Time
…

𝑡𝑖−1

𝑡𝑖

𝑡𝑖+1

…

Figure 1. Illustration of a temporal document network.

(DTM (Blei & Lafferty, 2006)) ignore the network aspect.
We postulate that the temporal nature relates not only to
when a document is created, but also to how documents created at different times may form linkages. Fig. 1 illustrates
the formation of a temporal document network. Initially at
time ti−1 , the network contains four documents (A, B, C,
and D) and links among them. At time ti , two new documents, E and F , are published, and bring links to documents
B and D, respectively. We use red documents and links
to denote the newly appearing data. Moving to time ti+1 ,
document G is published and connected to documents D
and F . As time goes by, we observe the growth in terms of
both corpus size and network connectivity. Modeling time
could better preserve text semantics and network topology.
Moreover, time also reveals the possibility of connection.
Indicatively, newly published documents are likely to connect to recent neighbors rather than previous ones. Existing
topic models for document networks, e.g., RTM (Chang &
Blei, 2009), focus on the static network. As a result, it may
predict a past link using documents published in future time.
Our strategy to better model topics in temporal document
networks is a confluence of three factors. First, most dynamic topic models (Blei & Lafferty, 2006) deal with the
plain text within documents and ignore the network connectivity across documents. However, links constitute additional information on documents’ similarities, and modeling
them could reveal insightful semantics. Second, models for
networked documents (Chang & Blei, 2009) mainly focus
on static networks without considering time. Dynamic process showcases topic evolution and network generation over
the time. By modeling it, we may better preserve text semantics and network topology. Third, most topic models (Chang
& Blei, 2009; Bai et al., 2018) preserve network structure

