Data-SUITE: Data-centric identification
of in-distribution incongruous examples

Nabeel Seedat 1 Jonathan Crabbé 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
Systematic quantification of data quality is critical
for consistent model performance. Prior works
have focused on out-of-distribution data. Instead,
we tackle an understudied yet equally important
problem of characterizing incongruous regions of
in-distribution (ID) data, which may arise from
feature space heterogeneity. To this end, we propose a paradigm shift with Data-SUITE: a datacentric AI framework to identify these regions, independent of a task-specific model. Data-SUITE
leverages copula modeling, representation learning, and conformal prediction to build featurewise confidence interval estimators based on a
set of training instances. These estimators can be
used to evaluate the congruence of test instances
with respect to the training set, to answer two practically useful questions: (1) which test instances
will be reliably predicted by a model trained with
the training instances? and (2) can we identify
incongruous regions of the feature space so that
data owners understand the data’s limitations or
guide future data collection? We empirically validate Data-SUITE’s performance and coverage
guarantees and demonstrate on cross-site medical
data, biased data, and data with concept drift, that
Data-SUITE best identifies ID regions where a
downstream model may be reliable (independent
of said model). We also illustrate how these identified regions can provide insights into datasets
and highlight their limitations.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models have a well-known reliance on
training data quality (Park et al., 2021). Hence, when deploying such models in the real world, the reliability of
1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute, London,
UK 3 University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence
to: Nabeel Seedat <ns741@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

predictions depends on the data’s congruence with respect
to the training data. Significant literature has focused on
identifying data instances that lie out of the training data’s
distribution (OOD). This includes label shifts (Ren et al.,
2018; Hsu et al., 2020) or input feature shift, where these
instances fall out of the support of the training set’s distribution (Zhang et al., 2021). However, a much less studied,
yet equally important problem is identifying heterogeneous
regions of in-distribution (ID) data.
Data in the wild can be ID yet have heterogeneous regions
in feature space. This manifests in varying levels of incongruence, in cases of different sub-populations, data biases or
temporal changes (Leslie et al., 2021; Gianfrancesco et al.,
2018; Obermeyer et al., 2019). We illustrate each of these
types of incongruence with real world data (Table 2), in the
experiments from Secs. 4.3 and 4.5.
In this paper, we present a data-centric framework to characterize such incongruous regions of ID data and define
two groups, namely (i) inconsistent and (ii) uncertain, with
respect to the training distribution. We contextualize the
difference based on confidence intervals (CI) (See Sec.3.3
for details). When feature values lie outside of a CI, we
term it inconsistent, alternatively we characterize the level
of feature uncertainty based on the CI’s width.
At this point, one might ask if the data is ID; why should we
worry? Not accounting for these incongruous ID regions of
the feature space can be problematic when deploying models
in high-stakes settings such as healthcare, where spurious
model predictions can be deadly (Saria & Subbaswamy,
2019; Varshney, 2020). That said, even in settings where
poor predictions are not risky, consistent exploratory data
analysis (EDA) and retroactive auditing of such data is timeconsuming for data scientists (Polyzotis et al., 2017; Kandel
et al., 2012). Hence, systematically identifying these incongruous regions has immense practical value.
Consequently, we build a framework to empower data scientists to address the previously mentioned challenges related
to insightful exploratory data analysis (EDA) and reliable
model deployment, anchored by the following desiderata:
(D1) Insightful Data Exploration: Alice has a new dataset
D and wants to explore and gain insights into it with respect

