Low-Complexity Deep Convolutional Neural Networks on Fully
Homomorphic Encryption Using Multiplexed Parallel Convolutions

Eunsang Lee 1 Joon-Woo Lee 1 Junghyun Lee 1 Young-Sik Kim 2 Yongjune Kim 3 Jong-Seon No 1
Woosuk Choi 4

Abstract
Recently, the standard ResNet-20 network was
successfully implemented on the fully homomorphic encryption scheme, residue number system variant Cheon-Kim-Kim-Song (RNS-CKKS)
scheme using bootstrapping, but the implementation lacks practicality due to high latency and
low security level. To improve the performance,
we first minimize total bootstrapping runtime using multiplexed parallel convolution that collects
sparse output data for multiple channels compactly. We also propose the imaginary-removing
bootstrapping to prevent the deep neural networks
from catastrophic divergence during approximate
ReLU operations. In addition, we optimize level
consumptions and use lighter and tighter parameters. Simulation results show that we have 4.67×
lower inference latency and 134× less amortized
runtime (runtime per image) for ResNet-20 compared to the state-of-the-art previous work, and
we achieve standard 128-bit security. Furthermore,
we successfully implement ResNet-110 with high
accuracy on the RNS-CKKS scheme for the first
time.

1. Introduction
The clients would be reluctant to send their sensitive private
data to the server, such as medical information. To protect clients’ privacy, privacy-preserving machine learnings
(PPMLs) have been studied to perform inferences directly
on encrypted data. Most previous PPMLs adopt the nonstandard convolutional neural networks (CNNs) that reduce the
1
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, INMC, Seoul
National University 2 Dept. of Information and Communication
Engineering, Chosun University 3 Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, DGIST 4 Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Joon-Woo Lee <joonwoo42@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

number of layers or replace activation functions with lowdegree polynomials (Gilad-Bachrach et al., 2016; Dathathri
et al., 2019; Boemer et al., 2019; Chou et al., 2018; Lou &
Jiang, 2021; Juvekar et al., 2018; Mishra et al., 2020; Park
et al., 2022; Brutzkus et al., 2019). This approach requires
the training stage for the newly designed CNNs. However,
since training is a costly process and even access to training datasets is often restricted due to data privacy issues,
the request for training is a burden on the server in many
real-world applications. Furthermore, it is not easy to design
nonstandard CNNs for large datasets. Thus, PPML based on
the standard CNNs (SCNNs) using already given pre-trained
parameters is also practically important.
Although relatively simple datasets can be classified using shallow SCNNs, very deep SCNNs (VDSCNNs) are
required for the more difficult datasets (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Szegedy et al., 2015). Thus, it is an important
and appealing goal to implement practical PPML for VDSCNNs, which is the main focus of our paper. In particular, the
ResNet model (He et al., 2016) is a popular SCNN because
it handles the gradient vanishing problem effectively. Thus,
it will be very meaningful to implement practical PPML for
very deep ResNet models (e.g., ResNet-110).
Interactive PPML is an approach that uses both homomorphic encryption (HE) and secure multi-party computation
(MPC) (Juvekar et al., 2018; Mishra et al., 2020; Park et al.,
2022). The interactive PPML’s inference for the SCNNs
requires a huge amount of data communication between
the server and the client. For example, one ReLU function
requires data communication of 19KB according to (Mishra
et al., 2020), hence, data communication of several gigabytes is required to classify only one encrypted CIFAR-10
image using the standard ResNet-20 or ResNet-32.
Thus, we focus on non-interactive PPML for VDSCNNs,
which performs VDSCNNs on the encrypted data using only
fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) without MPC. Since
available level consumption (i.e. depth of arithmetic circuit)
is limited in leveled HE, previous PPMLs that adopt leveled
HE only support a small number of layers. To achieve noninteractive PPML for VDSCNNs, it is essential to use bootstrapping operations (Gentry, 2009; Cheon et al., 2018b)

