Nested Bandits
Matthieu Martin 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 2 1 Thibaud Rahier 1 Houssam Zenati 1 3

Abstract
In many online decision processes, the optimizing
agent is called to choose between large numbers
of alternatives with many inherent similarities; in
turn, these similarities imply closely correlated
losses that may confound standard discrete choice
models and bandit algorithms. We study this question in the context of nested bandits, a class of
adversarial multi-armed bandit problems where
the learner seeks to minimize their regret in the
presence of a large number of distinct alternatives
with a hierarchy of embedded (non-combinatorial)
similarities. In this setting, optimal algorithms
based on the exponential weights blueprint (like
Hedge, EXP3, and their variants) may incur significant regret because they tend to spend excessive
amounts of time exploring irrelevant alternatives
with similar, suboptimal costs. To account for this,
we propose a nested exponential weights (NEW)
algorithm that performs a layered exploration of
the learner’s set of alternatives based on a nested,
step-by-step selection method. In so doing, we
obtain a series of tight bounds for the learner’s
regret showing that online learning problems with
a high degree of similarity between alternatives
can be resolved efficiently, without a red bus /
blue bus paradox occurring.

1. Introduction
Consider the following discrete choice problem (known as
the “red bus / blue bus paradox” in the context of transportation economics). A commuter has a choice between taking a
car or bus to work: commuting by car takes on average half
an hour modulo random fluctuations, whereas commuting
by bus takes an hour, again modulo random fluctuations
All authors in alphabetical order. 1 Criteo AI Lab 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble,
France 3 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France. Correspondence to: Panayotis Mertikopoulos <panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(it’s a long commute). Then, under the classical multinomial logit choice model for action selection [20, 21], the
commuter’s odds for selecting a car over a bus would be
exp(−1/2)/ exp(−1) ≈ 1.6 : 1. This indicates a very clear
preference for taking a car to work and is commensurate
with the fact that, on average, commuting by bus takes twice
as long.
Consider now the same model but with a twist. The company operating the bus network purchases a fleet of new
buses that are otherwise completely identical to the existing
ones, except for their color: old buses are red, the new buses
are blue. This change has absolutely no effect on the travel
time of the bus; however, since the new set of alternatives
presented to the commuter is {car, red bus, blue bus}, the
odds of selecting a car over a bus (red or blue, it doesn’t
matter) now drops to exp(−1/2)/[exp(−1) + exp(−1)] ≈
0.8 : 1. Thus, by introducing an irrelevant feature (the color
of the bus), the odds of selecting the alternative with the
highest utility have dropped dramatically, to the extent that
commuting by car is no longer the most probable outcome
in this example.
Of course, the shift in choice probabilities may not always
be that dramatic, but the point of this example is that the
presence of an irrelevant alternative (the blue bus) would
always induce such a shift – which is, of course, absurd. In
fact, the red bus / blue bus paradox was originally proposed
as a sharp criticism of the independence from irrelevant
alternatives (IIA) axiom that underlies the multinomial logit
choice model [20] and which makes it unsuitable for choice
problems with inherent similarities between different alternatives. In turn, this has led to a vast corpus of literature in
social choice and decision theory, with an extensive array of
different axioms and models proposed to overcome the failures of the IIA assumption. For an introduction to the topic,
we refer the reader to the masterful accounts of McFadden
[21], Ben-Akiva & Lerman [7] and Anderson et al. [2].
Perhaps surprisingly, the implications of the red bus / blue
bus paradox have not been explored in the context of online
learning, despite the fact that similarities between alternatives are prevalent in the field’s application domains – for
example, in recommender systems with categorized product
recommendation catalogues, in the economics of transport
and product differentiation, etc. What makes this gap particularly pronounced is the fact that logit choice underlies some

