Doubly Robust Distributionally Robust Off-Policy Evaluation and Learning

Nathan Kallus * 1 Xiaojie Mao * 2 Kaiwen Wang * 1 Zhengyuan Zhou * 3

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation and learning (OPE/L) use
offline observational data to make better decisions, which is crucial in applications where online experimentation is limited. However, depending entirely on logged data, OPE/L is sensitive to environment distribution shifts — discrepancies between the data-generating environment
and that where policies are deployed. Si et al.
(2020a) proposed distributionally robust OPE/L
(DROPE/L) to address this, but the proposal relies
on inverse-propensity weighting, whose estimation error and regret will deteriorate if propensities are nonparametrically estimated and whose
variance is suboptimal even if not. For standard, non-robust, OPE/L, this is solved by doubly robust (DR) methods, but they do not naturally extend to the more complex DROPE/L,
which involves a worst-case expectation. In this
paper, we propose the first DR algorithms for
DROPE/L with KL-divergence uncertainty sets.
For evaluation, we propose Localized Doubly
Robust DROPE (LDR2 OPE) and show that it
achieves semiparametric efficiency under weak
product rates conditions. Thanks to a localization technique, LDR2 OPE only requires fitting a
small number of regressions, just like DR methods for standard OPE. For learning, we propose
Continuum Doubly Robust DROPL (CDR2 OPL)
and show that, under a product rate condition
involving a continuum of regressions, it enjoys
a fast regret rate of O(N −1/2 ) even when unknown propensities are nonparametrically estimated. We empirically validate our algorithms
in simulations and further extend our results to
general f -divergence uncertainty sets.
*
Alphabetical Order. 1 Cornell University and Cornell Tech
Tsinghua University 3 Arena Technologies and New York University. Correspondence to: Kaiwen Wang <https://kaiwenw.
github.io>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The vast majority of online recommendations in search engines, e-commerce, social media, streaming platforms, etc.
are made by algorithms that learn from historical user interactions (Li et al., 2010; Bottou et al., 2013; Ren & Zhou,
2020; Liu et al., 2021). Even in high-stakes domains, such
as healthcare (Murphy, 2003) and education (Mandel et al.,
2014), the promise of cheaper and higher quality decisions,
made possible by the growing abundance of user-specific
data, incentivize the inclusion of automatic decision-making
components into existing approaches.
This task of making good decisions from observational data
is formalized by the problems of off-policy evaluation (OPE)
(Foster & Syrgkanis, 2019; Kallus & Uehara, 2020a; Chernozhukov et al., 2018; Farajtabar et al., 2018; Joachims &
Swaminathan, 2016; Bottou et al., 2013; Dudı́k et al., 2011)
and off-policy learning (OPL) (Manski, 2004; Kitagawa &
Tetenov, 2018; Athey & Wager, 2021; Zhan et al., 2021;
Zhou et al., 2022; Kallus & Uehara, 2020b; Swaminathan
& Joachims, 2015a; Dudı́k et al., 2011). OPE is concerned
with estimating the expected returns of a target policy given
logged data, collected under a different behavior policy.
OPL is concerned with learning a policy that maximizes
the expected returns given this data. OPE/L assumes that
the the environment in which these policies are deployed
is identical to the environment that generated the training
data. In practice, this often is not the case. For example, in
recommendation systems, user interests naturally shift with
seasonality and world events, which correspond to changes
in the state and reward distributions. Moreover, the environment could also be adversarially perturbed by attackers or
data corruption.
Distributional robustness is a way to guard against such
unknown discrepancies between training and deployment
environments. Instead of estimating/maximizing the expected policy return under the training environment, we
may consider estimating/maximizing the worst-case return
over all environments within an uncertainty set around the
unknown training environment. Si et al. (2020a;b) tackle
this distributionally robust OPE/L (DROPE/L) problem using methods based on self-normalized inverse propensity
scoring (SNIPS) (Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015b). The
uncertainty sets of (Si et al., 2020a) and this paper are with

