The Dual Form of Neural Networks Revisited: Connecting Test Time Predictions
to Training Patterns via Spotlights of Attention

Kazuki Irie∗ 1 Róbert Csordás∗ 1 Jürgen Schmidhuber 1 2

Abstract
Linear layers in neural networks (NNs) trained
by gradient descent can be expressed as a keyvalue memory system which stores all training
datapoints and the initial weights, and produces
outputs using unnormalised dot attention over the
entire training experience. While this has been
technically known since the 1960s, no prior work
has effectively studied the operations of NNs in
such a form, presumably due to prohibitive time
and space complexities and impractical model
sizes, all of them growing linearly with the number of training patterns which may get very large.
However, this dual formulation offers a possibility
of directly visualising how an NN makes use of
training patterns at test time, by examining the corresponding attention weights. We conduct experiments on small scale supervised image classification tasks in single-task, multi-task, and continual
learning settings, as well as language modelling,
and discuss potentials and limits of this view for
better understanding and interpreting how NNs
exploit training patterns. Our code is public† .

1. Introduction
Despite the broad success of neural nets (NNs) in many
applications, much of their internal functioning remains
obscure. Naive visualisation of their activations or weight
matrices rarely shows human-interpretable patterns, with
the occasional exception of certain special structures such
as filters in convolutional NNs trained for image processing
(Zeiler & Fergus, 2014), attention weights (Bahdanau et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 The Swiss AI Lab, IDSIA, USI & SUPSI,
Lugano, Switzerland 2 AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: <{kazuki, robert, juergen}@idsia.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
†
https://github.com/robertcsordas/linear_
layer_as_attention

2015) or the sequential Jacobian (Graves, 2008) in sequence
processing, or, to a limited extent, the distribution of individual word embeddings in natural language processing
(NLP) (Mikolov et al., 2013). In many ways, NNs remain
blackboxes. In particular, while iteratively trained on a large
number of datapoints, the entire training experience gets
somehow compressed (through lossy compression) into a
fixed size weight matrix, which may be useful for making predictions on yet unseen datapoints, although the raw
values of weights are not easily human-interpretable.
While it is debatable whether this lack of interpretability is
a problem, it makes it hard for humans to explain certain
practical results obtained by NNs—especially those trained
on a vast amount of data. For example, how can big language models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) generate
an answer to a question never seen during training, translate
languages without being trained to do so, or solve previously unseen math problems? How can DALL-E (Ramesh
et al., 2021) generate various pictures of a radish walking
a dog or a banana performing stand-up comedy without
training examples containing such images1 ? Perhaps there
have been at least some pictures of “radish” and others representing the concept of “walking a dog” among the training
samples, and somehow the model interpolated them2 . If so,
is it possible to point out exactly which training samples are
the original sources of that specific output?
Here we propose to revisit the dual form of the perceptron
(Aizerman et al., 1964) and apply it in the modern context
of deep NNs, with the objective of better understanding how
training datapoints relate to test time predictions in NNs.
Essentially, the dual form expresses the forward operation of
any linear layers in NNs trained by gradient descent (GD) as
a key/value/query-attention operation (Vaswani et al., 2017)
where the keys and values are training datapoints and the
query is generated from the test input (details in Sec. 3).
This allows for directly connecting test time predictions to
training datapoints. To the best of our knowledge, no prior
work has studied deep NNs in their dual form, which is
1

We assume that this was the case.
Here by “interpolate”, we informally mean “combine”. For a
discussion based on a formal definition of “interpolation”, see e.g.,
Balestriero et al. (2021).
2

