DFG-NAS: Deep and Flexible Graph Neural Architecture Search

Wentao Zhang 1 Zheyu Lin∗ 1 Yu Shen∗ 1 Yang Li 1 Zhi Yang 1 Bin Cui 1 2

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been intensively applied to various graph-based applications. Despite their success, manually designing
the well-behaved GNNs requires immense human
expertise. And thus it is inefﬁcient to discover
the potentially optimal data-speciﬁc GNN architecture. This paper proposes DFG-NAS, a new
neural architecture search (NAS) method that enables the automatic search of very deep and ﬂexible GNN architectures. Unlike most existing
methods that focus on micro-architectures, DFGNAS highlights another level of design: the search
for macro-architectures on how atomic propagation (P) and transformation (T) operations are
integrated and organized into a GNN. To this
end, DFG-NAS proposes a novel search space
for P-T permutations and combinations based
on message-passing dis-aggregation, deﬁnes four
custom-designed macro-architecture mutations,
and employs the evolutionary algorithm to conduct an efﬁcient and effective search. Empirical
studies on four node classiﬁcation tasks demonstrate that DFG-NAS outperforms state-of-the-art
manual designs and NAS methods of GNNs.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a set of message passing algorithms, whose intuition is to smooth the node embedding across the edges of a graph. By staking multiple
GNN layers, each node can enhance its node embedding
with distant neighborhood nodes. Recently, GNNs have
been applied in various domains such as social network
analysis (Zhang et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2021), chemistry
and biology (Dai et al., 2019; Bradshaw et al., 2019), rec*

Equal contribution 1 School of CS & Key Laboratory of High
Conﬁdence Software Technologies, Peking University 2 Institute
of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao),
China. Correspondence to: Zhi Yang <yangzhi@pku.edu.cn>,
Bin Cui <bin.cui@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ommendation (Jiang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2020), natural
language processing (Wu et al., 2021; Vashishth et al., 2020),
and computer vision (Shi et al., 2019; Sarlin et al., 2020).
Despite a broad spectrum of applications, designing GNN
architectures manually is a knowledge-intensive and laborintensive process. Existing literature (Huan et al., 2021)
suggests that handcrafted architectures (e.g., GCN (Kipf &
Welling, 2017), GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), and
GAT (Velickovic et al., 2018)) can not behave well in all
scenarios. Therefore, there is an ever-increasing demand
for automated architecture exploration to obtain the optimal
data-speciﬁc GNN architectures.
Motivated by the success of neural architecture search
(NAS) in other established areas, e.g., computer vision, several recent graph neural architecture search (G-NAS) methods are proposed to effectively tackle the architecture challenge in GNNs, including GraphNAS (Gao et al., 2020a),
Auto-GNN (Zhou et al., 2019), and GraphGym (You et al.,
2020). These G-NAS methods assume GNNs consist of
several repetitive message passing layers, and focus more
on the intra-layer design such as aggregation function and
nonlinear activation function. Despite their effectiveness,
they suffer from two limitations:
Fixed Pipeline Pattern. To generate GNNs, existing methods adopt a ﬁxed message-passing pipeline to organize two
types of atomic operations: propagating (P) representations of its neighbors and applying transformation (T) on
the representations. In particular, most G-NAS methods
adopt the tight entanglement of applying transformation
after propagation in each layer (e.g., P-T-P-T). Several
handcrafted architectures include a certain degree of entanglement by only retaining the ﬁrst transformation or propagation, e.g., T-P-P-P (Klicpera et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2020) or P-P-P-T (Wu et al., 2019; Rossi et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2021c). However, these speciﬁc P-T permutations and combinations are still ﬁxed pipeline designs,
limiting the expressive power of macro-architecture search
space. It remains to be seen whether more general and
ﬂexible pipelines can further improve the performance.
Restricted Pipeline Depth. A common practice to increase
the expressive power is to directly stack multiple GNN
layers (Kipf & Welling, 2017). However, when the layers become deeper, the performance decreases as the node

