Stochastic Rising Bandits

Alberto Maria Metelli 1 Francesco Trovò 1 Matteo Pirola 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
This paper is in the field of stochastic MultiArmed Bandits (MABs), i.e., those sequential
selection techniques able to learn online using
only the feedback given by the chosen option
(a.k.a. arm). We study a particular case of the
rested and restless bandits in which the arms’ expected payoff is monotonically non-decreasing.
This characteristic allows designing specifically
crafted algorithms that exploit the regularity of the
payoffs to provide tight regret bounds. We design
an algorithm for the rested case (R-ed-UCB) and
one for the restless case (R-less-UCB), providing a regret bound depending on the properties of
the instance and, under certain circumstances, of
2
r
OpT 3 q. We empirically compare our algorithms
with state-of-the-art methods for non-stationary
MABs over several synthetically generated tasks
and an online model selection problem for a realworld dataset. Finally, using synthetic and realworld data, we illustrate the effectiveness of the
proposed approaches compared with state-of-theart algorithms for the non-stationary bandits.

1. Introduction
The classical stochastic MAB framework (Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2020) has been successfully applied to a number
of applications, such as advertising, recommendation, and
networking. MABs model the scenario in which a learner
sequentially selects (a.k.a. pulls) an option (a.k.a. arm) in
a finite set, and receives a feedback (a.k.a. reward) corresponding to the chosen option. The goal of online learning
algorithms is to guarantee the no-regret property, meaning
that the loss due to not knowing the best arm is increasing
sublinearly with the number of pulls. One of the assumptions that allows designing no-regret algorithms consists in
requiring that the payoff (a.k.a. expected reward) provided
1

Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria,
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Alberto
Maria Metelli <albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

by the available options is stationary, i.e., rewards come
from a fixed distribution.
However, the arms’ payoff may change over time due to
intrinsic modifications of the arms or the environment. A
no-regret approach is offered by the adversarial algorithms,
in which no assumption on the nature of the reward is required. It has been shown that, in this setting, it is possible to
design effective algorithms, e.g., EXP3 (Auer et al., 1995).
However, in practice, their performance is unsatisfactory
because the non-stationarity of real-world cases is far from
being adversarial. Instead, non-stationarity is explicitly
accounted for by a surge of methods that consider either
abrupt changes (e.g., Garivier & Moulines, 2011), smoothly
changing environments (e.g., Trovò et al., 2020) or bounded
reward variation (e.g., Besbes et al., 2014).
While in non-stationary MABs the arms’ payoff changes
naturally over time, a different setting arises when the payoff changes as an effect of pulling the arm. This is the case
of rotting bandits (Levine et al., 2017; Seznec et al., 2019),
in which the payoff of the arms are monotonically nonincreasing over the pulls, modeling degradation phenomena.
Knowing the monotonicity property allows deriving more
specialized algorithms, exploiting the process characteristics and further decreasing the regret w.r.t. unrestricted
cases. Notably, the symmetric problem of monotonically
non-decreasing payoffs cannot be addressed with the same
approaches. Indeed, it was shown that it represents a significantly more complex problem, even for deterministic
arms (Heidari et al., 2016). In this non-decreasing setting, a
common assumption is the concavity of the payoff function
that defines the rising bandits setting (Li et al., 2020).
The goal of this paper is to study the stochastic MAB problem when the arms’ payoff is monotonically non-decreasing.
This setting arises in several real-world sequential selection
problems. For instance, suppose we have to choose among
a set of optimization algorithms to maximize an unknown
stochastic concave function. In this setting, we expect that
all the algorithms progressively increase (on average) the
function value and eventually converge to an optimal value,
possibly with different speeds. Therefore, we wonder which
candidate algorithm to assign the available resources (e.g.,
computational power or samples) to identify the one that
converges faster to the optimum. This online model selec-

