Steerable 3D Spherical Neurons
Pavlo Melnyk 1 Michael Felsberg 1 Mårten Wadenbäck 1

Abstract
Emerging from low-level vision theory, steerable
filters found their counterpart in prior work
on steerable convolutional neural networks
equivariant to rigid transformations. In our
work, we propose a steerable feed-forward
learning-based approach that consists of neurons
with spherical decision surfaces and operates on
point clouds. Such spherical neurons are obtained
by conformal embedding of Euclidean space and
have recently been revisited in the context of
learning representations of point sets. Focusing
on 3D geometry, we exploit the isometry property
of spherical neurons and derive a 3D steerability
constraint. After training spherical neurons to
classify point clouds in a canonical orientation,
we use a tetrahedron basis to quadruplicate
the neurons and construct rotation-equivariant
spherical filter banks. We then apply the
derived constraint to interpolate the filter bank
outputs and, thus, obtain a rotation-invariant
network. Finally, we use a synthetic point set
and real-world 3D skeleton data to verify our
theoretical findings. The code is available at
https://github.com/pavlo-melnyk/
steerable-3d-neurons.

1. Introduction
We present a feed-forward model consisting of steerable
3D neurons for point cloud classification, an important
and challenging problem with many applications such as
autonomous driving, human-robot interaction, and mixedreality installations. Constructing rotation-equivariant (steerable) models allows us to use the feature of a given point
cloud to synthesize features of the same point cloud with different orientations. Further, rotation-equivariant networks
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden. Correspondence to: Pavlo Melnyk <pavlo.melnyk@liu.se>,
Michael Felsberg <michael.felsberg@liu.se>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Ancestor

X

h
S

rest

non-rotation-invariant
class prediction

rest

rotation-invariant
class prediction

Steerable
y

RX

B(S)

h
v(R)

Figure 1. Our approach overview: First, we train a classifier (Ancestor) consisting of the spherical neurons (necessarily in the
first layer) to classify 3D point clouds in a canonical orientation.
We then fix all the learned parameters and construct rotationequivariant spherical filter banks B(S) (8) from the first layer
parameters. Next, we compute the interpolation coefficients v(R)
(15) to fulfill the steerability constraint (12). The result is a Steerable classifier, where y is equivariant and h is invariant to rotations
of the model input.

enable producing rotation-invariant predictions and, therefore, lowered data augmentation requirements for learning.
In this paper, we achieve the steerability using a conformal
embedding to obtain higher-order decision surfaces. Following the motivation in the recent work of Melnyk et al.
(2021), we focus on 3D geometry and spherical decision
surfaces, arguing for their natural suitability for problems in
Euclidean space. We show how a spherical neuron, i.e., the
hypersphere neuron (Banarer et al., 2003b) or its generalization for 3D input point sets — the geometric neuron (Melnyk
et al., 2021) — can be turned into a steerable neuron. Making spherical neurons steerable adds to the practical value
of the prior work by Melnyk et al. (2021).
We prove that the aforementioned spherical neurons in any
dimension require only up to first-degree spherical harmonics to accommodate the effect of rotation. This allows us to
derive a 3D steerability constraint for such neurons and to
describe a recipe for creating a steerable model from a pretrained classifier (see Figure 1). Using the synthetic Tetris
dataset (Thomas et al., 2018) and the skeleton data from the
UTKinect-Action3D dataset (Xia et al., 2012), we verify
the derived constraint and check its stability with respect to

