On the Statistical Benefits of Curriculum Learning

Ziping Xu 1 Ambuj Tewari 1

Abstract
Curriculum learning (CL) is a commonly used
machine learning training strategy. However, we
still lack a clear theoretical understanding of CL’s
benefits. In this paper, we study the benefits of
CL in the multitask linear regression problem under both structured and unstructured settings. For
both settings, we derive the minimax rates for CL
with the oracle that provides the optimal curriculum and without the oracle, where the agent has
to adaptively learn a good curriculum. Our results
reveal that adaptive learning can be fundamentally
harder than the oracle learning in the unstructured
setting, but it merely introduces a small extra term
in the structured setting. To connect theory with
practice, we provide justification for a popular
empirical method that selects tasks with highest
local prediction gain by comparing its guarantees
with the minimax rates mentioned above.

1. Introduction
It has long been realized that we can design more efficient
learning algorithms if we can make them learn on multiple tasks. Transfer learning, multitask learning and metalearning are just few of the sub-areas of machine learning
where this idea has been pursued vigorously. Often the goal
is to minimize the weighted average losses over a set of tasks
that are expected to be similar. While previous literature
often assumes a predetermined (and often equal) number
of observations for all the tasks, in many applications, we
are allowed to decide the order in which the tasks are presented and the number of observations from each task. Any
strategy that tries to improve the performance with a better
task scheduling is usually referred to curriculum learning
(CL) (Bengio et al., 2009). The agent that schedules tasks
at each step is often referred as the task scheduler.
Though curriculum learning has been extensively used in
1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Correspondence to: Ziping Xu <zipingxu@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

modern machine learning (Gong et al., 2016; Sachan &
Xing, 2016; Tang et al., 2018; Narvekar et al., 2020), there
is very little theoretical understanding of the actual benefits
of CL. We also do not know whether the heuristic methods
used in many empirical studies can be theoretically justified.
Even the problem itself has not been rigorously formulated.
To address these challenges, we first formulate the curriculum learning problem in the context of the linear regression
problem. We analyze the minimax optimal rate of CL in
two settings: an unstructured setting where parameters of
different tasks are arbitrary and a structured setting where
they have a low-rank structure. Finally we discuss the theoretical justification of a popular heuristic task scheduler that
greedily selects tasks with highest local prediction gain.
Related literature. Despite the lack of the literature on
curriculum learning theory, we found the following problems under a similar setting. Active learning (Settles, 2009;
2011), addresses the problem of actively selecting unlabeled
data points to maximize model accuracy. Active learning
can be treated as a curriculum learning when each unlabeled
point is a task with point mass. Active learning has also
been used for domain adaptation or transfer learning setting
(Persello & Bruzzone, 2012). Multi-source domain adaptation (Wang & Deng, 2018; Sun et al., 2015) also considers
multiple candidate source domains for a given target task.
Bhatt et al. (2016) proposed an iterative adaptation methods
to integrate the source data from each domain. However,
such adaptive procedure has not been theoretically understood.

2. Background
We would like to point out previous work on three crucial
aspects of CL: two types of benefits one may expect from
CL, task similarities assumptions, and task scheduler used
in empirical studies.
Two types of benefits. There are two distinct ways to
understand the benefits of CL. From the perspective of optimization, some papers argue that the benefits of curriculum
can be interpreted as learning from more convex and more
smooth objective functions, which serves as a better initialization point for the non-convex target objective function
(Bengio et al., 2009). The order of task scheduling is es-

