Weisfeiler-Lehman Meets Gromov-Wasserstein
Samantha Chen * 1 Sunhyuk Lim * 2 Facundo Mémoli * 3 Zhengchao Wan * 4 Yusu Wang * 1 4

Abstract

The Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) test is a classical
procedure for graph isomorphism testing. The
WL test has also been widely used both for designing graph kernels and for analyzing graph neural
networks. In this paper, we propose the WeisfeilerLehman (WL) distance, a notion of distance between labeled measure Markov chains (LMMCs),
of which labeled graphs are special cases. The
WL distance is polynomial time computable and
is also compatible with the WL test in the sense
that the former is positive if and only if the WL
test can distinguish the two involved graphs. The
WL distance captures and compares subtle structures of the underlying LMMCs and, as a consequence of this, it is more discriminating than
the distance between graphs used for defining the
state-of-the-art Wasserstein Weisfeiler-Lehman
graph kernel. Inspired by the structure of the WL
distance we identify a neural network architecture on LMMCs which turns out to be universal
w.r.t. continuous functions defined on the space of
all LMMCs (which includes all graphs) endowed
with the WL distance. Finally, the WL distance
turns out to be stable w.r.t. a natural variant of the
Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance for comparing metric Markov chains that we identify. Hence,
the WL distance can also be construed as a polynomial time lower bound for the GW distance
which is in general NP-hard to compute.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA 2 Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences,
Leipzig, Saxony, Germany 3 Department of Mathematics and Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA 4 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California,
USA. Correspondence to: Zhengchao Wan <zcwan@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) test (Lehman & Weisfeiler,
1968) is a classical procedure which provides a polynomial
time proxy for testing graph isomorphism. It is efficient and
can distinguish most pairs of graphs in linear time (Babai
& Kucera, 1979; Babai & Luks, 1983). The WL test has a
close relationship with graph neural networks (GNNs), both
in the design of GNN architectures and in terms of characterizing their expressive power. For example, Xu et al. (2018)
showed that graph isomorphism networks (GINs) have the
same discriminative power as the WL test in distinguishing whether two graphs are isomorphic or not. Recently,
Azizian et al. (2020) showed that message passing graph
neural networks (MPNNs) are universal with respect to the
continuous functions defined on the set of graphs (with the
topology induced by a specific variant of the graph edit distance) that have equivalent to or less discriminative power
than the WL test.
However, the WL test is only suitable for testing graph
isomorphism and cannot directly quantitatively compare
graphs. This state of affairs naturally suggests identifying a
distance function between graphs so that two graphs have
positive distance iff they can be distinguished by the WL
test. We note that there have been WL-inspired graph kernels which can quantitatively compare graphs (Shervashidze
et al., 2011; Togninalli et al., 2019). However, these either
cannot handle continuous node features naturally or they do
not have the same discriminative power as the WL test.
New work and connections to related work. Our work
provides novel connections between the WL test, GNNs
and the Gromov-Wasserstein distance. The central object
we define in this paper is a distance between graphs which
has the same discriminative power as the WL test. We do
this by combining ideas inherent to the WL test with optimal transport (OT) (Villani, 2009). We call this distance
the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) distance. We show that two
graphs are at zero WL distance if and only if they cannot be
distinguished by the WL test. Moreover, the WL distance
can be computed in polynomial time. Furthermore, our WL
distance is actually defined on a more general and flexible
type of objects called the labeled measure Markov chains
(LMMCs), of which labeled graphs (i.e, graph with node
features) are special cases. LMMCs can naturally model

