Improved Rates for Differentially Private Stochastic
Convex Optimization with Heavy-Tailed Data

Gautam Kamath * 1 Xingtu Liu * 1 Huanyu Zhang * 2

Abstract
We study stochastic convex optimization with
heavy-tailed data under the constraint of differential privacy (DP). Most prior work on this problem
is restricted to the case where the loss function is
Lipschitz. Instead, as introduced by Wang, Xiao,
Devadas, and Xu (Wang et al., 2020), we study
general convex loss functions with the assumption
that the distribution of gradients has bounded k-th
moments. We provide improved upper bounds
on the excess population risk under concentrated
DP for convex and strongly convex loss functions.
Along the way, we derive new algorithms for private mean estimation of heavy-tailed distributions,
under both pure and concentrated DP. Finally, we
prove nearly-matching lower bounds for private
stochastic convex optimization with strongly convex losses and mean estimation, showing new
separations between pure and concentrated DP.

1. Introduction
Stochastic convex optimization (SCO) is a classic optimization problem in machine learning. The goal is, given a
loss function ` and a dataset x1 , . . . , xn drawn i.i.d. from
some unknown distribution D, to output a parameter vector w which minimizes the population risk LD (w) =
E [`(w; x)]. The quality of a solution ŵ is measured in
x∼D

terms of the excess risk over the minimizer in the parameter
set W, LD (ŵ) − minw∈W LD (w). We study SCO under
the constraint of differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006)
(DP), a rigorous notion of privacy which guarantees that an
algorithm’s output distribution is insensitive to modification
of a small number of datapoints.
The field of DP optimization has seen a significant amount
*

Equal contribution 1 Cheriton School of Computer Science,
University of Waterloo 2 Meta. Correspondence to: Huanyu Zhang
<huanyuzhang@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of work. Early results focused on differentially private
empirical risk minimization (ERM), a non-statistical problem in which the goal is to privately output a parameter vector w which minimizes the loss function ` over a
fixed dataset
Pn x1 , . . . , xn : that is we would like to optimize
minw n1 i=1 `(w, xi ). See, for example, Chaudhuri &
Monteleoni (2008); Chaudhuri et al. (2011); Rubinstein
et al. (2012); Kifer et al. (2012); Thakurta & Smith (2013);
Song et al. (2013); Jain & Thakurta (2014); Bassily et al.
(2014); Talwar et al. (2015); Kasiviswanathan & Jin (2016);
Wu et al. (2017); Wang et al. (2017); Iyengar et al. (2019);
Wang et al. (2019); Zhang et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2021).
The first result to address the statistical problem of DP SCO
was Bassily et al. (2014), using generalization properties
of differential privacy and regularized ERM. However, the
excess risk bounds were suboptimal. Bassily et al. (2019)
addressed this and closed the gap by providing tight upper
bounds on DP SCO. Following this result there has been
renewed interest in DP SCO, with works reducing the gradient complexity and running time (Feldman et al., 2020;
Kulkarni et al., 2021), and deriving results for different
geometries (Asi et al., 2021; Bassily et al., 2021).
Despite the wealth of work in this area, a significant restriction in almost all results is that the loss function is assumed
to be Lipschitz. This assumption bounds the magnitude of
each datapoint’s gradient, a very convenient property for
restricting the sensitivity in the design of differentially private algorithms. While convenient, it is often an unrealistic
assumption which does not hold in practice, and DP optimizers resort to heuristic clipping of gradients to enforce a
bound on their magnitude (Abadi et al., 2016). One can remove the strong Lipschitz assumption by instead assuming
that the distribution of gradients is somehow well-behaved.
In this vein, Wang et al. (2020) and Hu et al. (2022) introduce and study the problem of DP SCO with heavy-tailed
data.1 Their work removes the requirement that the loss
function is Lipschitz, and instead assumes that the distribu1

Note that the phrase heavy-tailed data is a slight misnomer
– they actually consider a setting with heavy-tailed gradients.
Though the two are naturally related, they are not equivalent. Despite this unfortunate mismatch, we use the same nomenclature
as Wang et al. (2020) to signify that we consider the same setting
as they do.

