Model soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models
improves accuracy without increasing inference time

Abstract
The conventional recipe for maximizing model
accuracy is to (1) train multiple models with various hyperparameters and (2) pick the individual model which performs best on a held-out
validation set, discarding the remainder. In this
paper, we revisit the second step of this procedure in the context of fine-tuning large pre-trained
models, where fine-tuned models often appear
to lie in a single low error basin. We show that
averaging the weights of multiple models finetuned with different hyperparameter configurations often improves accuracy and robustness. Unlike a conventional ensemble, we may average
many models without incurring any additional
inference or memory costs—we call the results
“model soups.” When fine-tuning large pre-trained
models such as CLIP, ALIGN, and a ViT-G pretrained on JFT, our soup recipe provides significant improvements over the best model in a hyperparameter sweep on ImageNet. The resulting ViT-G model, which attains 90.94% top-1
accuracy on ImageNet, achieved a new state of
the art. Furthermore, we show that the model
soup approach extends to multiple image classification and natural language processing tasks,
improves out-of-distribution performance, and improves zero-shot performance on new downstream
tasks. Finally, we analytically relate the performance similarity of weight-averaging and logitensembling to flatness of the loss and confidence
of the predictions, and validate this relation empirically. Code is available at https://github.
com/mlfoundations/model-soups.

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Washington 2 Columbia University 3 Google Research, Brain Team 4 Meta AI Research 5 Tel
Aviv University. Correspondence to: <mitchnw@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Avg. accuracy on 5 distribution shifts

Mitchell Wortsman 1 Gabriel Ilharco 1 Samir Yitzhak Gadre 2 Rebecca Roelofs 3 Raphael Gontijo-Lopes 3
Ari S. Morcos 4 Hongseok Namkoong 2 Ali Farhadi 1 Yair Carmon * 5 Simon Kornblith * 3 Ludwig Schmidt * 1

55

50

45
Greedy Soup
Uniform Soup
Initialization
Various
hyperparameters

40

35

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

ImageNet Accuracy (top-1, %)
Figure 1: Model soups improve accuracy over the best individual
model when performing a large, random hyperparameter search
for fine-tuning a CLIP ViT-B/32 model on ImageNet. The uniform
soup (blue circle) averages all fine-tuned models (green diamonds)
in a random hyperparameter search over learning rate, weightdecay, iterations, data augmentation, mixup, and label smoothing.
The greedy soup adds models sequentially to the model soup,
keeping a model in the soup if accuracy on the held-out validation
set does not decrease.
Method

ImageNet acc.
(top-1, %)

Distribution
shifts

ViT-G (Zhai et al., 2021)
CoAtNet-7 (Dai et al., 2021)

90.45
90.88

–
–

Our models/evaluations based on ViT-G:
ViT-G (reevaluated)
90.47
Best model in
90.78
hyperparam search
Greedy soup
90.94

82.06
84.68
85.02

Table 1: Model soups improve accuracy over the best individual
model when fine-tuning a JFT-3B pre-trained ViT-G/14 model on
ImageNet. Instead of selecting the best model from a hyperparameter sweep during fine-tuning, model soups average the weights
of multiple fine-tuned models. To evaluate performance under
distribution shift we consider average accuracy on ImageNet-V2,
ImageNet-R, ImageNet-Sketch, ObjectNet, and ImageNet-A. Additional details are provided by Table 4 and Section 3.3.2, while
analogous results for BASIC (Pham et al., 2021) are in Appendix C.

