Scaling Out-of-Distribution Detection for Real-World Settings

Dan Hendrycks * 1 Steven Basart * 2 Mantas Mazeika 3 Andy Zou 1 Joe Kwon 4 Mohammadreza Mostajabi 5
Jacob Steinhardt 1 Dawn Song 1

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution examples is important for safety-critical machine learning
applications such as detecting novel biological
phenomena and self-driving cars. However,
existing research mainly focuses on simple smallscale settings. To set the stage for more realistic
out-of-distribution detection, we depart from
small-scale settings and explore large-scale multiclass and multi-label settings with high-resolution
images and thousands of classes. To make future
work in real-world settings possible, we create
new benchmarks for three large-scale settings.
To test ImageNet multiclass anomaly detectors,
we introduce the Species dataset containing over
700,000 images and over a thousand anomalous
species. We leverage ImageNet-21K to evaluate
PASCAL VOC and COCO multilabel anomaly
detectors. Third, we introduce a new benchmark
for anomaly segmentation by introducing a
segmentation benchmark with road anomalies.
We conduct extensive experiments in these more
realistic settings for out-of-distribution detection
and find that a surprisingly simple detector based
on the maximum logit outperforms prior methods
in all the large-scale multi-class, multi-label, and
segmentation tasks, establishing a simple new
baseline for future work.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a valuable tool for
developing safe and reliable machine learning (ML) systems.
Detecting anomalous inputs allows systems to initiate a conservative fallback policy or defer to human judgment. As an
important component of ML Safety (Hendrycks et al., 2021),
OOD detection is important for safety-critical applications
*

1

2

3

Equal contribution
UC Berkeley UChicago UIUC
Yale University 5 TTIC. Correspondence to: Dan Hendrycks
<hendrycks@berkeley.edu>.
4

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

such as self-driving cars and detecting novel microorganisms. Accordingly, research on out-of-distribution detection has a rich history spanning several decades (Schölkopf
et al., 1999; Breunig et al., 2000; Emmott et al., 2015).
Recent work leverages deep neural representations for outof-distribution detection in complex domains, such as image data (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Lee et al., 2018a;
Mohseni et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2019b). However,
these works still primarily use small-scale datasets with
low-resolution images and few classes. As the community
moves towards more realistic, large-scale settings, strong
baselines and high-quality benchmarks are imperative for
future progress.
Large-scale datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)
and Places365 (Zhou et al., 2017) present unique challenges not seen in small-scale settings, such as a plethora
of fine-grained object classes. We demonstrate that the
maximum softmax probability (MSP) detector, a state-ofthe-art method for small-scale problems, does not scale
well to these challenging conditions. Through extensive
experiments, we identify a detector based on the maximum
logit (MaxLogit) that greatly outperforms the MSP and
other strong baselines in large-scale multi-class anomaly
segmentation. To facilitate further research in this setting,
we also collect a new out-of-distribution test dataset suitable
for models trained on highly diverse datasets. Shown in
Figure 2, our Species dataset contains diverse, anomalous
species that do not overlap ImageNet-21K which has approximately twenty two thousand classes. Species avoids
data leakage and enables a stricter evaluation methodology for ImageNet-21K models. Using Species to conduct
more controlled experiments without train-test overlap, we
find that contrary to prior claims (Fort et al., 2021; Koner
et al., 2021), Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021a)
pre-trained on ImageNet-21K are not substantially better at
out-of-distribution detection.
Moreover, in the common real-world case of multi-label
data, the MSP detector cannot naturally be applied in the
first place, as it requires softmax probabilities. To enable
research into the multi-label setting for anomaly detection,
we contribute a multi-label experimental setup and explore
various methods on large-scale multi-label datasets. We find
that the MaxLogit detector from our investigation into the

