Towards Noise-adaptive, Problem-adaptive (Accelerated) SGD

Sharan Vaswani 1 Benjamin Dubois-Taine 2 Reza Babanezhad 3

Abstract

For supervised learning, n represents the number of training examples and fi is the loss on example i. We assume f
to be a smooth, strongly-convex function and denote w∗ to
be the unique minimizer of the above problem.

We aim to make stochastic gradient descent (SGD) adaptive to (i) the noise σ 2
in the stochastic gradients and (ii) problemdependent constants. When minimizing smooth,
strongly-convex functions with condition number κ, we prove that T iterations of SGD
with exponentially decreasing step-sizes and
knowledge of the smoothness
can achieve an

2
Õ exp (−T/κ) + σ /T rate, without knowing
σ 2 . In order to be adaptive to the smoothness,
we use a stochastic line-search (SLS) and show
(via upper and lower-bounds) that SGD with SLS
converges at the desired rate, but only to a neighbourhood of the solution. On the other hand, we
prove that SGD with an offline estimate of the
smoothness converges to the minimizer. However, its rate is slowed down proportional to the
estimation error. Next, we prove that SGD with
Nesterov acceleration and exponential step-sizes
(referred to as ASGD) can achieve
the near
2
√
optimal Õ exp (−T/ κ) + σ /T rate, without
knowledge of σ 2 . When used with offline estimates of the smoothness and strong-convexity,
ASGD still converges to the solution, albeit at a
slower rate. Finally, we empirically demonstrate
the effectiveness of exponential step-sizes coupled with a novel variant of SLS.

We study stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its accelerated variant for minimizing f (Robbins and Monro, 1951;
Nemirovski and Yudin, 1983; Nesterov, 2004; Bottou et al.,
2018). The empirical performance and the theoretical convergence of SGD is governed by the choice of its step-size,
and there are numerous ways of selecting it. For example, Moulines and Bach (2011); Gower et al. (2019) use
a constant step-size for convex and strongly convex functions. A constant step-size only guarantees convergence to
a neighborhood of the solution. In order to converge to the
exact minimizer, a common technique is to decrease the
step-size at an appropriate rate, and such decreasing stepsizes have also been well-studied (Robbins and Monro,
1951; Ghadimi and Lan, 2012). The rate at which the stepsize needs to be decayed depends on the function class under consideration. For example, when minimizing smooth,
strongly-convex functions using T iterations of SGD, the
step-size is decayed at an O(1/k) rate where k is the iteration number. This results in an Θ(1/T ) convergence rate
for SGD and is optimal in the stochastic setting (Nguyen
et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
We study unconstrained minimization of a finite-sum objective f : Rd → R prevalent in machine learning,
n

min f (w) :=

w∈Rd

1X
fi (w).
n i=1

(1)

1
Simon Fraser University 2 DI ENS, Ecole normale
supérieure, Université PSL, CNRS, INRIA, 75005 Paris, France
3
SAIT AI lab, Montreal. Correspondence to: Sharan Vaswani
<vaswani.sharan@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

On the other hand, when minimizing a smooth, stronglyconvex function with condition number κ, deterministic
(full-batch) gradient descent (GD) with a constant step-size
converges linearly at an O(exp(−T /κ)) rate. Augmenting constant step-size GD with Nesterov acceleration√can
further improve the convergence rate to Θ(exp(−T / κ))
which is optimal in the deterministic setting (Nesterov,
2004). Hence, the stochastic and deterministic algorithms
use different step-size strategies to obtain the optimal rates
in their respective settings.
Noise-adaptive SGD: Ideally, we want to design stepsize schemes that make SGD adaptive to the noise in
the stochastic gradients, matching the optimal convergence rates in both the deterministic and stochastic settings. Furthermore, in order for the algorithm to be practical, it should not require knowledge of the stochasticity
(e.g. a bound on σ 2 , the variance in stochastic gradients).
Recently, Khaled and Richtárik (2020); Li et al. (2020)

