Efficient Low Rank Convex Bounds for Pairwise Discrete Graphical Models

Valentin Durante 1 George Katsirelos 2 Thomas Schiex 1

Abstract
In this paper, we extend a Burer-Monteiro style
method to compute low rank Semi-Definite Programming (SDP) bounds for the MAP problem on
discrete graphical models with an arbitrary number of states and arbitrary pairwise potentials. We
consider both a penalized constraint approach and
a dedicated Block Coordinate Descent (BCD) approach which avoids large penalty coefficients in
the cost matrix. We show our algorithm is decreasing. Experiments show that the BCD approach
compares favorably to the penalized approach and
to usual linear bounds relying on convergent message passing approaches.

1. Introduction
Graphical models (GMs) (Koller & Friedman, 2009) are
descriptions of decomposable multivariate functions. A variety of frameworks in Computer Science, Logic, Constraint
Satisfaction/Programming, Machine Learning, Statistical
Physics, Operations Research and Artificial Intelligence can
be considered as specific sub-classes of graphical models.
In this paper we consider discrete pairwise graphical models. The maximum a posteriori (MAP) assignment problem
on probabilistic GMs consists in finding an assignment of
all variables that maximizes the posterior probability. It
is also known as the weighted constraint satisfaction problem (WCSP) for deterministic GMs (Cooper et al., 2020;
Schiex et al., 1995). This problem has applications in image
processing, computational biology (Simoncini et al., 2015),
resource management (Bensana et al., 1999), configuration,
etc.
A GM M = ⟨X, Φ⟩ is specified by a set of n variables
X = {x1 , . . . , xn }, where xi can take di possible states
and a set Φ of potential functions θS involving variables in
1
Université Fédérale de Toulouse, ANITI, INRAE, UR 875,
31326 Toulouse, France 2 MIA-Paris-Mathématiques et Informatique Appliquées, INRAE, 75231 Paris, France. Correspondence
to: Valentin Durante <valentin.durante@inrae.fr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Pn
S ⊂ X, the scope of θS . We note d = i=1 di the total
number of states. A graphical
P model defines a joint function
ΘM over X as ΘM = θS ∈Φ θS . When all scopes have
maximum cardinality 2, the model is pairwise and the graph
with vertices in X and edges defined by scopes is the graph
of the pairwise GM.
The MAP problem is decision NP-complete (Shimony,
1994). There exist some well studied polynomial classes, including structural restrictions, like bounded tree-width, and
restrictions on the type of potential functions θS . The latter
has been fully characterized by showing that, depending on
the potential functions, the problem is either polynomial or
NP-hard (Thapper & Živnỳ, 2016) and includes, for example, models defined by submodular functions (Cooper et al.,
2020). Outside of polynomial cases, a vast array of polynomial time heuristics have been developed. One strand of
research exploits the tight connection of GMs to Linear Programming (LP). Convergent belief propagation algorithms
such as TRW-S (Kolmogorov, 2005) for MAP or the Virtual
Arc Consistency (VAC) (Cooper et al., 2008; 2010) algorithm for WCSP give approximate LP-dual bounds through
reparametrizations. Combined with primal heuristics, they
offer post-hoc guarantees through an optimality gap, making
such algorithms useful in time-constrained scenarios.
In many cases, these bounds correspond to high quality
solutions and a small optimality gap. On the hardest instances however, the obtained bounds become increasingly
loose. One natural direction for improvement is to climb
up in the Sherali & Adams (1990) hierarchy by reasoning
on more than two variables simultaneously (Yedidia et al.,
2000; Sontag et al., 2012; Nguyen et al., 2017). The associated time and space costs quickly become extreme however,
as moving up one step in the hierarchy increases time and
space complexity by a factor equal to the average domain
size. Another approach is to use SDP bounds, which provide superior guarantees (Goemans & Williamson, 1995)
compared to approximate LP bounds.
However, SDP has found limited application in MAP/WCSP.
The main reason lies in the fact that Goemans and
Williamson’s SDP relaxation of MAXCUT, a specialization of MAP with binary variables, requires θ(n2 ) variables
and memory resulting in an O(n6 ) complexity for usual
interior point methods. The algorithm doesn’t scale well

