Koopman Q-learning: Offline Reinforcement Learning
via Symmetries of Dynamics

Matthias Weissenbacher 1 Samarth Sinha 2 Animesh Garg 2 Yoshinobu Kawahara 1 3

Abstract

Offline reinforcement learning leverages large
datasets to train policies without interactions with
the environment. The learned policies may then
be deployed in real-world settings where interactions are costly or dangerous. Current algorithms over-fit to the training dataset and as a consequence perform poorly when deployed to outof-distribution generalizations of the environment.
We aim to address these limitations by learning a
Koopman latent representation which allows us
to infer symmetries of the system’s underlying
dynamic. The latter is then utilized to extend the
otherwise static offline dataset during training;
this constitutes a novel data augmentation framework which reflects the system’s dynamic and is
thus to be interpreted as an exploration of the environment’s state space. To obtain the symmetries
we employ Koopman theory in which non-linear
dynamics are represented in terms of a linear operator acting on the space of measurement functions
of the system. We provide novel theoretical results on the existence and nature of symmetries
relevant for control systems such as reinforcement
learning settings. Moreover, we empirically evaluate our method on several benchmark offline reinforcement learning tasks and datasets including
D4RL, Metaworld and Robosuite and find that by
using our framework we consistently improve the
state-of-the-art of model-free Q-learning methods.

1
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan 2
Vector Institute, University of Toronto, Canada 3 Institute of Mathematics for Industry, Kyushu University, Japan . Correspondence to:
Matthias Weissenbacher <matthias.weissenbacher@a.riken.jp>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The recent impressive advances in reinforcement learning
(RL) range from robotics, to strategy games and recommendation systems (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Li et al., 2010).
Reinforcement learning is canonically regarded as an active
learning process - also referred to as online RL - where
the agent interacts with the environment at each training
run. In contrast, offline RL algorithms learn from large,
previously collected static datasets, and thus do not rely
on environment interactions (Agarwal et al., 2020; Ernst
et al., 2005; Fujimoto et al., 2019). Online data collection is
performed by simulations or by means of real world interactions e.g. robotics and in either scenario interactions maybe
costly and/or dangerous.
In principle offline datasets only need to be collected once
which alleviates the before-mentioned shortcomings of
costly online interactions. Offline datasets are typically collected using behavioral policies for the specific task ranging
from, random policies, or near-optimal policies to human
demonstrations. In particular, being able to leverage the
latter is a major advantage of offline RL over online approaches, and then the learned policies can be deployed
or fine-tuned on the desired environment. Offline RL has
successfully been applied to learn agents that outperform
the behavioral policy used to collect the data (Kumar et al.,
2020; Wu et al., 2019; Agarwal et al., 2020; Ernst et al.,
2005). However algorithms admit major shortcomings in regard to over-fitting and overestimating the true state-action
values of the distribution. One solution was recently proposed by Sinha et al. (2021), where they tested several data
augmentation schemes to improve the performance and generalization capabilities of the learned policies.
However, despite the recent progress, learning from offline
demonstrations is a tedious endeavour as the dataset typically does not cover the full state-action space. Moreover,
offline RL algorithms per definition do not admit the possibility for further environment exploration to refine their
distributions towards an optimal policy. It was argued previously that is basically impossible for an offline RL agent
to learn an optimal policy as the generalization to near data
generically leads to compounding errors such as overestimation bias (Kumar et al., 2020). In this paper, we look at

