Detecting Corrupted Labels Without Training a Model to Predict

Zhaowei Zhu 1 Zihao Dong 1 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
Label noise in real-world datasets encodes wrong
correlation patterns and impairs the generalization
of deep neural networks (DNNs). It is critical to
find efficient ways to detect corrupted patterns.
Current methods primarily focus on designing robust training techniques to prevent DNNs from
memorizing corrupted patterns. These approaches
often require customized training processes and
may overfit corrupted patterns, leading to a performance drop in detection. In this paper, from
a more data-centric perspective, we propose a
training-free solution to detect corrupted labels.
Intuitively, “closer” instances are more likely to
share the same clean label. Based on the neighborhood information, we propose two methods: the
first one uses “local voting” via checking the noisy
label consensuses of nearby features. The second
one is a ranking-based approach that scores each
instance and filters out a guaranteed number of instances that are likely to be corrupted. We theoretically analyze how the quality of features affects
the local voting and provide guidelines for tuning
neighborhood size. We also prove the worst-case
error bound for the ranking-based method. Experiments with both synthetic and real-world label noise demonstrate our training-free solutions
consistently and significantly improve most of
the training-based baselines. Code is available at
github.com/UCSC-REAL/SimiFeat.

1. Introduction
The generalization of deep neural networks (DNNs) depends
on the quality and the quantity of the data. Nonetheless, realworld datasets often contain label noise that challenges the
above assumption (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Zhang et al.,
2017; Agarwal et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2021a). Employing
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yang Liu
<yangliu@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

human workers to clean annotations is one reliable way to
improve the label quality, but it is too expensive and timeconsuming for a large-scale dataset. One promising way
to automatically clean up label errors is to first algorithmically detect possible label errors from a large-scale dataset
(Cheng et al., 2021a; Northcutt et al., 2021a; Pruthi et al.,
2020; Bahri et al., 2020), and then correct them using either
algorithm or crowdsourcing (Northcutt et al., 2021b).
Almost all the algorithmic detection approaches focus on
designing customized training processes to learn with noisy
labels, where the idea is to train DNNs with noisy supervisions and then make decisions based on the output (Northcutt et al., 2021a) or gradients (Pruthi et al., 2020) of the
last logit layer of the trained model. The high-level intuition of these methods is the memorization effects (Han
et al., 2020), i.e., instances with label errors, a.k.a., corrupted instances, tend to be harder to be learned by DNNs
than clean instances (Xia et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020; Bai
& Liu, 2021). By setting appropriate hyperparameters to
utilize the memorization effect, corrupted instances could
be identified.
Limitations of the learning-centric methods The above
methods suffer from two major limitations: 1) the customized training processes are task-specific and may require
fine-tuning hyperparameters for different datasets/noise; 2)
as long as the model is trained with noisy supervisions, the
memorization of corrupted instances exists. The model will
“subjectively” and wrongly treat the memorized/overfitted
corrupted instances as clean. For example, some lowfrequency/rare clean instances may be harder to memorize
than high-frequency/common corrupted instances. Memorizing these corrupted instances lead to unexpected and
disparate impacts (Liu, 2021).
Existing solutions to avoid memorizing/overfitting are to
employ some regularizers (Cheng et al., 2021a) or use
early-stopping (Bai et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020b). However, their performance depends on hyperparameter settings.
One promising way to avoid memorizing/overfitting is to
drop the dependency on the noisy supervision, which motivates us to design a training-free method to find label
errors. Intuitively, we can carefully use the information
from nearby features to infer whether one instance is corrupted or not. The comparison between our data-centric and

