Proximal Exploration for Model-guided Protein Sequence Design

Zhizhou Ren * 1 2 Jiahan Li * 1 3 Fan Ding 1 Yuan Zhou 4 Jianzhu Ma 3 Jian Peng 1 2 5

Designing protein sequences with a particular biological function is a long-lasting challenge for
protein engineering. Recent advances in machinelearning-guided approaches focus on building a
surrogate sequence-function model to reduce the
burden of expensive in-lab experiments. In this
paper, we study the exploration mechanism of
model-guided sequence design. We leverage a
natural property of protein fitness landscape that
a concise set of mutations upon the wild-type
sequence are usually sufficient to enhance the desired function. By utilizing this property, we propose Proximal Exploration (PEX) algorithm that
prioritizes the evolutionary search for high-fitness
mutants with low mutation counts. In addition, we
develop a specialized model architecture, called
Mutation Factorization Network (MuFacNet), to
predict low-order mutational effects, which further improves the sample efficiency of modelguided evolution. In experiments, we extensively
evaluate our method on a suite of in-silico protein
sequence design tasks and demonstrate substantial
improvement over baseline algorithms.

1. Introduction
Protein engineering aims to discover novel proteins with
useful biological functions, such as fluorescence intensity
(Biswas et al., 2021), enzyme activity (Fox et al., 2007),
and therapeutic efficiency (Lagassé et al., 2017), where
the functions of a particular protein is determined by its
amino-acid sequence (Crick, 1958; Nelson et al., 2008).
The protein fitness landscape (Wright, 1932) characterizes
the mapping between protein sequences and their functional
*
Equal contribution 1 HeliXon Limited 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 4 Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University 5 Institute for Industry AI Research, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Jian
Peng <jianpeng@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Fitness Score

Abstract

Sequence Space

Figure 1. (Left) Functional proteins are rare in the sequence space.
The yellow flag corresponds to the wild-type sequence. (Right)
The local landscape near the wild type is rugged. A few aminoacid mutations may dramatically alter the protein fitness.

levels (aka. fitness scores). It formulates the engineering
of proteins as a sequence design problem. The evolution
in nature can be regarded as a searching procedure on the
protein fitness landscape (Smith, 1970), which is driven by
natural selection pressure. This natural process inspires the
innovation of directed evolution (Arnold, 1998), the most
widely-applied approach for engineering protein sequences.
It mimics the evolution cycle in a laboratory environment
and conducts an iterative protocol. At each iteration, enormous variants are generated and scored by functional assays,
in which sequences with high fitness are selected to form the
next generation. Recent attempts focus on using machine
learning approaches to build a surrogate model of protein
landscape (Yang et al., 2019; Wittmann et al., 2021) and
designing model-guided searching schemes (Biswas et al.,
2018). This paradigm can effectively reduce the burden of
laboratory experiments by performing in-silico population
selection through model-based fitness prediction.
The exploration mechanism of directed evolution is a simple greedy strategy. It starts from the wild-type sequence
and continuously accumulates beneficial mutations in a
hill-climbing manner on the fitness landscape (Romero &
Arnold, 2009). As the evolution is conducted in both the
real landscape and the surrogate model, this unconstrained
greedy search may lead to sequences far from the wild type.
These sequences with high mutation counts are laborious to
synthesize for mass production (Storici & Resnick, 2006;
Fowler et al., 2014). In addition, it is hard for the training
procedure of the surrogate model to reuse previous samples
that are far from the current search region.
However, as shown in Figure 1, the protein landscape is

