Robust Models Are More Interpretable Because Attributions Look Normal

Zifan Wang 1 Matt Fredrikson 1 Anupam Datta 1

Abstract
Recent work has found that adversarially-robust
deep networks used for image classification are
more interpretable: their feature attributions tend
to be sharper, and are more concentrated on the
objects associated with the image’s ground-truth
class. We show that smooth decision boundaries
play an important role in this enhanced interpretability, as the model’s input gradients around
data points will more closely align with boundaries’ normal vectors when they are smooth. Thus,
because robust models have smoother boundaries,
the results of gradient-based attribution methods,
like Integrated Gradients and DeepLift, will capture more accurate information about nearby decision boundaries. This understanding of robust
interpretability leads to our second contribution:
boundary attributions, which aggregate information about the normal vectors of local decision
boundaries to explain a classification outcome.
We show that by leveraging the key factors underpinning robust interpretability, boundary attributions produce sharper, more concentrated
visual explanations—even on non-robust models. Code can be found at https://github.
com/zifanw/boundary.

1. Introduction
Feature attribution methods are widely used to explain the
predictions of neural networks (Binder et al., 2016; Dhamdhere et al., 2019; Fong & Vedaldi, 2017; Leino et al., 2018;
Montavon et al., 2015; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Shrikumar
et al., 2017; Simonyan et al., 2013; Smilkov et al., 2017;
Springenberg et al., 2014; Sundararajan et al., 2017). By
assigning an importance score to each input feature of the
model, these techniques help to focus attention on parts of
the data most responsible for the model’s observed behavior.

Figure 1: Visualizations of geometrical interpretations of
Saliency Map (SM), Boundary-based Saliency Map (BSM),
Integrated Gradient (IG) and Boundary-based Integrated
Gradient (BIG). Gradient computations can be viewed
as projecting the input onto a particular decision boundary. While SM projects to a nearby boundary (H1 ), BSM
projects to the nearest one (H2 ). IG (the red dashed path)
from a global baseline xg , i.e. zeros, aggregates boundaries
in colorful shaded areas; BIG (the green dashed path) integrates from the point xbd on the nearest boundary H2 to x
and therefore aggregates nearby boundaries, H1 and H2 in
gray shaded areas.

Recent work (Croce et al., 2019; Etmann et al., 2019) has observed that feature attributions in adversarially-robust image
models, when visualized, tend to be more interpretable—the
attributions correspond more clearly to the discriminative
portions of the input.

1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. Correspondence to: Zifan Wang <zifan@cmu.edu>.

One way to explain this observation relies on the fact that
robust models do not make use of non-robust features (Ilyas
et al., 2019) whose statistical meaning can change with
small, imperceptible changes in the source data. Thus, by
using only robust features to predict, these models naturally tend to line up with visibly-relevant portions of the
image. Etmann et al. take a different approach, showing
that the gradients of robust models’ outputs more closely
align with their inputs, which explains why attributions on
image models are more visually interpretable.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this paper, we build on this geometric understanding of
robust interpretability. With both analytical (Sec. 3) and
empirical (Sec. 5) results, we show that the gradient of the

