Minimax Classification under Concept Drift with
Multidimensional Adaptation and Performance Guarantees

Verónica Álvarez 1 Santiago Mazuelas 1 2 Jose A. Lozano 1 3

Abstract
The statistical characteristics of instance-label
pairs often change with time in practical scenarios of supervised classification. Conventional
learning techniques adapt to such concept drift
accounting for a scalar rate of change by means
of a carefully chosen learning rate, forgetting factor, or window size. However, the time changes
in common scenarios are multidimensional, i.e.,
different statistical characteristics often change
in a different manner. This paper presents
adaptive minimax risk classifiers (AMRCs) that
account for multidimensional time changes by
means of a multivariate and high-order tracking of the time-varying underlying distribution.
In addition, differently from conventional techniques, AMRCs can provide computable tight
performance guarantees. Experiments on multiple benchmark datasets show the classification
improvement of AMRCs compared to the stateof-the-art and the reliability of the presented performance guarantees.

1. Introduction
The statistical characteristics describing the underlying distribution of instance-label pairs often change with time in
practical scenarios of supervised classification (Gama et al.,
2014; Ditzler et al., 2015). Such concept drift is common
in multiple applications including electricity price prediction (Webb et al., 2018), spam mail filtering (Delany et al.,
2005), and credit card fraud detection (Wang et al., 2003).
For instance, in the problem of predicting electricity price
1

BCAM-Basque Center for Applied Mathematics, Bilbao, Spain 2 IKERBASQUE-Basque Foundation for Science
3
Intelligent Systems Group, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, San Sebastián, Spain.
Correspondence
to:
Verónica Álvarez <valvarez@bcamath.org>, Santiago Mazuelas <smazuelas@bcamath.org>, Jose A. Lozano
<jlozano@bcamath.org>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Class y = 1
Class y = 2

τ2

τ2

Rule

τ2

τ3

τ3

τ1

τ1

τ1

τ4

τ4
Time t1

Time t2

Figure 1. From time t1 to time t2 , the statistical characteristic corresponding with class 1 (τ1 and τ2 ) significantly change,
while those corresponding with class 2 (τ3 and τ4 ) do not change.
AMRCs account for such multidimensional time changes by
tightly tracking the time-varying underlying distribution.

increases/decreases, the statistical characteristics related
to electricity demand, generation, and price often change
over time due to varying habits and weather. Supervised
classification in those scenarios is commonly referred to
as learning under concept drift (e.g., Kolter & Maloof,
2007; Webb et al., 2018), learning in a drifting (dynamic)
scenario (e.g., Mohri & Medina, 2012; Shen et al., 2019),
and online adaptive learning (e.g., Zhang et al., 2018;
Cutkosky, 2020).
Supervised classification techniques adapt to concept drift
by updating classification rules as new instance-label pairs
arrive. Conventional learning techniques account for a
scalar rate of change by means of a carefully chosen
parameter such as a learning rate (Kivinen et al., 2004;
Orabona et al., 2008), forgetting factor (Klinkenberg, 2004;
Pavlidis et al., 2011), or window size (Bifet & Gavalda,
2007; Nguyen et al., 2018). Specifically, a slow/fast rate
of change is tackled by using a low/high learning rate, forgetting factor, or window size. More sophisticated techniques account for a time-varying scalar rate of change
by adjusting the learning rates (Shen et al., 2019), the forgetting factors (Pavlidis et al., 2011), or the window sizes

