Bayesian Model Selection, the Marginal Likelihood, and Generalization

Sanae Lotfi 1 Pavel Izmailov 1 Gregory Benton 1 Micah Goldblum 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract
How do we compare between hypotheses that
are entirely consistent with observations? The
marginal likelihood (aka Bayesian evidence),
which represents the probability of generating our
observations from a prior, provides a distinctive
approach to this foundational question, automatically encoding Occam’s razor. Although it has
been observed that the marginal likelihood can
overfit and is sensitive to prior assumptions, its
limitations for hyperparameter learning and discrete model comparison have not been thoroughly
investigated. We first revisit the appealing properties of the marginal likelihood for learning constraints and hypothesis testing. We then highlight
the conceptual and practical issues in using the
marginal likelihood as a proxy for generalization.
Namely, we show how marginal likelihood can be
negatively correlated with generalization, with implications for neural architecture search, and can
lead to both underfitting and overfitting in hyperparameter learning. We provide a partial remedy
through a conditional marginal likelihood, which
we show is more aligned with generalization, and
practically valuable for large-scale hyperparameter learning, such as in deep kernel learning.

1. Introduction
The search for scientific truth is elusive. No matter how
consistent a theory may be with all available data, it is always possible to propose an alternative theory that is equally
consistent. Moreover, no theory is entirely correct: there
will always be missed nuances, or phenomena we have not
or cannot measure. To decide between different possible
explanations, we heavily rely on a notion of Occam’s razor
— that the “simplest” explanation of data consistent with our
observations is most likely to be true. For example, there are
1

New York University.
Correspondence to: Sanae
Lotfi <sl8160@nyu.edu>, Andrew Gordon Wilson <andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

alternative theories of gravity to general relativity that are
similarly consistent with observations, but general relativity
is preferred because of its simplicity and intuitive appeal.
Jeffreys (1939), and many follow up works, showed that
Occam’s razor is not merely an ad-hoc rule of thumb, but
a rigorous quantifiable consequence of probability theory.
MacKay (2003, Chapter 28) arguably makes this point most
clearly. Suppose we observe what appears to be a block
behind a tree. If we had x-ray vision, perhaps we would see
that there are in fact two blocks of equal height standing
next to each other. The two block model can generate many
more observations, but as a consequence, has to assign these
observations lower probabilities. For what we do observe,
the one block hypothesis is significantly more likely (see
Figure 1(c)), even if we believe each hypothesis is equally
likely before we observe the data. This probability of generating a dataset from a prior model is called the marginal
likelihood, or Bayesian evidence. The marginal likelihood
is widely applied to hypothesis testing, and model selection, where we wish to know which trained model is most
likely to provide the best generalization. Marginal likelihood optimization has also been applied with great success
for hyperparameter learning, where it is known as empirical
Bayes, often outperforming cross-validation.
There is a strong polarization in the way marginal likelihood
is treated. Advocates make compelling arguments about its
philosophical benefits for hypothesis testing, its ability to
learn constraints, and its practical successes, especially in
Gaussian process kernel learning — often embracing the
marginal likelihood as a nearly all-encompassing solution
to model selection (e.g., MacKay, 1992c; Minka, 2001; Rasmussen and Williams, 2006; Wilson et al., 2016a). Critics
tend to focus narrowly on its sensitivity to prior assumptions, without appreciating its many strengths (e.g., Domingos, 1999; Gelman, 2011; Gelman et al., 2013). There is
a great need for a more comprehensive exposition, clearly
demonstrating the limits of the marginal likelihood, while
acknowledging its unique strengths, especially given the
rise of the marginal likelihood in deep learning.
Rather than focus on a specific feature of the marginal likelihood, such as its sensitivity to the prior in isolation, in
this paper we aim to fundamentally re-evaluate whether the
marginal likelihood is the right metric for predicting the gen-

