Beyond Worst-Case Analysis in Stochastic Approximation:
Moment Estimation Improves Instance Complexity

Jingzhao Zhang 1 Hongzhou Lin 2 Subhro Das 3 Suvrit Sra 4 Ali Jadbabaie 4

Abstract
We study oracle complexity of gradient based
methods for stochastic approximation problems.
Though in many settings optimal algorithms and
tight lower bounds are known for such problems,
these optimal algorithms do not achieve the best
performance when used in practice. We address
this theory-practice gap by focusing on instancedependent complexity instead of worst case complexity. In particular, we first summarize known
instance-dependent complexity results and categorize them into three levels. We identify the
domination relation between different levels and
propose a fourth instance-dependent bound that
dominates existing ones. We then provide a sufficient condition according to which an adaptive
algorithm with moment estimation can achieve
the proposed bound without knowledge of noise
levels. Our proposed algorithm and its analysis
provide a theoretical justification for the success
of moment estimation as it achieves improved
instance complexity.

1. Introduction
Stochastic approximation (SA) methods, introduced and
analyzed in the seminal works (Robbins & Monro, 1951;
Fabian et al., 1968; Polyak, 1987; Kushner & Yin, 2003;
Moulines & Bach, 2011), are central to modern machine
learning algorithms. Due to their wide applicability and
importance, they have been extensively studied. It is now
well established that an algorithm as simple as stochastic
gradient descent achieves minimax optimal rates in many
settings (Nesterov, 2013; Agarwal et al., 2009; Fang et al.,
2018a; Arjevani et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2015; Allen-Zhu,
2016; Ghadimi & Lan, 2012).
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Amazon 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab,
IBM Research 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Jingzhao Zhang <jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

These well-studied stochastic methods are, however, optimal
in the sense of a worst case measure of complexity:
inf

Aθ ∈A

sup

Tϵ (Aθ [f, x1 ], f ),

(1)

x1 ∈Rd ,f ∈F

where Tϵ (Aθ [f, x1 ], f ) denotes the number of iterations to
obtain an ϵ-solution initialising at x1 . In the most common
setting of convex problems, the ϵ-solution is measured by
the function suboptimality gap:
Tϵ ({xt }t∈N , f ) := inf{t ∈ N|f (xt ) − f (x∗ ) ≤ ϵ}. (2)
The worst case complexity measure is naturally achieved in
certain extreme cases within a function class, which may be
quite rare in practice. Empirical observations (Defazio &
Bottou, 2018; Reddi et al., 2019) suggests that a gap does exist between worst case analysis and empirical performance.
To reduce the mistmatch between theory and practice, it is
necessary to go beyond worst case scenarios, and to include
more domain-specific nuances. One alternative is to consider average case complexity analysis. Such an approach
is well established in theoretical computer science, and is
used to explain the superior empirical performance of QuickSort (Hoare, 1962), quickhull (Preparata & Shamos, 2012),
simplex methods (Borgwardt, 2012). In contrast, the use of
average-case complexity analysis in optimization scenarios
is less mature and in its infancy (Pedregosa & Scieur, 2020;
Lacotte & Pilanci, 2020; Paquette et al., 2021).
Another approach to move away from the worst-case is to
conduct smoothed analysis (Spielman, 2005), in which the
complexity is instance-dependent (Fagin et al., 2003; Afshani et al., 2017). Here, instance could be referring to a
specific sample, or more broadly to an easily parametrizable subclass of samples. The goal is to build a middle
ground between worst-case and average-case analyses, such
that we can eventually interpolate between them (Spielman,
2005). This idea has been recently extended to the study of
complexity in Q-learning (Khamaru et al., 2021; Pananjady
& Wainwright, 2020), and further analyzed in Markovian
linear stochastic approximation setting (Mou et al., 2021).
Following this line of work, we propose an instancedependent analysis in the general convex setup, extending

