Estimating the Optimal Covariance with Imperfect Mean
in Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Fan Bao 1 Chongxuan Li 2 Jiacheng Sun 3 Jun Zhu 1 Bo Zhang 1

Abstract
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) are a class
of powerful deep generative models (DGMs). Despite their success, the iterative generation process
over the full timesteps is much less efficient than
other DGMs such as GANs. Thus, the generation
performance on a subset of timesteps is crucial,
which is greatly influenced by the covariance design in DPMs. In this work, we consider diagonal
and full covariances to improve the expressive
power of DPMs. We derive the optimal result for
such covariances, and then correct it when the
mean of DPMs is imperfect. Both the optimal
and the corrected ones can be decomposed into
terms of conditional expectations over functions
of noise. Building upon it, we propose to estimate
the optimal covariance and its correction given
imperfect mean by learning these conditional expectations. Our method can be applied to DPMs
with both discrete and continuous timesteps. We
consider the diagonal covariance in our implementation for computational efficiency. For an
efficient practical implementation, we adopt a parameter sharing scheme and a two-stage training
process. Empirically, our method outperforms a
wide variety of covariance design on likelihood results, and improves the sample quality especially
on a small number of timesteps.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b)
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, TsinghuaHuawei Joint Center for AI, BNRist Center, State Key Lab for
Intell. Tech. & Sys., Tsinghua University 2 Gaoling School of
AI, Renmin University of China; Beijing Key Lab of Big Data
Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China 3 Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Chongxan Li <chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn>, Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

have shown great promise for generative modeling. Such
models smoothly inject noise to the data distribution, which
forms a diffusion process. By learning to reverse the process using a Markov model, DPMs are able to generate high
quality images (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) and audios (Chen et al., 2020; Kong
et al., 2020), which are comparable or even superior than
the current state-of-the-art generative models (Brock et al.,
2018; Wu et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2020; Bińkowski et al.,
2019; Kalchbrenner et al., 2018).
However, the iterative generation over the full timesteps
of DPMs makes them much less efficient than generative
models such as GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Thus, the
generation performance on a subset of timesteps is crucial.
In this case, the transition of the reversed diffusion process
becomes more complex (Xiao et al., 2021), and the covariance design in DPMs matters (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021;
Bao et al., 2022). Most prior works (Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2020a; Bao et al., 2022) use an isotropic covariance
that only depends on the timestep without considering the
state. A notable recent progress is Analytic-DPM (Bao
et al., 2022), which estimates the optimal isotropic covariance (in the sense of maximum likelihood) instead of using
handcrafted values (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020a) and
shows significant improvement on likelihood estimation and
sampling efficiency. However, the isotropic covariance sacrifices the expressive power of DPMs for simplicity. Moreover, the optimality of the covariance estimate in Bao et al.
(2022) holds by assuming that the optimal mean is known,
which is not the case in practice.
To overcome the aforementioned limitations and further
improve DPMs for likelihood estimation and sampling efficiency, we consider diagonal and full covariances to improve
the expressive power of DPMs. We derive the optimal mean
and covariance from the perspective of the maximum likelihood. We also correct the optimal covariance given an
imperfect mean (i.e., considering the approximation and
optimization errors) in terms of maximum likelihood. Both
the optimal and the corrected ones can be decomposed into
terms of conditional expectations over functions of noise,
which can be estimated by minimizing mean squared error
(MSE) losses. Although our theory applies to the full covariance case, in our implementation, we consider the diagonal

