Constrained Discrete Black-Box Optimization using Mixed-Integer
Programming

Theodore P. Papalexopoulos 1 2 Christian Tjandraatmadja 2 Ross Anderson 2 Juan Pablo Vielma 2
David Belanger 2

Abstract
Discrete black-box optimization problems are
challenging for model-based optimization (MBO)
algorithms, such as Bayesian optimization, due
to the size of the search space and the need to
satisfy combinatorial constraints. In particular,
these methods require repeatedly solving a complex discrete global optimization problem in the
inner loop, where popular heuristic inner-loop
solvers introduce approximations and are difficult to adapt to combinatorial constraints. In response, we propose NN+MILP, a general discrete
MBO framework using piecewise-linear neural
networks as surrogate models and mixed-integer
linear programming (MILP) to optimize the acquisition function. MILP provides optimality guarantees and a versatile declarative language for
domain-specific constraints. We test our approach
on a range of unconstrained and constrained problems, including DNA binding, constrained binary
quadratic problems from the MINLPLib benchmark, and the NAS-Bench-101 neural architecture search benchmark. NN+MILP surpasses or
matches the performance of black-box algorithms
tailored to the constraints at hand, with global
optimization of the acquisition problem running
in a few minutes using only standard software
packages and hardware.

1. Introduction
The problem of optimizing an expensive black-box function f : Ω 7→ R over a discrete, constrained domain arises
in numerous application domains, e.g. neural architecture
1
Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA, USA 2 Google Research, Cambridge MA,
USA. Correspondence to: Theodore P. Papalexopoulos <tedpapalex@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

search (Zoph & Le, 2017), program synthesis (Summers,
1977; Biermann, 1978), small-molecule design (Elton et al.,
2019), and protein design (Yang et al., 2019). In such
resource-constrained settings, it is desirable to develop algorithms that exploit known combinatorial structure in Ω to
search the space more efficiently.
Model-based Black-box Optimization (MBO), a popular
paradigm that includes Bayesian Optimization as a special
case, iteratively refines a function approximator fˆ(x) ≈
f (x) and selects new points to query by optimizing an acquisition function a(x) derived from a point estimate or
posterior distribution over fˆ (Section 2.1). This inner-loop
optimization problem is assumed to be easier than the original, since, for example, a(x) is less expensive to query than
f (x) or provides “white-box” properties such as gradients.
There is a vast literature addressing the challenges of applying MBO in practice. We focus on two of these: first,
optimizing a(x) may itself be a computationally-difficult
optimization problem; second, in many applications, practitioners are confronted by additional constraints on x. For
example, in neural architecture search, x might represent a
computation graph that must be both connected and acyclic.
Due to the difficulty in optimizing the acquisition function
over a combinatorial domain, most approaches resort to
heuristic inner-loop solvers, which often need to be specialized to the problem at hand to ensure feasibility, e.g.,
evolutionary solvers with custom mutation operators.
To address the challenge of inner-loop optimization, we introduce a general framework for discrete, constrained MBO,
NN+MILP, that exactly solves the acquisition problem using mixed-integer linear programming (MILP). Crucially,
by framing the inner-loop optimization as an MILP, our
approach can flexibly incorporate a wide variety of logical,
combinatorial, and polyhedral constraints on the domain,
which need only be provided in a declarative sense.
Using MILP in the inner loop does restrict the functional
form of fˆ (or the acquisition function based on it), but it
supports any piecewise linear function. In particular, we
employ the class of neural network (NN) approximators
with ReLU activation functions due to their scalability and

