Skin Deep Unlearning: Artefact and Instrument Debiasing in the Context of
Melanoma Classification
Peter J. Bevan 1 Amir Atapour-Abarghouei 2

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks have demonstrated dermatologist-level performance in the
classification of melanoma from skin lesion images, but prediction irregularities due to biases
seen within the training data are an issue that
should be addressed before widespread deployment is possible. In this work, we robustly remove bias and spurious variation from an automated melanoma classification pipeline using
two leading bias ‘unlearning’ techniques. We
show that the biases introduced by surgical markings and rulers presented in previous studies can
be reasonably mitigated using these bias removal
methods. We also demonstrate the generalisation
benefits of ‘unlearning’ spurious variation relating to the imaging instrument used to capture lesion images. Our experimental results provide
evidence that the effects of each of the aforementioned biases are notably reduced, with different
debiasing techniques excelling at different tasks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
have demonstrated skin lesion diagnosis performance
on par with experienced dermatologists (Brinker et al.,
2019a;b; Haenssle et al., 2018). This is particularly important since, when diagnosed early, melanoma may be easily
cured by surgical excision (Haenssle et al., 2020; Winkler
et al., 2019), and so accessible and accurate diagnostic tools
have the potential to democratise dermatology and save numerous lives worldwide.
While deploying such learning-based techniques far and
wide could be massively beneficial, great care must be
1
School of Computing, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, UK 2 Department of Computer Science, Durham University, Durham, UK. Correspondence to: Peter Bevan <peterbevan@hotmail.co.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Examples of artefacts seen in ISIC 2020 data (Rotemberg et al., 2021). Top row shows images with surgical
markings present, bottom row shows images with rulers.

taken as any small pitfall could be replicated on a massive
scale. For example, some dermatologists use visual aids
such as skin markings to mark the location of a lesion, or
rulers to indicate scale, as seen in Figure 1. In fact, Winkler et al. (Winkler et al., 2021; 2019) demonstrated how
bias induced by the presence of these artefacts can result
in diminished classification performance. They also suggest that dermatologists avoid using these aids in the future,
which is a valid solution to the problem, though changing
the habits of every dermatologist is highly unrealistic and
could potentially be detrimental to their performance.
Segmentation of the lesion from the surrounding skin has
also previously been proposed, but is not a good option,
since “any kind of pre-processing or segmentation itself
may erroneously introduce changes that impede a CNN’s
correct classification of a lesion” (Winkler et al., 2021).
Cropping surgical markings out of the image has been
shown to be effective at mitigating surgical marking bias
in the work of Winkler et al. (2019), but it is noted this
must be done by an experienced dermatologist to prevent
the loss of important information, which is costly and timeconsuming.
Consequently, the alternative path towards diminishing the
effects of such artefacts would be not to remove the artefacts themselves from the image, but to reduce their influence on how the model functions, which translates to removing the ‘bias’ these artefacts introduce into the learning

