Agnostic Learnability of Halfspaces via Logistic Loss

Ziwei Ji 1 Kwangjun Ahn 2 Pranjal Awasthi 3 Satyen Kale 3 Stefani Karp 3 4

Abstract

We investigate approximation guarantees provided by logistic regression for the fundamental
problem of agnostic learning of homogeneous
halfspaces. Previously, for a certain broad class
of “well-behaved” distributions on the examples,
e
Diakonikolas et al. (2020d) proved an Ω(OPT)
lower
√ bound,
 while Frei et al. (2021b) proved an
e OPT upper bound, where OPT denotes
O
the best zero-one/misclassification risk of a homogeneous halfspace. In this paper, we close this
gap by constructing a well-behaved distribution
such that the global minimizer of the logistic
√ risk
over this distribution only achieves Ω OPT
misclassification risk, matching the upper bound
in (Frei et al., 2021b). On the other hand, we also
show that if we impose a radial-Lipschitzness condition in addition to well-behaved-ness on the distribution, logistic regression on a ball of bounded
e
radius reaches O(OPT)
misclassification risk.
Our techniques also show for any well-behaved
distribution, regardless
√of radial
 Lipschitzness, we
can overcome the Ω OPT lower bound for logistic loss simply at the cost of one additional
convex optimization step involving the hinge loss
and attain e
O(OPT) misclassification risk. This
two-step convex optimization algorithm is simpler
than previous methods obtaining this guarantee,

all of which require solving O log(1/OPT)
minimization problems.

Part of this work was done when Ziwei Ji and Kwangjun
Ahn were interns at Google. 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
Google Research, New York City, NY, USA 4 School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Correspondence to: Ziwei Ji <ziweiji2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the fundamental problem of
agnostically learning homogeneous halfspaces. Specifically, we assume there is an unknown distribution P over
Rd × {−1, +1} to which we have access in the form of
independent and identically distributed samples drawn from
P . A sample from P consists of an input feature vector
x ∈ Rd , and a binary label y ∈ {−1, +1}. Our goal is to
compete with a homogeneous linear classifier ū (i.e. one
that predicts the label sign(hū, xi) for input x) that achieves
the optimal zero-one risk of OPT > 0 over P ; formally,
this means Pr(x,y)∼P sign(hū, xi) 6= y = OPT. Alternatively, we can think that the labels of the examples are first
generated by ū, and then an OPT fraction of the labels are
adversarially corrupted.
There have been many algorithmic and hardness results on
this topic, see Section 1.1 for a discussion. A very natural
heuristic for solving the problem is to use logistic regression.
However, the analysis of logistic regression for this problem
is still largely incomplete, even though it is one of the most
fundamental algorithms in machine learning. One reason for
this is that it can return extremely poor solutions in the worst
case: Ben-David et al. (2012) showed that the minimizer
of the logistic risk may attain a zero-one risk as bad as
1 − OPT on an adversarially-constructed distribution.
As a result, much attention has been devoted to certain “wellbehaved” distributions, for which much better results can be
obtained. However, even when the marginal distribution on
the feature space, Px , is assumed to be isotropic log-concave,
in a recent
 work, Diakonikolas et al. (2020d) proved an
e OPT lower bound on the zero-one risk for any convex
Ω
surrogate, including the logistic loss. On the positive side, in
another recent work, Frei et al. (2021b) proved that vanilla
gradient
√ descent
 on the logistic loss can attain a zero-one risk
e OPT , as long as Px satisfies some well-behavedof O
ness conditions. (See Sections 1.1 and 3 for precise details.)
The above results still leave a big gap between the upper
and the lower bounds, raising the question of identifying the
fundamental limits of logistic regression for this problem. In
this work, we study this question and develop the following
set of results.

