On the Role of Discount Factor in Offline Reinforcement Learning

Hao Hu * 1 Yiqing Yang * 2 Qianchuan Zhao 2 Chongjie Zhang 1

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) enables effective learning from previously collected data
without exploration, which shows great promise
in real-world applications when exploration is expensive or even infeasible. The discount factor,
γ, plays a vital role in improving online RL sample efficiency and estimation accuracy, but the
role of the discount factor in offline RL is not
well explored. This paper examines two distinct
effects of γ in offline RL with theoretical analysis, namely the regularization effect and the pessimism effect. On the one hand, γ is a regulator to trade-off optimality with sample efficiency
upon existing offline techniques. On the other
hand, lower guidance γ can also be seen as a
way of pessimism where we optimize the policy’s
performance in the worst possible models. We
empirically verify the above theoretical observation with tabular MDPs and standard D4RL tasks.
The results show that the discount factor plays
an essential role in the performance of offline RL
algorithms, both under small data regimes upon
existing offline methods and in large data regimes
without other conservative methods.

1. Introduction
Online reinforcement learning has achieved great success
in various domains, including video games (Mnih et al.,
2015), class games (Silver et al., 2016) and continuous
control (Lillicrap et al., 2015). However, it requires extensive interaction with the environment to learn through
trial-and-error. In many real-world problems, like personalized recommendation systems (Swaminathan & Joachims,
2015) and autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016;

Dataset size/quality

w other pessimisms

Large, good coverage
Small or bad coverage

w\o other pessimisms
pessimism effect X

regurlarization
effect X

Table 1. The applicability of a lower guidance discount factor.

Singh et al., 2020), exploration can be expensive and unsafe,
which requires conducting RL in a supervised manner. In
contrast, offline RL (Levine et al., 2020; Fujimoto et al.,
2019) enables learning from previously collected datasets,
which shows great potential for real-world applications.
One of the major challenges of offline RL comes from the
distributional shift between the data collection policy and
the learned policy (Levine et al., 2020), and the direct application of online RL algorithms is known to lead to poor
performance (Fujimoto et al., 2019). One paradigm for algorithm design in offline RL incorporates proper conservatism
to the learning algorithm. There are several conservative
methods in existing empirical literature, including policy
regularization (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2020), ensemble-based uncertainty (Wu et al.,
2021; An et al., 2021) and model-based penalty (Yu et al.,
2021; 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020).
However, as an essential number in RL, the discount factor
already provides a natural way of conservatism. The effect
of γ is extensively discussed in online RL and specifically
TD-learning. For instance, Jiang et al. (2015) shows that
the discount factor can be regarded as a complexity control
parameter for the class of policies. Amit et al. (2020) shows
that it is equivalent to L2-regularization of Q-values in TDlearning to improve generalization. However, the analysis
of the role of γ in the context of offline RL is missing, which
naturally leads to the following question:

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Interdisciplinary Information
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Hao Hu <hu-h19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Yiqing Yang <yangyiqi19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

What are the roles of the discount factor in the context of
offline RL, and how does it contribute to proper
conservative offline RL methods?

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this paper, we examine the two roles of the discount factor in offline RL that affect the performance in two distinct
ways. First, we show that γ plays as a regulator upon exist-

