How Faithful is your Synthetic Data?
Sample-level Metrics for Evaluating and Auditing Generative Models

Ahmed M. Alaa 1 2 Boris van Breugel 3 Evgeny Saveliev 3 Mihaela van der Schaar 3 4
Support of real
distribution

Abstract
Devising domain- and model-agnostic evaluation
metrics for generative models is an important and
as yet unresolved problem. Most existing metrics,
which were tailored solely to the image synthesis
application, exhibit a limited capacity for diagnosing modes of failure of generative models across
broader application domains. In this paper, we
introduce a 3-dimensional metric, (α-Precision,
β-Recall, Authenticity), that characterizes the fidelity, diversity and generalization performance
of any generative model in a wide variety of application domains. Our metric unifies statistical
divergence measures with precision-recall analysis, enabling sample- and distribution-level diagnoses of model fidelity and diversity. We introduce generalization as an additional dimension
for model performance that quantifies the extent
to which a model copies training data—a crucial
performance indicator when modeling sensitive
and private data. The three metric components are
interpretable probabilistic quantities, and can be
estimated via sample-level binary classification.
The sample-level nature of our metric inspires
a novel use case which we call model auditing,
wherein we judge the quality of individual samples generated by a (black-box) model, discarding low-quality samples and hence improving the
overall model performance in a post-hoc manner.

1. Introduction
Intuitively, it would seem that evaluating the likelihood function of a generative model is all it takes to assess its performance. As it turns out, the problem of evaluating generative
models is far more complicated. This is not only because
state-of-the-art models, such as Variational Autoencoders
1
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard 2 MIT 3 Cambridge University 4 UCLA. Correspondence to: A. M. Alaa <amalaa@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Support of synthetic
distribution
Noisy
synthetic
sample
(a)

Unauthentic
high-quality sample
(b)

(d)
(c)

Outlier

Authentic
high-quality
sample

Real

Synthetic

Figure 1. Pictorial depiction for the proposed metrics. The blue
and red spheres correspond to the α- and β-supports of real and
generative distributions, respectively. Blue and red points correspond to real and synthetic data. (a) Synthetic data falling outside the blue sphere will look unrealistic or noisy. (b) Overfitted
models can generate ostensibly high-quality data samples that are
“unauthentic” because they are copied from the training data. (c)
High-quality data samples should reside inside the blue sphere.
(d) Outliers do not count in the β-Recall metric. (Here, α=β=0.9,
α-Precision=8/9, β-Recall = 4/9, and Authenticity = 9/10.)

(VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), do not
possess tractable likelihood functions, but also because the
likelihood score itself is a flawed measure of performance—
it scales badly in high dimensions, and it obscures distinct
modes of model failure into a single uninterpretable score
(Theis et al., 2015). Absent domain-agnostic metrics, earlier
work focused on crafting domain-specific scores, e.g., the
Inception score in (Salimans et al., 2016), with an exclusive
emphasis on image data (Lucic et al., 2018).
In this paper, we follow an alternative approach to evaluating
generative models, where instead of assessing the generative
distribution by looking at all synthetic samples collectively
to compute likelihood or statistical divergence, we classify
each sample individually as being of high or low quality.
Our metric represents the performance of a generative model
as a point in a 3-dimensional space—each dimension corre-

