Improving Language Models by Retrieving from Trillions of Tokens

Sebastian Borgeaud * Arthur Mensch * Jordan Hoffmann * Trevor Cai Eliza Rutherford Katie Millican
George van den Driessche Jean-Baptiste Lespiau Bogdan Damoc Aidan Clark Diego de Las Casas
Aurelia Guy Jacob Menick Roman Ring Tom Hennigan Saffron Huang Loren Maggiore Chris Jones
Albin Cassirer Andy Brock Michela Paganini Geoffrey Irving Oriol Vinyals Simon Osindero
Karen Simonyan Jack W. Rae † Erich Elsen † Laurent Sifre * †

Abstract
We enhance auto-regressive language models by
conditioning on document chunks retrieved from
a large corpus, based on local similarity with preceding tokens. With a 2 trillion token database,
our Retrieval-Enhanced Transformer (R ETRO)
obtains comparable performance to GPT-3 and
Jurassic-1 on the Pile, despite using 25× fewer parameters. After fine-tuning, R ETRO performance
translates to downstream knowledge-intensive
tasks such as question answering. R ETRO combines a frozen B ERT retriever, a differentiable encoder and a chunked cross-attention mechanism
to predict tokens based on an order of magnitude more data than what is typically consumed
during training. We typically train R ETRO from
scratch, yet can also rapidly R ETROfit pre-trained
transformers with retrieval and still achieve good
performance. Our work opens up new avenues
for improving language models through explicit
memory at unprecedented scale.
Language modelling is an unsupervised task that consists
of modelling the probability of text, usually by factorising
it into conditional next-token predictions p(x1 , . . . , xn ) =
Q
i p(xi |x<i ). Neural networks have proven to be powerful language models, first in the form of recurrent models
(Mikolov et al., 2010; Graves, 2013; Jozefowicz et al., 2016)
and more recently in the form of Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017), that use attention to contextualise the past.
Large performance improvements have come from increasing the amount of data, training compute, or model pa†
Equal contribution.
Equal senior authorship.
All
work done at DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Sebastian Borgeaud <sborgeaud@deepmind.com>, Arthur Mensch
<amensch@deepmind.com>, Jordan Hoffmann <jordanhoffmann@deepmind.com>, Laurent Sifre <sifre@deepmind.com>.
*

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

rameters. Transformers have been scaled from millions of
parameter models in seminal work to over hundred billion
parameters (Brown et al., 2020), which has led to models
that do well on a wide array of tasks in a zero or few-shot
formulation. Increasing model size predictably improves
performance on downstream tasks (Kaplan et al., 2020). Increasing the number of parameters is beneficial in two ways:
additional computations at training and inference time, and
increased memorization of the training data.
We endeavor to decouple these improvements, by efficiently
augmenting language models with a massive-scale memory
without significantly increasing computations. Specifically,
we suggest retrieval from a large text database as a complementary path to scaling language models. Instead of increasing the model size and training on more data, we equip
models with the ability to directly access a large database
to perform predictions—a semi-parametric approach. At a
high level, our Retrieval Transformer (R ETRO) model splits
the input sequence into chunks and retrieves text similar to
the previous chunk to improve the predictions in the current
chunk. Existing retrieval for language modelling work only
considers small transformers (100 millions parameters) and
databases of limited size (up to billions of tokens) (Khandelwal et al., 2020; Yogatama et al., 2021; Guu et al., 2020;
Lewis et al., 2020). To our knowledge, our work is the
first to show the benefits of scaling the retrieval database
to trillions of tokens for large parametric language models.
Our main contributions are the following:
• We introduce R ETRO, a retrieval-enhanced autoregressive
language model (§2.2). We use a chunked cross-attention
module to incorporate the retrieved text (§2.4), with time
complexity linear in the amount of retrieved data. We show
that retrieving based on a pre-trained frozen B ERT model
(§2.3) works at scale, removing the need for training and
updating a retriever network.
• We show that our method scales well with model size
and database size (Fig. 1): R ETRO provides a constant gain
for models ranging from 150M to 7B parameters; it can be
improved at evaluation time by increasing the database size
and the number of retrieved neighbours. Our largest model

