Offline RL Policies Should be Trained to be Adaptive

Dibya Ghosh 1 Anurag Ajay 2 Pulkit Agrawal 2 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Offline RL algorithms must account for the fact
that the dataset they are provided may leave many
facets of the environment unknown. The most
common way to approach this challenge is to employ pessimistic or conservative methods, which
avoid behaviors that are too dissimilar from those
in the training dataset. However, relying exclusively on conservatism has drawbacks: performance is sensitive to the exact degree of conservatism, and conservative objectives can recover
highly suboptimal policies. In this work, we propose that offline RL methods should instead be
adaptive in the presence of uncertainty. We show
that acting optimally in offline RL in a Bayesian
sense involves solving an implicit POMDP. As
a result, optimal policies for offline RL must be
adaptive, depending not just on the current state
but rather all the transitions seen so far during
evaluation. We present a model-free algorithm for
approximating this optimal adaptive policy, and
demonstrate the efficacy of learning such adaptive
policies in offline RL benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Uncertainty about the environment is paramount in offline
reinforcement learning (RL), the task of learning control
behaviors from a dataset of logged environment interactions.
Unlike in traditional RL, where the agent learns about all
aspects of the environment through online interaction during training, offline RL methods must rely only on a fixed
dataset, which often precludes the agent from identifying
the exact dynamics of the environment.
The most common approach for handling the resulting uncertainty is to learn conservative state-based policies incentivized to stay close to dataset behaviors. While these methods have been empirically successful with careful hyperpa1
UC Berkeley 2 MIT. Correspondence to: Dibya Ghosh
<dibya@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

rameter choices, it remains unclear whether conservative
objectives are, in general, the best approach for designing
offline RL algorithms. To formally understand this, we
study the problem of offline RL under a Bayesian perspective. We show that when learning from an offline dataset
of experience that does not fully specify the environment,
uncertainty manifests as an implicit partial observability
in the original fully-observable learning problem. This implicit partial observability leads to a surprising consequence:
a static state-based policy in offline RL, no matter how
conservative, can be arbitrarily sub-optimal for maximizing test-time return, and in general, offline RL agents must
adapt to changes in the agent’s uncertainty to act optimally.
To understand where adaptation can help, consider what
happens if an offline RL policy makes a mistake at evaluation time, e.g. taking an action that the agent incorrectly
believes to lead to a high-value state. Since the agent observes transitions from the environment in RL, it sees that
the action doesn’t lead to a high-value state, and has the
ability to correct this behavior instead of blindly continuing
the original learned strategy. In general, there exist a breadth
of strategies for changing behaviors based on witnessed environment transitions that are untapped by contemporary
offline RL algorithms, which learn static policies using objectives not designed to incentivize adaptation.
The Bayesian perspective defines an optimal adaptive offline RL policy, which is the solution to a POMDP implicitly
induced by the offline dataset (Duff & Barto, 2002; Ghosh
et al., 2021). Unfortunately, this optimal policy cannot be
easily obtained using standard model-free POMDP algorithms, since the POMDP is only an implicit construction
defined by the agent’s epistemic uncertainty. Rather, we
derive an approximate approach to solve the POMDP that
uses an ensemble of value functions to estimate the implicit
partial observability, and learns an adaptive policy using
this ensemble. By optimizing this adaptive policy with the
implicit POMDP objective, the policy learns to adapt in a
way that helps the agent maximize evaluation performance
in the true environment.
The primary contribution of our work is to formally demonstrate the necessity of adaptation in offline RL, and to provide a practical algorithm for learning optimally adaptive
policies. We use the Bayesian formalism to show why

