Understanding Policy Gradient Algorithms: A Sensitivity-Based Approach

Shuang Wu 1 Ling Shi 2 Jun Wang 3 Guangjian Tian 1

Abstract
The REINFORCE algorithm from Williams is
popular in policy gradient (PG) for solving reinforcement learning (RL) problems. Meanwhile,
the theoretical form of PG is from Sutton et al. Although both formulae prescribe PG, their precise
connections are not yet illustrated. Recently, Nota
and Thomas (2020) have found that the ambiguity causes implementation errors. Motivated by
the ambiguity and implementation incorrectness,
we study PG from a perturbation perspective. In
particular, we derive PG in a unified framework,
precisely clarify the relation between PG implementation and theory, and echo back the findings
by Nota and Thomas. Diving into factors contributing to empirical successes of the existing
erroneous implementations, we find that small
approximation error and the experience replay
mechanism play critical roles.

1. Introduction
The policy gradient (PG) method refers to methods for reinforcement learning (RL) that directly search parameterized
decision-making policy using the gradient of a performance
metric with respect to the policy parameters. PG-based
algorithms (e.g., TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018), SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018)) have prevailed in solving reinforcement learning (RL) problems for
their applicability for both continuous and discrete action
space and compatibility with value function approximations.
Despite its popularity, our understanding of PG is limited.
Recently, several researchers have found that while PGbased algorithms succeeded in practice, PG implementations are hard to comprehend. Engstrom et al. (2019)
showed that code-level details significantly affect perfor1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 2 Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology 3 University College London. Correspondence to:
Shuang Wu <wushuang.noah@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

mances of TRPO and PPO. Ilyas et al. (2020) showed
through experiments that some claims regarding PG are not
consistent with those observed in experiments.
Our motivation is two-fold. The first is the ambiguity between empirically implemented PG rooted in (Williams,
1988; 1992) and the theoretical formula derived in (Sutton et al., 1999). Williams (1988; 1992) developed REINFORCE to approximate PG based on empirical trajectory.
A few years later, Sutton et al. (1999) derived the theoretical form of PG. While the result in (Sutton et al., 1999)
lays down the theoretical foundation of PG, most PG implementations (such as those mentioned at the beginning)
follow the recipe prescribed by Williams (1992). Although
Sutton et al. (1999) claimed that Williams’ REINFORCE
algorithm implies the theoretical formula, the precise derivation has not been revealed. The gap between theory and
implementation even leads to concerns regarding the correctness of current implementations. In particular, Nota
& Thomas (2020) found that most of the modern PG implementations1 (such as those mentioned at the beginning)
followed Williams’ episodic PG recipe incorrectly. While
they adopted a discounted action-value function estimator,
they dropped the discounting factor imposed on the empirical sample path. The asymmetry is inconsistent with the
theoretical PG formula prescribed by Sutton et al. (1999).
The other motivation is based on the lack of a unified treatment of various PG formulae. Sutton et al. (1999) derived
a unified formula for different setups, but the derivation is
performed separately for different setups. Moreover, the related derivations are only performed for stochastic policies
and are not directly extendable for the deterministic PG in
(Silver et al., 2014). Since all these formulae are essentially
gradient of a policy, it is natural to expect that there is a
unified framework to derive and treat these equations.
Motivated by the ambiguities between theory and practice
and lack of unification, we revisit PG using the perturbation
approach originated from (Cao & Chen, 1997). Although
1
This issue is so widely spread that even influential
platforms, such as OpenAI Spinning Up https://
spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/index.html
and MATLAB toolbox https://www.mathworks.com/
help/reinforcement-learning/agents.html,
inherit this issue.

