Measuring dissimilarity with diffeomorphism invariance

Théophile Cantelobre 1 2 Carlo Ciliberto 3 Benjamin Guedj 2 3 4 Alessandro Rudi 1

Abstract
Measures of similarity (or dissimilarity) are a key
ingredient to many machine learning algorithms.
We introduce DID, a pairwise dissimilarity measure applicable to a wide range of data spaces,
which leverages the data’s internal structure to be
invariant to diffeomorphisms. We prove that DID
enjoys properties which make it relevant for theoretical study and practical use. By representing
each datum as a function, DID is defined as the
solution to an optimization problem in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space and can be expressed
in closed-form. In practice, it can be efficiently
approximated via Nyström sampling. Empirical
experiments support the merits of DID.

1. Introduction
One of the overarching goals of most machine learning
algorithms is to generalize to unseen data. Ensuring and
quantifying generalization is of course challenging, especially in the high-dimensional setting. One way of reducing
the hardness of a learning problem is to study the invariances that may exist with respect to the distribution of data,
effectively reducing its dimension. Handling invariances
in data has attracted considerable attention over time in
machine learning and applied mathematics more broadly.
Two notable examples are image registration (De Castro
and Morandi, 1987; Reddy and Chatterji, 1996) and time series alignment (Sakoe and Chiba, 1978; Cuturi and Blondel,
2017; Vayer et al., 2020; Blondel et al., 2021; Cohen et al.,
2021).
In practice, data augmentation is a central tool in the ma1

DI ENS, Ecole normale supérieure, Université PSL, CNRS,
Inria, Paris, France 2 Inria London, UK 3 Centre for AI, Department
of Computer Science, University College London, UK 4 Inria, Lille
- Nord Europe Research Centre, Lille, France. Correspondence
to: Théophile Cantelobre <theophile.cantelobre@inria.fr>,
Carlo Ciliberto <c.ciliberto@ucl.ac.uk>, Benjamin Guedj
<benjamin.guedj@inria.fr>, Alessandro Rudi <alessandro.rudi@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

chine learning practitioner’s toolbox. In computer vision
for instance, images are randomly cropped, color spaces are
changed, and artifacts are added. Such heuristics enforce
some form of invariance to transformations that are chosen
by hand, often parametrically, and comes at the cost of a
more demanding learning step (e.g., more data to store and
process, more epochs, to name but a few).
Prior work. Learning under invariances has also spurred
significant theoretical interest. DeCoste and Schölkopf
(2002), Haasdonk and Burkhardt (2007), Kondor (2008)
and Mroueh et al. (2015) algebraically studied how kernels
invariant to group actions behave for learning. Bruna and
Mallat (2013) takes inspiration in signal processing (with
wavelet spaces) to build scattering networks, which can
present good properties with respect to invariances. Focusing on neural networks, Mairal et al. (2014) and Bietti and
Mairal (2019) introduced and analyzed a model aiming to
mimic Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). More recently, Bietti et al. (2021) studied the sample complexity
of learning in the presence of invariances, with invariant
kernels. Conversely, the hypothesis that invariance can be a
proxy for neural network performance has been put to test
empirically by Petrini et al. (2021).
Contributions. We introduce a dissimilarity called DID
(standing for Diffeomorphism Invariant Dissimilarity)
which is invariant to smooth diffeomorphisms present between data points. Although DID is somewhat less sophisticated than most of the models presented above, it is
considerably more generic and can be seen as a building
block for devising practical machine learning algorithms in
the presence of invariances.
In order to exploit the internal structure of a data point (e.g.
of an image), we cast them as functions between two spaces
(e.g. coordinate and color spaces). This unlocks the potential of using the change of variable formula to eliminate
diffeomorphisms between functions (i.e. transformations
between data points) when they exist. DID is based on a
generic method for identifying if a function g is of the form
f ◦ Q, without any parametric model over Q, founded on the
change of variable formula. This makes DID a promising
and flexible tool for image processing (e.g., image registration), time-series analysis (e.g., dynamic time warping) and

