Thompson Sampling for (Combinatorial) Pure Exploration

Siwei Wang 1 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
Existing methods of combinatorial pure exploration mainly focus on the UCB approach. To
make the algorithm efficient, they usually use the
sum of upper confidence bounds within arm set
S to represent the upper confidence bound of S,
which can be much larger than the tight upper
confidence bound of S and leads to a much higher
complexity than necessary, since the empirical
means of different arms in S are independent. To
deal with this challenge, we explore the idea of
Thompson Sampling (TS) that uses independent
random samples instead of the upper confidence
bounds, and design the first TS-based algorithm
TS-Explore for (combinatorial) pure exploration.
In TS-Explore, the sum of independent random
samples within arm set S will not exceed the tight
upper confidence bound of S with high probability. Hence it solves the above challenge, and
achieves a lower complexity upper bound than existing efficient UCB-based algorithms in general
combinatorial pure exploration. As for pure exploration of classic multi-armed bandit, we show that
TS-Explore achieves an asymptotically optimal
complexity upper bound.

1. Introduction
Pure exploration is an important task in online learning, and
it tries to find out the target arm as fast as possible. In pure
exploration of classic multi-armed bandit (MAB) (Audibert
et al., 2010), there are totally m arms, and each arm i is
associated with a probability distribution Di with mean µi .
Once arm i is pulled, it returns an observation ri , which
is drawn independently from Di by the environment. At
each time step t, the learning policy π either chooses an
arm i(t) to pull, or chooses to output an arm a(t). The goal
of the learning policy is to pull arms properly, such that
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch
Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Jun
Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

with an error probability at most δ, its output arm a(t) is the
optimal arm (i.e., a(t) = argmaxi∈[m] µi ) with complexity
(the total number of observations) as low as possible.
Pure exploration is widely adopted in real applications. For
example, in the selling procedure of cosmetics, there is always a testing phase before the commercialization phase
(Audibert et al., 2010). The goal of the testing phase is to
help to maximize the cumulative reward collected in the
commercialization phase. Therefore, instead of regret minimization (Berry & Fristedt, 1985; Auer et al., 2002), the
testing phase only needs to do exploration (e.g., to investigate which product is the most popular one), and wants
to find out the target with both correctness guarantee and
low cost. In the real world, sometimes the system focuses
on the best action under a specific combinatorial structure,
instead of the best single arm (Chen et al., 2014). For example, a network routing system needs to search for the path
with minimum delay between the source and the destination.
Since there can be an exponential number of paths, the cost
of exploring them separately is unacceptable. Therefore,
people choose to find out the best path by exploring single
edges, and this is a pure exploration problem instance in
combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB). In this setting,
we still pull single arms (base arms) at each time step, and
there is a super arm set IP⊆ 2[m] . The expected reward
of a super arm S ∈ I is i∈S µi , i.e., the sum of the expected rewards of its contained base arms. And the goal of
the player is to find out the optimal super arm with error
probability at most δ and complexity as low as possible.
Most of the existing solutions for pure exploration follow
the UCB approach (Audibert et al., 2010; Kalyanakrishnan
et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2014; Kaufmann & Kalyanakrishnan, 2013). They compute the confidence bounds for all the
arms, and claim that one arm is optimal only if its lower
confidence bound is larger than the upper confidence bounds
of all the other arms. Though this approach is asymptotically optimal in pure exploration of classic MAB problems
(Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2012; Kaufmann & Kalyanakrishnan, 2013), it faces some challenges in the CMAB setting
(Chen et al., 2014). In the UCB approach, for a super arm
S, the algorithm usually uses the sum of upper confidence
bounds of all its contained base arms as its upper confidence bound to achieve a low implementation cost. This
means that the gap between the empirical mean of super

