Feature Space Particle Inference for Neural Network Ensembles

Shingo Yashima 1 Teppei Suzuki 1 Kohta Ishikawa 1 Ikuro Sato 1 2 Rei Kawakami 1 2

Abstract
Ensembles of deep neural networks demonstrate
improved performance over single models. For enhancing the diversity of ensemble members while
keeping their performance, particle-based inference methods offer a promising approach from
a Bayesian perspective. However, the best way
to apply these methods to neural networks is still
unclear: seeking samples from the weight-space
posterior suffers from inefficiency due to the overparameterization issues, while seeking samples
directly from the function-space posterior often
results in serious underfitting. In this study, we
propose optimizing particles in the feature space
where the activation of a specific intermediate
layer lies to address the above-mentioned difficulties. Our method encourages each member to
capture distinct features, which is expected to improve ensemble prediction robustness. Extensive
evaluation on real-world datasets shows that our
model significantly outperforms the gold-standard
Deep Ensembles on various metrics, including accuracy, calibration, and robustness.

1. Introduction
Averaging predictions of multiple trained models has been
a very popular technique in machine learning because it
can significantly improve the generalization ability of a prediction system. In particular, ensemble methods of neural
networks have recently achieved significant success in terms
of predictive performance (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017),
uncertainty estimation (Ovadia et al., 2019), and robustness
to adversarial attacks (Pang et al., 2019) or perturbations
(Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019). Among many ensemble
methods, Deep Ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017),
which train each model independently from randomly initialized weights, has been the de facto approach with a
1

Denso IT Laboratory Inc., Tokyo, Japan 2 Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Shingo Yashima
<yashima.shingo@core.d-itlab.co.jp>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

decent performance and ease of implementation. However,
it relies only on the randomness of initialization to generate
different ensemble members and thus does not explicitly encourage diversity among them, which can cause redundancy
in model averaging (Rame & Cord, 2021).
More recently, particle-based variational inference methods
(Liu & Wang, 2016) have provided a promising approach
for composing better ensembles from a Bayesian perspective (Wang et al., 2019; D’Angelo & Fortuin, 2021). These
methods intend to approximate the Bayes posterior by the
(pre-specified) finite number of models (called particles)
using deterministic optimization. They have greater nonparametric flexibility than classical variational inferences
(Blundell et al., 2015; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) and provide better efficiency than sampling-based Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (Neal, 1996; Welling &
Teh, 2011). Notably, their optimizations take interactions
between models into account using kernel functions and
explicitly promote model diversity, unlike Deep Ensembles.
These inferences are usually performed on the weight space
of neural networks to approximate weight-space posterior.
However, this is far from ideal due to the over-parameterized
nature of recent neural networks. Such models have many
local modes in the weight-space posterior that are distant
from each other, yet corresponding to the same predictive
function (Fort et al., 2019; Entezari et al., 2021). Therefore, promoting diversity of weights does not necessarily
result in diversity as a predictive function, and it can yield a
degenerate ensemble when the number of models is limited.
To circumvent this, Wang et al. (2019) proposed performing the inference on model outputs to obtain an approximation of the function-space posterior. They treat output
logits on data points as inferred parameters and promote
diversity on them. Although they do not suffer from the
above-mentioned degeneration issues, directly seeking a
posterior on the output space of neural network functions
often results in severe underfitting (D’Angelo & Fortuin,
2021). Overall, none of these methods have shown significant improvements over naive Deep Ensembles in accuracy
and calibration (D’Angelo et al., 2021).
On the other hand, a recent theoretical study suggests that
the critical component of the success of neural network
ensembles is the multi-view structure of data (Allen-Zhu

