Sanity Simulations for Saliency Methods

Joon Sik Kim 1 Gregory Plumb 1 Ameet Talwalkar 1

Abstract
Saliency methods are a popular class of feature
attribution explanation methods that aim to capture a model’s predictive reasoning by identifying
“important” pixels in an input image. However,
the development and adoption of these methods
are hindered by the lack of access to ground-truth
model reasoning, which prevents accurate evaluation. In this work, we design a synthetic benchmarking framework, SMERF, that allows us to
perform ground-truth-based evaluation while controlling the complexity of the model’s reasoning.
Experimentally, SMERF reveals significant limitations in existing saliency methods and, as a result,
represents a useful tool for the development of
new saliency methods.

1. Introduction
Saliency methods are a popular tool to help understand the
behavior of machine learning models. Given a model and
an input image, these methods output a feature attribution
that indicates which pixels they deem to be most “important”
to the model’s prediction (Simonyan et al., 2013; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Lundberg & Lee, 2017). Then, a natural
question to ask is: how do we define “important” and subsequently evaluate the efficacy of these methods?
One intuitive approach to answering this question is to measure how well a saliency method locates the expected pixels
of interest in the input image. In fact, this so-called “pointing game” (Zhang et al., 2018) is one of the predominant
evaluations used today (Zhou et al., 2016; Selvaraju et al.,
2017; Chattopadhay et al., 2018; Woo et al., 2018; Gao et al.,
2019; Arun et al., 2020). Current versions of this evaluation
rely on external knowledge to define an expected feature
attribution that highlights the region that a human would
expect to be important for the given task. Then, the quality
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Joon Sik Kim
<joonkim@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Expected Feature Attribution

Input

predict:
baseball bat

Feature Attribution

Typical
Pointing
Game

Model

hitter ⇢ small box
bat ⇢ letter B
glove ⇢ big box

predict:
letter B

Model

Ideal
Pointing
Game
Hypothetical Ground-truth Feature Attribution

Feature Attribution

Ground-truth Feature Attribution

SMERF

Figure 1. Top. Existing pointing game evaluations do not have
access to ground-truth feature attributions but instead rely on expected feature attributions. For instance, while a model trained to
identify a baseball bat is expected to rely on the baseball bat region
of the image (top), it may rely on a more complex reasoning by
using the presence of a hitter and a glove to identify a bat (bottom).
Bottom. SMERF constructs a synthetic set of tasks that are stylized
versions of real object classification tasks. Consider the task of
identifying the letter ‘B’ in an image, where the letter and the two
boxes correspond to the bat, the hitter, and the glove, respectively.
SMERF controls the model’s underlying reasoning via simulations
over different data distributions, providing ground-truth feature
attributions used to evaluate saliency methods (in this example, a
model is relying on two boxes to identify the letter).

of a saliency method is measured using the overlap between
its output and this expected feature attribution by metrics
such as Intersection-Over-Union (IOU) (See Section 4).
Unfortunately, this approach has two key limitations. First,
the results are unreliable when the model’s ground-truth
reasoning does not match human expectations, e.g., when
the model is relying on spurious correlations. This is particularly problematic because detecting such discrepancies is
one of the motivating use cases of saliency methods. Second, existing versions are based on relatively simple object
classification tasks where we expect only a single region of
the image, i.e., the object itself, to be relevant to the prediction. In practice, there exist more complex tasks, e.g., in
medical imaging or autonomous driving, where considering
interactions among multiple regions of the image may be
necessary for the model to achieve high predictive accuracy.
These two limitations highlight the same fundamental con-

