Variational Inference with Locally Enhanced Bounds for Hierarchical Models

Tomas Geffner 1 Justin Domke 1

Abstract
Hierarchical models represent a challenging setting for inference algorithms. MCMC methods
struggle to scale to large models with many local
variables and observations, and variational inference (VI) may fail to provide accurate approximations due to the use of simple variational families. Some variational methods (e.g. importance
weighted VI) integrate Monte Carlo methods to
give better accuracy, but these tend to be unsuitable for hierarchical models, as they do not allow
for subsampling and their performance tends to
degrade for high dimensional models. We propose
a new family of variational bounds for hierarchical models, based on the application of tightening
methods (e.g. importance weighting) separately
for each group of local random variables. We
show that our approach naturally allows the use
of subsampling to get unbiased gradients, and that
it fully leverages the power of methods that build
tighter lower bounds by applying them independently in lower dimensional spaces, leading to
better results and more accurate posterior approximations than relevant baselines.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical models (Kreft & De Leeuw, 1998; Gelman,
2006; Snijders & Bosker, 2011) represent a general class of
probabilistic models which are used in a wide range of scenarios. They have been successfully applied in psychology
(Vallerand, 1997), ecology (Royle & Dorazio, 2008; Cressie
et al., 2009), political science (Lax & Phillips, 2012), collaborative filtering (Lim & Teh, 2007), and topic modeling
(Blei et al., 2003), among others. While these models may
take a wide range of forms, a widely used one consists of a
tree structure, where a set of global variables θ controls the
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA, USA.. Correspondence
to: Tomas Geffner <tgeffner@cs.umass.edu>, Justin Domke
<domke@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

distribution over local variables zi in multiple independent
groups (see Figure 1 (left)). Then, after observing some
data yi from each group, the inference problem consists in
accurately approximating the posterior distribution over the
global and local variables.
Inference is often difficult in hierarchical models. MCMC
methods struggle to scale to big models and datasets due to
their incapacity to handle subsampling (Betancourt, 2015;
Bardenet et al., 2017). Variational inference (VI) methods,
on the other hand, are naturally compatible with subsampling, and thus represent a more scalable alternative (Hoffman et al., 2013; Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla, 2014; Agrawal
& Domke, 2021). Their accuracy, however, is sometimes
limited by the use of simple variational families, such as
factorized Gaussians.
Recently, many methods have been proposed to integrate
Monte Carlo methods into variational inference to give
tighter bounds and better posterior approximations (henceforth tightening methods). These include importance weighting (Burda et al., 2016) and many others (Salimans et al.,
2015; Wolf et al., 2016; Maddison et al., 2017; Domke &
Sheldon, 2019; Thin et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Geffner
& Domke, 2021b). While these methods have shown good
performance in practice, we observe that a direct application
of them may be unsuitable with hierarchical models. There
are two reasons for this. First, the posterior distributions
for hierarchical models are often high dimensional—the
dimensionality typically grows linearly with the number of
local variables. This is problematic as the performance of
tightening methods sometimes degrades in higher dimensions. Second, current tightening methods are incompatible
with subsampling, leading to slow inference.
Practitioners are thus faced with a choice: They can use
powerful but inefficient methods (variational inference with
tightening methods), or faster methods with lower accuracy
(plain variational inference).
We propose locally-enhanced bounds, a new family of variational objectives for hierarchical models that enjoys much
of the best of both worlds. The main idea involves applying tightening methods at a local level, separately for each
set of local variables zi , while using a regular variational
approximation (e.g. Gaussian, normalizing flow) to model
the posterior distribution over the global variables. This is

