Strategic Instrumental Variable Regression:
Recovering Causal Relationships From Strategic Responses

Keegan Harris 1 Daniel Ngo * 2 Logan Stapleton * 2 Hoda Heidari 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract

In settings where Machine Learning (ML) algorithms automate or inform consequential decisions about people, individual decision subjects
are often incentivized to strategically modify their
observable attributes to receive more favorable
predictions. As a result, the distribution the assessment rule is trained on may differ from the one
it operates on in deployment. While such distribution shifts, in general, can hinder accurate predictions, our work identifies a unique opportunity
associated with shifts due to strategic responses:
We show that we can use strategic responses effectively to recover causal relationships between
the observable features and outcomes we wish to
predict, even under the presence of unobserved
confounding variables. Specifically, our work establishes a novel connection between strategic responses to ML models and instrumental variable
(IV) regression by observing that the sequence of
deployed models can be viewed as an instrument
that affects agents’ observable features but does
not directly influence their outcomes. We show
that our causal recovery method can be utilized
to improve decision-making across several important criteria: individual fairness, agent outcomes,
and predictive risk. In particular, we show that if
decision subjects differ in their ability to modify
non-causal attributes, any decision rule deviating
from the causal coefficients can lead to (potentially unbounded) individual-level unfairness.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Computer Science Department, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA. Correspondence to: Keegan Harris <keeganh@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) predictions increasingly inform
high-stakes decisions for people in areas such as college
admissions (Pangburn, 2019; Somvichian-Clausen, 2021),
credit scoring (Petrasic et al., 2017; Rice & Swesnik, 2013),
employment (Sánchez-Monedero et al., 2020), and beyond.
One of the major criticisms against the use of ML in socially consequential domains is the failure of these technologies to identify causal relationships among relevant
attributes and the outcome of interest (Kusner et al., 2017).
The single-minded focus of ML on predictive accuracy has
given rise to brittle predictive models that learn to rely on
spurious correlations—and at times, harmful stereotypes—
to achieve seemingly accurate predictions on held-out test
data (Sweeney, 2013; Kusner & Loftus, 2020). The resulting models frequently underperform in deployment, and
their predictions can negatively impact decision subjects.
As an example of the long-term negative consequences of
ML-based decision-making systems, they often prompt individuals to modify their observable attributes strategically
to receive more favorable predictions—and subsequently,
decisions (Hardt et al., 2016). These strategic responses
are among the primary causes of distribution shifts (and
subsequently, the unsatisfactory performance) of ML in
high-stakes decision-making domains. Moreover, recent
work has established the potential of these tools to amplify
existing social disparities by incentivizing different effort
investments across distinct groups of subjects (Liu et al.,
2020; Heidari et al., 2019; Mouzannar et al., 2019).
The above challenges have led to renewed calls on the ML
community to strengthen their understanding of the connections between ML and causality (Pearl, 2019; Schölkopf,
2019). Knowledge of causal relationships among predictive
attributes and outcomes of interest promotes several desirable aims: First, ML practitioners can use this knowledge to
debug their models and ensure robustness even if the underlying population shifts over time. Second, policymakers can
utilize the causal understanding of a domain in their policy
choices and examine a decision-making system’s compliance with policy goals and societal values (e.g., they can
audit the system for unfairness against particular populations (Loftus et al., 2018)). Finally, predictions rooted in

