Scalable First-Order Bayesian Optimization
via Structured Automatic Differentiation
Sebastian Ament 1

Abstract
Bayesian Optimization (BO) has shown great
promise for the global optimization of functions
that are expensive to evaluate, but despite many
successes, standard approaches can struggle in
high dimensions. To improve the performance of
BO, prior work suggested incorporating gradient
information into a Gaussian process surrogate of
the objective, giving rise to kernel matrices of
size nd × nd for n observations in d dimensions.
Naïvely multiplying with (resp. inverting) these
matrices requires O(n2 d2 ) (resp. O(n3 d3 )) operations, which becomes infeasible for moderate
dimensions and sample sizes. Here, we observe
that a wide range of kernels gives rise to structured
matrices, enabling an exact O(n2 d) matrix-vector
multiply for gradient observations and O(n2 d2 )
for Hessian observations. Beyond canonical kernel classes, we derive a programmatic approach
to leveraging this type of structure for transformations and combinations of the discussed kernel
classes, which constitutes a structure-aware automatic differentiation algorithm. Our methods
apply to virtually all canonical kernels and automatically extend to complex kernels, like the
neural network, radial basis function network, and
spectral mixture kernels without any additional
derivations, enabling flexible, problem-dependent
modeling while scaling first-order BO to high d.

1. Introduction
Bayesian Optimization (BO) has demonstrated tremendous
promise for the global optimization of functions, in particular those that are expensive to evaluate (Shahriari et al.,
2016; Frazier, 2018). Instantiations of BO can be found in
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, 14850, USA. Correspondence to:
Sebastian Ament
<ament@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Carla Gomes 1
Active Learning (AL) (Settles, 2009; Tuia et al., 2011; Fu
et al., 2013), the optimal design of experiments (Chaloner
and Verdinelli, 1995; Foster et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2020),
and Optimal Learning (Powell and Ryzhov, 2012). Its applications range widely from the optimization of hyperparameters of complex machine learning models (Snoek
et al., 2012) to the sciences and engineering as Attia et al.
(2020), who optimized charging protocols to maximize battery life. Li et al. (2018) reported that random search with
only twice as many samples can outperform standard BO
methods on a certain hyper-parameter optimization task.
This lead Ahmed et al. (2016) to advocate for first-order
BO (FOBO) as a critical improvement, a call that recently
received theoretical heft due to Shekhar and Javidi (2021),
who proved that FOBO achieves an exponential improvement on the expected regret of standard BO for multi-armed
bandit problems as a function of the number of observations
n and dimensionality d of the input.
At the same time, differentiable programming and automatic
differentiation (AD), which enable the calculation of gradients through complex numerical programs, have become
an integral part of machine learning research (Innes et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2018; Baydin et al., 2018) and practice,
perhaps best illustrated by PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019)
and Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2015), both of which include
AD engines. Certainly, AD has powered an increasing pace
of model development by automating the error-prone writing of derivative code and is thus a natural complement to
FOBO, if only to compute the gradients of the objective.
On a high level, most BO approaches build a surrogate
model of an objective with a few potentially noisy observations and make informed choices about further queries
based on predictive values and uncertainties of the surrogate.
In principle, any functional form could be employed as a
surrogate, and indeed Wang and Shang (2014), Snoek et al.
(2015), and Gal et al. (2017) use deep neural networks for
AL and BO. However, Gaussian Processes (GP) are currently the most commonly used models for research and applications of BO because they work well with little data and
permit closed-form posterior inference. Fortunately, GPs
are closed under differentiation with benign assumptions,
see Section A, and maintain their analytical properties when
conditioned on gradient information (Solak et al., 2003).

