Structured Stochastic Gradient MCMC
Antonios Alexos * 1 Alex Boyd * 2 Stephan Mandt 1 2

Abstract
Stochastic gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(SGMCMC) is a scalable algorithm for asymptotically exact Bayesian inference in parameterrich models, such as Bayesian neural networks.
However, since mixing can be slow in high dimensions, practitioners often resort to variational
inference (VI). Unfortunately, VI makes strong assumptions on both the factorization and functional
form of the posterior. To relax these assumptions,
this work proposes a new non-parametric variational inference scheme that combines ideas from
both SGMCMC and coordinate-ascent VI. The approach relies on a new Langevin-type algorithm
that operates on a "self-averaged" posterior energy function, where parts of the latent variables
are averaged over samples from earlier iterations
of the Markov chain. This way, statistical dependencies between coordinates can be broken in a
controlled way, allowing the chain to mix faster.
This scheme can be further modified in a “dropout”
manner, leading to even more scalability. We test
our scheme for ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10, SVHN,
and FMNIST. In all cases, we find improvements
in convergence speed and/or final accuracy compared to SGMCMC and parametric VI.

1. Introduction
There has been much recent interest in deep Bayesian neural networks (BNN) due to their reliable confidence estimates and generalization properties (Wilson & Izmailov,
2020; Jospin et al., 2020; Cardelli et al., 2019). BNNs
rely on ensemble averages over model parameters typically
obtained from Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms, which contrasts to regular neural networks that depend on a single set of parameters. The sheer size of these
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University of California, Irvine, USA. Correspondence to: Antonios Alexos <aalexos@uci.edu>, Alex Boyd <alexjb@uci.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

models requires scalable MCMC approaches based on inexpensive stochastic gradients, of which stochastic gradient
Markov chain Monte Carlo (SGMCMC) algorithms are
most widely used (Li et al., 2016; Welling & Teh, 2011; Patterson & Teh, 2013). These algorithms owe their scalability
to approximating gradients via mini-batching.
The main downside of using SGMCMC algorithms is their
slow mixing rate in high dimensions. A less ambitious
goal than sampling from the true high-dimensional posterior
is to approximate the latter by a simpler, typically factorized distribution, as done in variational inference (VI) (Blei
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018). However, classical VI
methods make strong parametric assumptions on the posterior, such as modeling it using product of univariate Gaussian distributions. These distributional assumptions are frequently over-simplistic in high-dimensional models, where
the posterior can be highly multi-modal and possibly heavytailed. Another downside is that the variational approximation typically underestimates the posterior variance, leading
to poorly calibrated uncertainties and overfitting (Ormerod
& Wand, 2010; Giordano et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2018).
In this work, we derive a new approximate SGMCMC approach that takes inspiration from structured VI (Saul &
Jordan, 1996; Wainwright & Jordan, 2008), a version of VI
that maintains selected posterior correlations while breaking
others. While our approach remains a sampling algorithm
resembling SGMCMC, we speed up the mixing time by
systematically breaking pre-specified posterior correlations.
Our approach thus adapts the partial factorization aspect
from structured mean-field VI, but it remains fully nonparametric and makes no assumptions on the functional
form of the approximate posterior. For this reason, we name
our approach structured SGMCMC.
We start by reviewing the functional view on VI, deriving the
optimal variational distribution for a given posterior subject
to factorization constraints. Our main contribution is then to
show that one can sample from this target distribution by running SGMCMC on a modified energy function. This energy
function is inspired by the partially-marginalized log joint
distribution as encountered in coordinate-ascent VI (Saul
& Jordan, 1996; Bishop, 2006). We can tractably approximate the involved expectations by averaging selected latent
variables over samples from the Markov chain. The resulting "self-averaged" energy function defines un-normalized

