Structure-preserving GANs

Jeremiah Birrell 1 Markos A. Katsoulakis 1 Luc Rey-Bellet 1 Wei Zhu 1

Abstract

Generative adversarial networks (GANs), a class
of distribution-learning methods based on a twoplayer game between a generator and a discriminator, can generally be formulated as a minmax
problem based on the variational representation
of a divergence between the unknown and the
generated distributions. We introduce structurepreserving GANs as a data-efficient framework
for learning distributions with additional structure such as group symmetry, by developing new
variational representations for divergences. Our
theory shows that we can reduce the discriminator space to its projection on the invariant discriminator space, using the conditional expectation with respect to the σ-algebra associated to
the underlying structure. In addition, we prove
that the discriminator space reduction must be
accompanied by a careful design of structured
generators, as flawed designs may easily lead to a
catastrophic “mode collapse” of the learned distribution. We contextualize our framework by building symmetry-preserving GANs for distributions
with intrinsic group symmetry, and demonstrate
that both players, namely the equivariant generator and invariant discriminator, play important
but distinct roles in the learning process. Empirical experiments and ablation studies across
a broad range of data sets, including real-world
medical imaging, validate our theory, and show
our proposed methods achieve significantly improved sample fidelity and diversity—almost an
order of magnitude measured in Fréchet Inception
Distance—especially in the small data regime.

1

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. Correspondence
to: Jeremiah Birrell <birrell@math.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Real and GAN generated ANHIR images dyed with the
H&E stain [cf. Section 5.5]. Left panel: real images. Right panels: randomly selected D2L -GAN generated samples after 40,000
generator iterations. Top right panel: CNN G&D, i.e., the baseline
model. Bottom right panel: Eqv G + Inv D, i.e., our proposed
framework contextualized in learning group-invariant distributions.
More images are available in Appendix F.

Figure 2. Randomly generated digits 2, 3 and 8 by GANs trained
on the rotated MNIST images using 1% (600) training samples.
(a): the baseline CNN model. (b): our proposed framework for
learning group-invariant distributions.

1. Introduction
Since their introduction by Goodfellow et al. (2014), generative adversarial networks (GANs) have become a burgeoning domain in distribution learning with a diverse range
of innovative applications (Karras et al., 2019; Zhu et al.,
2019; Mustafa et al., 2019; Yi et al., 2019). Mathematically,
the minmax game between a generator and a discriminator in GAN can typically be formulated as minimizing a
divergence— or other notions of “distance”—with a variational representation between the unknown and the generated distributions. Such formulations, however, do not
make prior structural assumptions on the probability measures, making them sub-optimal in sample efficiency when
learning distributions with intrinsic structures, such as the
(rotation) group symmetry for medical images without preferred orientation; see Figure 1.
We introduce, in this work, the structure-preserving GANs,
a data-efficient framework for learning probability measures

