Adaptive Conformal Predictions for Time Series

Margaux Zaffran 1 2 3 Olivier Féron 1 4 Yannig Goude 1 5 Julie Josse 2 6 Aymeric Dieuleveut 3

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification of predictive models is
crucial in decision-making problems. Conformal
prediction is a general and theoretically sound
answer. However, it requires exchangeable data,
excluding time series. While recent works tackled
this issue, we argue that Adaptive Conformal Inference (ACI, Gibbs & Candès, 2021), developed
for distribution-shift time series, is a good procedure for time series with general dependency.
We theoretically analyse the impact of the learning rate on its efficiency in the exchangeable and
auto-regressive case. We propose a parameter-free
method, AgACI, that adaptively builds upon ACI
based on online expert aggregation. We lead extensive fair simulations against competing methods that advocate for ACI’s use in time series. We
conduct a real case study: electricity price forecasting. The proposed aggregation algorithm provides efficient prediction intervals for day-ahead
forecasting. All the code and data to reproduce
the experiments are made available on GitHub.

1. Introduction
The increasing use of renewable intermittent energy leads
to more dependent and volatile energy markets. Therefore,
an accurate electricity price forecasting is required to stabilize energy production planning, gathering loads of research
work as evidenced by recent substantial reviews (Weron,
2014; Lago et al., 2018; 2021). Furthermore, probabilistic
forecasts are needed to develop risk-based strategies (Gaillard et al., 2016; Maciejowska et al., 2016; Nowotarski &
Weron, 2018; Uniejewski & Weron, 2021). On the one hand,
the lack of uncertainty quantification of predictive models is
1

Electricité de France R&D, Palaiseau, France 2 INRIA SophiaAntipolis, Montpellier, France 3 CMAP, École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France 4 FiME, Université
Paris-Dauphine, France 5 LMO, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay,
France 6 IDESP, Montpellier, France. Correspondence to: Margaux
Zaffran <margaux.zaffran@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

a major barrier to the adoption of powerful machine learning
methods. On the other hand, probabilistic forecasts are only
valid asymptotically or upon strong assumptions on the data.
Conformal prediction (CP, Vovk et al., 1999; 2005; Papadopoulos et al., 2002) is a promising framework to overcome both issues. It is a general procedure to build predictive intervals for any (black box) predictive model, such
as neural networks, which are valid (i.e. achieve nominal
marginal coverage) in finite sample and without any distributional assumptions except that the data are exchangeable.
Thereby, CP has received increasing attention lately, favored
by the development of split conformal prediction (SCP, Lei
et al., 2018, reformulated from inductive CP, Papadopoulos
et al., 2002). More formally, suppose we have n training
samples (xi , yi ) ∈ Rd × R, i ∈ J1, nK, realizations of
random variables (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ), and that we aim
at predicting a new observation yn+1 at xn+1 . Given a
miscoverage rate α ∈ [0, 1] fixed by the user (typically 0.1
or 0.05) the aim is to build a predictive interval Cα such that:
P {Yn+1 ∈ Cα (Xn+1 )} ≥ 1 − α,

(1)

with Cα as small as possible, in order to be informative. For
the sequel, we call a valid interval an interval satisfying
equation (1) and an efficient interval when it is as small as
possible (Vovk et al., 2005; Shafer & Vovk, 2008).
To achieve this, SCP first splits the n points of the training set into two sets Tr, Cal ⊂ J1, nK, to create a proper
training set, Tr, and a calibration set, Cal. On the proper
training set a regression model µ̂ (chosen by the user) is
fitted, and then used to predict on the calibration set. A conformity score is applied to assess the conformity between the
calibration’s response values and the predicted values, giving SCal = {(si )i∈Cal }. In regression, usually the absolute
value of the residuals is used, i.e. si = |µ̂(xi ) − yi |. Finally,
b 1−α̂ (SCal )
a corrected1 (1 − α̂)-th quantile of these scores Q
is computed to define the size of the interval, which,
in its simplest form, is centered on the predicted value:
bα̂ (xn+1 ) := [µ̂(xn+1 ) ± Q
b 1−α̂ (SCal )].
Cα (xn+1 ) = C
These steps are detailed in Appendix A, and illustrated in
Figure 9. More details on CP, including beyond regres1

The correction α → α̂ is needed because of the inflation of
quantiles in finite sample (see Lemma 2 in Romano et al. (2019)
or Section 2 in Lei et al. (2018)).

