Unified Fourier-based Kernel and Nonlinearity Design for Equivariant Networks
on Homogeneous Spaces

Yinshuang Xu * 1 Jiahui Lei * 1 Edgar Dobriban 1 2 Kostas Daniilidis 1

Abstract
We introduce a unified framework for group equivariant networks on homogeneous spaces derived
from a Fourier perspective. We consider tensorvalued feature fields, before and after a convolutional layer. We present a unified derivation
of kernels via the Fourier domain by leveraging
the sparsity of Fourier coefficients of the lifted
feature fields. The sparsity emerges when the
stabilizer subgroup of the homogeneous space
is a compact Lie group. We further introduce a
nonlinear activation, via an elementwise nonlinearity on the regular representation after lifting
and projecting back to the field through an equivariant convolution. We show that other methods
treating features as the Fourier coefficients in the
stabilizer subgroup are special cases of our activation. Experiments on SO(3) and SE(3) show
state-of-the-art performance in spherical vector
field regression, point cloud classification, and
molecular completion.

1

Introduction

Following the success of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) (Fukushima, 1980; LeCun et al., 1989), researchers
made great strides in designing equivariant networks for
groups beyond the standard translation operation. Equivariance preserves symmetries and drastically reduces sample
complexity, making data augmentation unnecessary and
consequently reducing training and testing time.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, United States 2 Department of Statistics and
Data Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, United States. Correspondence to: Yinshuang Xu
<xuyin@seas.upenn.edu>, Jiahui Lei <leijh@seas.upenn.edu>,
Edgar Dobriban <dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu>, Kostas Daniilidis <kostas@cis.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The standard approach for equivariance by design is groupconvolutional networks (G-CNNs), specified by convolution kernels (Cohen & Welling, 2016). Kondor & Trivedi
(2018) prove that such group convolutions are both sufficient and necessary for linear layers to be equivariant to
the action of compact groups. Existing group convolutional
nets construct equivariant kernels in a case by case fashion; for example, Cohen et al. (2018a) present a general
constraint for the kernel of G-CNNs with features on a homogeneous space that is solved algebraically, while Finzi
et al. (2021) solve for kernels numerically based on a similar
finite-dimensional constraint.
We propose a unified recipe for kernel design. We lift the
feature fields from the initial homogeneous space to the
corresponding Mackey functions on the acting group, as introduced in (Cohen et al., 2018a). Since a Mackey function
satisfies a well-known constraint, it has redundant information. Specifically, when the irreducible representation of
the stabilizer subgroup is trivial, Kondor & Trivedi (2018)
proves that the Fourier Transform of the Mackey function
has a certain block sparsity pattern. This naturally leads to
the question whether the Fourier transform of Mackey functions for nontrivial irreducible representations over more
general groups may have a similar property. We prove that
when the stabilizer subgroup is a compact Lie group, the
Fourier coefficients are sparse and nonzero for specific field
types, as stated in proposition 3.2. This spectral sparsity,
appearing in both the input and the output of the convolution, implies that the kernel itself can be taken as sparse.
This enables us to characterize the space of kernels without using the classical equivariance constraints and lays the
foundation of our framework for linear layer design.
Regarding the nonlinearity, most existing group convolution
methods on homogeneous spaces (Cohen et al., 2018a) apply norms or gated nonlinearities. The exceptions are works
applying the Clebsch-Gordan decomposition of tensor products (Kondor et al., 2018) or interpreting the features as
Fourier coefficients (De Haan et al., 2020; Poulenard &
Guibas, 2021), since the feature vectors are in the vector
space under the irreducible representation of the stabilizer
subgroup. We propose a general formulation for nonlinear
layers that consists of lifting the fields to the Mackey func-

