Gradient Based Clustering

Aleksandar Armacki 1 Dragana Bajovic 2 Dusan Jakovetic 3 Soummya Kar 1

Abstract
We propose a general approach for distance based
clustering, using the gradient of the cost function
that measures clustering quality with respect to
cluster assignments and cluster center positions.
The approach is an iterative two step procedure
(alternating between cluster assignment and cluster center updates) and is applicable to a wide
range of functions, satisfying some mild assumptions. The main advantage of the proposed approach is a simple and computationally cheap update rule. Unlike previous methods that specialize
to a specific formulation of the clustering problem, our approach is applicable to a wide range of
costs, including non-Bregman clustering methods
based on the Huber loss. We analyze the convergence of the proposed algorithm, and show that it
converges to the set of appropriately defined fixed
points, under arbitrary center initialization. In the
special case of Bregman cost functions, the algorithm converges to the set of centroidal Voronoi
partitions, which is consistent with prior works.
Numerical experiments on real data demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervized learning and is ubiquitous in various applications and domains,
(Chandola et al., 2009), (Pediredla & Seelamantula, 2011),
(Jain, 2010), (Dhillon et al., 2003). K-means (Lloyd, 1982)
is a classical and widely adopted method for clustering. For
a given target number K of clusters, K-means proceeds
iteratively by alternating between two steps: 1) cluster assignment, i.e., assign each data point to its closest (in terms
of the Euclidean distance) cluster; and 2) finding cluster
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Faculty of Technical
Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia 3 Faculty of
Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia. Correspondence to: Aleksandar Armacki <aarmacki@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

centers, i.e., position each cluster’s center at the average of
the data points currently assigned to the cluster. Besides
K-means, popular clustering methods include its improved
version K-means++ (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007), as well
as K-modes (Huang, 1997), K-medians (Arya et al., 2004),
(Arora et al., 1998), etc.
It is well-known, e.g., (Selim & Ismail, 1984), that K-means
can be formulated as a joint minimization of a loss function
with respect to two groups of variables: 1) binary variables
that encode cluster assignments; and 2) continuous variables
that designate cluster centers, where the corresponding loss
function is a squared Euclidean norm. This K-means representation has motivated a class of new clustering methods
called Bregman clustering (Banerjee et al., 2005), where
the squared Euclidean norm is replaced with arbitrary Bregman divergence (Bregman, 1967), such as Kullback-Leibler,
Mahalanobis, etc. An appealing feature of Bregman clustering is that the introduction of a different loss (other than
squared Euclidean) does not harm computational efficiency,
as, despite a more involved loss function, the cluster center
finding step is still akin to K-means, i.e., it corresponds to
computing an average vector.
Several relevant clustering methods have been proposed that
also generalize the squared Euclidean norm of K-means and
that do not correspond to a Bregman divergence. For example, clustering methods based on the Huber loss (Huber,
1964) have been shown to exhibit good clustering performance and exhibit a high degree of robustness to noisy
data, (Pediredla & Seelamantula, 2011), (Liu et al., 2019).
However, several challenges emerge when generalizing clustering beyond Bregman divergences. First, the cluster center
finding step–that corresponds to minimizing the loss with
respect to cluster center variables–is no longer an averagefinding operation and may be computationally expensive.
Second, convergence and stability results for clustering beyond Bregman divergences are limited. For example, reference (Pediredla & Seelamantula, 2011) shows a local convergence to a stationary point, assuming that the algorithm
starts from an accurate cluster assignment.
In this paper, we propose a novel generalized clustering
algorithm for a broad class of loss functions, and we provide a comprehensive convergence (stability) analysis for
the algorithm. The assumed class of losses includes sym-

