Towards understanding how momentum improves generalization in deep
learning

Samy Jelassi 1 Yuanzhi Li 2

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum is widely used for training modern deep learning architectures. While it is well-understood
that using momentum can lead to faster convergence rate in various settings, it has also been
observed that momentum yields higher generalization. Prior work argue that momentum stabilizes the SGD noise during training and this leads
to higher generalization. In this paper, we adopt
another perspective and first empirically show that
gradient descent with momentum (GD+M) significantly improves generalization compared to gradient descent (GD) in some deep learning problems.
From this observation, we formally study how
momentum improves generalization. We devise a
binary classification setting where a one-hidden
layer (over-parameterized) convolutional neural
network trained with GD+M provably generalizes
better than the same network trained with GD,
when both algorithms are similarly initialized.
The key insight in our analysis is that momentum is beneficial in datasets where the examples
share some feature but differ in their margin. Contrary to GD that memorizes the small margin data,
GD+M still learns the feature in these data thanks
to its historical gradients. Lastly, we empirically
validate our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
It is commonly accepted that adding momentum to an optimization algorithm is required to optimally train a largescale deep network. Most of the modern architectures maintain during the training process a heavy momentum close to
1 (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014;
1

Princeton University, NJ, USA. 2 Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA.. Correspondence to: Samy Jelassi <sjelassi@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

He et al., 2016; Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016). Indeed,
it has been empirically observed that architectures trained
with momentum outperform those which are trained without
(Sutskever et al., 2013). Several papers have attempted to
explain this phenomenon. From the optimization perspective, (Defazio, 2020) assert that momentum yields faster
convergence of the training loss since, at the early stages,
it cancels out the noise from the stochastic gradients. On
the other hand, (Leclerc & Madry, 2020) empirically observes that momentum yields faster training convergence
only when the learning rate is small. While these works shed
light on how momentum acts on neural network training,
they fail to capture the generalization improvement induced
by momentum (Sutskever et al., 2013). Besides, the noise
reduction property of momentum advocated by (Defazio,
2020) contradicts the observation that, in deep learning, having a large noise in the training improves generalization
(Li et al., 2019; HaoChen et al., 2020). To the best of our
knowledge, there is no existing work which theoretically
explains how momentum improves generalization in deep
learning. Therefore, this paper aims to close this gap and
addresses the following question:
Why does momentum improve generalization? What is the
underlying mechanism of momentum improving
generalization in deep learning?
In computer vision, practitioners usually train their architectures with stochastic gradient descent with momentum
(SGD+M). It is therefore natural to investigate whether the
generalization improvement induced by momentum is tied
to the stochasticity of the gradient. We train a VGG-19
(Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) using SGD, SGD+M, gradient descent (GD) and GD with momentum (GD+M) on
the CIFAR-10 image classification task. To further isolate
the regularization effect of momentum, we turn off data
augmentation and batch normalization. Figure 1 displays
the training loss and test accuracy of the four models. Not
only momentum improves generalization in the full batch
setting but the generalization improvement increases as the
batch size is larger. Motivated by this empirical observation, we focus on the contribution of momentum in gradient
descent. We emphasize that this setting allows to isolate
the contribution of momentum on generalization since the
stochastic gradient noise influences generalization (Li et al.,

