Test-Time Training Can Close the Natural Distribution Shift Performance Gap
in Deep Learning Based Compressed Sensing

Mohammad Zalbagi Darestani 1 Jiayu Liu 2 Reinhard Heckel 2 1

Abstract
Deep learning based image reconstruction methods outperform traditional methods. However,
neural networks suffer from a performance drop
when applied to images from a different distribution than the training images. For example,
a model trained for reconstructing knees in accelerated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
does not reconstruct brains well, even though
the same network trained on brains reconstructs
brains perfectly well. Thus there is a distribution shift performance gap for a given neural network, defined as the difference in performance
when training on a distribution P and training
on another distribution Q, and evaluating both
models on Q. In this work, we propose a domain
adaptation method for deep learning based compressive sensing that relies on self-supervision
during training paired with test-time training at
inference. We show that for four natural distribution shifts, this method essentially closes the
distribution shift performance gap for state-ofthe-art architectures for accelerated MRI.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods enable fast and accurate image
reconstruction and outperform traditional methods on
a variety of imaging tasks (Dong et al., 2014; Jin et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2017; Sriram et al., 2020; Rivenson
et al., 2018; Jalal et al., 2021). Performance is typically
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice
University 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich. Correspondence to: Mohammad Zalbagi Darestani <mz35@rice.edu>, Reinhard Heckel
<rh43@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

measured as in-distribution performance: A dataset is
split into test and training sets, and a method trained
on the training set is evaluated on the test set.
In practice, however, the train and test distributions are
usually different: For example, we train a network on
data from one hospital, and apply the network to data
from a different hospital. Or we train on data acquired
with one scanner type and acquisition mode, and apply
it to a different scanner type or acquisition mode.
Deep learning imaging methods perform significantly
worse under such distribution shifts. For accelerated
MRI, a medical imaging technique, deep learning methods incur a significant accuracy drop when shifting
from one distribution to another, as shown for three
natural distribution shifts by Zalbagi Darestani et al.
(2021) and for SNR changes by Knoll et al. (2019).
The part of this accuracy drop that can be overcome
in principle can be measured by the distribution shift
performance gap: Suppose P and Q denote the train
and test distributions. We define the distribution shift
performance gap as the reconstruction accuracy (measured by a standard metric, e.g., the SSIM score) of
training on Q and testing on Q minus the reconstruction accuracy of training on P and testing on Q.
In this paper, we propose a novel domain adaptation
method for deep learning based compressive sensing,
and show that it overcomes the gap caused by four natural distribution shifts in accelerated MRI. Our approach
consists of two parts: (1) including self-supervision
during the supervised training stage of deep learning
models, and (2) performing self-supervised test-time
training for each new test sample at inference.
We show that our method works with two wellknown network architectures: the baseline U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) and the state-of-the-art end-toend variational network (Sriram et al., 2020). We evaluate robustness under four natural distribution shifts,

