Order Constraints in Optimal Transport

Fabian Lim 1 Laura Wynter 1 Shiau Hong Lim 1

Abstract
Optimal transport is a framework for comparing measures whereby a cost is incurred for
transporting one measure to another. Recent
works have aimed to improve optimal transport
plans through the introduction of various forms
of structure. We introduce novel order constraints into the optimal transport formulation to
allow for the incorporation of structure. We define an efficient method for obtaining explainable solutions to the new formulation that scales
far better than standard approaches. The theoretical properties of the method are provided.
We demonstrate experimentally that order constraints improve explainability using the e-SNLI
(Stanford Natural Language Inference) dataset
that includes human-annotated rationales as well
as on several image color transfer examples.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) is a framework for comparing measures whereby a cost is incurred for transporting one measure to another. Optimal transport enjoys both significant
theoretical interest and widespread applicability (Villani,
2008; Peyré & Cuturi, 2019). Recent work (Swanson et al.,
2020; Alvarez-Melis et al., 2018) aims to improve the interpretability of optimal transport plans through the introduction of structure. Structure can take many forms: text documents where context is given (Alvarez-Melis et al., 2020),
images with certain desired features (Shi et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2021), fairness properties (Laclau et al., 2021), or
even patterns in RNA (Forrow et al., 2019). Swanson et al.
(2020) postulate that structure can be discovered by sparsifying optimal transport plans.
Motivated by advances in sparse model learning, order
statistics and isotonic regression (Paty et al., 2020), we introduce novel order constraints (OC) into the optimal trans1
IBM Research, Singapore. Correspondence to: Fabian Lim
<flim@sg.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

port formulation so as to allow for more complex structure
to be readily added to optimal transport plans. We show
theoretically that, for convex cost functions with efficiently
computable gradients, the resulting order-constrained optimal transport problem can be solved using a form of
ADMM (Boyd et al., 2011) and can be δ-approximated efficiently. We further derive computationally efficient lower
bounds for our formulation. Specifically, when the structure is not provided in advance, we show how it can be
estimated. The bounds allow the use of an explainable
method for identifying the most important constraints, rendered tractable through branch-and-bound. Each of these
order constraints leads to an optimal transport plan computed sequentially using the algorithm we introduce. The
end result is a diverse set of the most important optimal
transport plans from which a user can select the plan that is
preferred.
The order constraints allow context to be taken into account, explicitly, when known in advance, or implicitly,
when estimated through the proposed procedure. Consider
OT for document retrieval (e.g., see Kusner et al. (2015);
Swanson et al. (2020)) where a user enters a text query.
The multiple transport plans provided by OT with order
constraints offer a diverse set of the best responses, each
accounting for different possible contexts. The resulting
method is weakly-supervised with only two tunable thresholds (or unsupervised if the parameters are set to default
values), and is amenable to applications of OT where labels are not available to train a supervised model.
An example is provided in Fig. 2 which aims to learn the
similarity between two phrases. The top box depicts the
transport plan learnt by OT; the darker the line, the stronger
the transport measure. The match provided by OT does not
reveal the contradiction in the two phrases. The second to
fourth transport plans are more human-interpretable. The
second plan matches “red” clothing to the “black” pants.
The third matches “piece” to “pair”, a relation not included
in the standard OT plan. The last plan matches “clothing”
to “pants”.1 The example makes use of OT with a single
order constraint to better illustrate the idea of order constraints. OT with multiple order constraints can incorporate
1

For readability of Fig. 2, very low scores were suppressed,
making it appear that they do not sum to one though they do.

