GNNRank: Learning Global Rankings from Pairwise Comparisons via
Directed Graph Neural Networks

Yixuan He 1 * Quan Gan 2 David Wipf 2 Gesine Reinert 1 3 Junchi Yan 4 5 Mihai Cucuringu 1 3

Abstract
Recovering global rankings from pairwise comparisons has wide applications from time synchronization to sports team ranking. Pairwise comparisons corresponding to matches in a competition
can be construed as edges in a directed graph (digraph), whose nodes represent e.g. competitors
with an unknown rank. In this paper, we introduce neural networks into the ranking recovery
problem by proposing the so-called GNNRank,
a trainable GNN-based framework with digraph
embedding. Moreover, new objectives are devised to encode ranking upsets/violations. The
framework involves a ranking score estimation
approach, and adds an inductive bias by unfolding the Fiedler vector computation of the graph
constructed from a learnable similarity matrix.
Experimental results on extensive data sets show
that our methods attain competitive and often superior performance against baselines, as well as
showing promising transfer ability. Codes and
preprocessed data are at: https://github.
com/SherylHYX/GNNRank.

1. Introduction
Recovering global rankings from pairwise comparisons reflecting relative latent strengths or scores is a fundamental
problem in information retrieval (Schütze et al., 2008; Liu,
2011) and beyond. When analyzing large-scale data sets,
one often seeks various forms of rankings (i.e. orderings) of
*

Work was partially done during an internship at Amazon and
a visit to Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 1 Department of Statistics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Amazon Web
Services AI Shanghai Lablet, Shanghai, China 3 The Alan Turing
Institute, London, United Kingdom 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Mihai Cucuringu
<mihai.cucuringu@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the data for the purpose of identifying the most important
entries, efficient computation of search & sort operations, or
for extracting the main features. There is a swarm of applications employing ranking techniques ranging from Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk system for crowdsourcing (Raykar & Yu,
2011) to the movie recommendation system provided by
Netflix (Cremonesi et al., 2010), and modeling outcomes of
football matches (Tsokos et al., 2019).
A very rich literature on ranking traces back to (Kendall
& Smith, 1940), who studied recovering the ranking of a
set of players from pairwise comparisons reflecting a total
ordering. The last decades have seen a flurry of methods
for ranking from pairwise comparisons, mostly based on
spectral methods leveraging the eigenvectors of suitably defined matrix operators built directly from the data, which
will be detailed in the related work. In particular, SerialRank (Fogel et al., 2014) shows promising ability in ranking
for a set of totally ordered items without ties, by introducing a specific inductive bias from the so-called seriation
problem (Atkins et al., 1998): a Fiedler vector of a certain
similarity matrix could recover true rankings given enough
pairwise comparisons in the noiseless setting. The Fiedler
value of a symmetric and nonnegative matrix (or a graph)
is defined to be the second smallest eigenvalue of the combinatorial Laplacian of the matrix (Fiedler, 1973), and its
corresponding eigenvector is called a Fiedler vector. The
Fiedler vector is able to encode useful information of a
graph, such as bi-partitions of a graph (Fiedler, 1973) and
the seriation problem (Atkins et al., 1998), and can be employed for partitioning hypergraphs (Chen et al., 2017).
Moreover, there has been promising progress on combinatorial optimization in machine learning (Wang et al., 2021;
Maurya et al., 2021), especially graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Zhou et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020), due to their
potential in data exploration. Compared with their great success in many combinatorial tasks, the capability of GNNs in
ranking tasks is not well developed. The few existing works
are restricted to specific settings e.g. top-n personalized
recommendations (Wang et al., 2021), and approximating
centrality measures (Maurya et al., 2021). Another technical
gap is the inability to learn a model by directly optimizing
the ranking objective, which we aim to fill in our work.

