ShiftAddNAS: Hardware-Inspired Search
for More Accurate and Efficient Neural Networks
Haoran You† 1 Baopu Li 2 Huihong Shi 3 Yonggan Fu 1 Yingyan Lin 1

Abstract
Neural networks (NNs) with intensive multiplications (e.g., convolutions and transformers) are
capable yet power hungry, impeding their more
extensive deployment into resource-constrained
devices. As such, multiplication-free networks,
which follow a common practice in energyefficient hardware implementation to parameterize NNs with more efficient operators (e.g., bitwise shifts and additions), have gained growing
attention. However, multiplication-free networks
usually under-perform their vanilla counterparts
in terms of the achieved accuracy. To this end,
this work advocates hybrid NNs that consist of
both powerful yet costly multiplications and efficient yet less powerful operators for marrying the
best of both worlds, and proposes ShiftAddNAS,
which can automatically search for more accurate and more efficient NNs. Our ShiftAddNAS
highlights two enablers. Specifically, it integrates
(1) the first hybrid search space that incorporates both multiplication-based and multiplicationfree operators for facilitating the development
of both accurate and efficient hybrid NNs; and
(2) a novel weight sharing strategy that enables
effective weight sharing among different operators that follow heterogeneous distributions (e.g.,
Gaussian for convolutions vs. Laplacian for add
operators) and simultaneously leads to a largely
reduced supernet size and much better searched
networks. Extensive experiments and ablation
studies on various models, datasets, and tasks consistently validate the efficacy of ShiftAddNAS,
e.g., achieving up to a +7.7% higher accuracy or
a +4.9 better BLEU score compared to state-ofthe-art NN, while leading to up to 93% or 69%
†
Work done while interning at Baidu USA 1 Rice University 2 Oracle Health and AI 3 Nanjing University. Correspondence to: Baopu Li <baopu.li@oracle.com>, Yingyan Lin
<yingyan.lin@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

energy and latency savings, respectively. Codes
and pretrained models are available at https://
github.com/RICE-EIC/ShiftAddNAS.

1. Introduction
The unprecedented performance achieved by neural networks (NNs), e.g., convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and Transformers, requires intensive multiplications and
thus prohibitive training and inference costs, contradicting
the explosive demand for embedding various intelligent
functionalities into pervasive resource-constrained edge devices. In response, multiplication-free networks have been
proposed to alleviate the prohibitive resource requirements
by replacing the costly multiplications with lower-cost operators for boosting hardware efficiency. For example, AdderNet (Chen et al., 2020) utilizes mere additions to design
NNs; and ShiftAddNet (You et al., 2020a) follows a commonly used hardware practice to re-parameterize NNs with
both bitwise shifts and additions. Despite their promising
performance in hardware efficiency, multiplication-free NNs
in general under-perform their CNN and Transformer counterparts in terms of task accuracy for both computer vision
(CV) and natural language processing (NLP) applications.
To marry the best of both worlds, we advocate hybrid
multiplication-reduced network architectures that integrate
both multiplication-based operators (e.g., vanilla convolution (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and attention (Vaswani et al.,
2017)) and multiplication-free operators (e.g., shift and
add (You et al., 2020a)) to simultaneously boost task accuracy and efficiency. Thanks to the amazing success of
neural architecture search (NAS) in automating the process
of designing state-of-the-art (SOTA) NNs, it is natural to
consider NAS as the design engine of the aforementioned
hybrid NNs for various applications and tasks, each often
requiring a different performance-efficiency trade-off. However, there still exist a few challenges in leveraging NAS
to design the hybrid NNs. First, existing NAS methods
mostly consider the search for either efficient CNNs (Wan
et al., 2020), Transformers (Chen et al., 2021b), or hybrid
CNN-Transformers (Ding et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021), and
there still is a lack of a seminal work that searches for
multiplication-reduced hybrid networks, especially for the

