Stochastic Deep Networks with Linear Competing Units
for Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning

Konstantinos Kalais 1 Sotirios Chatzis 1

Abstract
This work addresses meta-learning (ML) by considering deep networks with stochastic local
winner-takes-all (LWTA) activations. This type
of network units results in sparse representations
from each model layer, as the units are organized into blocks where only one unit generates
a non-zero output. The main operating principle
of the introduced units rely on stochastic principles, as the network performs posterior sampling over competing units to select the winner. Therefore, the proposed networks are explicitly designed to extract input data representations of sparse stochastic nature, as opposed
to the currently standard deterministic representation paradigm. Our approach produces stateof-the-art predictive accuracy on few-shot image classification and regression experiments,
as well as reduced predictive error on an active learning setting; these improvements come
with an immensely reduced computational cost.
Code is available at: https://github.com/
Kkalais/StochLWTA-ML

1. Introduction
When we train machine learning models on problems with
limited amounts of training data, we cannot usually get good
predictive performance (Sculley et al., 2015; Lai, 2019).
This comes in contrast to the human ability to quickly derive
information from a range of different tasks, and then adapt
to a new task with limited available new examples (Castro
et al., 2008; Kühl et al., 2020). In essence, this capability
of the mind of learning how to learn (Black et al., 2006)
has inspired researchers to investigate the concept of Meta1

Dept. of Electrical Eng., Computer Eng., and Informatics,
Cyprus University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus. Correspondence to: Konstantinos Kalais <ki.kalais@cut.ac.cy>, Sotirios
Chatzis <sotirios.chatzis@cut.ac.cy>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Learning (ML) (Lake et al., 2017; Buysse et al., 2019).
There is a large variety of deep learning methods for ML
(Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2019; Baik et al.,
2020). Specifically, Finn et al. (2017) presented the ModelAgnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) algorithm that enables
tuning the parameters of a trained network to quickly learn a
new task with only a few gradient updates. To get away with
the entailed second-order computations, that are expensive,
several researchers proposed appropriate first-order approximations for MAML; such works are the First-Order MAML
(FOMAML) of Finn et al. (2017) and the Reptile algorithm
of Nichol et al. (2018). Recently, several researchers have
also considered Bayesian inference-driven methods for deep
learning ML, extending upon older works built for conventional machine learning approaches (Grant et al., 2018;
Yoon et al., 2018; Finn et al., 2018; Ravi & Beatson, 2019;
Patacchiola et al., 2020; Zou & Lu, 2020; Chen et al., 2020).
This work proposes a different regard toward improving
generalization capacity for deep networks in the context
of ML. Specifically, our proposed approach relies on the
following main concepts:
• The concept of sparse learned representations. For
the first time in the literature of deep network-driven
ML, we employ a mechanism that inherently learns
to extract sparse data representations. This consists in
replacing standard unit nonlinearities (e.g., ReLU) with
a unit competition mechanism. Specifically, (linear)
units are organized into blocks. Presented with some
input, the units within a block engage in a competition
process with only one winner. The outputs of all units
except for the winner are zeroed out; the output of
the winner retains its computed value (local winner
takes-all, LWTA, architecture).
• The concept of stochastic representations. We establish a stochastic formulation for the previously described competition process. Specifically, we postulate
that, within a block of competing units, winner is selected via sampling from an appropriate Categorical
posterior. The corresponding winning probability of
each unit is proportional to its linear computation (thus
depending on the layer input). Via this competition

