Graph Neural Architecture Search Under Distribution Shifts

Yijian Qin 1 Xin Wang 1 2 Ziwei Zhang 1 Pengtao Xie 3 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract
Graph neural architecture search has shown great
potentials for automatically designing graph neural network (GNN) architectures for graph classification tasks. However, when there is a distribution
shift between training and test graphs, the existing approaches fail to deal with the problem of
adapting to unknown test graph structures since
they only search for a fixed architecture for all
graphs. To solve this problem, we propose a novel
Graph neuRal Architecture Customization with
disEntangled Self-supervised learning (GRACES)
model which is able to generalize under distribution shifts through tailoring a customized GNN
architecture suitable for each graph instance with
unknown distribution. Specifically, we design
a self-supervised disentangled graph encoder to
characterize invariant factors hidden in diverse
graph structures. Then, we propose a prototype based architecture self-customization strategy to generate the most suitable GNN architecture weights in a continuous space for each graph
instance. We further propose a customized supernetwork to share weights among different architectures for the sake of efficient training. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate that our proposed GRACES
model can adapt to diverse graph structures and
achieve state-of-the-art performance for graph
classification tasks under distribution shifts.

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data has attracted lots of attention in recent years for its flexible representation ability in various
domains. Graph neural networks (GNNs) models such as
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), GAT (Veličković et al., 2018),
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University 2 THU-Bosch JCML center 3 UC San Diego. Correspondence to: Wenwu Zhu <wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Xin Wang
<xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and GIN (Xu et al., 2019) have been proposed and achieved
great successes in many graph tasks. Generally, GNNs learn
node representations by a recursive message passing scheme
where nodes aggregate information from their neighbors iteratively. Then for the graph classification task, GNNs
use pooling methods to derive graph-level representations.
Different GNN architectures mainly differ in their messagepassing mechanism, i.e., how to exchange information, to
adapt to the demands of different graph scenarios.
To save human efforts on designing GNN architectures
for different tasks and automatically design more powerful GNNs, graph neural architecture search (GraphNAS) (Li
et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021) has been utilized to search for an optimal GNN architecture. These automatically designed architectures have achieved competitive
or better performances compared with manually designed
GNNs on datasets with the same distributions under the independently and identically distributed (I.I.D.) assumption,
i.e., the training and test graphs are independently sampled
from the identical distribution.
Nevertheless, distribution shifts are ubiquitous and inevitable in real-world graph applications where there exist a
large number of unforeseen and uncontrollable hidden factors. Taking drug discovery as an example, there exists only
a limited amount of training data that can be obtained for
experiments, and the interaction mechanism varies greatly
for different molecules due to their complex chemical properties (Ji et al., 2022). That being the case, the GNN models
designed for drug discovery frequently have to be tested on
data with distribution shifts.
The existing GraphNAS approaches under the I.I.D. assumption only search a single fixed GNN architecture based on
the training set before directly applying the selected architecture on the test set, failing to deal with varying distribution
shifts under the out-of-distribution setting. Because the single GNN architecture discovered by existing methods may
overfit the distributions of the training graph data, it may
fail to make accurate predictions on test data with various
distributions different from the training data.
To solve this problem, in this paper we are the first to
study graph neural architecture search for graph classification under distribution shifts, to the best of our knowledge.
We propose Graph neuRal Architecture Customization with

