A Parametric Class of Approximate Gradient Updates for Policy Optimization

Ramki Gummadi 1 Saurabh Kumar 1 2 Junfeng Wen 3 Dale Schuurmans 1 4

Abstract
Approaches to policy optimization have been motivated from diverse principles, based on how the
parametric model is interpreted (e.g. value versus policy representation) or how the learning
objective is formulated, yet they share a common
goal of maximizing expected return. To better
capture the commonalities and identify key differences between policy optimization methods, we
develop a unified perspective that re-expresses the
underlying updates in terms of a limited choice of
gradient form and scaling function. In particular,
we identify a parameterized space of approximate
gradient updates for policy optimization that is
highly structured, yet covers both classical and
recent examples, including PPO. As a result, we
obtain novel yet well motivated updates that generalize existing algorithms in a way that can deliver benefits both in terms of convergence speed
and final result quality. An experimental investigation demonstrates that the additional degrees
of freedom provided in the parameterized family
of updates can be leveraged to obtain non-trivial
improvements both in synthetic domains and on
popular deep RL benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Policy optimization in reinforcement learning considers the
problem of learning a parameterized policy that maximizes
some notion of expected return, either via direct interactions with the environment (on-policy) or via learning from
a fixed dataset (off-policy). A direct approach to policy
optimization is based on the policy gradient (PG) theorem
(Sutton et al., 1999), which shows how a parameterized
policy can be locally improved from unbiased Monte Carlo
estimates of the gradient of the expected return. Alternately,
1

Google Research, Brain Team 2 Stanford University 3 Layer 6
AI University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Ramki Gummadi
<gsrk@google.com>.
4

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

value-based methods attempt to solve a proxy task of fitting a parameterized action-value function, which explicitly
models returns in the environment.
Even though the learning objectives appear different, they
share a common goal of constructing an agent that maximizes returns in an unknown environment. Moreover, they
share a low level algorithmic primitive of incrementally updating model parameters based on learning signals derived
from random experience, which suggests a deeper underlying connection. In this paper, we consider learning a single
parametric model while being agnostic about whether it is
a policy or a value model. A key contribution in Section 3
is to derive tight constraints on gradient estimates that correspond to standard action value or policy gradient updates
on a parametric model. These results highlight the shared
sample dependent components of the updates while also
emphasizing key differences, which we use to organize a
form-axis of update variations. This leads us to propose a
novel form of policy gradient (PG) in Theorem 3.1, Policy
Gradient With Policy Baseline, that leverages a specific form
of state-action baseline (Gu et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018;
Tucker et al., 2018), typically used to provide a control
variate for additional variance reduction beyond state only
baselines (Weaver & Tao, 2001; Greensmith et al., 2001).
In Section 4, an alternate axis of variation among updates is
identified, the scale-axis, which covers gradients for robust
alternatives to the MSE loss, including Huber loss. Notably,
the only difference between updates along this axis lies in
how return estimates are rescaled in the gradient update. In
Section 4.2, we show the Maximum-Likelihood gradient
can also be approximated as a scale variation.
Prior work has shown that accounting for distribution shift
from the behavior policy is valuable (Espeholt et al., 2018;
Schulman et al., 2017) in the case of off-policy learning. In
Section 4.3, we consider off-policy corrections as another
instance of scale-axis variation. A key insight is the central
role of a simple scaling function whose two scalar inputs
are sample-dependent learning signals: (1) the return error
estimate and (2) the log probability ratio of importance
weight. In Section 4.4, we prove that the gradient update
arising from the surrogate objective defined for Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) also
corresponds to a particular non-trivial instantiation of this

