Sequential- and Parallel- Constrained Max-value Entropy Search
via Information Lower Bound
Shion Takeno 1 2 Tomoyuki Tamura 3 Kazuki Shitara 4 5 Masayuki Karasuyama 1

Abstract
Max-value entropy search (MES) is one of the
state-of-the-art approaches in Bayesian optimization (BO). In this paper, we propose a novel
variant of MES for constrained problems, called
Constrained MES via Information lower BOund
(CMES-IBO), that is based on a Monte Carlo
(MC) estimator of a lower bound of a mutual information (MI). Unlike existing studies, our MI
is deﬁned so that uncertainty with respect to feasibility can be incorporated. We derive a lower
bound of the MI that guarantees non-negativity,
while a constrained counterpart of conventional
MES can be negative. We further provide theoretical analysis that assures the low-variability
of our estimator which has never been investigated for any existing information-theoretic BO.
Moreover, using the conditional MI, we extend
CMES-IBO to the parallel setting while maintaining the desirable properties. We demonstrate the effectiveness of CMES-IBO by several
benchmark functions and real-world problems.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) has been widely studied as an
effective framework for expensive black-box optimization
problems. On the other hand, additional unknown constraints often exist in real-world problems of a variety of
ﬁelds such as scientiﬁc experiments, industrial product designs, and automatic machine learning (AutoML). For example, materials discovery can be seen as an optimiza1
Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project,
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan 3 Department of Physical Science and Engineering, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 4 Joining
and Welding Research Institute, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
5
Nanostructures Research Laboratory, Japan Fine Ceramics Center, Aichi, Japan. Correspondence to: Masayuki Karasuyama
<karasuyama@nitech.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tion of a physical property of materials, such as conductivity, under constraints derived from other physical properties, such as stability. In the case of AutoML, for example, constraints are useful to guarantee the classiﬁcation
accuracy of minority classes for class-imbalanced datasets.
However, constrained black-box optimization is often quite
difﬁcult because, in many practical problems, a measurement comes at a high cost, and further, functional forms
of both the objective and the constraints are unknown. To
incorporate unknown constraint functions, constrained BO
(CBO) has also been studied (Gardner et al., 2014; Gelbart et al., 2014; Schonlau et al., 1998; Snoek, 2013). CBO
tries to achieve the sample-efﬁcient constrained optimization based on Bayesian models for objective and constraint
functions.
Max-value entropy search (MES) (Wang & Jegelka, 2017)
is one of the state-of-the-art approaches in BO. The basic
idea is to maximize the mutual information (MI) between
a querying point and the optimal objective value. For constrained problems, Perrone et al. (2019) have proposed an
extension of MES, but it is restricted to only one constraint
(note that although their main focus is on a setting in which
only a binary indicator of feasibility is observed for constraints, they also show the ‘real-valued feedback’ case in
the appendix). Although it is possible to consider a multiple constraint extension of this approach, which we call
constrained MES (CMES), the resulting MI approximation
can have a negative value (though the MI should be nonnegative) when the number of constraints is more than 5 as
we will show in Section 4.1. A more comprehensive review
of related studies is shown in Section 5.
In this paper, we propose a novel information-theoretic
CBO method called Constrained Max-value Entropy
Search via Information lower BOund (CMES-IBO), which
is based on a Monte Carlo (MC) estimator of a lower bound
of an MI. We ﬁrst deﬁne the random ‘max-value’ of a constrained problem so that uncertainty with respect to feasibility (whether the problem has a feasible region or not)
can be incorporated. Uncertainty of feasibility has not been
considered by existing information-theoretic CBO studies,
though for constrained problems in general, to identify the
feasibility of the problem is a key issue known as the feasibility problem (Chinneck, 2007). Unlike CMES, our ac-

