Branchformer: Parallel MLP-Attention Architectures to Capture
Local and Global Context for Speech Recognition and Understanding

Yifan Peng 1 Siddharth Dalmia 2 Ian Lane 1 Shinji Watanabe 2

Abstract

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
USA 2 Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. Correspondence to: Yifan Peng <yifanpen@andrew.cmu.edu>, Siddharth Dalmia <sdalmia@cs.cmu.edu>, Shinji Watanabe
<swatanab@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Our code and models are released as part of the ESPnet toolkit:
https://github.com/espnet/espnet.

% Character Error Rate (↓)

Conformer has proven to be effective in many
speech processing tasks. It combines the benefits
of extracting local dependencies using convolutions and global dependencies using self-attention.
Inspired by this, we propose a more flexible, interpretable and customizable encoder alternative,
Branchformer, with parallel branches for modeling various ranged dependencies in end-to-end
speech processing. In each encoder layer, one
branch employs self-attention or its variant to capture long-range dependencies, while the other
branch utilizes an MLP module with convolutional gating (cgMLP) to extract local relationships. We conduct experiments on several speech
recognition and spoken language understanding
benchmarks. Results show that our model outperforms both Transformer and cgMLP. It also
matches with or outperforms state-of-the-art results achieved by Conformer. Furthermore, we
show various strategies to reduce computation
thanks to the two-branch architecture, including the ability to have variable inference complexity in a single trained model. The weights
learned for merging branches indicate how local
and global dependencies are utilized in different
layers, which benefits model designing. 1

Branchformer
Conformer

5.4

cgMLP
Transformer

5.2
5
4.8
4.6
4.4
30

40
50
60
Number of Parameters (Millions)

Figure 1. Character Error Rate (%) vs. Model Size. Our Branchformer outperforms previously proposed Conformer, cgMLP and
Transformer at all scales on the benchmark Aishell ASR task.

1. Introduction
Conformer (Gulati et al., 2020), which is a variant of Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), has been successfully applied
to various speech processing tasks (Guo et al., 2021; Arora
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021). The key feature of Conformer is that it captures both local and global contextual
information using convolution and self-attention, respectively. The effectiveness of combining local and global
dependencies is also demonstrated by other studies in vision
(Wu et al., 2021b) and language (Wu et al., 2020) tasks.
Despite the superior performance of Conformer, there are
some limitations. Conformer combines convolution and
self-attention sequentially. This static single-branch architecture is hard to interpret and modify. It is unclear how
local and global relationships are used in different encoder
layers. Are they equally important in every layer? If not,
which type of operation plays a major role in the initial
layers? Understanding these questions can help researchers
design better architectures.
To address these questions, we propose a flexible, interpretable and customizable encoder alternative, Branchformer, with two parallel branches to capture various ranged
context in end-to-end automatic speech recognition (ASR)
and spoken language understanding (SLU) tasks. In Branchformer, one branch employs self-attention or its variant to

