On the Finite-Time Performance of the Knowledge Gradient Algorithm

Yanwen Li 1 Siyang Gao 1 2

Abstract
The knowledge gradient (KG) algorithm is a popular and effective algorithm for the best arm identification (BAI) problem. Due to the complex
calculation of KG, theoretical analysis of this algorithm is difficult, and existing results are mostly
about the asymptotic performance of it, e.g., consistency, asymptotic sample allocation, etc. In this
research, we present new theoretical results about
the finite-time performance of the KG algorithm.
Under independent and normally distributed rewards, we derive bounds for the sample allocation of the algorithm. With these bounds, existing
asymptotic results become simple corollaries. Furthermore, we derive upper and lower bounds for
the probability of error and simple regret of the
algorithm, and show the performance of the algorithm for the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem.
These developments not only extend the existing
analysis of the KG algorithm, but can also be used
to analyze other improvement-based algorithms.
Last, we use numerical experiments to compare
the bounds we derive and the performance of the
KG algorithm.

1. Introduction
In the best arm identification (BAI) problem, there is a finite
number of arms with unknown mean rewards. In each round,
an agent chooses an arm to pull and observes a noisy reward.
The reward is drawn from a fixed but unknown underlying
distribution corresponding to the pulled arm, and no information about other arms is obtained. After learning the
mean rewards of the arms by pulling them, the agent identifies an arm that is expected to be the one with the largest
mean reward. BAI is also known as the pure exploration
1

Department of Advanced Design and Systems Engineering,
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 2 School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Yanwen Li <yanwen.li@my.cityu.edu.hk>, Siyang Gao
<siyangao@cityu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

problem (Bubeck et al., 2009) and serves as a fundamental
and useful model for many practical problems such as the
inventory management (Mahajan & Ryzin, 2001), mobile
communication (Audibert et al., 2010), A/B testing (Scott,
2015), and clinic trials (Villar et al., 2015).
We consider the BAI problem under the fixed-budget setting, where the agent tries to identify the best arm under a
fixed number of rounds. That is, the agent aims to make
the maximum use of the available resources (i.e., a limited number of pulls) to explore the set of arms and optimize the quality of the selected arm. The fixed-budget
BAI has been widely studied in the literature. Some wellknown methods for it include the knowledge gradient (KG,
Gupta & Miescke (1996); Frazier et al. (2008)), expected improvement (EI, Jones et al. (1998); Ryzhov (2016)), optimal
computing budget allocation (OCBA, Chen et al. (2000);
Gao & Shi (2015); Gao et al. (2017); Li & Gao (2022)),
Upper Confidence Bound Exploration (UCB-E, Audibert
et al. (2010)), successive rejects (SR, Audibert et al. (2010);
Bubeck et al. (2013a)), gap-based exploration (GapE, Gabillon et al. (2011)), top-two Thompson sampling (TTTS,
Russo (2016)), etc.
In this research, we focus on the KG algorithm. It is a singlestep Bayesian look-ahead algorithm that was first introduced
in Gupta & Miescke (1996), and was intensively studied
later in Frazier et al. (2008). In each round of the KG algorithm, the agent pulls the arm with the largest knowledge
gradient, i.e., the arm with the largest expected increment
in the posterior mean reward. Such a myopic heuristic is
optimal if only one round is left before the agent identifies
the best arm. For the general situation where more than
one rounds are available, the KG algorithm has also demonstrated excellent empirical performance in various numerical
tests, e.g., in Frazier et al. (2008), Frazier (2009), Powell
(2011), and Wang & Powell (2018). Now, the KG algorithm
has been successfully applied to different real problems
such as the drug discovery (Negoescu et al., 2011), urban
delivery (Huang et al., 2019), risk quantification (Cakmak
et al., 2020), and the experimental design in material science
(Chen et al., 2015) and biotechnology (Li et al., 2018). The
KG algorithm was also extended to solve other types of BAI
problems such as the parallel BAI (Wu & Frazier, 2016) and
contextual bandits (Ding et al., 2021).

