Context-Aware Drift Detection
Oliver Cobb 1 Arnaud Van Looveren 1

Abstract
When monitoring machine learning systems, twosample tests of homogeneity form the foundation
upon which existing approaches to drift detection
build. They are used to test for evidence that the
distribution underlying recent deployment data
differs from that underlying the historical reference data. Often, however, various factors such as
time-induced correlation mean that batches of recent deployment data are not expected to form an
i.i.d. sample from the historical data distribution.
Instead we may wish to test for differences in the
distributions conditional on context that is permitted to change. To facilitate this we borrow machinery from the causal inference domain to develop a
more general drift detection framework built upon
a foundation of two-sample tests for conditional
distributional treatment effects. We recommend
a particular instantiation of the framework based
on maximum conditional mean discrepancies. We
then provide an empirical study demonstrating its
effectiveness for various drift detection problems
of practical interest, such as detecting drift in the
distributions underlying subpopulations of data
in a manner that is insensitive to their respective
prevalences. The study additionally demonstrates
applicability to ImageNet-scale vision problems.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are designed to operate on unseen
data sharing the same underlying distribution as a set of
historical training data. When the distribution changes, the
data is said to have drifted and models can fail catastrophically (Recht et al., 2019; Engstrom et al., 2019; Hendrycks
& Dietterich, 2019; Taori et al., 2020; Barbu et al., 2019). It
is therefore important to have systems in place that detect
when drift occurs and raise alarms accordingly (Breck et al.,
2019; Klaise et al., 2020; Paleyes et al., 2020).
1
Seldon Technologies. Correspondence to: Oliver Cobb
<oc@seldon.io>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Batches of the most recent deployment data may not
cover all contexts (e.g. day and night) covered by the training
data. We often do not wish for this partial coverage to cause drift
detections, but instead to detect other changes not explained by
the change/narrowing of context. A nighttime deployment batch
should be permitted to contain only wolves and owls, but a daytime
deployment batch should not contain any owls.

Given a model of interest, drift can be categorised based
on whether the change is in the distribution of features, the
distribution of labels, or the relationship between the two.
Approaches to drift detection are therefore diverse, with
some methods focusing on one or more of these categories.
They invariably, however, share an underlying structure (Lu
et al., 2018). Available data is repeatedly arranged into a set
of reference samples, a set of deployment1 samples, and a
test of equality is performed under the assumption that the
samples within each set are i.i.d. Methods then vary in the
notion of equality chosen to be repeatedly tested, which may
be defined in terms of specific moments, model-dependent
transformations, or in the most general distributional sense.
(Gretton et al., 2008; 2012a; Tasche, 2017; Lipton et al.,
2018; Page, 1954; Gama et al., 2004; Baena-Garcıa et al.,
2006; Bifet & Gavaldà; Wang & Abraham, 2015; QuioneroCandela et al., 2009; Rabanser et al., 2019; Cobb et al.,
2022). Each test evaluates a test statistic capturing the extent
to which the two sets of samples deviate from the chosen
notion of equality and make a detection if a threshold is
exceeded. Threshold values are set such that, under the
assumptions of i.i.d. samples and strict equality, the rate of
false positives is controlled. However, in practice windows
of deployment data may stray from these assumptions in
ways deemed to be permissible.
1
Throughout this paper we use “deployment” data to mean the
unseen data on which a model was designed to operate.

