Path-Gradient Estimators for Continuous Normalizing Flows

Lorenz Vaitl 1 Kim Nicoli 1 2 Shinichi Nakajima 1 2 3 Pan Kessel 1 2

Abstract
Recent work has established a path-gradient estimator for simple variational Gaussian distributions and has argued that the path-gradient is particularly beneficial in the regime in which the
variational distribution approaches the exact target distribution. In many applications, this regime
can however not be reached by a simple Gaussian variational distribution. In this work, we
overcome this crucial limitation by proposing a
path-gradient estimator for the considerably more
expressive variational family of continuous normalizing flows. We outline an efficient algorithm
to calculate this estimator and establish its superior performance empirically.

1. Introduction
Variational Inference is increasingly applied to very highdimensional systems in various application domains. For
example, recent developments in Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014;
Kingma et al., 2016; van den Berg et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2018) have led to models that can generate high-resolution
natural images. Similarly promising examples are applications in computer graphics (Müller et al., 2019), theoretical
physics (Wu et al., 2019; Nicoli et al., 2020; Albergo et al.,
2021; Nicoli et al., 2021) and computational chemistry (Noé
et al., 2019).
A recurrent theme of most of these examples is that a
highly expressive normalizing flow model is used as the
variational density which can be trained by maximizing
the evidence lower bound (ELBO) with the reparameterization trick (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,
2014). These models are considerably more expressive
1
Machine Learning Group, Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
2
BIFOLD - Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and
Data, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany 3 RIKEN
Center for AIP, 103-0027 Tokyo, Chuo City, Japan. Correspondence to: Pan Kessel <pan.kessel@tu-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

than traditional models, such as (mixtures of) Gaussians,
and thereby enable the application of Variational Inference
to these highly complex problems.
A promising subclass of these models are continuous normalizing flows (Chen et al., 2018) because they allow for
a free-form Jacobian (Grathwohl et al., 2019) and are particularly suited for incorporating known symmetries of the
target density (Köhler et al., 2020) as inductive bias in their
architecture. The latter point is of crucial importance in
many applications in the natural sciences, (see e.g. Köhler
et al. (2020); Kanwar et al. (2020); de Haan et al. (2021)).
In a seminal paper, Roeder et al. (2017) proposed a promising alternative training method for Variational Inference.
Specifically, they derived a new unbiased estimator for the
gradient of the ELBO with respect to the variational parameters. Unlike the standard estimator, their proposed estimator
is not based on the total derivative but rather on the path gradient, i.e. it only takes into account the implicit dependency
on the variational parameters through reparameterized sampling but is insensitive to any explicit parameter dependency.
From theoretical arguments, which we will discuss in Section 3, it may be expected that this estimator has lower
variance than the standard estimator. In their experiments,
Roeder et al. (2017) demonstrated that, for comparatively
simple variational models, this estimator indeed leads to
faster convergences and better approximation results.
Unfortunately, their method cannot be efficiently implemented for normalizing flows for reasons that we will
describe in detail in Section 4. As a result, the pathgradient estimator cannot efficiently be applied to the modern normalizing-flow-based applications of Variational Inference discussed above.
The main contribution of this work is to propose a method to
estimate the path-gradient for continuous normalizing flow
models. Our method has only slightly larger runtime and
the same memory costs per iteration as the standard total
derivative training. This mild increase in computational
cost per iteration is however more than compensated by
faster convergence often leading to a substantial speed-up
in training time and better overall training results.
We demonstrate for two application domains, i.e. VAEs and
lattice field theories in theoretical physics, that a simple re-

