Stochastic Contextual Dueling Bandits
under Linear Stochastic Transitivity Models

Viktor Bengs 1 Aadirupa Saha 2 Eyke Hüllermeier 1

Abstract
We consider the regret minimization task in a
dueling bandits problem with context information. In every round of the sequential decision
problem, the learner makes a context-dependent
selection of two choice alternatives (arms) to be
compared with each other and receives feedback
in the form of noisy preference information. We
assume that the feedback process is determined
by a linear stochastic transitivity model with contextualized utilities (CoLST), and the learner’s
task is to include the best arm (with highest latent context-dependent utility) in the duel. We
propose a computationally efficient algorithm,
C O LSTIM, which makes its choice based on
imitating the feedback process using perturbed
context-dependent utility estimates of the underlying CoLST model. If each arm is associated
with a d-dimensional feature vector, we show
√ that
C O LSTIM achieves a regret of order Õ( dT )
after T learning rounds. Additionally, we also
establish the optimality of C O LSTIM by showing a lower bound for the weak regret that refines
the existing average regret analysis. Our experiments demonstrate its superiority over state-of-art
algorithms for special cases of CoLST models.

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem represents a class
of online machine learning problems in which a learner
can perform different actions (metaphorically referred to
as “pulling arms”) resulting in numerical rewards within a
sequential decision process (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020).
From a learning perspective, the main challenge of this problem is the exploration-exploitation dilemma. The learner’s
1

Institute of Informatics, LMU Munich, Germany 2 Microsoft
Research, New York City, US. Correspondence to: Viktor Bengs
<Viktor.bengs@lmu.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lack of knowledge about the underlying reward mechanism
associated with the actions forces it to try different actions
often enough, so as to gradually understand these mechanisms better in the course of time (exploration). On the
other side, the learner is inclined to choose actions deemed
rewarding, as as to maximize the rewards cumulated over
time (exploitation).
Although this learning scenario has been used in many application areas, such as web advertising or medical treatments,
it has been generalized in various ways to take specific aspects arising in practical problems into account. In many
applications, for example, additional information is available about the context in which an action is performed, for
instance, the user profile in web advertising or a patient’s
medical record. In the contextual MAB setting (Chu et al.,
2011; Valko et al., 2013), an action’s reward mechanism
might depend on the contextual information, so that one or
the other action is optimal depending on the context.
Another practically relevant extension of the classical
MAB problem is the dueling (Yue & Joachims, 2009) or
preference-based (Bengs et al., 2021) bandit problem, where
the learner’s action is to select a pair of arms resulting in
a noisy qualitative comparison between these arms (which
arm generated the highest reward?) rather than selecting
a single arm resulting in a numerical reward (what is the
generated reward?). An example is A/B testing, where
users are presented with two options from which the more
preferred one should be selected, but no (meaningful) numerical reward can be measured for that choice. Although
the dueling bandits problem itself — just like the standard
MAB problem — has already been the starting point for
various generalizations, little attention has been paid to a
contextual learning scenario in the same spirit as the contextual bandits. One reason might be that, in contrast to
numerical reward learning scenarios, in preference-based
learning scenarios it is often far from obvious to specify
basic characteristics such as the optimal (pair of) arm(s) or
a practically meaningful model assumption for the feedback
mechanism.
One way to get around these issues, which we propose in
this paper, is to use the so-called linear stochastic transi-

