Discrete Tree Flows via Tree-Structured Permutations
Mai Elkady * 1 Jim Lim * 2 David I. Inouye 2

Abstract
While normalizing flows for continuous data have
been extensively researched, flows for discrete
data have only recently been explored. These
prior models, however, suffer from limitations
that are distinct from those of continuous flows.
Most notably, discrete flow-based models cannot
be straightforwardly optimized with conventional
deep learning methods because gradients of discrete functions are undefined or zero. Previous
works approximate pseudo-gradients of the discrete functions but do not solve the problem on
a fundamental level. In addition to that, backpropagation can be computationally burdensome
compared to alternative discrete algorithms such
as decision tree algorithms. Our approach seeks
to reduce computational burden and remove the
need for pseudo-gradients by developing a discrete flow based on decision trees—building upon
the success of efficient tree-based methods for
classification and regression for discrete data. We
first define a tree-structured permutation (TSP)
that compactly encodes a permutation of discrete
data where the inverse is easy to compute; thus,
we can efficiently compute the density value and
sample new data. We then propose a decision
tree algorithm to build TSPs that learns the tree
structure and permutations at each node via novel
criteria. We empirically demonstrate the feasibility of our method on multiple datasets.

1. Introduction
Discrete categorical data is abundant in numerous applications and domains, from DNA sequences and medical
records to text data and many forms of tabular data. Analyzing discrete data by modelling and inferring its distribution
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Computer Science, Purdue University 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University. Correspondence to: Mai Elkady
<melkady1@purdue.edu>, Jim Lim <lim316@purdue.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

is crucial in many of those applications and can encourage
innovation in discrete data utilization such as generating
new data that is of similar distribution and properties to our
original data. However, discrete data can be inherently hard
to model.
Probabilistic graphical models are an important classical
way to model discrete distributions such as the Ising model
for binary data (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008), multivariate
Poisson distributions (Inouye et al., 2017) for count data,
mixture models (Ghojogh et al., 2020), admixture models
(Inouye et al., 2014), and discrete variational autoencoders
(VAE) (van den Oord et al., 2018), (Razavi et al., 2019).
However, some of these graphical models lack tractable
exact likelihood computation or sampling procedures.
Autoregressive models for discrete data can provide exact
likelihood computation (e.g., (Germain et al., 2015)), however, their structures hinder sampling speed as variables
are conditionally dependent on one another and must be
traversed in a fixed order.
A relatively new approach in tackling this problem is normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2016), which leverage
invertible models to combine different advantages of latent
variable models by having a latent variable representation
of the data, while also allowing for exact likelihood computation and fast sampling. These models have mostly focused
on continuous random variables (Dinh et al., 2017),(Kingma
et al., 2016),(Papamakarios et al., 2018), but have recently
been introduced for discrete random variables as well.
The two key components of discrete flows are a base distribution (similar to continuous flows) and a permutation
of the discrete configuration values (a discrete version of
invertible functions) (Tran et al., 2019). Discrete flows have
a similar change of variable structure via invertible models
as seen in this comparison between continuous change of
variables and discrete change of variables:
Px (x) = Qz (f (x)) det

df (x)
dx

(Continuous)

(1)

Px (x) = Qz (f (x)) (Discrete)
where Qz is some (possibly learnable) base distribution that
is usually a simple distribution (e.g., a Gaussian in the continuous flows case or an independent categorical distribution
for discrete flows), and f is an invertible function. Impor-

