Identifiability Conditions for Domain Adaptation

Ishaan Gulrajani 1 Tatsunori B. Hashimoto 1

Abstract
Domain adaptation algorithms and theory have
relied upon an assumption that the observed data
uniquely specify the correct correspondence between the domains. Unfortunately, it is unclear
under what conditions this identifiability assumption holds, even when restricting ourselves to the
case where a correct bijective map between domains exists. We study this bijective domain
mapping problem and provide several new sufficient conditions for the identifiability of linear
domain maps. As a consequence of our analysis, we show that weak constraints on the third
moment tensor suffice for identifiability, prove
identifiability for common latent variable models
such as topic models, and give a computationally
tractable method for generating certificates for the
identifiability of linear maps. Inspired by our certification method, we derive a new objective function for domain mapping that explicitly accounts
for uncertainty over maps arising from unidentifiability. We demonstrate that our objective leads
to improvements in uncertainty quantification and
model performance estimation.

learnable?”
There is a long history of domain adaptation theory work
that attempts to bound the target-domain error (e.g. BenDavid et al. (2010b) and survey in Redko et al. (2020)) but
these methods either require that source and target distributions already be extremely similar (and often overlapping)
or that the hypothesis class is highly constrained. While
there are invariant representation approaches (Ganin et al.,
2016) that avoid these drawbacks by learning representations that increase overlap between the domains, the target
error guarantees for these models contain terms that require
target-domain labels to estimate and can’t easily be assumed
away (Johansson et al., 2019).
There have been some recent successes in obtaining provable guarantees for complex predictors with little to no
overlap in the setting where we assume the existence of
a bijective domain map that relates the source and target
inputs (Richardson & Weiss, 2021; Courty et al., 2016). In
this setting, the problem of domain adaptation reduces to
recovering the map. Domain mapping algorithms (e.g. Zhu
et al., 2017) learn such a map by minimizing a distance between the distributions of source inputs and mapped target
inputs over a family of maps with the true map achieving a
distance of zero.

1. Introduction
Given labeled data from a source domain and only unlabeled
data from a different target domain, can we learn a classifier
that performs well on the target domain? Many unsupervised domain adaptation algorithms have been proposed to
learn such models, but the lack of labeled target-domain data
makes it difficult to evaluate or trust the resulting models.
Overcoming this challenge requires us to derive methods
that provide guarantees on target-domain error in domain
adaptation problems. More generally, these guarantees are
a key step to answering the broader research question of
“under what conditions are domain adaptation problems
1
Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to: Ishaan Gulrajani <igul@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

…
Target
domain

Source
domain

Possible maps

Figure 1. When mapping an unlabeled target domain to a labeled
source domain, many possible maps can exist which yield different
labelings.

Domain mapping suffers from a problem: besides the correct map, our map family may also contain may contain
“spurious maps” which yield high target-domain error, but
still align the input distributions. We have no way to disqualify these maps based on the data alone. We illustrate
this problem in Figure 1: if both domains’ inputs follow a
uniform distribution over a circle, any rotation matrix will

