Unsupervised Ground Metric Learning Using Wasserstein Singular Vectors

Geert-Jan Huizing 1 2 Laura Cantini 2 Gabriel Peyré 1

Abstract
Defining meaningful distances between samples
in a dataset is a fundamental problem in machine
learning. Optimal Transport (OT) lifts a distance
between features (the “ground metric”) to a geometrically meaningful distance between samples. However, there is usually no straightforward choice of ground metric. Supervised ground
metric learning approaches exist but require labeled data. In absence of labels, only ad-hoc
ground metrics remain. Unsupervised ground
metric learning is thus a fundamental problem
to enable data-driven applications of OT. In this
paper, we propose for the first time a canonical
answer by simultaneously computing an OT distance between samples and between features of a
dataset. These distance matrices emerge naturally
as positive singular vectors of the function mapping ground metrics to OT distances. We provide
criteria to ensure the existence and uniqueness of
these singular vectors. We then introduce scalable computational methods to approximate them
in high-dimensional settings, using stochastic approximation and entropic regularization. Finally,
we showcase Wasserstein Singular Vectors on a
single-cell RNA-sequencing dataset.

1. Introduction
Machine learning tasks like information retrieval and classification require a notion of distance between samples in a
dataset X ∈ Rn×m . In particular, we will study the case of
single-cell RNA-sequencing data (scRNA-seq).
1

Département de mathématiques et applications de l’Ecole
Normale Supérieure, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Université PSL, 75005, Paris, France 2 Computational Systems Biology
Team, Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS,
INSERM, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Université PSL, 75005,
Paris, France. Correspondence to: Geert-Jan Huizing <huizing@ens.fr>, Gabriel Peyré <gabriel.peyre@ens.fr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Samples
Feature k
Feature l

Pairwise
distance

Pairwise
distance

?

Sample i
Sample j

Features
Figure 1. How to jointly define a distance A between features and a
distance B between samples? Wasserstein Singular Vectors define
natural Wasserstein distances (A, B) in an unsupervised manner.

Discrete histograms In scRNA-seq data, the sample
x i ∈ Rm
+ represents the expression value of all genes in
the i-th cell. This motivates two key assumptions in this
paper: (i) samples are positive, which is natural when quantifying presence and quantity of physical objects (ii) samples
can be normalized to discrete histograms, which is natural
when the distribution over features (e.g. genes) is more
important than the total mass. Indeed, gene expression in
scRNA-seq data is usually normalized in some way as part
of preprocessing (Luecken & Theis, 2019).
Optimal Transport distances
Optimal Transport
(OT) (Monge, 1781; Kantorovich, 1942) offers a geometrically meaningful distance between discrete probability
distributions, and has recently emerged as a useful tool for
machine learning applications (Frogner et al., 2015; Rolet
et al., 2016). Contrarily to the Euclidean distance, OT does
not compare distributions bin by bin. Instead, OT lifts a
ground pairwise distance matrix A ∈ Rm×m
between the m
+
features to the “Wasserstein” OT distance between normalized samples ai := xi /∥xi ∥1 . It optimizes a transport plan
P ∈ Rm×m encoding the displacement of mass between
the two m-dimensional histograms ai , aj .
(
P
P 1m = ai ,
WA (ai , aj ) := min
k,ℓ Pk,ℓ Ak,ℓ s.t.
m×m
P ⊤ 1m = aj .
P ∈R+
From supervised to unsupervised ground metric learning The crucial aspect of successful application of OT in
ML is the design of a metric A which encodes the geometric
relationships between features. In a supervised setting, one
might take advantage of so-called ground metric learning

