Composing Partial Differential Equations with Physics-Aware Neural Networks

Matthias Karlbauer? 1 Timothy Praditia? 2 Sebastian Otte 1 Sergey Oladyshkin 2 Wolfgang Nowak 2
Martin V. Butz 1

Abstract
We introduce a compositional physics-aware
FInite volume Neural Network (FINN) for
learning spatiotemporal advection-diffusion processes. FINN implements a new way of combining the learning abilities of artificial neural
networks with physical and structural knowledge from numerical simulation by modeling
the constituents of partial differential equations (PDEs) in a compositional manner. Results on both one- and two-dimensional PDEs
(Burgers’, diffusion-sorption, diffusion-reaction,
Allen–Cahn) demonstrate FINN’s superior modeling accuracy and excellent out-of-distribution
generalization ability beyond initial and boundary conditions. With only one tenth of the number of parameters on average, FINN outperforms
pure machine learning and other state-of-the-art
physics-aware models in all cases—often even
by multiple orders of magnitude. Moreover,
FINN outperforms a calibrated physical model
when approximating sparse real-world data in a
diffusion-sorption scenario, confirming its generalization abilities and showing explanatory potential by revealing the unknown retardation factor of the observed process.

1. Introduction
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are considered universal function approximators (Cybenko, 1989). Their effective learning ability, however, greatly depends on domain
and task-specific prestructuring and methodological modifications referred to as inductive biases (Battaglia et al.,
2018). Typically, inductive biases limit the space of pos*

sible models by reducing the opportunities for computational shortcuts that might otherwise lead to erroneous implications derived from a potentially limited dataset (overfitting). The recently evolving field of physics-informed
machine learning employs physical knowledge as inductive bias providing vast generalization advantages in contrast to pure machine learning (ML) in physical domains
(Raissi et al., 2019). While numerous approaches have
been introduced to augment ANNs with physical knowledge, these methods either do not allow the incorporation
of explicitly defined physical equations (Long et al., 2018;
Seo et al., 2019; Guen & Thome, 2020; Li et al., 2020a;
Sitzmann et al., 2020) or cannot generalize to other initial and boundary conditions than those encountered during
training (Raissi et al., 2019).
In this work, we present the FInite volume Neural Network (FINN)—a physics-aware ANN adhering to the idea
of spatial and temporal discretization in numerical simulation. FINN consists of multiple neural network modules
that interact in a distributed, compositional manner (Lake
et al., 2017; Battaglia et al., 2018; Lake, 2019). The modules are designed to account for specific parts of advectiondiffusion equations, a class of partial differential equations
(PDEs). This modularization allows us to combine two advantages that are not yet met by state-of-the-art models:
The explicit incorporation of physical knowledge and the
generalization over initial and boundary conditions. To the
best of our knowledge, FINN’s ability to adjust to different
initial and boundary conditions and to explicitly learn constitutive relationships and reaction terms is unique, yielding
excellent out-of-distribution generalization. The core contributions of this work are:
• Introduction of FINN, a physics-aware ANN, explicitly designed to generalize over initial and boundary
conditions, yielding excellent generalization ability.

Equal contribution 1 Neuro-Cognitive Modeling, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 2 Department of Stochastic Simulation and Safety Research for Hydrosystems, University of
Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany. Correspondence to: Matthias Karlbauer <matthias.karlbauer@uni-tuebingen.de>.

• Evaluation of state-of-the-art pure ML and physicsaware models, contrasted to FINN on one- and twodimensional benchmarks, demonstrating the benefit of
explicit model design.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

• Application of FINN to a real-world contaminationdiffusion problem, verifying its applicability to real,
spatially and temporally constrained training data.

