Hindering Adversarial Attacks with Implicit Neural Representations

Andrei A. Rusu 1 Dan A. Calian 1 Sven Gowal 1 Raia Hadsell 1

Abstract
We introduce the Lossy Implicit Network Activation Coding (LINAC) defence, an input transformation which successfully hinders several common adversarial attacks on CIFAR-10 classifiers
for perturbations up to  = 8/255 in L∞ norm
and  = 0.5 in L2 norm. Implicit neural representations are used to approximately encode
pixel colour intensities in 2D images such that
classifiers trained on transformed data appear to
have robustness to small perturbations without
adversarial training or large drops in performance.
The seed of the random number generator used
to initialise and train the implicit neural representation turns out to be necessary information for
stronger generic attacks, suggesting its role as a
private key. We devise a Parametric Bypass Approximation (PBA) attack strategy for key-based
defences, which successfully invalidates an existing method in this category. Interestingly, our
LINAC defence also hinders some transfer and
adaptive attacks, including our novel PBA strategy. Our results emphasise the importance of a
broad range of customised attacks despite apparent robustness according to standard evaluations.

1. Introduction
Training Deep Neural Network (DNN) classifiers which are
accurate yet generally robust to small adversarial perturbations is an open problem in computer vision and beyond,
inspiring much empirical and foundational research into
modern DNNs. Szegedy et al. (2014) showed that DNNs are
not inherently robust to imperceptible input perturbations,
which reliably cross learned decision boundaries, even those
of different models trained on similar data. With hindsight,
it becomes evident that two related yet distinct design principles have been at the core of proposed defences ever since.
1
DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Andrei A. Rusu
<andrei@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Intuitively, accurate DNN classifiers could be considered robust in practice if: (I) their decision boundaries were largely
insensitive to all adversarial perturbations, and/or (II) computing any successful adversarial perturbations was shown
to be expensive, ideally intractable. Early defences built
on principle (I) include the adversarial training approach of
Madry et al. (2018) and the verifiable defences of Hein &
Andriushchenko (2017); Raghunathan et al. (2018), with
many recent works continually refining such algorithms,
e.g. Cohen et al. (2019); Gowal et al. (2020); Rebuffi et al.
(2021). A wide range of defences were built, or shown
to operate, largely on principle (II), including adversarial
detection methods (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a), input transformations (Guo et al., 2018) and denoising strategies (Liao
et al., 2018; Niu et al., 2020). Many such approaches have
since been circumvented by more effective attacks, such as
those proposed by Carlini & Wagner (2017b), or by using
“adaptive attacks” (Athalye et al., 2018; Tramer et al., 2020).
Despite the effectiveness of recent attacks against these
defences, Garg et al. (2020) convincingly argue on a theoretical basis that principle (II) is sound; similarly to cryptography, robust learning could rely on computational hardness, even in cases where small adversarial perturbations
do exist and would be found by a hypothetical, computationally unbounded adversary. However, constructing such
robust classifiers for problems of interest, e.g. image classification, remains an open problem. Recent works have
proposed defences based on cryptographic principles, such
as the pseudo-random block pixel shuffling approach of
AprilPyone & Kiya (2021a). As we will show, employing
cryptographic principles in algorithm design is not in itself enough to prevent efficient attacks. Nevertheless, we
build on the concept of key-based input transformation and
propose a novel defence based on Implicit Neural Representations (INRs). We demonstrate that our Lossy Implicit
Neural Activation Coding (LINAC) defence hinders most
standard and even adaptive attacks, more so than the related
approaches we have tested, without making any claims of
robustness about our defended classifier.
Contributions: (1) We demonstrate empirically that lossy
INRs can be used in a standard CIFAR-10 image classification pipeline if they are computed using the same implicit
network initialisation, a novel observation which makes our
LINAC defence possible. (2) The seed of the random num-

