CtrlFormer: Learning Transferable State Representation for
Visual Control via Transformer
Yao Mu 1 Shoufa Chen 1 Mingyu Ding 1 Jianyu Chen 2 Runjian Chen 1 Ping Luo 1

1. Introduction
Visual control is important for various real-world applications such as playing Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015), Go
games (Silver et al., 2017), robotic control (Kober et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, the University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong 2 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences (IIIS), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Ping Luo <pluo@cs.hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

DrQ-Scratch
800
DrQ-Retest
CtrlF-Scratch
600
CtrlF-Retest
400
200
0 Finger (easy) Cartpole (swingup)

(a) Maintainability

750
Score

Transformer has achieved great successes in learning vision and language representation, which is
general across various downstream tasks. In visual control, learning transferable state representation that can transfer between different control
tasks is important to reduce the training sample
size. However, porting Transformer to sampleefficient visual control remains a challenging and
unsolved problem. To this end, we propose a
novel Control Transformer (CtrlFormer), possessing many appealing benefits that prior arts
do not have. Firstly, CtrlFormer jointly learns
self-attention mechanisms between visual tokens
and policy tokens among different control tasks,
where multitask representation can be learned and
transferred without catastrophic forgetting. Secondly, we carefully design a contrastive reinforcement learning paradigm to train CtrlFormer, enabling it to achieve high sample efficiency, which
is important in control problems. For example,
in the DMControl benchmark, unlike recent advanced methods that failed by producing a zero
score in the “Cartpole” task after transfer learning with 100k samples, CtrlFormer can achieve
a state-of-the-art score 769±34 with only 100k
samples, while maintaining the performance of
previous tasks. The code and models are released
in our project homepage.

Score

Abstract

500

DrQ-Scratch
DrQ-Transfer
CtrlF-Scratch
CtrlF-Transfer

250
8
0 0 0
0 Finger
(hard) Cartpole (sparse)

(b) Transferability

Figure 1. Effect of CtrlFormer. The agent first learns state representations in one task, and then transfers them to a new task,
e.g., from finger (turn-easy) to finger (turn-hard), and from cartpole (swingup) to cartpole (swingup-sparse). Figure 1a shows
the maintainability by comparing the performance in the old task
before (scratch) and after (retest) transferring to a new task. CtrlFormer doesn’t have catastrophic forgetting after transferring to
the new task, and the performance is basically the same as learning from scratch. However, the performance of DrQ (Kostrikov
et al., 2020) drops significantly after transferring; Figure 1b shows
the transferability by comparing the performance of learning from
scratch and from transferring. Transferring previous learned knowledge benefits much for CtrlFormer (labeled as CtrlF).

2013; Yuan et al., 2022), and autonomous driving (Wang
et al., 2018). Although remarkable successes have been
made, a long-standing goal of visual control, transferring
the learned knowledge to new tasks without catastrophic
forgetting, remains challenging and unsolved.
Unlike a machine, a human can quickly identify the critical
information to learn a new task with only a few actions and
observations, since a human can discover the relevancy/irrelevancy between the current task and the previous tasks
he/she has learned, and decides which information to keep
or transfer. As a result, a new task can be learned quickly by
a human without forgetting what has been learned before.
Moreover, the “state representation” can be strengthened for
better generalization to future tasks.
Modern machine learning methods for transferable representation learning across tasks can be generally categorized
into three streams. They have certain limitations. In the first
stream, many representative works such as (Shah & Kumar,
2021) utilize features pretrained in the ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009) and COCO (Lin et al., 2014) datasets. The
domain gap between the pretraining datasets and the target
datasets hinders their performance and sample efficiency. In

