Revisiting Label Smoothing and Knowledge Distillation Compatibility
What was Missing?

Keshigeyan Chandrasegaran 1 Ngoc-Trung Tran 1 * Yunqing Zhao 1 * Ngai-Man Cheung 1

Abstract
This work investigates the compatibility between
label smoothing (LS) and knowledge distillation (KD). Contemporary findings addressing this
thesis statement take dichotomous standpoints:
Müller et al. (2019); Shen et al. (2021b). Critically, there is no effort to understand and resolve
these contradictory findings, leaving the primal
question − to smooth or not to smooth a teacher
network? − unanswered. The main contributions
of our work are the discovery, analysis and validation of systematic diffusion as the missing concept
which is instrumental in understanding and resolving these contradictory findings. This systematic
diffusion essentially curtails the benefits of distilling from an LS-trained teacher, thereby rendering KD at increased temperatures ineffective.
Our discovery is comprehensively supported by
large-scale experiments, analyses and case studies including image classification, neural machine
translation and compact student distillation tasks
spanning across multiple datasets and teacherstudent architectures. Based on our analysis, we
suggest practitioners to use an LS-trained teacher
with a low-temperature transfer to achieve high
performance students. Code and models are available at https://keshik6.github.io/
revisiting-ls-kd-compatibility/

1. Introduction
This paper deeply investigates the compatibility between
label smoothing (Szegedy et al., 2016) and knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015). Specifically, we aim to revisit
and resolve the contradictory standpoints of Müller et al.
(2019) and Shen et al. (2021b), thereby establishing a foundational understanding on the compatibility between label
*

Equal contribution 1 Singapore University of Technology
and Design (SUTD). Correspondence to: Ngai-Man Cheung
<ngaiman cheung@sutd.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

smoothing (LS) and knowledge distillation (KD). Both LS
and KD involve training a model (i.e.: deep neural networks) with soft-targets. In LS, instead of computing cross
entropy loss with the hard-target (one-hot encoding) of a
training sample, a soft-target is used, which is a weighted
mixture of the one-hot encoding and the uniform distribution. A mixture parameter α is used in LS to specify the
extent of mixing. On the other hand, KD involves training
a teacher model (usually a powerful model) and a student
model (usually a compact model). The objective of KD is
to transfer knowledge from the teacher model to the student
model. In the most common form, the student model is
trained to match the soft output of the teacher model. The
success of KD has been attributed to the transference of
logits’ information about resemblances between instances
of different classes (logits are the inputs to the final softmax
which produces the soft targets). In KD (Hinton et al., 2015),
a temperature T is introduced to facilitate the transference:
an increased T may produce more suitable soft targets that
have more emphasis on the probabilities of incorrect classes
(or equivalently, logits of the incorrect classes).
LS and KD research dialogue. Recently, a notable amount
of research efforts has been conducted to understand the
relationship between LS and KD (Müller et al., 2019; Shen
et al., 2021b; Lukasik et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2020; Tang
et al., 2021). One of the most intriguing and controversial
discussion is the compatibility between LS and KD. Particularly, in KD, does label smoothing in a teacher network
suppress the effectiveness of the distillation?
Müller et al. (2019) are the first to investigate this topic,
and their findings suggest that applying LS to a teacher
network impairs the performance of KD. In particular, they
visualize the penultimate layer representations in the teacher
network to show that LS erases information in the logits
about resemblances between instances of different classes.
Since this information is essential for KD, they conclude
that applying LS for the teacher network can hurt KD. • “If a
teacher network is trained with label smoothing, knowledge
distillation into a student network is much less effective.”
(Müller et al., 2019) • “Label smoothing can hurt distillation”
(Müller et al., 2019)
The conclusion of Müller et al. (2019) is widely accepted

