REvolveR: Continuous Evolutionary Models for Robot-to-robot Policy Transfer

Xingyu Liu 1 Deepak Pathak 1 Kris M. Kitani 1

Abstract
A popular paradigm in robotic learning is to train
a policy from scratch for every new robot. This
is not only inefficient but also often impractical
for complex robots. In this work, we consider the
problem of transferring a policy across two different robots with significantly different parameters
such as kinematics and morphology. Existing
approaches that train a new policy by matching
the action or state transition distribution, including imitation learning methods, fail due to optimal action and/or state distribution being mismatched in different robots. In this paper, we
propose a novel method named REvolveR of using continuous evolutionary models for robotic
policy transfer implemented in a physics simulator. We interpolate between the source robot
and the target robot by finding a continuous evolutionary change of robot parameters. An expert
policy on the source robot is transferred through
training on a sequence of intermediate robots that
gradually evolve into the target robot. Experiments on a physics simulator show that the proposed continuous evolutionary model can effectively transfer the policy across robots and achieve
superior sample efficiency on new robots. The
proposed method is especially advantageous in
sparse reward settings where exploration can be
significantly reduced. Code is released at https:
//github.com/xingyul/revolver.

1. Introduction
A popular paradigm in learning robotic skills is to leverage
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to train a policy for
every new robot in every new environment from scratch.
This is not only inefficient in terms of sample efficiency
but also often impractical for complex robots due to an
1

The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. Correspondence to: Xingyu Liu
<xingyul3@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Continuous robot evolution model allows policy to be
transferred from one robot to another robot. Upper row: an Ant
robot continuously grow additional legs from the tip of its feet.
Middle row: a Humanoid robot continuously changes the length
and mass of its legs. Lower row: a dexterous gripper continuously
shrink three of its fingers to evolve to a two-finger gripper. We
show the robots at evolution parameters of 0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8
and 1.0 respectively from left to right in each row.

extremely large exploration space. How can one transfer a
well-trained policy on one robot to another robot?
Past endeavors have explored two main directions for transferring policy between robots. Statistic matching Imitation
learning (IL) methods train a new policy on the target robot
with the aim of matching the behavior of the policy on a
source robot. Methods that optimize to match the distribution of actions (Ross et al., 2011), state rollouts (Liu et al.,
2019; Radosavovic et al., 2020), or reward function (Ng
et al., 2000; Ho & Ermon, 2016) have been successful on
robotic learning tasks on robot with similar dynamics. However, these methods are unable to deal with cases with very
large difference in robot parameters and dynamics, since
when mapped to the same state and action space, the robots
could have very different optimal distributions of states or
actions. An alternative to imitation learning is to learn the
robot hardware dynamics together with the policy by encoding the robot hardware specifics with neural networks
(Chen et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2020). However, to train
such hardware-aware policies, it usually requires training
diverse tasks on a huge number of robots in advance, which
could be computationally prohibitive.

