Style Equalization: Unsupervised Learning of Controllable
Generative Sequence Models

Jen-Hao Rick Chang 1 Ashish Shrivastava 1 Hema Swetha Koppula 1 Xiaoshuai Zhang 2 Oncel Tuzel 1
https://apple.github.io/ml-style-equalization

Abstract
Controllable generative sequence models with the
capability to extract and replicate the style of specific examples enable many applications, including narrating audiobooks in different voices, autocompleting and auto-correcting written handwriting, and generating missing training samples for
downstream recognition tasks. However, under an
unsupervised-style setting, typical training algorithms for controllable sequence generative models suffer from the training-inference mismatch,
where the same sample is used as content and style
input during training but unpaired samples are
given during inference. In this paper, we tackle
the training-inference mismatch encountered during unsupervised learning of controllable generative sequence models. The proposed method is
simple yet effective, where we use a style transformation module to transfer target style information
into an unrelated style input. This method enables
training using unpaired content and style samples and thereby mitigate the training-inference
mismatch. We apply style equalization to textto-speech and text-to-handwriting synthesis on
three datasets. We conduct thorough evaluation,
including both quantitative and qualitative user
studies. Our results show that by mitigating the
training-inference mismatch with the proposed
style equalization, we achieve style replication
scores comparable to real data in our user studies.

1. Introduction
The goal of controllable generative sequence models is to
generate sequences containing target content in a target style.
With the capability to select speaker voices, multi-speaker
1
Apple 2 University of California, San Diego. Correspondence
to: Jen-Hao Rick Chang <jenhao chang@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

text-to-speech models have been successfully adopted in
many voice assistants (Gibiansky et al., 2017; Ping et al.,
2018; Hayashi et al., 2020). Many applications, however,
require style controllability beyond selecting speaker voices.
To perfectly reconstruct a speech example, we need to replicate not only the speaker’s voice but also other aspects of
style, including but not limited to prosody, intonation dynamics, background noise, echo, and microphone response
appeared in the given sample. To utilize synthetic data to
analyze failures or biases of a downstream recognizer, we
need a style representation that models the style distribution beyond speaker identity. In these applications, style
represents all information (except the content) to exactly
reconstruct a sample, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. To model the
temporal dynamics contained in input samples (e.g., speech
and handwriting), our style representation is a time-varying
sequence, instead of a fixed vector. To capture the large
variation of style, we learn the style representation in an
unsupervised manner from a reference sample, rather than
using a few human-annotated attributes.
Our goal is to learn a controllable generative sequence
model that controls its style with a reference example
(e.g., an existing audio) and controls the content with
a content sequence (e.g., text), as shown
in Fig. 1b.

Our training dataset X is composed of (xi , ci ) i=1,...,n ,


where xi = xi1 . . . xiTi | xit ∈ Rd is the i-th sample and


ci = ci1 . . . ciNi | cij ∈ Rm is the corresponding content sequence. In general, xi and ci have different lengths, i.e.,
Ti ̸= Ni , and we do not assume to have the alignment between them. For example, in text-to-speech synthesis, xi
is the mel-spectrogram of an audio sample, ci is the corresponding phonemes of the spoken words. While there exist
methods, e.g., (McAuliffe et al., 2017; Kotani et al., 2020),
that can segment phonemes from an mel-spectrogram or
characters from a handwriting sequence, we choose not to
rely on these information and directly learn the alignment
using attention. This allows the learned models to deal
with ambiguous phoneme/character boundaries (e.g., cursive handwriting). We also do not assume to have any style
supervision, including speaker or attribute labels, nor any
grouping of the data based on style.

