Measure Estimation in the Barycentric Coding Model

Matthew Werenski 1 Ruijie Jiang 2 Abiy Tasissa 3 Shuchin Aeron 2 James M. Murphy 3

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of measure
estimation under the barycentric coding model
(BCM), in which an unknown measure is assumed
to belong to the set of Wasserstein-2 barycenters
of a finite set of known measures. Estimating a
measure under this model is equivalent to estimating the unknown barycentric coordinates. We
provide novel geometrical, statistical, and computational insights for measure estimation under
the BCM, consisting of three main results. Our
first main result leverages the Riemannian geometry of Wasserstein-2 space to provide a procedure
for recovering the barycentric coordinates as the
solution to a quadratic optimization problem assuming access to the true reference measures. The
essential geometric insight is that the parameters
of this quadratic problem are determined by inner
products between the optimal displacement maps
from the given measure to the reference measures
defining the BCM. Our second main result then
establishes an algorithm for solving for the coordinates in the BCM when all the measures are
observed empirically via i.i.d. samples. We prove
precise rates of convergence for this algorithm—
determined by the smoothness of the underlying
measures and their dimensionality—thereby guaranteeing its statistical consistency. Finally, we
demonstrate the utility of the BCM and associated
estimation procedures in three application areas:
(i) covariance estimation for Gaussian measures;
(ii) image processing; and (iii) natural language
processing.

1. Introduction
A number of recent machine learning applications including
computer vision (Schmitz et al., 2018; Bonneel et al., 2016),
domain adaptation (Montesuma & Mboula, 2021; Redko
et al., 2019), natural language processing (NLP) (Singh
et al., 2020; Colombo et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2018), and
unsupervised segmentation of multivariate time series data
(Cheng et al., 2021) have shown the utility of representing
and modeling high-dimensional data as probability distributions. The essential insight in these applications is to
utilize the Riemannian geometry of the space of probability
distributions induced by the Wasserstein-2 metric and the
Wasserstein-2 barycenters as alternatives to the Euclidean
distance and linear combinations, respectively.
In this context, the methods that use Wasserstein barycenters
for data modeling and inference involve solving two core
problems which we term the synthesis problem and analysis
problem. To be precise, let P2,ac (Rd ) denote the space of
absolutely continuous distributions on Rd with finite second
moment. For µ, ν ∈ P2,ac (Rd ),
Z
W22 (µ, ν) , min
||T (x) − x||22 dµ(x)
(1)
T #µ=ν

Rd

defines the Wasserstein-2 metric where the minimum is over
all measurable maps T : Rd → Rd and the pushforward
T #µ = ν is such that for all Borel sets B we have ν[B] =
µ[T −1 (B)] (Villani, 2003; Santambrogio, 2015). Under
the assumption µ, ν ∈ P2,ac (Rd ), unique minimizing T
are known to exist and the resulting W2 distance is finite
(Villani, 2003). We refer to the space P2,ac (Rd ) equipped
with the metric W2 as the Wasserstein-2 space, denoted W2 .
Pp
Let ∆p = {λ = (λ1 , . . . , λp ) ∈ Rp : λi ≥ 0, i=1 λi = 1}
and let {µi }pi=1 be known reference measures. The W2
barycenter for coordinates λ ∈ ∆p with respect to {µi }pi=1
is defined as
p

1

Department of Computer Science, Tufts University
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tufts
University 3 Department of Mathematics, Tufts University . Correspondence to: Matthew Werenski <matthew.werenski@tufts.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1X
λi W22 (ν, µi ).
2
d
ν∈P2,ac (R )
i=1

νλ , arg min

(2)

The measure νλ is an advection of {µi }pi=1 and blends their
geometric features; it may be thought of as a “displacement interpolation" (McCann,
Pp 1997; Villani, 2003). In contrast, the linear mixture i=1 λi µi simply sets λi to be the

