Label-Free Explainability for Unsupervised Models

Jonathan Crabbé 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
Unsupervised black-box models are challenging
to interpret. Indeed, most existing explainability
methods require labels to select which component(s) of the black-box’s output to interpret. In
the absence of labels, black-box outputs often are
representation vectors whose components do not
correspond to any meaningful quantity. Hence,
choosing which component(s) to interpret in a
label-free unsupervised/self-supervised setting is
an important, yet unsolved problem. To bridge
this gap in the literature, we introduce two crucial
extensions of post-hoc explanation techniques: (1)
label-free feature importance and (2) label-free
example importance that respectively highlight
influential features and training examples for a
black-box to construct representations at inference time. We demonstrate that our extensions
can be successfully implemented as simple wrappers around many existing feature and example
importance methods. We illustrate the utility of
our label-free explainability paradigm through a
qualitative and quantitative comparison of representation spaces learned by various autoencoders
trained on distinct unsupervised tasks.

1. Introduction
Are machine learning models ready to be deployed in highstakes applications? Recent years have witnessed a success of deep models on nontrivial tasks such as computer
vision (Voulodimos et al., 2018), natural language processing (Young et al., 2018) and scientific discovery (Jumper
et al., 2021; Davies et al., 2021). The success of these models comes at the cost of their complexity. Deep models
typically involve millions to billions operations in order to
turn their input data into a prediction. Since it is not pos1
University of Cambridge 2 The Alan Turing Institute
University of California Los Angeles. Correspondence to:
Jonathan Crabbé <jc2133@cam.ac.uk>, Mihaela van der Schaar
<mv472@cam.ac.uk>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

sible for a human user to analyze each of these operations,
the models appear as black-boxes. When the deployment
of these models impact critical areas, such as healthcare,
finance or justice, their opacity appears as a major obstruction (Lipton, 2016; Ching et al., 2018; Tjoa & Guan, 2020).
Post-Hoc Explainability. As a response to this transparency
problem, the field of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI)
received an increasing interest, see (Adadi & Berrada, 2018;
Barredo Arrieta et al., 2020; Das & Rad, 2020) for reviews.
In order to retain the approximation power of deep models, many post-hoc explainability methods were developed.
These methods complement the predictions of black-box
models with various explanations. In this way, models can
be understood through the lens of explanations regardless
their complexity. We focus on two types of such methods.
(1) Feature Importance explanations highlight crucial features for the black-box to issue a prediction. Examples
include Saliency (Simonyan et al., 2013), Lime (Ribeiro
et al., 2016), Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al.,
2017), Shap (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), DeepLift (Shrikumar et al., 2017) and Perturbation Masks (Fong & Vedaldi,
2017; Crabbé & Van Der Schaar, 2021). (2) Example Importance explanations highlight crucial training examples
for the black-box to issue a prediction. Examples include Influence Function (Cook & Weisenberg, 1982; Koh & Liang,
2017), Deep K-Nearest Neighbours (Papernot & McDaniel,
2018), TraceIn (Pruthi et al., 2020) and SimplEx (Crabbé
et al., 2021).
Supervised Setting. The previous works almost exclusively
focus on explaining models obtained in a supervised setting.
In this setting, the black box f : X → Y connects two
meaningful spaces: the feature space X and the label space
Y. By meaningful, we mean that each axis of these spaces
corresponds to a quantity known by the model’s user. This
is illustrated at the top of Figure 1 with an idealized prostate
cancer risk predictor. Each axis of Y corresponds to a
clear label: the probability of mortality with and without
treatment. We can explain the predictions of this model with
the importance of features/examples to make a prediction
on each individual axis y1 , y2 or for a combination of those
axes (e.g in this case y1 − y2 is associated to the treatment
effect). The key point is that, in the supervised setting, the
user knows the meaning of the black-box output they try to
interpret. This is not always the case in machine learning.

