H-Consistency Bounds for Surrogate Loss Minimizers

Pranjal Awasthi 1 Anqi Mao 2 Mehryar Mohri 1 2 Yutao Zhong 2

Abstract
We present a detailed study of estimation errors in terms of surrogate loss estimation errors.
We refer to such guarantees as H-consistency
bounds, since they account for the hypothesis set
H adopted. These guarantees are significantly
stronger than H-calibration or H-consistency.
They are also more informative than similar excess error bounds derived in the literature, when
H is the family of all measurable functions.
We prove general theorems providing such guarantees, for both the distribution-dependent and
distribution-independent settings. We show that
our bounds are tight, modulo a convexity assumption. We also show that previous excess error
bounds can be recovered as special cases of our
general results. We then present a series of explicit bounds in the case of the zero-one loss, with
multiple choices of the surrogate loss and for both
the family of linear functions and neural networks
with one hidden-layer. We further prove more favorable distribution-dependent guarantees in that
case. We also present a series of explicit bounds
in the case of the adversarial loss, with surrogate
losses based on the supremum of the ρ-margin,
hinge or sigmoid loss and for the same two general hypothesis sets. Here too, we prove several
enhancements of these guarantees under natural
distributional assumptions. Finally, we report the
results of simulations illustrating our bounds and
their tightness.

1. Introduction
Most learning algorithms rely on optimizing a surrogate loss
function distinct from the target loss function tailored to the
task considered. This is typically because the target loss
1

Google Research, New York, NY; 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Anqi Mao
<aqmao@cims.nyu.edu>, Yutao Zhong <yutao@cims.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

function is computationally hard to optimize or because it
does not admit favorable properties, such as differentiability
or smoothness, crucial to the convergence of optimization
algorithms. But, what guarantees can we count on for the
target loss estimation error, when minimizing a surrogate
loss estimation error?
A desirable property of a surrogate loss function, often referred to in that context is Bayes-consistency. It requires
that asymptotically, nearly optimal minimizers of the surrogate excess error also nearly optimally minimize the target
excess error (Steinwart, 2007). This property holds for a
broad family of convex surrogate losses of the standard binary and multi-class classification losses (Zhang, 2004a;
Bartlett et al., 2006; Tewari & Bartlett, 2007; Steinwart,
2007). But, Bayes-consistency is not relevant when learning with a hypothesis set H distinct from the family of all
measurable functions. Instead, the hypothesis set-dependent
notion of H-consistency should be adopted, as argued by
Long & Servedio (2013) (see also (Kuznetsov et al., 2014)
and (Zhang & Agarwal, 2020)). More recently, Awasthi et al.
(2021a) further studied H-consistency guarantees for the adversarial loss (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2017;
Tsipras et al., 2018; Carlini & Wagner, 2017). Nevertheless,
consistency and H-consistency are both asymptotic properties and thus do not provide any guarantee for approximate
minimizers learned from finite samples.
Instead, we will consider upper bounds on the target estimation error expressed in terms of the surrogate estimation
error, which we refer to as H-consistency bounds, since
they account for the hypothesis set H adopted. These guarantees are significantly stronger than H-calibration or Hconsistency (Section 6) or some margin-based properties
of convex surrogate losses for linear predictors studied by
Ben-David et al. (2012) and Long & Servedio (2011). They
are also more informative than similar excess error bounds
derived in the literature, which correspond to the special
case where H is the family of all measurable functions
(Zhang, 2004a; Bartlett et al., 2006) (see also (Mohri et al.,
2018)[section 4.7]). We prove general theorems providing
such guarantees, which could be used in both distributiondependent and distribution-independent settings (Section 4).
We show that our bounds are tight, modulo a convexity assumption (Section 5.2 and 6.1). We also show that previous
excess error bounds can be recovered as special cases of our

