SpaceMAP: Visualizing High-dimensional Data by Space Expansion

Xinrui Zu 1 Qian Tao 1

Abstract
Dimensionality reduction (DR) of highdimensional data is of theoretical and practical
interest in machine learning. However, there exist
intriguing, non-intuitive discrepancies between
the geometry of high- and low-dimensional
space. We look into such discrepancies and
propose a novel visualization method called
Space-based Manifold Approximation and
Projection (SpaceMAP). Our method establishes
an analytical transformation on distance metrics
between spaces to address the “crowding
problem” in DR. With the proposed equivalent
extended distance (EED), we are able to match
the capacity of high- and low-dimensional space
in a principled manner. To handle complex data
with different manifold properties, we propose
hierarchical manifold approximation to model the
similarity function in a data-specific manner. We
evaluated SpaceMAP on a range of synthetic and
real datasets with varying manifold properties,
and demonstrated its excellent performance in
comparison with classical and state-of-the-art
DR methods. In particular, the concept of space
expansion provides a generic framework for
understanding nonlinear DR methods including
the popular t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (t-SNE) and Uniform Manifold
Approximation and Projection (UMAP).

1. Introduction
Real-world data, including images, videos, genetic expressions, natural languages, etc., commonly have a high ambient dimension (i.e. number of pixels or measurements). The
intrinsic dimension of these data, however, is typically much
lower, which fact is recognized as a fundamental reason for
modern machine learning to work well (Levina & Bickel,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Imaging Physics, Delft
University of Technology. Correspondence to: Xinrui Zu <X.Zu1@tudelft.nl>, Qian Tao <Q.Tao@tudelft.nl>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2004; Pope et al., 2021; Wright & Ma, 2022). Effective and
accurate dimensionality reduction (DR) to discover the intrinsic low-dimensional data structure is of significant value
for machine learning research.
DR is also essential for data visualization, which provides
valuable intuition for researchers from different disciplines
dealing with high-dimensional data. A space with a dimensionality higher than 3, however, is already beyond our
accustomed way of seeing data. Here we enumerate a number of challenges in visualizing high-dimensional data onto
a drastically reduced dimension (2 or 3):
Firstly, our intuition of geometry in 2- or 3-dimensional
space often does not generalize to high-dimensional space.
Theories on high-dimensional geometry revealed a number
of intriguing, non-intuitive phenomena (Giraud, 2021), one
of which is “concentration on crust”. Imagine a ball with
a radius r in a d-dimensional Euclidean space. Consider
a “crust” of the d-dimensional ball, which is between the
surfaces of this ball and a slightly smaller concentric ball
with radius (1 − ϵ)r, where ϵ is small (Fig.1 a.1). The
ratio of the volume of between the “crust” Cd (r) to the ball
d (r)
d
is Vd (r) is C
Vd (r) = 1 − (1 − ϵ) . Take ϵ = 0.01, it is
intuitive to see that the ratio is tiny with small d, however
this ratio grows fast to near 100% when d increases, as
illustrated in Fig.1 a.2. The mass of a high-dimensional
ball is therefore counter-intuitively concentrated on a crust.
Such concentration underlies the “crowding problem” of DR
(van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008): a faithful preservation of
distances of high-dimensional space would lead to crowded
data points in low-dimensional space (all pairwise distances
become similar as shown in Fig.1 a.3). This suggests that
distances need to be defined differently in high- and lowdimensional spaces to mitigate the crowding.
Secondly, many real-world high-dimensional datasets exhibit hierarchical structures, with sub-manifolds on large
manifolds, governed by the underlying data generation process (Bengio, 2013; Abdolali & Rahmati, 2019). The stateof-the-art DR methods, such as Barnes-Hut t-distributed
Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) (van der Maaten,
2014) and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) (McInnes et al., 2018), commonly consider a
restricted k−nearest neighborhood, hence part of the manifold. Isomap (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), on the other hand,

