Minimizing Control for Credit Assignment with Strong Feedback

Alexander Meulemans * 1 Matilde Tristany Farinha * 1 Maria Cervera * 1
João Sacramento 1 Benjamin F. Grewe 1

Abstract
The success of deep learning ignited interest
in whether the brain learns hierarchical representations using gradient-based learning. However, current biologically plausible methods for
gradient-based credit assignment in deep neural
networks need infinitesimally small feedback signals, which is problematic in biologically realistic
noisy environments and at odds with experimental
evidence in neuroscience showing that top-down
feedback can significantly influence neural activity. Building upon deep feedback control (DFC),
a recently proposed credit assignment method,
we combine strong feedback influences on neural
activity with gradient-based learning and show
that this naturally leads to a novel view on neural
network optimization. Instead of gradually changing the network weights towards configurations
with low output loss, weight updates gradually
minimize the amount of feedback required from
a controller that drives the network to the supervised output label. Moreover, we show that the
use of strong feedback in DFC allows learning forward and feedback connections simultaneously,
using learning rules fully local in space and time.
We complement our theoretical results with experiments on standard computer-vision benchmarks,
showing competitive performance to backpropagation as well as robustness to noise. Overall,
our work presents a fundamentally novel view of
learning as control minimization, while sidestepping biologically unrealistic assumptions.

1. Introduction
The error backpropagation (BP) method (Rumelhart et al.,
1986; Werbos, 1982) has emerged as the method of choice
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and ETH Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Alexander Meulemans <ameulema@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

for training deep artificial neural networks, due to its efficient computation of gradients, which is crucial for learning
in high-dimensional parameter spaces (LeCun et al., 2015).
Although biological networks in the neocortex form similar hierarchies (Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016), it is not clear
yet if they follow similar principles to implement credit assignment (CA), i.e., determining how to change synaptic
connectivity strengths to get closer to some desired output.
Several key properties of the BP method are highly incompatible with cortical networks (Crick, 1989; Lillicrap et al.,
2020). For example, synaptic plasticity in biological neurons is local in space and time and tightly coupled to neural
activity. By contrast, artificial neural networks trained with
BP process activity and weight update signals separately and
in distinct phases while requiring exactly the same synaptic
weights in the forward and feedback pathways.
To couple synaptic plasticity directly to neural activity, recent work designed cortical network models that propagate
CA signals by leveraging the network dynamics (Scellier
& Bengio, 2017; Whittington & Bogacz, 2017; Sacramento
et al., 2018; Meulemans et al., 2021) or using multiplexed
neural signals (Payeur et al., 2021). However, these methods
require tightly coordinated plasticity mechanisms, possibly
through the use of distinct training phases, and it remains
unclear whether cortical networks can exhibit these levels of
coordination. Moreover, to approximate gradient-based optimization these methods consider the weak-feedback limit
where, to avoid interference, feedback cannot significantly
alter the feedforward processing of the network. This weakfeedback assumption is problematic in biologically realistic
noisy environments, and is in stark contrast with biological
observations showing that top-down feedback can significantly affect forward processing (Jordan & Keller, 2020;
Keller et al., 2020).
To date, several studies used strong feedback control signals in combination with error-based learning rules to drive
the network activity to track a reference output (Gilra &
Gerstner, 2017; Alemi et al., 2018; Denève et al., 2017;
Bourdoukan & Deneve, 2015). Although these models use
strong feedback influences on neural activity, they have
only been successfully applied to train single-layer recurrent neural networks with fixed feedback weights and it
remains unclear whether they can be extended for training

