Fast Finite Width Neural Tangent Kernel

Roman Novak 1 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 1 Samuel S. Schoenholz 1

Abstract
The Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), defined as

 
 T
Θfθ (x1, x2 ) = 
∂f (θ,
 x1 ) ∂θ ∂f (θ, x2 ) ∂θ
where ∂f (θ, ·) ∂θ is a neural network (NN) Jacobian, has emerged as a central object of study
in deep learning. In the infinite width limit, the
NTK can sometimes be computed analytically
and is useful for understanding training and generalization of NN architectures. At finite widths, the
NTK is also used to better initialize NNs, compare
the conditioning across models, perform architecture search, and do meta-learning. Unfortunately,
the finite width NTK is notoriously expensive
to compute, which severely limits its practical
utility. We perform the first in-depth analysis of
the compute and memory requirements for NTK
computation in finite width networks. Leveraging the structure of neural networks, we further
propose two novel algorithms that change the exponent of the compute and memory requirements
of the finite width NTK, dramatically improving
efficiency. Our algorithms can be applied in a
black box fashion to any differentiable function,
including those implementing neural networks.
We open-source our implementations within the
Neural Tangents package (Novak et al., 2020) at
github.com/google/neural-tangents.

1. Introduction
The past few years have seen significant progress towards
a theoretical foundation for deep learning. Much of this
work has focused on understanding the properties of random functions in high dimensions. One significant line of
work (Neal, 1994; Lee et al., 2018; Matthews et al., 2018;
Borovykh, 2018; Garriga-Alonso et al., 2019; Novak et al.,
2019; Yang, 2019; Hron et al., 2020b;a; Hu et al., 2020)
1
Google Brain, Mountain View, California, United States.
Correspondence to: Roman Novak <romann@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

established that in the limit of infinite width, randomly initialized Neural Networks (NNs) are Gaussian Processes
(called NNGPs). Building on this development, Jacot et al.
(2018) showed that in function space the dynamics under
gradient descent could be computed analytically using the
so-called Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) and Lee et al. (2019)
showed that wide neural networks reduce to their linearizations in weight space throughout training. A related set of
results (Belkin et al., 2019; Spigler et al., 2019) showed that
the ubiquitous bias-variance decomposition breaks down
as high-dimensional models enter the so-called interpolating regime. Together these results describe learning in the
infinite width limit and help explain the impressive generalization capabilities of NNs.
Insights from the wide network limit have had significant
practical impact. The conditioning of the NTK has been
shown to significantly impact trainability and generalization in NNs (Schoenholz et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2018;
2020). This notion inspired initialization schemes like
Fixup (Zhang et al., 2019), MetaInit (Dauphin & Schoenholz, 2019), and Normalizer Free networks (Brock et al.,
2021a;b), and has enabled efficient neural architecture
search (Park et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021b). The NTK
has additionally given insight into a wide range of phenomena such as: behavior of Generative Adversarial Networks (Franceschi et al., 2021), neural scaling laws (Bahri
et al., 2021), and neural irradiance fields (Tancik et al.,
2020). Kernel regression using the NTK has further enabled
strong performance on small datasets (Arora et al., 2020),
and applications such as approximate inference (Khan et al.,
2019), dataset distillation (Nguyen et al., 2020; 2021), and
uncertainty prediction (He et al., 2020; Adlam et al., 2020).
Despite the significant promise of theory based on the NTK,
computing the NTK in practice is challenging. In the infinite
width limit, the NTK can sometimes be computed analytically. However, the infinite-width kernel remains intractable
for many architectures and finite width corrections are often
important to describe actual NNs used in practice (see §I for
detailed discussion). The NTK matrix can be computed for
finite width networks as the outer product of Jacobians using
forward or reverse mode automatic differentiation (AD),

 
 T
Θfθ (x1 , x2 ) := ∂f (θ, x1 ) ∂θ ∂f (θ, x2 ) ∂θ ,
| {z }
|
{z
}|
{z
}
O×O

O×P

P×O

(1)

