Convergence Rates of Non-Convex Stochastic Gradient Descent
Under a Generic Łojasiewicz Condition and Local Smoothness

Kevin Scaman 1 2 Cédric Malherbe 3 Ludovic Dos Santos 3

Abstract
Training over-parameterized neural networks involves the empirical minimization of highly nonconvex objective functions. Recently, a large
body of works provided theoretical evidence that,
despite this non-convexity, properly initialized
over-parameterized networks can converge to a
zero training loss through the introduction of the
Polyak-Łojasiewicz condition. However, these
analyses are restricted to quadratic losses such
as mean square error, and tend to indicate fast
exponential convergence rates that are seldom observed in practice. In this work, we propose to
extend these results by analyzing stochastic gradient descent under more generic Łojasiewicz conditions that are applicable to any convex loss function, thus extending the current theory to a larger
panel of losses commonly used in practice such
as cross-entropy. Moreover, our analysis provides
high-probability bounds on the approximation error under sub-Gaussian gradient noise and only
requires the local smoothness of the objective
function, thus making it applicable to deep neural
networks in realistic settings.

1. Introduction
Large neural networks trained with gradient-like methods
have proved successful in a wide variety of domains such as
natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019), computer
vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and reinforcement learning
(Silver et al., 2016). However, the non-convex nature of the
associated optimization problem makes the theoretical explanation of this success notoriously difficult. Recently, a lot
1
DI ENS, École normale supérieure, CNRS, INRIA, PSL
University 2 This work was done while the author was working at Huawei. 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark. Correspondence to:
Kevin Scaman <kevin.scaman@inria.fr>, Cédric Malherbe
<cedric.malherbe@huawei.com>, Ludovic Dos Santos <ludovic.dos.santos@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of progress has been made in that direction by analyzing the
convergence of gradient algorithms in a variety of specific
settings (Jacot et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2019; Nitanda &
Suzuki, 2019; Li & Liang, 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018; Song
et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2020; Li & Yuan, 2017). More
specifically, in a series of works, Liu et al., 2020a; 2022
proposed a unified view on these results by observing that
the optimization problem induced by over-parameterized
models surprisingly satisfy a very simple assumption called
PL∗ standing for Polyak-Łojasiewicz (Lojasiewicz, 1963).
Indeed, using this assumption, they provide a theoretical
explanation of the convergence to zero training loss for a
wide variety of large networks such as ResNet (He et al.,
2016) and ConvNets (Fukushima et al., 1983). However,
despite their generality, their analysis requires the loss to
be quadratic, such as mean square error (MSE), thus limiting the applicability of the results. Moreover, the direct
extension of these results to cross entropy (CE) or the logistic loss poses significant challenges as their associated
optimization problems do not satisfy the PL∗ condition. In
this work, we extend these results to a wider class of loss
functions by considering novel Łojasiewicz conditions and
analyzing the convergence of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) under these assumptions. This analysis is then used
to prove convergence to a zero training loss of SGD for
neural networks satisfying a local smoothness and uniform
conditioning assumption. As a byproduct, we show that
the choice of the loss drastically impacts the convergence
rates as shown in Table 1 summarizing our results. More
precisely, our contribution can be summarized as follows:
1. The introduction of a novel assumption, called
Separable-Łojasiewicz∗ (SL∗ ), which extend PL∗ as
well as the Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz∗ assumption (KL∗ )
to a wider class of non-convex objective functions;
2. The derivation of novel convergence rates for GD and
SGD under these assumptions holding with high probability and for a sub-Gaussian gradient noise;
3. We identify three different regimes, depending on the
size of the noise and the dimension of the parameter
space, leading to three different convergence rates;
4. We show that locally smooth neural networks satisfy

