Generalization and Robustness Implications in Object-Centric Learning

Andrea Dittadi 1 2 Samuele Papa 1 Michele De Vita 1
Bernhard Schölkopf 2 Ole Winther 1 3 4 Francesco Locatello 5

Abstract
The idea behind object-centric representation
learning is that natural scenes can better be modeled as compositions of objects and their relations
as opposed to distributed representations. This inductive bias can be injected into neural networks
to potentially improve systematic generalization
and performance of downstream tasks in scenes
with multiple objects. In this paper, we train stateof-the-art unsupervised models on five common
multi-object datasets and evaluate segmentation
metrics and downstream object property prediction. In addition, we study generalization and robustness by investigating the settings where either
a single object is out of distribution—e.g., having
an unseen color, texture, or shape—or global properties of the scene are altered—e.g., by occlusions,
cropping, or increasing the number of objects.
From our experimental study, we find objectcentric representations to be useful for downstream tasks and generally robust to most distribution shifts affecting objects. However, when the
distribution shift affects the input in a less structured manner, robustness in terms of segmentation
and downstream task performance may vary significantly across models and distribution shifts.

1. Introduction
In object-centric representation learning, we make the assumption that visual scenes are composed of multiple entities or objects that interact with each other, and exploit this
compositional property as inductive bias for neural networks.
Informally, the goal is to find transformations r of the data
x into a set of vector representations r(x) = {zk } each
corresponding to an individual object, without supervision
1
Technical University of Denmark 2 Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 University of Copenhagen 4 Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital 5 Amazon.
Correspondence to: Andrea Dittadi <adit@dtu.dk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Burgess et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Crawford & Pineau,
2019; Engelcke et al., 2020b; Eslami et al., 2016; Greff
et al., 2017; 2019; Gregor et al., 2015; Kosiorek et al., 2018;
Lin et al., 2020b; Locatello et al., 2020; Mnih et al., 2014;
Weis et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2019). Relying on this inductive bias, object-centric representations are conjectured
to be more robust than distributed representations, and to
enable the systematic generalization typical of symbolic systems while retaining the expressiveness of connectionist approaches (Bengio et al., 2013; Greff et al., 2020; Lake et al.,
2017; Schölkopf et al., 2021). Grounding for these claims
comes mostly from cognitive psychology and neuroscience
(Spelke, 1990; Téglás et al., 2011; Wagemans, 2015). E.g.,
infants learn about the physical properties of objects as entities that behave consistently over time (Baillargeon et al.,
1985; Spelke & Kinzler, 2007) and are able to re-apply their
knowledge to new scenarios involving previously unseen
objects (Dehaene, 2020). Similarly, in complex machine
learning tasks like physical modelling and reinforcement
learning, it is common to train from the internal representation of a simulator (Battaglia et al., 2016; Sanchez-Gonzalez
et al., 2020) or of a game engine (Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals
et al., 2019) rather than from raw pixels, as more abstract
representations facilitate learning. Finally, learning to represent objects separately is a crucial step towards learning
causal models of the data from high-dimensional observations, as objects can be interpreted as causal variables that
can be manipulated independently (Schölkopf et al., 2021).
Such causal models are believed to be crucial for humanlevel generalization (Pearl, 2009; Peters et al., 2017), but
traditional causality research assumes causal variables to be
given rather than learned (Schölkopf, 2019).
As object-centric learning developed recently as a subfield
of representation learning, we identify three key hypotheses
and design systematic experiments to test them. (1) The unsupervised learning of objects as pretraining task is useful
for downstream tasks. Besides learning to separate objects
without supervision, current approaches are expected to separately represent information about each object’s properties,
so that the representations can be useful for arbitrary downstream tasks. (2) In object-centric models, distribution shifts
affecting a single object do not affect the representations of
other objects. If objects are to be represented independently

