PMIC: Improving Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning with Progressive Mutual Information Collaboration

Pengyi Li 1 Hongyao Tang 1 Tianpei Yang 1 2 Xiaotian Hao 1 Tong Sang 1 Yan Zheng 1 Jianye Hao 1
Matthew E.Taylor 2 Wenyuan Tao 1 Zhen Wang 3

Abstract
Learning to collaborate is critical in MultiAgent Reinforcement Learning (MARL). Previous works promote collaboration by maximizing
the correlation of agents’ behaviors, which is typically characterized by Mutual Information (MI) in
different forms. However, we reveal sub-optimal
collaborative behaviors also emerge with strong
correlations, and simply maximizing the MI can,
surprisingly, hinder the learning towards better
collaboration. To address this issue, we propose a
novel MARL framework, called Progressive Mutual Information Collaboration (PMIC), for more
effective MI-driven collaboration. PMIC uses a
new collaboration criterion measured by the MI
between global states and joint actions. Based on
this criterion, the key idea of PMIC is maximizing the MI associated with superior collaborative
behaviors and minimizing the MI associated with
inferior ones. The two MI objectives play complementary roles by facilitating better collaborations while avoiding falling into sub-optimal ones.
Experiments on a wide range of MARL benchmarks show the superior performance of PMIC
compared with other algorithms.

1. Introduction
With the potential to solve complex real-world problems,
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has attracted
much attention in recent years (Lyu et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2021b; Zheng et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020c; HernandezLeal et al., 2019) and has been applied to many practical
domains like Game AI (Peng et al., 2017), Robotics Con1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China 2 University of Alberta, Canada 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University, China. Correspondence to: Yan Zheng
<yanzheng@tju.edu.cn>, Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

trol (Matignon et al., 2012), Transportation (Li et al., 2019).
However, efficiently achieving collaboration and learning
optimal policies still remains challenging in MARL (Liu
et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2021a; Zheng
et al., 2018a;b).
Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution
(CTDE) (Rashid et al., 2018; Sunehag et al., 2017) is a
popular MARL paradigm, adopted to promote collaboration
among agents. During centralized training, agents are
granted access to other agents’ information and possibly the
global state, while during decentralized execution, agents
make decisions independently based on their individual
policies. There are many CTDE-based MARL algorithms
being proposed, including MADDPG (Lowe et al., 2017),
MASAC (Kim et al., 2020), VDN (Sunehag et al., 2017),
and QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018). However, although global
information is incorporated during centralized CTDE
training, optimizing the decentralized policies of multiple
agents only through reward signals is often inefficient,
especially when the reward signals are stochastic or sparse
— therefore, additional mechanisms are often critical to
facilitating effective collaboration. A complementing
branch of works proposes to leverage the correlation or
influence of agents (Jaques et al., 2018; 2019; Xie et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2020; Merhej & Chetouani, 2021). The
intuition behind these works is that if agents make decisions
that account for their influence on the behaviors of other
agents, the problem of non-stationarity could be mitigated,
and thus agents are more likely to achieve collaboration.
Several works (Chen et al., 2021; Mahajan et al., 2019; Kim
et al., 2020) proposed to maximize the correlation of agents’
behaviors to promote collaboration, which commonly quantifies the correlation of agents’ behaviors by the mutual
information (MI). Unfortunately, these previous works overlook the fact that agents with a high degree of collaboration
may not necessarily generate high rewards. In complex
environments, there exist multiple types of collaborations
differing in return when agents achieve them — simply
maximizing the MI of agents’ behaviors cannot guarantee
high-quality collaboration because agents in sub-optimal
collaborations can also have a high degree of correlation.

