Learning-Augmented Binary Search Trees

Honghao Lin * 1 Tian Luo * 1 David P. Woodruff * 1

Abstract
A treap is a classic randomized binary search tree
data structure that is easy to implement and supports O(log n) expected time access. However,
classic treaps do not take advantage of the input distribution or patterns in the input. Given
recent advances in algorithms with predictions,
we propose pairing treaps with machine advice
to form a learning-augmented treap. We are the
first to propose a learning-augmented data structure that supports binary search tree operations
such as range-query and successor functionalities. With the assumption that we have access
to advice from a frequency estimation oracle, we
assign learned priorities to the nodes to better
improve the treap’s structure. We theoretically analyze the learning-augmented treap’s performance
under various input distributions and show that under those circumstances, our learning-augmented
treap has stronger guarantees than classic treaps
and other classic tree-based data structures. Further, we experimentally evaluate our learned treap
on synthetic datasets and demonstrate a performance advantage over other search tree data structures. We also present experiments on real world
datasets with known frequency estimation oracles
and show improvements as well.

1. Introduction
Querying ordered elements is a fundamental problem in
computer science. Classically, hash tables and various treebased data structures such as Red-Black Trees, AVL Trees,
and Treaps have been used to efficiently solve this problem. While hash tables are very efficient and extensively
used in practice, trees are more memory-efficient and can
*

1
Equal contribution
Computer Science Department,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Honghao Lin <honghaol@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Tian Luo <tianl1@andrew.cmu.edu>, David P. Woodruff
<dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

dynamically resize with greater convenience. Additionally,
search trees can offer extra functionality over hash tables
in the form of successor/predecessor, minimum/maximum,
order statistics, and range query capabilities. In practice,
self-balancing binary search trees are used in routing tables,
database indexing (B-Trees), the Linux kernel (Red-Black
Trees), and various implementations of collections, sets, and
dictionaries in standard libraries.
Classic binary search tree data structures often support these
functionalities in O(log n) time. However, most binary
search tree implementations, such as Red-Black Trees and
AVL Trees, do not leverage patterns in the data to improve
performance; instead, they provide a worst-case of O(log n)
time per access. Splay Trees are able to implicitly take
advantage of the underlying input distribution without any
information about the distribution as they are, up to a constant factor, statically optimal and conjectured to be dynamically optimal (Sleator & Tarjan, 1985). Unfortunately, each
access is accompanied by a series of rotations that is proportional to the number of nodes visited during the access,
which increases the access time by a possibly large constant
factor. On the other hand, if the underlying distribution is
known, then one can generate a statically optimal tree in
O(n2 ) time (Knuth, 1971) or an approximately statically
optimal tree in O(n log n) time (Mehlhorn, 1971); however, these methods do not allow for dynamic insertion and
deletion operations.
A natural idea that arises is to use patterns in data to improve
the efficiency of these data structures. In recent years, the
field of learning-augmented algorithms has blossomed (see
(Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii, 2020) for a survey). Given a
predictor that can output useful properties of the dataset, we
can then leverage these predictions to optimize the performance of the algorithm based on the predicted patterns. In
this paper, we present a learning-augmented binary search
tree that is the first to support efficient range queries and
order statistics.
In summary, we present the following contributions:
• We introduce a learning-augmented Treap structure
which exploits a rank prediction oracle to decrease the
number of comparisons needed to find an element.
• We analyze our learning-augmented Treap and provide

