Sketching Algorithms and Lower Bounds for Ridge Regression

Praneeth Kacham 1 David P. Woodruff 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Given a matrix A ∈ Rn×d , a vector b ∈ Rn , and a parameter
λ ≥ 0, the ridge regression problem is defined as:

We give a sketching-based iterative algorithm
that computes a 1 + ε approximate solution for
the ridge regression problem minx ∥Ax − b∥22 +
λ∥x∥22 where A ∈ Rn×d with d ≥ n. Our algorithm, for a constant number of iterations (requiring a constant number of passes over the input),
improves upon earlier work (Chowdhury et al.,
2018) by requiring that the sketching matrix only
has a weaker Approximate Matrix Multiplication
(AMM) guarantee that depends on ε, along with
a constant subspace embedding guarantee. The
earlier work instead requires that the sketching
matrix has a subspace embedding guarantee that
depends on ε. For example, to produce a 1 + ε approximate solution in 1 iteration, which requires
2 passes over the input, our algorithm requires
the OSNAP embedding to have m = O(nσ 2 /λε)
rows with a sparsity parameter s = O(log(n)),
whereas the earlier algorithm of Chowdhury et al.
(2018) with the same number p
of rows of OSNAP
requires a sparsity s = O( σ 2 /λε · log(n)),
where σ = ∥A∥2 is the spectral norm of the matrix A. We also show that this algorithm can be
used to give faster algorithms for kernel ridge regression. Finally, we show that the sketch size
required for our algorithm is essentially optimal
for a natural framework of algorithms for ridge
regression by proving lower bounds on oblivious
sketching matrices for AMM. The sketch size
lower bounds for AMM may be of independent
interest.

min ∥Ax − b∥22 + λ∥x∥22 .
x

Throughout the paper, we assume n ≤ d, and that x∗ is the
optimal solution for the problem. Let Opt be the optimal
value for the above problem. Earlier work (Chowdhury
et al., 2018) gives an iterative algorithm using so-called
subspace embeddings. The following theorem states their
results when their algorithm is run for 1 iteration. Note that
their algorithm is more general and when run for t iterations,
the error is proportional to εt .
Theorem 1.1 (Theorem 1 of Chowdhury et al. (2018)).
Given A ∈ Rn×d , let V ∈ Rd×n be an orthonormal basis for the rowspace of matrix A. If S ∈ Rm×d is a matrix
which satisfies
∥V T S T SV − In ∥2 ≤ ε/2,

(1)

then x̃ = AT (AS T SAT + λIn )−1 b satisfies
∥x̃ − x∗ ∥2 ≤ ε∥x∗ ∥2 .
A matrix S which satisfies (1) is called an ε/2 subspace
embedding for the column space of V , since for any y in
colspan(V ), we have (1 − ε/2)∥y∥22 ≤ ∥Sy∥22 ≤ (1 +
ε/2)∥y∥22 . We also frequently drop the term “column space”
and say S is an ε/2 subspace embedding for the matrix V
itself.

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Praneeth Kacham <pkacham@cs.cmu.edu>,
David P. Woodruff <dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu>.

There are many oblivious and non-oblivious constructions
of subspace embeddings. As the name suggests, oblivious
subspace embedding (OSE) constructions do not depend
on the matrix V that is to be embedded. OSEs specify a
distribution S such that for any arbitrary matrix V , a random
matrix S drawn from the distribution S is an ε subspace
embedding for V with probability ≥ 1 − δ. On the other
hand, non-oblivious constructions compute a distribution S
that depends on the matrix V that is to be embedded. See
the survey by Woodruff (2014) for an overview.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In many cases, such as in streaming, it is important that the
sketch used is oblivious, since matrix-dependent subspace
embedding constructions may need to read the entire input

1

