Individual Reward Assisted Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Li Wang * 1 2 Yupeng Zhang * 1 2 Yujing Hu 2 Weixun Wang 3 4 Chongjie Zhang 5 Yang Gao 1 Jianye Hao 3 4
Tangjie Lv 2 Changjie Fan 2

Abstract
In many real-world multi-agent systems, the sparsity of team rewards often makes it difficult for
an algorithm to successfully learn a cooperative
team policy. At present, the common way for
solving this problem is to design some dense individual rewards for the agents to guide the cooperation. However, most existing works utilize
individual rewards in ways that do not always promote teamwork and sometimes are even counterproductive. In this paper, we propose Individual
Reward Assisted Team Policy Learning (IRAT),
which learns two policies for each agent from the
dense individual reward and the sparse team reward with discrepancy constraints for updating
the two policies mutually. Experimental results in
different scenarios, such as the Multi-Agent Particle Environment and the Google Research Football Environment, show that IRAT significantly
outperforms the baseline methods and can greatly
promote team policy learning without deviating
from the original team objective, even when the
individual rewards are misleading or conflict with
the team rewards.

1. Introduction
Many control problems in real life require the mutual cooperation among multiple agents. In recent years, cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has been
widely applied in many areas such as video games (Vinyals
et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019; Kurach et al., 2020), aerial
*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 NetEase
Fuxi AI Lab, Hangzhou, China 3 College of Intelligence and
Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 4 Noah’s Ark
Lab, Beijing, China 5 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yujing Hu <huyujing@corp.netease.com>, Yang Gao
<gaoy@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

vehicles (Jin & Ma, 2019), transportation (Shamsoshoara
et al., 2019) and power grids (Jin & Ma, 2019). Cooperative multi-agent tasks generally only have rewards for team
goals. In spite of the progress of the value-based and policybased MARL algorithms (Sunehag et al., 2018; Rashid et al.,
2018; Wang et al., 2021a; Lowe et al., 2017; Foerster et al.,
2018; Iqbal & Sha, 2019; Wang et al., 2021b; Yu et al., 2021)
made by researchers, the sparsity of the team rewards in
many multi-agent systems still remains a big challenge for
the state-of-the-art MARL algorithms. Practical application
of these algorithms usually requires some dense individual
rewards that can guide the agents perform the task. For
example, in the case of solving a football game, although
the team rewards (e.g., win or loss of the match, or scoring)
are very sparse, we can manually assign positive rewards to
the agents for performing a successful pass, a nice shot, and
a good tackle, and assign negative rewards for unexpected
behaviors such as offside and running out of the field.
There are usually two straightforward ways for utilizing
individual rewards. The first one is to distribute the sum
of the individual and team rewards of all agents equally
among them. The second one is to generate a new reward
function for each agent by adding its individual rewards to
the team rewards. However, such simple methods face three
problems: (1) The introduction of individual rewards will
change the learning objectives of the agents, resulting in
unexpected behaviors that deviate from the desired goal of
the team. For example, for training agents to play football
games, if too many individual rewards that encourage individual skills (such as passing, shooting, and tackling) are
introduced, the agents may focus more on achieving those
skills rather than winning the game. (2) The mixing of the
individual and team rewards often involves weighting coefficients and the corresponding fine-tuning work in practice.
(3) The mixture of the two types of rewards makes the credit
assignment problem (Foerster et al., 2018; Son et al., 2019)
more difficult. The learning of each agent is likely to be
disturbed by the individual rewards of other agents. Still
taking the football scenario as an example, if an agent runs
out of the playing field, distributing its punishment to all
agents will definitely affect the learning of other agents.
In this paper, we propose Individual Reward Assisted Team
Policy Learning (IRAT), a novel multi-agent policy gradient

