Cycle Representation Learning for Inductive Relation Prediction

Zuoyu Yan 1 Tengfei Ma 2 Liangcai Gao 1 Zhi Tang 1 Chao Chen 3

Abstract
In recent years, algebraic topology and its modern
development, the theory of persistent homology,
has shown great potential in graph representation
learning. In this paper, based on the mathematics
of algebraic topology, we propose a novel solution for inductive relation prediction, an important
learning task for knowledge graph completion. To
predict the relation between two entities, one can
use the existence of rules, namely a sequence of
relations. Previous works view rules as paths and
primarily focus on the searching of paths between
entities. The space of rules is huge, and one has
to sacrifice either efficiency or accuracy. In this
paper, we consider rules as cycles and show that
the space of cycles has a unique structure based
on the mathematics of algebraic topology. By exploring the linear structure of the cycle space, we
can improve the searching efficiency of rules. We
propose to collect cycle bases that span the space
of cycles. We build a novel GNN framework on
the collected cycles to learn the representations of
cycles, and to predict the existence/non-existence
of a relation. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance on benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are graph-structured knowledge
bases that integrate human knowledge through relational
triplets. In a KG, nodes represent entities and edges represent relational triplets connecting them. A relational triplet
is defined as (eh , r, et ), where eh and et are the head and
tail entities respectively, and r is the relation between them.
KGs have been used in many problems such as recom1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking
University, Beijing, China 2 T. J. Watson Research Center,
IBM, New York, USA 3 Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University, New York, USA. Correspondence
to: Chao Chen <chao.chen.1@stonybrook.edu>, Liangcai Gao
<glc@pku.edu.cn>, Zhi Tang <tangzhi@pku.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

mendation systems (Wang et al., 2018), question answering (Huang et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2018), biomedical
research (Zhao et al., 2020b; Zhu et al., 2020), and zeroshot learning (Kampffmeyer et al., 2019).
Due to the limitation of human knowledge and data extraction algorithms, we cannot thoroughly define and excavate
all the entities and relations in a KG (Chen et al., 2020).
The incomplete structures and contents of KGs can significantly benefit from an automatic completion algorithm.
Early works (Bordes et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2014; Sun
et al., 2019) focus on incorporating the attributes of entities.
Recent works develop models that are agnostic of entity
attributes. They can handle new entities and dynamic KGs,
which are quite common.
These entity-agnostic methods (Yang et al., 2017; Sadeghian
et al., 2019; Teru et al., 2020) are called inductive relation
prediction methods. They predict missing triplets by learning logical rules in KGs. For example, from the KG shown
in Figure 1(a), we can learn the rule:
∃X, (X, part of , Y ) ∧ (X, lives in , Z)
→ (Y, located in , Z). (1)
Based on this rule, in Figure 1(b), we can induce the missing
triplet (M anchesterU nited, located in , M anchester)
due to the existence of the two-hop path consisting
of the relations (Cristiano, lives in , M anchester) and
(Cristiano, part of , M anchesterU nited).1
Previous inductive relation prediction methods (Galárraga
et al., 2013; Meilicke et al., 2018) mainly search for the
good rules in a KG to predict the existence of a target triplet.
However, the number of possible good rules is exponential
to the size of the KG. In case of large searching cost, these
works need to introduce artificial pruning methods, thus
cannot suit many benchmarks. Inspired by the rapid development of deep learning, Yang et al. (2017) and Sadeghian
et al. (2019) introduce neural networks to approximate the
searching of rules. However, the approximation is rather
coarse, leading to inferior performance in downstream tasks.
To avoid searching through the exponential-size space of
1

Technically speaking, these methods only learn the “and”
operation between relations. We are interested in expanding to
more sophisticated rules. But this is beyond the scope of this paper.

