Maslow’s Hammer for Catastrophic Forgetting:
Node Re-Use vs Node Activation
Sebastian Lee 1 2 3 Stefano Sarao Mannelli 2 3 Claudia Clopath 1 2 Sebastian Goldt 4 Andrew Saxe 2 3 5

Abstract
Continual learning—learning new tasks in sequence while maintaining performance on old
tasks—remains particularly challenging for artificial neural networks. Surprisingly, the amount of
forgetting does not increase with the dissimilarity
between the learned tasks, but appears to be worst
in an intermediate similarity regime.
In this paper we theoretically analyse both a
synthetic teacher-student framework and a real
data setup to provide an explanation of this phenomenon that we name Maslow’s hammer hypothesis. Our analysis reveals the presence of a
trade-off between node activation and node re-use
that results in worst forgetting in the intermediate
regime. Using this understanding we reinterpret
popular algorithmic interventions for catastrophic
interference in terms of this trade-off, and identify
the regimes in which they are most effective.

1. Introduction
Artificial neural networks have reached astonishing performance in a number of different applications (Silver et al.,
2016; Rajkomar et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2019; Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2021), but they tend to perform poorly when
they have to solve a sequence of learned tasks (Kemker et al.,
2018). The ineffectiveness of deep learning algorithms in
this learning paradigm—known as continual learning or
lifelong learning—is strikingly different from observations
in human and animal learning, where tasks can effectively
be learned sequentially and interference is a rarity (Barnett
& Ceci, 2002; Calvert et al., 2004; Mareschal et al., 2007;
1
Imperial College, London, UK 2 Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, UCL 3 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, UCL
4
International School of Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy 5 CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholars program, CIFAR,
Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Sebastian Lee <sebastian.lee14@imperial.ac.uk>, Andrew Saxe <a.saxe@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Pallier et al., 2003). Neuroscientists and psychologists have
been interested in the mechanisms underpinning this ability
for some time (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Cichon & Gan,
2015; Yang et al., 2014; Flesch et al., 2018); more recently
the engagement of the machine learning community with
this paradigm has also grown as the focus shifts from performance on single tasks to distributions of tasks and learning
from the real world (Parisi et al., 2019).
The key difficulty of continual learning is avoiding socalled catastrophic forgetting or catastrophic interference (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990), the phenomenon of deteriorating performance on earlier tasks when
learning later tasks. Humans are very good continual learners, and various biological mechanisms have been proposed
to account for the brain’s ability to combat forgetting (McClelland et al., 1995). On the other hand artificial systems,
in particular neural networks trained with gradient descent
algorithms, suffer badly from catastrophic forgetting (Goodfellow et al., 2014). This has prompted research into methods to augment vanilla gradient descent with additional
elements specifically aimed at reducing forgetting (Parisi
et al., 2019), including some that take inspiration form the
aforementioned biological mechanisms (Hinton & Plaut,
1987; Robins, 1995; Gepperth & Karaoguz, 2016; Rebuffi
et al., 2017).
In addition to this algorithmic line of research, there is growing interest in understanding why forgetting affects deep
learning so severely and what the main drivers of forgetting
are. Ramasesh et al. (2021) performed a series of systematic
experiments in a range of architectures and training setups
and made the counterintuitive observation that catastrophic
forgetting is worst between tasks of intermediate similarity.
Lee et al. (2021) then analysed the impact of task similarity on continual learning in a solvable model of two-layer
neural networks and found the same non-monotonic relationship between task similarity and forgetting. Despite these
results, the precise mechanism that makes intermediate task
similarity the worst has remained unclear.
Here, we describe a possible mechanism that drives catastrophic forgetting in two-layer neural networks trained in
a teacher-student setup. Our main contributions can be
summarised as follows:

