Self-Supervised Models of Audio Effectively Explain
Human Cortical Responses to Speech

Aditya R. Vaidya 1 Shailee Jain 1 Alexander G. Huth 1 2

Abstract
Self-supervised language models are very effective at predicting high-level cortical responses during language comprehension. However, the best
current models of lower-level auditory processing
in the human brain rely on either hand-constructed
acoustic filters or representations from supervised
audio neural networks. In this work, we capitalize on the progress of self-supervised speech
representation learning (SSL) to create new stateof-the-art models of the human auditory system.
Compared against acoustic baselines, phonemic
features, and supervised models, representations
from the middle layers of self-supervised models
(APC, wav2vec, wav2vec 2.0, and HuBERT) consistently yield the best prediction performance for
fMRI recordings within the auditory cortex (AC).
Brain areas involved in low-level auditory processing exhibit a preference for earlier SSL model
layers, whereas higher-level semantic areas prefer
later layers. We show that these trends are due
to the models’ ability to encode information at
multiple linguistic levels (acoustic, phonetic, and
lexical) along their representation depth. Overall, these results show that self-supervised models
effectively capture the hierarchy of information
relevant to different stages of speech processing
in human cortex.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a popular
and successful pre-training objective. In natural language
processing, self-supervised language models (LM) encode
diverse linguistic information and achieve excellent zero1

Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Neuroscience, The University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to:
Aditya Vaidya <avaidya@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

shot performance on many language tasks (Peters et al.,
2018; Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019). Capitalizing on these findings, neuroimaging studies have shown
that representations extracted from LMs are highly effective at predicting brain activity elicited by natural language
(Wehbe et al., 2014; Jain & Huth, 2018; Toneva & Wehbe,
2019; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Caucheteux et al., 2021; Goldstein et al., 2020) and can help reveal how linguistic representations are organized across human cortex (Jain et al.,
2020; Antonello et al., 2021). Even outside the domain
of language, self-supervised models have proven fruitful
in modeling the mammalian visual system (Zhuang et al.,
2021).
In automatic speech recognition there has been a similar
trend towards SSL-based approaches. Using autoregressive, contrastive, and masked prediction losses, SSL models learn powerful acoustic representations that are highly
transferable across applications (Hsu et al., 2021; Schneider et al., 2019; Baevski et al., 2020). Much like language
models, SSL models of speech have also been shown to
capture higher-order linguistic structure without explicit
supervision (Pasad et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021). This
can be attributed to their ability to integrate information
over a broader context than traditional acoustic filters. However, SSL models have not yet been combined with neuroimaging to study auditory processing in the human brain,
where the best models are currently hand-constructed features (Norman-Haignere & McDermott, 2018; Venezia et al.,
2019; Chi et al., 2005; Mesgarani et al., 2014) or supervised
neural networks (Millet & King, 2021). In this paper, we
investigate the potential of SSL speech representations for
predicting human cortical responses to natural speech.
One approach to studying sensory representations in the
brain is through “encoding models” (Wu et al., 2006). These
predictive models of brain activity learn a mapping from
stimulus features to responses measured using a neuroimaging technique like fMRI. In this work, we use SSL models
to extract acoustic features of natural speech and in turn,
build voxel-wise speech encoding models using data from
an fMRI experiment (Figure 1). Our experiment comprised
human participants passively listening to English-language
narrative stories while their whole-brain fMRI BOLD activ-

