Mitigating Neural Network Overconfidence with Logit Normalization

Hongxin Wei 1 Renchunzi Xie 1 Hao Cheng 1 2 Lei Feng 3 Bo An 1 Yixuan Li 4

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution inputs is critical for
the safe deployment of machine learning models
in the real world. However, neural networks are
known to suffer from the overconfidence issue,
where they produce abnormally high confidence
for both in- and out-of-distribution inputs. In this
work, we show that this issue can be mitigated
through Logit Normalization (LogitNorm)—a
simple fix to the cross-entropy loss—by enforcing a constant vector norm on the logits in training.
Our method is motivated by the analysis that the
norm of the logit keeps increasing during training, leading to overconfident output. Our key idea
behind LogitNorm is thus to decouple the influence of output’s norm during network optimization. Trained with LogitNorm, neural networks
produce highly distinguishable confidence scores
between in- and out-of-distribution data. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
LogitNorm, reducing the average FPR95 by up to
42.30% on common benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Modern neural networks deployed in the open world often
struggle with out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs—samples
from a different distribution that the network has not been
exposed to during training, and therefore should not be predicted with high confidence at test time. A reliable classifier
should not only accurately classify known in-distribution
(ID) samples, but also identify as “unknown” any OOD
input. This gives rise to the importance of OOD detection,
which determines whether an input is ID or OOD and allows
the model to take precautions in deployment.
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Nanjing
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China 3 Chongqing University,
Chongqing, China 4 University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin, United States. Correspondence to: Renchunzi Xie
<XIER0002@e.ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A naive solution uses the maximum softmax probability
(MSP)—also known as the softmax confidence score—for
OOD detection (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016). The operating hypothesis is that OOD data should trigger relatively
lower softmax confidence than that of ID data. Whilst intuitive, the reality shows a non-trivial dilemma. In particular,
deep neural networks can easily produce overconfident predictions, i.e., abnormally high softmax confidences, even
when the inputs are far away from the training data (Nguyen
et al., 2015). This has cast significant doubt on using softmax confidence for OOD detection. Indeed, many prior
works turned to define alternative OOD scoring functions
(Liang et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020; Sastry
& Oore, 2020; Sun et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021; Sun
et al., 2022). Yet to date, the community still has a limited
understanding of the fundamental cause and mitigation of
the overconfidence issue.
In this work, we show that the overconfidence issue can be
mitigated through a simple fix to the cross-entropy loss—the
most commonly used training objective for classification—
by enforcing a constant norm on the logit vector (i.e., presoftmax output). Our method, Logit Normalization (dubbed
LogitNorm), is motivated by our analysis on the norm of
the neural network’s logit vectors. We find that even when
most training examples are classified to their correct labels,
the softmax cross-entropy loss can continue to increase the
magnitude of the logit vectors. The growing magnitude during training thus leads to the overconfidence issue, despite
having no improvement on the classification accuracy.
To mitigate the issue, our key idea behind LogitNorm is to
decouple the influence of output’s norm from the training
objective and its optimization. This can be achieved by
normalizing the logit vector to have a constant norm during training. In effect, our LogitNorm loss encourages the
direction of the logit output to be consistent with the corresponding one-hot label, without exacerbating the magnitude
of the output. Trained with normalized outputs, the network
tends to give conservative predictions and results in strong
separability of softmax confidence scores between ID and
OOD inputs (see Figure 4).
Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of LogitNorm over existing methods for OOD detection. First,
our method drastically improves the OOD detection perfor-

