Equivariant Priors for Compressed Sensing with Unknown Orientation

Anna Kuzina † 1 Kumar Pratik * 2 Fabio Valerio Massoli * 2 Arash Behboodi 2

Abstract

an MR image is reconstructed from an undersampled kspace. It is also used in wireless communication for channel
estimation problems (Paredes et al., 2007). Single-pixel
imaging (Duarte et al., 2008) is another example of linear
inverse problems.

In compressed sensing, the goal is to reconstruct
the signal from an underdetermined system of linear measurements. Thus, prior knowledge about
the signal of interest and its structure is required.
Additionally, in many scenarios, the signal has
an unknown orientation prior to measurements.
To address such recovery problems, we propose
using equivariant generative models as a prior,
which encapsulate orientation information in their
latent space. Thereby, we show that signals with
unknown orientations can be recovered with iterative gradient descent on the latent space of
these models and provide additional theoretical
recovery guarantees. We construct an equivariant variational autoencoder and use the decoder
as generative prior for compressed sensing. We
discuss additional potential gains of the proposed
approach in terms of convergence and latency.

1. Introduction
Compressed sensing (CS) deals with the problem of reconstructing an unknown underlying signal x ∈ Rm from m
linear measurements generated as
y = Ax + ε

(1)

where A ∈ Rm×n is a task-specific measurement matrix
and ε is additive noise. A wide range of practical problems
can be formulated as a recovery of an unknown signal from
the noisy linear measurements. Medical applications include
computed tomography (Chen et al., 2008), where one seeks
to recover an unknown image from a sinogram (set of linear
measurements) and rapid MRI (Lustig et al., 2007), where
*
Equal contribution 1 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands.
† Work done during the internship in Qualcomm AI
research. 2 Qualcomm AI Research, Qualcomm Technologies
Netherlands B.V. Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.. Correspondence to: Anna Kuzina
<av.kuzina@yandex.ru>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Since the number of measurements is assumed to be smaller
than the signal space dimension, this system of linear equations is under-determined, and extra assumptions are needed
to recover the solution. One common approach would be to
use the sparsity assumption about the signal of interest in a
given basis (Tibshirani, 1996; Candès et al., 2006; Donoho,
2006). There are other notions of structure beyond sparsity
such as low rankness. More complicated structures can be
captured using generative modelling. This field is usually
referred to as generative compressed sensing. Generative
CS uses a pre-trained generative model to capture the prior
over the space of signals. In this case, the signal recovery is
done by finding the latent code of the generative model, for
example, using gradient descent (Bora et al., 2017). There
are, however, some challenges in using generative priors for
compressed sensing, such as convergence and latency issues.
Gradient descent methods sometimes need many iterations
and restarts for convergence (see (Whang et al., 2021b) and
references and discussions therein).
In this work, we consider a more general setup, where along
with the known linear forward operator, the input is also
transformed by an unknown group operation. A typical
example is a rotation by an angle α. Such examples occur in many imaging applications where the signal pose
is unknown before the imaging. Another example is cryoelectron microscopy (Singer, 2018). We are interested in
this problem:
y = ATg x + ε,
(2)
where Tg : G × X → X is an action of a group element g in
the group G on the signal space X . For example, it can be
a rotation by some angle which is, in many cases, captured
by a linear transformation. The group transformation Tg is
assumed to be unknown.
To use standard generative priors for this task, the signal
pose should be estimated jointly with the latent code. It is
therefore natural to include group action information in the
latent space. In this paper, we propose equivariant generative priors for this task. A generative model G(·) is equiv-

