Neural Laplace: Learning diverse classes of differential equations
in the Laplace domain

Samuel Holt 1 Zhaozhi Qian 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract
Neural Ordinary Differential Equations model dynamical systems with ODEs learned by neural
networks. However, ODEs are fundamentally inadequate to model systems with long-range dependencies or discontinuities, which are common
in engineering and biological systems. Broader
classes of differential equations (DE) have been
proposed as remedies, including delay differential equations and integro-differential equations.
Furthermore, Neural ODE suffers from numerical
instability when modelling stiff ODEs and ODEs
with piecewise forcing functions. In this work, we
propose Neural Laplace, a unified framework for
learning diverse classes of DEs including all the
aforementioned ones. Instead of modelling the
dynamics in the time domain, we model it in the
Laplace domain, where the history-dependencies
and discontinuities in time can be represented as
summations of complex exponentials. To make
learning more efficient, we use the geometrical
stereographic map of a Riemann sphere to induce
more smoothness in the Laplace domain. In the
experiments, Neural Laplace shows superior performance in modelling and extrapolating the trajectories of diverse classes of DEs, including the
ones with complex history dependency and abrupt
changes.

1. Introduction
Learning differential equations that govern dynamical systems is of great practical interest in the natural and social
sciences. Chen et al. (2018) introduced neural Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) to model the temporal states x(t)
according to an ODE ẋ = f (t, x(t)), where the function f
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Samuel Holt
<sih31@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Table 1. Families of DEs captured by Neural Laplace.

Model

Equation

ODE
DDE
IDE
Forced ODE

ẋ = f (t, x(t))
ẋ = f (t, x(t), x(t − τ )), τ ∈ R+
Rt
ẋ = f (t, x(t)) + 0 h(τ, x(τ ))dτ
ẋ = f (t, x(t), u(t))

Stiff ODE

ẋ = f (t, x(t)), ∃ i, j, ẋi ≫ ẋj

is unknown a priori and is learned by a neural network.
However, there exists much broader classes of DEs, for
which Neural ODE cannot model or describe (Table 1).
These DEs are formulated to capture more general temporal
dynamics, which are beyond an ODE’s modeling capacity.
For example, the delay differential equation (DDE) and the
integro-differential equation (IDE) both include historical
states x(t − τ ), ∀τ > 0; they thus offer a natural way of
capturing the impact from history (Forde, 2005; Koch et al.,
2014). In contrast, ODEs are inadequate to represent such
history dependency because they determine the temporal
derivative ẋ by the current state x(t) alone. As a remedy, the
users of ODEs often resort to introducing latent variables or
additional states, which may not have any semantic meaning
or physical interpretation, making the model less transparent
(Dupont et al., 2019; Rubanova et al., 2019).
Furthermore, there also exists sub-classes of ODEs that cannot be adequately modeled by Neural ODEs. Two prime
examples are forced ODEs and stiff ODEs (Table 1). In
the former case, the system dynamics are influenced by an
external forcing function u(t) which may be only piecewise
continuous in time. In the latter case, the system often involves states operating at different time scales, i.e. ẋi ≫ ẋj
for some i, j. However, in both cases, the numerical solver
employed by Neural ODE would encounter difficulty in
accurately solving the initial value problem (IVP, Equation
1), which causes problems in training and inference.
Z t
x(t) = x(0) +
f (τ, x(τ ))dτ = Solve(x(0), f, t) (1)
0

Prior works have attempted to address these limitations separately and individually, which leads to a suite of methods

