Least Squares Estimation using Sketched Data with Heteroskedastic Errors

Sokbae Lee * 1 Serena Ng * 1

Abstract
Researchers may perform regressions using a
sketch of data of size m instead of the full sample of size n for a variety of reasons. This paper
considers the case when the regression errors do
not have constant variance and heteroskedasticity
robust standard errors would normally be needed
for test statistics to provide accurate inference.
We show that estimates using data sketched by
random projections will behave ‘as if’ the errors
were homoskedastic. Estimation by random sampling would not have this property. The result
arises because the sketched estimates in the case
of random projections can be expressed as degenerate U -statistics, and under certain conditions,
these statistics are asymptotically normal with
homoskedastic variance. We verify that the conditions hold not only in the case of least squares
regression when the covariates are exogenous, but
also in instrumental variables estimation when the
covariates are endogenous. The result implies that
inference can be simpler than the full sample case
if the sketching scheme is appropriately chosen.

1. Introduction
Big data sets can be costly to store and analyze, and one
approach around the data bottlenecks is to work with a randomly chosen subset, or a sketch, of the data. Data privacy
may also dictate that a sketch of the data be made available
for public use. The early works of Sarlos (2006), Drineas
et al. (2006) and Drineas et al. (2011) consider the algorithmic properties of the least squares estimator using sketched
data. Subsequent work extends the analysis to ridge regression (e.g., Wang et al., 2018; Liu & Dobriban, 2020), and
logistic regression (e.g., Wang, 2019). See, e.g., Woodruff
(2014), Drineas & Mahoney (2018) and Martinsson & Tropp
(2020) for a review. However, Ma et al. (2015), Raskutti
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Economics, Columbia
University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Sokbae Lee
<sl3841@columbia.edu>, Serena Ng <sn2294@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

& Mahoney (2016), Dobriban & Liu (2019) and Ma et al.
(2020) have found that an optimal worse-case (algorithmic)
error may not yield an optimal mean-squared (statistical)
error. This has led to interest in better understanding the
sketched least squares estimates in a Bayesian setting as
in Geppert et al. (2017), or its asymptotic distribution as
in Ahfock et al. (2020) and Ma et al. (2020). Lee & Ng
(2020) highlights the tension between a large m required
for accurate inference, and a small m for computation efficiency. To date, these results have been derived under the
assumptions that the errors are homoskedastic and that the
regressors are exogenous. But these assumptions are not
innocuous. The estimates will be biased when the regressors
are not exogenous, as would normally be the case in causal
inference. And if the errors are heteroskedastic, test statistics must use standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity, or
else inference will not be accurate even if the regressors are
exogenous.
In this paper, we obtain the surprising result that when
sketching is based on random projections, robust standard
errors will not be needed, meaning that inference using the
sketched estimates can proceed as though the errors were
homoskedastic. The proof is obtained by analyzing the difference between the full sample and the sketched estimates
in terms of degenerate U -statistics. However, the result does
not hold when sketching is based on random sampling. Our
analysis of the least squares estimator and two-stage least
squares estimator shows that these findings hold both when
the regressors are exogenous and endogenous.
The following notation will be used. Let kak denote the
Euclidean norm of any vector a. Let Aij or [A]ij denote the
(i, j) element of a matrix A. For k = 1, . . . , d, let σk (A) be
a singular value of A. Let kAk2 = σmax (A) denote its spectral norm, where σmax (A), and σmin (A) are the largest and
smallest singular values of A. The superscript T denotes
the transpose of a matrix. For an integer n ≥ 1, [n] is the
set of positive integers from 1 to n. Let →p and →d , respectively, denote convergence in probability and in distribution.
For a sequence of random variables An and a sequence of
positive real numbers an , An = op (an ) iff a−1
n An →p 0;
An = Op (an ) iff a−1
A
is
bounded
in
probability.
n
n
An accompanying R package is available on the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) at https://

