DRIBO: Robust Deep Reinforcement Learning via
Multi-View Information Bottleneck
Jiameng Fan 1 Wenchao Li 1

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) agents are
often sensitive to visual changes that were unseen
in their training environments. To address this
problem, we leverage the sequential nature of RL
to learn robust representations that encode only
task-relevant information from observations based
on the unsupervised multi-view setting. Specifically, we introduce a novel contrastive version
of the Multi-View Information Bottleneck (MIB)
objective for temporal data. We train RL agents
from pixels with this auxiliary objective to learn
robust representations that can compress away
task-irrelevant information and are predictive of
task-relevant dynamics. This approach enables us
to train high-performance policies that are robust
to visual distractions and can generalize well to
unseen environments. We demonstrate that our
approach can achieve SOTA performance on a diverse set of visual control tasks in the DeepMind
Control Suite when the background is replaced
with natural videos. In addition, we show that
our approach outperforms well-established baselines for generalization to unseen environments
on the Procgen benchmark. Our code is opensourced and available at https://github.
com/BU-DEPEND-Lab/DRIBO.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL)has been shown to be
successful in learning high-quality controllers directly from
raw images in an end-to-end fashion (Mnih et al., 2015;
Levine et al., 2016; Bojarski et al., 2016). However, it has
been observed that DRL agents perform poorly in environments different from those where the agents were trained on,
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Jiameng
Fan <jmfanbu@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

even when these environments contain semantically equivalent information relevant to the control task (Farebrother
et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2018b;a; Yu
et al., 2019). By contrast, humans routinely adapt to new,
unseen environments. For example, while visual scenes
can be drastically different when driving in different cities,
human drivers can quickly adjust to driving in a new city
which they have never visited. We argue that this ability to
adapt stems from the fact that driving skills are invariant to
many visual details that are actually not relevant to driving.
Conversely, DRL agents without this ability are hindered
from understanding the temporal structure of task-relevant
dynamics. As a result, they can be easily distracted by
task-irrelevant visual details (Jonschkowski & Brock, 2015;
Zhang et al., 2021; Agarwal et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2020b) .
Viewing from a representation-learning perspective, a desired latent state representation for RL should facilitate the
prediction of future states, beyond expected rewards, on
potential actions (Lee et al., 2020b; Agarwal et al., 2021;
Mazoure et al., 2020) and exclude excessive, task-irrelevant
information in the visual observations (Zhang et al., 2021;
Fu et al., 2021). An RL agent that learns from such representations has the advantage of being more robust to visual
distractions. The resulting policy is also more likely to
generalize to unseen environments if the task-relevant information in the new environment remains similar to that in the
training environments. Prior works (Hafner et al., 2019; Lee
et al., 2020a) rely on a reconstruction loss to learn latent representations and dynamics jointly in a latent space. While
these approaches learn representations that retain information in the visual observations, they do nothing to discard
the irrelevant information (Zhang et al., 2021; Tomar et al.,
2021).
We tackle this problem by considering latent state representations for RL that are robust under the multi-view setting (Li et al., 2018; Federici et al., 2020; Fischer, 2020),
where each view is assumed to provide the same amount
of task-relevant information while all the information not
shared by them is deemed task-irrelevant. Data augmentation can be easily leveraged to generate such multi-view
observations without requiring additional new data. Data
augmentation in RL has delivered promising results for visual control tasks (Laskin et al., 2020a; Lange et al., 2012;

