Debiaser Beware: Pitfalls of Centering Regularized Transport Maps

Aram-Alexandre Pooladian 1 Marco Cuturi 2 Jonathan Niles-Weed 1 3

Abstract
Estimating optimal transport (OT) maps (a.k.a.
Monge maps) between two measures P and Q
is a problem fraught with computational and statistical challenges. A promising approach lies in
using the dual potential functions obtained when
solving an entropy-regularized OT problem between samples Pn and Qn , which can be used to
recover an approximately optimal map. The negentropy penalization in that scheme introduces,
however, an estimation bias that grows with the
regularization strength. A well-known remedy to
debias such estimates, which has gained wide popularity among practitioners of regularized OT, is
to center them, by subtracting auxiliary problems
involving Pn and itself, as well as Qn and itself.
We do prove that, under favorable conditions on
P and Q, debiasing can yield better approximations to the Monge map. However, and perhaps
surprisingly, we present a few cases in which debiasing is provably detrimental in a statistical sense,
notably when the regularization strength is large
or the number of samples is small. These claims
are validated experimentally on synthetic and real
datasets, and should reopen the debate on whether
debiasing is needed when using entropic OT.

1. Introduction
Estimating an optimal transport (OT) map from a source
measure P to a target measure Q is an increasingly central
issue in machine learning: such a map, when successfully
learned from data, would in principle allow the generation
of new samples from Q by pushing particles sampled from
P . For example, if we are given full access to the source
measure (typically a Gaussian) but only samples from the
1

Center for Data Science, New York University, New York,
USA 2 Google Research, currently at Apple 3 Courant Institute
of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York,
USA. Correspondence to: Aram-Alexandre Pooladian <aramalexandre.pooladian@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

target, this problem can be viewed with the lens of normalizing flows (Finlay et al., 2020; Grathwohl et al., 2018; Huang
et al., 2021) with tight connections with the problem of estimating generative models (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Genevay
et al., 2018a; Salimans et al., 2018). When both P and Q can
only be accessed through i.i.d samples X1 , . . . , Xn ∼ P
and Y1 , . . . , Yn ∼ Q, estimating such maps is even more
challenging, yet increasingly relevant when, for instance,
trying to infer cellular evolution from population measurements (Demetci et al., 2021; Moriel et al., 2021; Schiebinger
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020).
Formally, we call T0 : Rd → Rd an OT map, or a Monge
map, when it is the minimizer to the Monge problem (1781):
Z
1
min
∥x − T (x)∥22 dP (x),
(1)
2
T ∈T (P,Q)
where P and Q are two probability measures on Ω ⊆ Rd ,
and T (P, Q) is the set of pushforward maps from P to Q,
namely T (P, Q) := {T : Ω → Ω | T♯ P := P ◦ T −1 = Q}.
The existence of such a minimizer is guaranteed under mild
regularity conditions on the two measures (Santambrogio,
2015). The task of map estimation is to provide an estimator
T̂n on the basis of samples Pn from P and Qn from Q
whose expected L2 (P ) distance to T0 is small.
When T0 ∈ C α (the space of ⌊α⌋-times differentiable functions whose ⌊α⌋th derivative is α − ⌊α⌋ Hölder smooth) and
P and Q satisfy additional technical assumptions, Hütter
& Rigollet (2021) provided the first estimator that achieved
the following estimation rate,
2α

E∥T̂n − T0 ∥2L2 (P ) ≲ n− 2α−2+d log3 (n) ,

(2)

which they showed to be minimax optimal up to logarithmic factors. Though statistically optimal, their estimator
requires gridding the space of observations, with computational complexity scaling exponentially in d. This work
left open the question of finding a computationally tractable
estimator that has good statistical properties. While Manole
et al. (2021) and Deb et al. (2021) proposed minimax optimal estimators, the fastest estimator between these two
works has a runtime of Õ(n3 ). Similarly, Muzellec et al.
(2021) devised a nearly minimax map estimator in the high
smoothness regime based on kernel sum-of-squares, however the underlying constant depends exponentially in d as
their regularization parameter goes to zero.

