Detecting Adversarial Examples Is (Nearly) As Hard As Classifying Them

Florian Tramèr 1 2

Abstract
Making classifiers robust to adversarial examples is challenging. Thus, many works tackle the
seemingly easier task of detecting perturbed inputs.
We show a barrier towards this goal. We prove
a hardness reduction between detection and classification of adversarial examples: given a robust
detector for attacks at distance  (in some metric), we show how to build a similarly robust (but
computationally inefficient) classifier for attacks
at distance /2.
Our reduction is computationally inefficient, but
preserves the sample complexity of the original
detector. The reduction thus cannot be directly
used to build practical classifiers. Instead, it is
a useful sanity check to test whether empirical
detection results imply something much stronger
than the authors presumably anticipated (namely
a highly robust and data-efficient classifier).
To illustrate, we revisit 14 empirical detector defenses published over the past years. For 12/14
defenses, we show that the claimed detection results imply an inefficient classifier with robustness far beyond the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Building models that are robust to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Biggio et al., 2013) is a major challenge and open problem in machine learning. Due
to the inherent difficulty in building robust classifiers, researchers have attempted to build techniques to at least detect adversarial examples, a weaker task that is largely considered easier than robust classification (Xu et al., 2018;
Pang et al., 2021; Sheikholeslami et al., 2021).
1

Google Research 2 Work done while the author was at
Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Florian Tramèr
<tramer@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Yet, evaluating the robustness of detector defenses is challenging. This is in part due to a lack of strong evaluation
guidelines and benchmarks—akin to those developed for
robust classifiers (Carlini et al., 2019; Croce et al., 2020)—
as well as to a lack of long-standing comparative baselines
such as adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018). As a result, when a new detection defense is proposed, it can be
hard to judge if the claimed empirical results are credible.
To illustrate this challenge, consider the following (fictitious) claims about two defenses against adversarial examples on CIFAR-10:
• defense A is a classifier that claims robust accuracy of
90% under `∞ -perturbations bounded by  = 4/255;
• defense B also has a “rejection” option, and claims
robust accuracy of 90% under `∞ -perturbations
bounded by  = 8/255 (we say that defense B is robust for some example if it classifies that example correctly, and either rejects/detects or correctly classifies
all perturbed examples at distance .)
Which of these two (empirical) claims are you more likely
to believe to be correct?
Defense A claims much higher robustness than the current best results achieved with adversarial training (Madry
et al., 2018; Rebuffi et al., 2021), the only empirical defense
against adversarial examples that has stood the test of time.
Indeed, the state-of-the-art `∞ robustness for  = 4/255 on
CIFAR-10 (without external data) is ≈ 79% (Rebuffi et al.,
2021). Thus, the claim of defense A is likely to be met
with initial skepticism and heightened scrutiny, as could be
expected for such a claimed breakthrough result.
The claim of defense B is harder to assess, due to a lack
of long-standing baselines for robust detectors (many detection defenses have been shown to be broken (Carlini &
Wagner, 2017; Tramèr et al., 2020)). On one hand, detection of adversarial examples has largely been considered to
be an easier task than classification (Xu et al., 2018; Pang
et al., 2021; Sheikholeslami et al., 2021). On the other
hand, defense B claims robustness to perturbations that are
twice as large as defense A ( = 8/255 vs.  = 4/255).
In this paper, we show that the claims of defenses A and B
are, in fact, equivalent! (up to computational efficiency.)

