Bregman Proximal Langevin Monte Carlo via Bregman–Moreau Envelopes

Tim Tsz-Kit Lau 1 Han Liu 2 1

Abstract
We propose efficient Langevin Monte Carlo algorithms for sampling distributions with nonsmooth
convex composite potentials, which is the sum of
a continuously differentiable function and a possibly nonsmooth function. We devise such algorithms leveraging recent advances in convex analysis and optimization methods involving Bregman
divergences, namely the Bregman–Moreau envelopes and the Bregman proximity operators, and
in the Langevin Monte Carlo algorithms reminiscent of mirror descent. The proposed algorithms
extend existing Langevin Monte Carlo algorithms
in two aspects—the ability to sample nonsmooth
distributions with mirror descent-like algorithms,
and the use of the more general Bregman–Moreau
envelope in place of the Moreau envelope as a
smooth approximation of the nonsmooth part of
the potential. A particular case of the proposed
scheme is reminiscent of the Bregman proximal
gradient algorithm. The efficiency of the proposed
methodology is illustrated with various sampling
tasks at which existing Langevin Monte Carlo
methods are known to perform poorly.

1. Introduction
The problem of sampling efficiently from high-dimensional
log-Lipschitz-smooth and (strongly) log-concave target distributions via discretized Langevin diffusions has been extensively studied in the machine learning and statistics literature lately. A thorough understanding of the nonasymptotic
convergence properties of Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC)
has been developed, where the log-Lipschitz-smoothness
and (strong) log-concavity of the density play a vital role
in characterizing its convergence rates. However, such conditions are not always satisifed in applications and there is
1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to:
Han Liu <hanliu@northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

recent effort to move beyond such scenarios. On the other
hand, since the efficiency of LMC algorithms in the stanard
Euclidean space heavily hinges on the shape of the target
distributions, algorithms based on Riemannian Langevin
diffusions (Girolami & Calderhead, 2011) are considered in
the case of ill-conditioned target distributions to exploit the
local geometry of the log-density. However, algorithms derived by discretizing such Riemannian Langevin diffusions
are notoriously hard to analyze, depending on the choice of
the Riemannian metric.
In this paper, we propose two Riemannian LMC algorithms
based on Bregman divergences to efficiently sample from
high-dimensional distributions whose potentials (i.e., negative log-densities) are possibly not strongly convex nor
(globally) Lipschitz smooth in the standard Euclidean geometry, but only strongly convex and Lipschitz smooth relative
to a Legendre function subsequent to a smooth approximation. To be more precise, potentials can take the form of the
sum of a relatively smooth part and a nonsmooth part (which
includes the convex indicator function of a closed convex
set) in the standard Euclidean geometry. A smooth approximation of the nonsmooth part based on the Bregman divergence is used and we instead sample from the smoothened
distribution. By tuning a parameter of the smooth approximation, such a smoothened distribution is sufficiently close
to the original target distribution. On the other hand, motivated by the connection between Langevin algorithms and
convex optimization, the proposed algorithms can be viewed
as the sampling analogue of the Bregman proximal gradient algorithm (Van Nguyen, 2017; Bauschke et al., 2017;
Bolte et al., 2018; Bùi & Combettes, 2021; Chizat, 2021)
(cf. mirror descent in the smooth case), in which Riemannian structures of the algorithms are induced by the Hessian
of some Legendre function. This specific choice of the Riemannian metric also offers us a principled way to analyze
the behavior of the proposed algorithms.
1.1. Langevin and Mirror-Langevin Monte Carlo
Algorithms
We consider the problem of sampling from a probability
measure π on (Rd , B(Rd )) which admits a density, with
slight abuse of notation, also denoted by π, with respect to

