Bisimulation Makes Analogies in Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning

Philippe Hansen-Estruch 1 Amy Zhang 1 2 Ashvin Nair 1 Patrick Yin 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Building generalizable goal-conditioned agents
from rich observations is a key to reinforcement
learning (RL) solving real world problems. Traditionally in goal-conditioned RL, an agent is provided with the exact goal they intend to reach.
However, it is often not realistic to know the
configuration of the goal before performing a
task. A more scalable framework would allow
us to provide the agent with an example of an
analogous task, and have the agent then infer
what the goal should be for its current state. We
propose a new form of state abstraction called
goal-conditioned bisimulation that captures functional equivariance, allowing for the reuse of
skills to achieve new goals. We learn this representation using a metric form of this abstraction, and show its ability to generalize to new
goals in simulation manipulation tasks. Further,
we prove that this learned representation is sufficient not only for goal-conditioned tasks, but
is amenable to any downstream task described
by a state-only reward function. Videos can
be found at https://sites.google.com/
view/gc-bisimulation.

1. Introduction
Goal-conditioned RL has the potential to train agents that
can accomplish a variety of tasks when given a goal. However, the way the goal is represented in a goal-conditioned
RL problem has a critical effect on how the resulting policy
will interpret goals. For example, if a person is asked to
accomplish the goal of cutting a vegetable, they can perform
this task for any vegetable. The goal is represented in a way
that is invariant to irrelevant factors, and potentially even
equivariant to factors that vary between similar tasks, such
1
University of California,
Berkeley 2 Meta AI
Research.
Correspondence to:
Philippe HansenEstruch <hansenpmeche@berkeley.edu>,
Amy Zhang
<amyzhang@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

?
Figure 1. Analogous tasks of dicing carrots and radishes. Although
the target objects are different, the skill required and functional
difference between the initial state and goal images are similar.
Our goal is to use this form of analogy to describe goals for new,
unseen environments.

as cutting long carrots versus short radishes. We use this
equivariance to generalize to new problems and domains,
by drawing associations to problems and domains we have
experienced in the past. If we can acquire representations
that have these properties, then we can similarly specify
goals for goal-conditioned policies in one setting, and have
them carry out those goals in many diverse settings. This
frees us from needing an exact goal image for achieving the
same functional task in a new setting. As shown in Figure 1,
given an agent that has learned to cut carrots, rather than
needing to present the agent with an image of chopped up
radishes, we can instead say something along the lines of,
“Do the same thing to the radish that you did to the carrot.”
Prior work has proposed representation learning objectives
that induce invariance to irrelevant factors through the
use of domain knowledge about the relevant state features
for a task (Jonschkowski and Brock, 2015; Jonschkowski
et al., 2017), via data augmentations and contrastive learning (Laskin et al., 2020a), dynamics (Watter et al., 2015;
Gelada et al., 2019), or proxy computer vision tasks (e.g., image reconstruction or segmentation) (Lange and Riedmiller,
2010; Sax et al., 2019). In goal-conditioned problems however, which features are relevant or irrelevant depends not
only on the current state but also the goal. While there may
be uncontrollable aspects of an environment that can always
be ignored, knowledge of the task and current state is necessary to determine what is relevant to complete the task.
Rather than construct representations that ignore features
that are never relevant, our goal is to construct functionally
equivariant representations that only capture changes be-

