Reducing Variance in Temporal-Difference Value Estimation
via Ensemble of Deep Networks

Litian Liang 1 Yaosheng Xu 1 Stephen McAleer 2 Dailin Hu 1
Alexander Ihler 1 Pieter Abbeel 3 Roy Fox 1

Abstract

In temporal-difference reinforcement learning algorithms, variance in value estimation can cause
instability and overestimation of the maximal target value. Many algorithms have been proposed
to reduce overestimation, including several recent
ensemble methods, however none have shown
success in sample-efficient learning through addressing estimation variance as the root cause of
overestimation. In this paper, we propose MeanQ,
a simple ensemble method that estimates target
values as ensemble means. Despite its simplicity,
MeanQ shows remarkable sample efficiency in
experiments on the Atari Learning Environment
benchmark. Importantly, we find that an ensemble
of size 5 sufficiently reduces estimation variance
to obviate the lagging target network, eliminating
it as a source of bias and further gaining sample
efficiency. We justify intuitively and empirically
the design choices in MeanQ, including the necessity of independent experience sampling. On a
set of 26 benchmark Atari environments, MeanQ
outperforms all tested baselines, including the
best available baseline, SUNRISE, at 100K interaction steps in 16/26 environments, and by 68%
on average. MeanQ also outperforms Rainbow
DQN at 500K steps in 21/26 environments, and
by 49% on average, and achieves average humanlevel performance using 200K (±100K) interaction steps. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/indylab/MeanQ.

1

University of California, Irvine 2 Carnegie Mellon University
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Litian
Liang and Roy Fox <{litianl1, royf}@uci.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) with deep learning has proven successful at achieving master-level performance in many sequential decision making problems (Silver
et al., 2016; 2018; Mnih et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2019;
Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018b). RL algorithms learn a control policy that maximizes the expected
discounted sum of future rewards (the policy value) through
experience collected via interacting with an environment.
Temporal-Difference (TD) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a principled approach to RL that maintains value estimates and
iteratively improves them using bootstrapped targets that
combine experienced short-term rewards and current estimates of future long-term values.
Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) learns state–action
value estimates (Q function) by minimizing the TD error
between the estimates and the bootstrapped targets. Although tabular Q-learning asymptotically converges to the
optimal policy (Tsitsiklis, 1994; Jaakkola et al., 1994), it is
known to be positively biased and overestimate the value
before convergence due to Jensen’s inequality under value
estimation uncertainty (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993; Fox et al.,
2015). This bias is detrimental to efficient learning, because
it propagates through bootstrapping and because it can cause
further experience collection to use suboptimal actions that
appear optimal. Deep Q-Networks (DQN) (Mnih et al.,
2013; 2015) represent the Q function with a deep neural
network to learn expressive policies in environments with
high dimensional states. Unfortunately, such value function approximation can further exacerbate instability and
overestimation (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993; Mahmood et al.,
2015).
One way to reduce the variance (between-runs variability)
and instability (within-run variability) of value estimation is
to use an ensemble of estimators. Ensemble learning is wellstudied in machine learning and is known for its property of
reducing estimation variance and ability to capture epistemic
(model) uncertainty, usually in a form of prediction variance.
In the field of RL, ensemble RL methods (Wiering & van
Hasselt, 2008) have been applied to improve exploration
(Osband et al., 2016a;b; Chen et al., 2017; Fortunato et al.,

