Translating Robot Skills:
Learning Unsupervised Skill Correspondences Across Robots

Tanmay Shankar 1 2 Yixin Lin 2 Aravind Rajeswaran 2 Vikash Kumar 2 Stuart Anderson 2 Jean Oh 1

Abstract
In this paper, we explore how we can endow
robots with the ability to learn correspondences
between their own skills, and those of agents with
different embodiments and in different domains
than their own, in an entirely unsupervised
manner. Our insight and premise is that agents
with different embodiments use similar strategies
(high-level skill sequences) to solve similar
tasks. Based on this insight, we frame learning
skill correspondences as a problem of matching
distributions of sequences of skills across agents.
We then present an unsupervised objective
that encourages a learnt skill translation model
to match these distributions across domains
inspired by recent advances in unsupervised
machine translation. Our approach is able to
learn semantically meaningful correspondences
between skills across multiple robot-robot
and human-robot domain pairs, despite being
completely unsupervised. Further, the learnt
correspondences enable the transfer of task
strategies across robots and domains. Dynamic
visualization of our results can be found here:
https://sites.google.com/view/
translatingrobotskills/home

1. Introduction
Humans have a remarkable ability to efficiently learn to
perform tasks by watching others demonstrate similar tasks.
For example, children quickly learn the skills needed to play
a new sport by watching their parents perform skills such as
kicking a ball. Notably, they are able to learn from these visual demonstrations despite significant differences between
themselves and the demonstrator, including visual perspec*
Equal contribution 1 Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Meta AI Research, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Tanmay Shankar <tanmay.shankar@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tives, environments, kinematic and dynamic properties, and
morphologies. This ability may be attributed to two factors;
firstly, humans have well-developed basic motor skills that
we can execute with little effort. Second, we can recognize
the sequence of skills (or the high-level strategy) the demonstrator uses, and understand a corresponding set of skills
that we can execute ourselves (Meltzoff & Moore, 1977).
In this paper, we explore how we can endow robots with this
ability - i.e., to adopt task strategies from agents with different embodiments (such as morphologically different robots,
or even human demonstrators), and then execute corresponding skills to solve similar tasks. Key to solving this problem
is for the robot to identify how its owns skills correspond
to those of the demonstrator, which is tremendously powerful. First, it allows the robot to adopt the demonstrator’s
strategies for solving various tasks. Second, by adopting
and adapting these strategies for itself, the robot can efficiently learn to solve a variety of tasks previously outside its
repertoire. Finally, it allows us to understand the task strategies used by various agents in a unified manner, enabling
robots to learn from data collected from a heterogeneous
collection of tasks and agent embodiments. Skills provide
a natural framework to facilitate such concise knowledge
transfer across agents compared to low-level controls; skills
inherently abstract away low-level details that may differ
across the demonstrator and the learner, and instead focus
on the commonalities between them, such as the task strategy. For example, skills such as reaching and placing on
robot manipulators abstract away differences in morphologies or configuration, and are thus well grounded across
robots, while there may not be obvious correspondence in
their low-level actions.
How can one acquire correspondences between skills?
Stated more formally, given agents with different embodiments, a set of unlabelled demonstrations of each agent
solving a variety of tasks, and a method for extracting skills
from those demonstrations, how can one learn correspondences between the skills of these different agents? Learning
such correspondences is straightforward when supervised
pairs of skills or trajectories are available. However, collecting and annotating such data is time-consuming and
tedious, and requires a high degree of human expertise,

