Multirate Training of Neural Networks

Tiffany Vlaar 1 Benedict Leimkuhler 1

Abstract
We propose multirate training of neural networks:
partitioning neural network parameters into “fast”
and “slow” parts which are trained on different
time scales, where slow parts are updated less frequently. By choosing appropriate partitionings
we can obtain substantial computational speed-up
for transfer learning tasks. We show for applications in vision and NLP that we can fine-tune deep
neural networks in almost half the time, without
reducing the generalization performance of the
resulting models. We analyze the convergence
properties of our multirate scheme and draw a
comparison with vanilla SGD. We also discuss
splitting choices for the neural network parameters which could enhance generalization performance when neural networks are trained from
scratch. A multirate approach can be used to learn
different features present in the data and as a form
of regularization. Our paper unlocks the potential
of using multirate techniques for neural network
training and provides several starting points for
future work in this area.

1. Introduction
Multirate techniques have been widely used for efficient simulation of multiscale ordinary differential equations (ODEs)
and partial differential equations (PDEs) (Rice, 1960; Gear,
1974; Gear & Wells, 1984; Günther & Rentrop, 1993; Engstler & Lubich, 1997; Constantinescu & Sandu, 2013).
Motivations for using multirate techniques are the presence
of fast and slow time scales in the system dynamics and to
simulate systems which are computationally infeasible to
evolve with a single stepsize.
In their most general formulation the multirate methods we
consider in this work involve separating the model parame1

Department of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Tiffany Vlaar
<Tiffany.Vlaar@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ters Θ into multiple components Θ1 , ..., ΘN corresponding
to different time scales. Slow parameters are updated less
frequently than their fast counterparts but with larger stepsizes. Synchronization of the parts occurs every slow time
step. This is illustrated for two time scales (and accompanying fast ΘF and slow ΘS parameters) in Figure 1.
k updates

Θ

ΘF

hF

ΘF,1

...

ΘF,k−1

hF

Θ′F

Split

Join
ΘS

hS = khF

Θ′

Θ′S

Figure 1. The basic principle of the multirate techniques considered in this paper is illustrated for two time scales in this figure. We
first split our model parameters Θ into fast and slow components,
ΘF and ΘS , respectively. The fast components are then updated
every step with stepsize hF , whereas the slow components are
updated every k steps with stepsize hS = k · hF .

The idea of using fast and slow weights in a machine learning context has been around for a long time (Feldman, 1982;
Hinton & Plaut, 1987; Ba et al., 2016), originally inspired
by neuroscience as synapses in the brain have dynamics at
different time scales. However, the use of multirate methods
has so far been largely overlooked for this area. In this
work we seek to change this. We propose a novel multirate
training scheme and show its use in various neural network
training settings. We describe connections with the current
machine learning literature in Section 6.
To demonstrate how multirate methods may be applicable in
deep learning applications, consider a WideResNet-16 architecture trained on the patch-augmented CIFAR-10 dataset
(Li et al., 2019) using SGD with momentum and weight
decay and different learning rates (Figure 2). In this dataset
a noisy patch of 7 × 7 pixels is added to the center of some
CIFAR-10 images. Some images contain both the patch and
CIFAR-10 data, while other images only contain the patch
or are patch-free. When training using a large learning rate,
the network is unable to memorize the patch, but achieves
high accuracy on patch-free data. Meanwhile, when training using a small learning rate the network can memorize
the patch quickly, but the accuracy on clean data is lower.
We demonstrate that a multirate approach trained on two

