NAFS: A Simple yet Tough-to-beat Baseline for Graph Representation Learning

Wentao Zhang 1 Zeang Sheng 1 Mingyu Yang 1 Yang Li 1 Yu Shen 1 Zhi Yang 1 Bin Cui 1 2

Abstract
Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have
shown prominent performance in graph representation learning by leveraging knowledge from
both graph structure and node features. However, most of them have two major limitations.
First, GNNs can learn higher-order structural information by stacking more layers but can not deal
with large depth due to the over-smoothing issue.
Second, it is not easy to apply these methods on
large graphs due to the expensive computation
cost and high memory usage. In this paper, we
present node-adaptive feature smoothing (NAFS),
a simple non-parametric method that constructs
node representations without parameter learning.
NAFS ﬁrst extracts the features of each node with
its neighbors of different hops by feature smoothing, and then adaptively combines the smoothed
features. Besides, the constructed node representation can further be enhanced by the ensemble of
smoothed features extracted via different smoothing strategies. We conduct experiments on four
benchmark datasets on two different application
scenarios: node clustering and link prediction.
Remarkably, NAFS with feature ensemble outperforms the state-of-the-art GNNs on these tasks
and mitigates the aforementioned two limitations
of most learning-based GNN counterparts.

1. Introduction
In recent years, graph representation learning has been extensively applied in various application scenarios, such as node
clustering, link prediction, node classiﬁcation, and graph
classiﬁcation (Kipf & Welling, 2016b; Wu et al., 2020a;
Zhang et al., 2020; Miao et al., 2021a; Jiang et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2020b; Miao et al., 2021b).
1
School of CS & Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software
Technologies, Peking University 2 Institute of Computational Social
Science, Peking University (Qingdao), China. Correspondence to:
Bin Cui <bin.cui@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The goal of graph representation learning is to encode graph
information to node embeddings. Traditional graph representation learning methods, such as DeepWalk (Perozzi
et al., 2014), Node2vec (Grover & Leskovec, 2016), LINE
(Tang et al., 2015), and ComE (Cavallari et al., 2017) merely
focus on preserving graph structure information. GNNbased graph representation learning has attracted intensive
interest by combining knowledge from both graph structure
and node features. While most of these GNN-based methods are designed based on Graph AutoEncoder (GAE) and
Variational Graph AutoEncoder (VGAE) (Kipf & Welling,
2016b), these methods share two major limitations:
Shallow Architecture. Previous work shows that although
stacking multiple GNN layers in Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016a) is capable of exploiting deep structural information, applying a large number of
GNN layers might lead to indistinguishable node embeddings, i.e., the over-smoothing issue (Li et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2021a). Therefore, most state-of-the-art GNNs resort to shallow architectures, which hinders the model from
capturing long-range dependencies.
Low Scalability. GNN-based graph representation learning methods can not scale well to large graphs due to the
expensive computation cost and high memory usage. Most
existing GNNs need to repeatedly perform the computationally expensive and recursive feature smoothing, which
involves the participation of the entire graph at each training epoch. (Zhang et al., 2022) Furthermore, most methods
adopt the same training loss function as GAE, which introduces high memory usage by storing the dense-form
adjacency matrix on GPU. For a graph of size 200 million,
its dense-form adjacency matrix requires a space of roughly
150GB, exceeding the memory capacity of the current powerful GPU devices.
To tackle these issues, we propose a new graph representation learning method, which is embarrassingly simple: just
smooth the node features and then combine the smoothed
features in a node-adaptive manner. We name this method
node-adaptive feature smoothing (NAFS), and its goal is
to construct better node embeddings that integrate the information from both graph structural information and node
features. Based on the observation that different nodes
have highly diverse “smoothing speed”, NAFS adaptively

