Tractable Uncertainty for Structure Learning

Benjie Wang 1 Matthew Wicker 1 Marta Kwiatkowska 1

Abstract
Bayesian structure learning allows one to capture
uncertainty over the causal directed acyclic graph
(DAG) responsible for generating given data. In
this work, we present Tractable Uncertainty for
STructure learning (T RUST), a framework for approximate posterior inference that relies on probabilistic circuits as the representation of our posterior belief. In contrast to sample-based posterior
approximations, our representation can capture a
much richer space of DAGs, while also being able
to tractably reason about the uncertainty through a
range of useful inference queries. We empirically
show how probabilistic circuits can be used as an
augmented representation for structure learning
methods, leading to improvement in both the quality of inferred structures and posterior uncertainty.
Experimental results on conditional query answering further demonstrate the practical utility of the
representational capacity of T RUST.

1. Introduction
Understanding the causal and probabilistic relationship between variables of underlying data-generating processes can
be a vital step in many scientific inquiries. Such systems are
often represented by causal Bayesian networks (BNs), probabilistic models with structure expressed using a directed
acyclic graph (DAG). The basic task of structure learning
is to identify the underlying BN from a set of observational
data, which, if successful, can provide useful insights about
the relationships between random variables and the effects
of potential interventions. However, even under strong assumptions such as causal sufficiency and faithfulness, it is
typically impossible to identify a single causal DAG from
purely observational data. Further, while consistent methods exist for producing a point estimate DAG in the limit
of infinite data (Chickering, 2002), in practice, when data
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Benjie Wang <benjie.wang@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

is scarce many BNs can fit the data well. It thus becomes
vitally important to quantify the uncertainty over causal
structures, particularly in safety-critical scenarios.
Bayesian methods for structure learning tackle this problem
by defining a prior and likelihood over DAGs, such that the
posterior distribution can be used to reason about the uncertainty surrounding the learned causal edges, for instance
by performing Bayesian model averaging. Unfortunately,
the super-exponential space of DAGs makes both representing and learning such a posterior extremely challenging. A
major breakthrough was the introduction of order-based representations (Friedman & Koller, 2003), in which the state
space is reduced to the space of topological orders.
Unfortunately, the number of possible orders is still factorial in the dimension d, making it infeasible to represent
the posterior as a tabular distribution over orders. Approximate Bayesian structure learning methods have thus mostly
sought to approximate the distribution using samples of
DAGs or orders (Lorch et al., 2021; Agrawal et al., 2018).
However, such sample-based representations have very limited coverage of the posterior, restricting the information
they can provide. Consider, for instance, the problem of finding the most probable graph extension, given an arbitrary
set of required edges. Given the super-exponential space,
even a large sample may not contain even a single order
consistent with the given set of edges, making answering
such a query impossible.
A natural question, therefore, is whether it is possible to
more compactly represent distributions over orders (and
thus DAGs) while retaining the ability to perform useful
inference queries tractably (in the size of the representation).
We answer in the affirmative, by proposing a novel representation, OrderSPNs, for distributions over orders and graphs.
Under the assumption of order-modularity, we show that
OrderSPNs form a natural and flexible approximation to the
target distribution. The key component is the encoding of
hierarchical conditional independencies into the form of a
sum-product network (SPN) (Poon & Domingos, 2011), a
well-known type of tractable probabilistic circuit. Based on
this, we develop an approximate Bayesian structure learning framework, T RUST, for efficiently querying OrderSPNs
and learning them from data. Empirical results corroborate the increased representational capacity and coverage

