One-Pass Diversified Sampling with Application to Terabyte-Scale Genomic
Sequence Streams

Benjamin Coleman * 1 Benito Geordie * 2 Li Chou 3 R. A. Leo Elworth 2 Todd J. Treangen 2
Anshumali Shrivastava 2 4

Abstract
A popular approach to reduce the size of a massive dataset is to apply efficient online sampling
to the stream of data as it is read or generated.
Online sampling routines are currently restricted
to variations of reservoir sampling, where each
sample is selected uniformly and independently
of other samples. This renders them unsuitable for
large-scale applications in computational biology,
such as metagenomic community profiling and
protein function annotation, which suffer from
severe class imbalance. To maintain a representative and diverse sample, we must identify and
preferentially select data that are likely to belong
to rare classes. We argue that existing schemes for
diversity sampling have prohibitive overhead for
large-scale problems and high-throughput streams.
We propose an efficient sampling routine that uses
an online representation of the data distribution as
a prefilter to retain elements from rare groups. We
apply this method to several genomic data analysis tasks and demonstrate significant speedup in
downstream analysis without sacrificing the quality of the results. Because our algorithm is 2x
faster and uses 1000x less memory than coreset,
reservoir and sketch-based alternatives, we anticipate that it will become a useful preprocessing
step for applications with large-scale streaming
data.

Whole-genome shotgun sequencing (WGS) has inspired nu*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Rice University, Houston TX, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
3
Department of Engineering and Computer Science, West Texas
A&M University, Canyon TX, USA 4 Third AI, Houston TX,
USA. Correspondence to: Benjamin Coleman <brc7@rice.edu>,
Benito Geordie <bg31@rice.edu>, Todd J. Treangen <treangen@rice.edu>, Anshumali Shrivastava <anshumali@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

merous breakthroughs over the past decade in large-scale
comparative genomics research. The total amount of WGS
data doubles approximately every seven months (Stephens
et al., 2015), far exceeding even the pace of computing
capabilities predicted by Moore’s law. Genomic data facilitates many advances in human health, including pathogen
surveillance (Timme et al., 2019), antibiotic resistance detection (Köser et al., 2014), and cancer genomics (Meyerson
et al., 2010). Labs are thus motivated to sequence as many
organisms as possible, culminating in repositories like the
the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) (Leinonen et al.,
2010a), which contains one-fifth of a petabyte of bacterial
and viral DNA alone, and the NCBI Short Read Archive
(SRA)(Leinonen et al., 2010b). At the time of writing, the
SRA contains over 43 petabytes of publicly-hosted data on
the AWS cloud. The scale of genomic data rivals that of
the largest web-scale companies and government agencies,
and the data collection rate is likely to increase thanks to
ambitious plans such as the NIH All of Us program (Sankar
& Parker, 2017), which will sequence 1 million human
genomes as part of its personalized medicine initiative. Recent developments in sequencing hardware also threaten to
inflate the exponential growth rate. The PromethION system from Oxford Nanopore Technologies has a data rate of
over 4 terabytes per run, with a theoretical maximum yield
of 15 TB.
This ‘data deluge’ requires continued innovation for data
processing and analysis (Schatz & Langmead, 2013). For
example, hardware vendors are actively developing “Read
Until” technology – a real-time selective sequencing approach that ejects abundant background sequences in favor
of scarce diverse sequences present in a sample (Loose
et al., 2016; Edwards et al., 2019). When run on fast GPUs,
recent base calling algorithms, such as Guppy, can keep
up with a single MinION or PromethION data stream by
offering 1.5-6 Mbps throughput (Wick et al., 2019). However, it is increasingly challenging to store the data off of
the device on local storage, and many downstream methods require storing all k-mers from a dataset in memory.
This is untenable for terabyte-scale datasets. To cope with
the onslaught of data, the algorithms community must develop streaming algorithms that can both retain the diversity

