Partial Counterfactual Identification from Observational and Experimental Data

Junzhe Zhang 1 Jin Tian 2 Elias Bareinboim 1

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of bounding
counterfactual queries from an arbitrary collection of observational and experimental distributions and qualitative knowledge about the underlying data-generating model represented in the
form of a causal diagram. We show that all counterfactual distributions in an arbitrary structural
causal model (SCM) with discrete observed domains could be generated by a canonical family
of SCMs with the same causal diagram where
unobserved (exogenous) variables are also discrete, taking values in finite domains. Utilizing
the canonical SCMs, we translate the problem
of bounding counterfactuals into that of polynomial programming whose solution provides optimal bounds for the counterfactual query. Solving
such polynomial programs is in general computationally expensive. We then develop effective
Monte Carlo algorithms to approximate optimal
bounds from a combination of observational and
experimental data. Our algorithms are validated
extensively on synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
This paper studies the problem of inferring counterfactual
queries from a combination of observations, experiments,
and qualitative assumptions about the phenomenon under investigation. The assumptions are represented in the form of
a causal diagram (Pearl, 1995), which is a directed acyclic
graph where arrows indicate the potential existence of functional relationships among variables; some variables are
unobserved. This problem arises in diverse fields such as artificial intelligence, statistics, cognitive science, economics,
and the health and social sciences. For example, when investigating the gender discrimination in college admission, one
1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University. Correspondence to: Junzhe Zhang <junzhez@cs.columbia.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

may ask “what would the admission outcome be for a female applicant had she been a male?” Such a counterfactual
query contains conflicting information: in the real world,
the applicant is female; in the hypothetical world, she is not.
Formally, counterfactual lies on top of a hierarchy of increasingly expressive languages that also include observations
and interventions, which is called Pearl Causal Hierarchy
(Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018; Bareinboim et al., 2020). In
general, counterfactuals are not immediately computable
from observational and experimental distributions.
The problem of identifying counterfactual distributions from
the combination of data and a causal diagram has been studied in the causal inference literature. First, there exists
a sound and complete proof system for reasoning about
counterfactual queries (Halpern, 1998). While such a system, in principle, is sufficient in evaluating any identifiable
counterfactual expression, it lacks a proof guideline that
efficiently determines the feasibility of such evaluation. Further, Shpitser & Pearl (2007) studied an algorithm for the
identification of counterfactuals from all possible controlled
experiments. There exist also algorithms for identifying
path-specific effects from experimental data (Avin et al.,
2005) and observational data (Shpitser & Sherman, 2018).
More recently, Correa et al. (2021) developed the first sound,
complete, and efficient algorithm that decides whether any
nested counterfactual distribution is identifiable from an
arbitrary combination of observations and experiments.
In practice, the combination of qualitative assumptions and
data does not always permit one to uniquely determine the
target counterfactual query. In such cases, the counterfactual
query is said to be non-identifiable. Partial identification
methods concern with inferring about the target counterfactual probability in non-identifiable settings. Several algorithms have been developed to derive informative bounds
over counterfactual probabilities from the combination of
observational and experimental data (Manski, 1990; Robins,
1989; Balke & Pearl, 1994; 1997; Tian & Pearl, 2000; Evans,
2012; Richardson et al., 2014; Zhang & Bareinboim, 2017;
Kallus & Zhou, 2018; Finkelstein & Shpitser, 2020; Kilbertus et al., 2020; Zhang & Bareinboim, 2021).
In this work, we build on the approach introduced by (Balke
& Pearl, 1994), which involves direct discretization of unobserved domains, also referred to as the canonical parti-

