Deep Safe Incomplete Multi-view Clustering: Theorem and Algorithm

Huayi Tang 1 2 Yong Liu 1 2

Abstract
Incomplete multi-view clustering is a significant
but challenging task. Although jointly imputing incomplete samples and conducting clustering has been shown to achieve promising performance, learning from both complete and incomplete data may be worse than learning only from
complete data, particularly when imputed views
are semantic inconsistent with missing views. To
address this issue, we propose a novel framework
to reduce the clustering performance degradation
risk from semantic inconsistent imputed views.
Concretely, by the proposed bi-level optimization
framework, missing views are dynamically imputed from the learned semantic neighbors, and
imputed samples are automatically selected for
training. In theory, the empirical risk of the model
is no higher than learning only from complete
data, and the model is never worse than learning only from complete data in terms of expected
risk with high probability. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves superior performance and efficient safe
incomplete multi-view clustering.

1. Introduction
Multi-view data, containing modalities from multiple domains, exists widely in real-world application scenarios. For
example, multiple types of information is provided by sensors attached to the autonomous vehicle, which are treated
as multiple views. Due to the expensive cost of collecting
a large amount of data with manual annotations, numerous
studies in multi-view clustering (Nie et al., 2016; Zhang
et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021c; Xu et al.,
2021; Pan & Kang, 2021; Xu et al., 2022b) are developed
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data
Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yong Liu <liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and demonstrate that mining the complementary information of multiple views yields promising performance.
The aforementioned studies are based on the assumption that
instances contain the same number of views, which may not
be satisfied in real-world applications. Taking autonomous
driving as an example, some types of information from sensors is missing due to hardware faults or interference signals,
leading to the incompleteness of multi-view data. Recent
years have witnessed the development of incomplete multiview clustering (IMVC) approaches (Li et al., 2014; Shao
et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2016; Hu & Chen, 2018; Guo & Ye,
2019; Wen et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022a),
and most of them fall into imputation approaches that jointly
fill incomplete instances and conduct clustering. However,
learning from complete and filled samples is sometimes
worse than learning only from complete data. Intuitively,
the model attempts to recover the missing views without
ground-truth information, which may affect the quality of
imputed views. Cluster-oriented imputed samples that are
semantic consistent with the missing samples boost clustering performance, yet the semantic inconsistency between
imputed views and other views disturbs the intrinsic common semantics of multiple views, leading to the difficulty
of learning consistent cluster assignments and degenerated
clustering performance. Therefore, incomplete multi-view
clustering should focus on the following two challenges at
the same time, namely (i) how to achieve semantic consistency between imputed views and missing views? and (ii)
how to reduce the risk of clustering performance degradation
caused by semantic inconsistency between imputed views
and missing views? Although existing studies have explored
to learn imputations with high semantic consistency, efforts
to simultaneously address these two challenges, particularly
reducing the cluster performance degradation risk caused
by semantic inconsistent imputed views, are still limited.
To this end, we propose a novel IMVC framework named
Deep Safe Incomplete Multi-View Clustering (DSIMVC)
to achieve safe incomplete multi-view clustering, namely,
learning from both complete and incomplete data is no
worse than learning only from complete data. Towards
this goal, a weighting function is introduced to automatically assign weights to the incomplete samples. On the one
hand, the weighting function is optimized to minimize the
empirical clustering risk of the learner on complete data.

