De Novo Mass Spectrometry Peptide Sequencing with a Transformer Model

Melih Yilmaz 1 William E Fondrie 2 Wout Bittremieux 3 Sewoong Oh 1 William Stafford Noble 4 1

Abstract

Tandem mass spectrometry is the only highthroughput method for analyzing the protein content of complex biological samples and is thus
the primary technology driving the growth of the
field of proteomics. A key outstanding challenge
in this field involves identifying the sequence of
amino acids—the peptide—responsible for generating each observed spectrum, without making
use of prior knowledge in the form of a peptide sequence database. Although various machine learning methods have been developed to address this
de novo sequencing problem, challenges that arise
when modeling tandem mass spectra have led to
complex models that combine multiple neural networks and post-processing steps. We propose a
simple yet powerful method for de novo peptide
sequencing, Casanovo, that uses a transformer
framework to map directly from a sequence of observed peaks (a mass spectrum) to a sequence
of amino acids (a peptide). Our experiments
show that Casanovo achieves state-of-the-art performance on a benchmark dataset using a standard cross-species evaluation framework which
involves testing with spectra with never-beforeseen peptide labels. Casanovo not only achieves
superior performance but does so at a fraction of
the model complexity and inference time required
by other methods.

1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA 2 Talus Bioscience, Seattle, WA, USA 3 Skaggs School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, USA 4 Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Sewoong Oh
<sewoong@cs.washington.edu>, William Stafford Noble <wnoble@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Tandem mass spectrometry provides a high-throughput
framework for identifying and quantifying proteins in complex biological samples, but determining the exact protein
content from observed mass spectra at scale remains a challenge. At the core of this challenge is the spectrum identification problem, in which we are given an observed mass
spectrum and the associated mass and charge of the peptide
(known as the precursor) that is responsible for generating
the spectrum, and we must infer the amino acid sequence of
the precursor peptide. The standard method for solving this
problem is enumerative, scoring each observed spectrum
with respect to a list of candidate peptides (i.e., peptides
whose masses are close to the observed precursor mass associated with the spectrum) and reporting the best-scoring
peptide-spectrum match (PSM) per spectrum.
However, the drawback to any database search methodology
is that it requires that we specify a priori which peptides
might occur in the sample. Such an approach is often sensible when analyzing samples from a species, such as human,
with a well-characterized genome sequence. However, relying on a database prevents the detection of unexpected
peptide sequences, such as those that arise from genetic
variation. A sequence database also cannot be used for the
analysis of some types of immunopeptidomics data (VanDuijn et al., 2017), in antibody sequencing (Tran et al.,
2017), or in vaccine development when searching for bacterial peptides present on the surface of infected cells (Mayer
& Impens, 2021). Finally, constructing an accurate database
for metaproteomic analyses, such as the human microbiome
or environmental samples, is nearly impossible (Muth et al.,
2013). Such settings require de novo peptide sequencing
from the acquired mass spectra.
Early de novo methods used heuristic search (Taylor & Johnson, 1997) or dynamic programming (Ma et al., 2003; Dancik et al., 1999; Frank & Pevzner, 2005) to score peptide
sequences against each observed spectrum. Machine learning has provided state-of-the-art performance on this task
since 2015 (Ma, 2015), and recent methods employ deep
neural networks (Tran et al., 2017; Qiao et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2019; Karunratanakul et al., 2019). Although de novo
search tools are improving, there is still a long way to go.
The most recent report (Qiao et al., 2021) suggests that

