RieszNet and ForestRiesz: Automatic Debiased
Machine Learning with Neural Nets and Random Forests

Victor Chernozhukov 1 Whitney Newey 1 Vı́ctor Quintas-Martı́nez 1 Vasilis Syrgkanis 2

Abstract
Many causal and policy effects of interest are defined by linear functionals of high-dimensional
√
or non-parametric regression functions.
nconsistent and asymptotically normal estimation
of the object of interest requires debiasing to reduce the effects of regularization and/or model
selection on the object of interest. Debiasing is
typically achieved by adding a correction term
to the plug-in estimator of the functional, which
leads to properties such as semi-parametric efficiency, double robustness, and Neyman orthogonality. We implement an automatic debiasing procedure based on automatically learning the Riesz
representation of the linear functional using Neural Nets and Random Forests. Our method only
relies on black-box evaluation oracle access to the
linear functional and does not require knowledge
of its analytic form. We propose a multitasking
Neural Net debiasing method with stochastic gradient descent minimization of a combined Riesz
representer and regression loss, while sharing representation layers for the two functions. We also
propose a Random Forest method which learns a
locally linear representation of the Riesz function.
Even though our method applies to arbitrary functionals, we experimentally find that it performs
well compared to the state of art neural net based
algorithm of Shi et al. (2019) for the case of the
average treatment effect functional. We also evaluate our method on the problem of estimating
average marginal effects with continuous treatments, using semi-synthetic data of gasoline price
changes on gasoline demand. Code available at
github.com/victor5as/RieszLearning.
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Economics, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA, USA 2 Microsoft Research New England, Cambridge MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Vı́ctor Quintas-Martı́nez <vquintas@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
A large number of problems in causal inference, off-policy
evaluation and optimization and interpretable machine learning can be viewed as estimating the average value of a moment functional that depends on an unknown regression
function:
θ0 = E[m(W ; g0 )],
(1)
where W := (Y, Z) and g0 (Z) := E[Y | Z]. In most
cases, Y will be the outcome of interest, and inputs Z =
(T, X) will include a binary or continuous treatment T and
covariates X. Prototypical examples include the estimation
of average treatment effects, average policy effects, average
derivatives and incremental policy effects.
Example 1.1 (Average treatment effect). Here Z = (T, X)
where T is a binary treatment indicator, and X are covariates. The object of interest is:
θ0 = E[g0 (1, X) − g0 (0, X)]
If Y = T · Y (1) + (1 − T ) · Y (0), where potential outcomes
(Y (1), Y (0)) are conditionally independent of treatment T
given covariates X, then this object is the average treatment
effect (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983).
Example 1.2 (Average policy effect). In the context of
offline policy evaluation and optimization, our goal is to
optimize over a space of assignment policies π : X →
{0, 1}, when having access to observational data collected
by some unknown treatment policy. The policy value can
also be formulated as the average of a linear moment:
θ0 = E[π(X)(g0 (1, X) − g0 (0, X)) + g0 (0, X)]

A long-line of prior work has considered doubly-robust
approaches to optimizing over a space of candidate policies
from observational data (see, e.g., Dudı́k et al., 2011; Athey
& Wager, 2021).
Example 1.3 (Average marginal effect / derivative). Here
Z = (T, X), where T is a continuously distributed policy
variable of interest, X are covariates, and:


∂g0 (T, X)
θ0 = E
∂t
This object has received previous attention in the econometrics literature (e.g., Imbens & Newey, 2009), and it is

