Ripple Attention for Visual Perception with Sub-quadratic Complexity

Lin Zheng 1 Huijie Pan 1 Lingpeng Kong 1 2

Abstract
Transformer architectures are now central to sequence modeling tasks. At its heart is the attention
mechanism, which enables effective modeling of
long-term dependencies in a sequence. Recently,
transformers have been successfully applied in the
computer vision domain, where 2D images are
first segmented into patches and then treated as 1D
sequences. Such linearization, however, impairs
the notion of spatial locality in images, which
bears important visual clues. To bridge the gap,
we propose ripple attention, a sub-quadratic attention mechanism for vision transformers. Built
upon the recent kernel-based efficient attention
mechanisms, we design a novel dynamic programming algorithm that weights contributions of different tokens to a query with respect to their relative spatial distances in the 2D space in linear observed time. Extensive experiments and analyses
demonstrate the effectiveness of ripple attention
on various visual tasks.

1. Introduction
The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has been
dominant in various important natural language processing (NLP) tasks, including machine translation (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Dehghani et al., 2019), language understanding
(Devlin et al., 2018), language modeling (Dai et al., 2019;
Baevski & Auli, 2019) and many others. The cornerstone of
a transformer is the attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al.,
2014) which computes pair-wise interactions between any
token pairs of the input sequence. As a result, it is capable
of modeling long-term dependencies in a sequence, which
is an important factor to the success of transformers.
Recently, the transformer architecture has also found its
applications in the domain of computer vision (CV). It is
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Correspondence to: Lin Zheng <linzheng@connect.hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

adopted for image classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020;
Touvron et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a; Yang et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2021b), segmentation (Wang et al., 2020b;
Strudel et al., 2021), low-level image processing (Chen
et al., 2020), image generation (Parmar et al., 2018), object
detection (Carion et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2021) and many
other tasks. In these vision applications, a 2D image is represented as a set of patches flattened into a 1D sequence.
These patches are analogous to the tokens in sequence modeling tasks that are commonly seen in NLP. Nevertheless,
such linearization undermines the inherent local structure of
a 2D image, which bears important visual clues (Simoncelli
& Olshausen, 2001). There often exist strong correlations
within local neighborhoods in an image. Therefore, paying
more attention to patches in a closer region could facilitate
gathering information that is particularly useful in visual
pattern recognition. This is similar to the concept of context
in NLP, just that the structural context of a visual token is
scattered in the 1D sequence, making it difficult for the transformer to capture such prior knowledge. In contrast, the
convolutional neural network (CNN) (Fukushima & Miyake,
1982; LeCun et al., 1989; Krizhevsky et al., 2012), which
has been the de-facto architecture in computer vision tasks
for decades, utilizes local receptive fields and achieves good
performance. The drawback of that is, as convolution operations are limited to small receptive fields, they have great
difficulty in extracting global image features.
Therefore, it is appealing to incorporate the notion of spatial
vicinity into the transformer, while still preserving its capacity of modeling long-term dependencies. To bridge the gap,
we propose ripple attention (Figure 1; §3), an efficient attention mechanism for vision transformers based on recently
proposed linearized attention variants (§2.2). In ripple attention, contributions from different tokens to a query are
weighted with respect to their relative spatial distances in
the 2D space. These spatial weights are derived through a
stick-breaking transformation (§3.2), which promotes local
correlations by leaning to assign larger weights to spatially
closer tokens. We then design a dynamic programming algorithm (§3.3) that is capable of executing ripple attention
in linear observed time, taking advantage of the recently
proposed linearized attention (§2.2) and the summed-area
table technique (§3.3).
We validate our method by conducting extensive experi-

