Probabilistic Bilevel Coreset Selection
Xiao Zhou * 1 Renjie Pi * 1 Weizhong Zhang * 1 Yong Lin 1 Tong Zhang 1 2

Abstract
The goal of coreset selection in supervised learning is to produce a weighted subset of data, so that
training only on the subset achieves similar performance as training on the entire dataset. Existing
methods achieved promising results in resourceconstrained scenarios such as continual learning
and streaming. However, most of the existing algorithms are limited to traditional machine learning models. A few algorithms that can handle
large models adopt greedy search approaches due
to the difficulty in solving the discrete subset selection problem, which is computationally costly
when coreset becomes larger and often produces
suboptimal results. In this work, for the first time
we propose a continuous probabilistic bilevel formulation of coreset selection by learning a probablistic weight for each training sample. The overall objective is posed as a bilevel optimization
problem, where 1) the inner loop samples coresets and train the model to convergence and 2)
the outer loop updates the sample probability progressively according to the model’s performance.
Importantly, we develop an efficient solver to the
bilevel optimization problem via unbiased policy
gradient without trouble of implicit differentiation. We provide the convergence property of
our training procedure and demonstrate the superiority of our algorithm against various coreset
selection methods in various tasks, especially in
more challenging label-noise and class-imbalance
scenarios.

2016) and natural language processing (Vaswani et al.,
2017). These superior performances are mostly achieved
via learning from huge amounts of data. However, this datadriven paradigm also poses several new challenges: 1) the
cumbersome dataset becomes harder to store and transfer;
2) for some real applications, such as continual learning,
one can only access a small number of training data at each
stage of training; 3) in some more extreme scenarios, where
the training data is incorrectly labelled, or they are collected
from different domains, more training data may even hurt
the model’s performance. To address these issues, a natural
idea is to select a small subset (i.e., coreset) comprised of
most informative training samples, such that training on this
subset can achieve comparable or even better performance
with that on the full dataset, which is verified in Appendix
D. Therefore, how to construct a good coreset for DNNs
now becomes a crucial problem.
We notice that, coreset selection has been investigated for
the traditional machine learning models, e.g., SVM (Tsang
et al., 2005), logistic regression (Huggins et al., 2016) and
Gaussian mixture model (Lucic et al., 2017), for a long
time to accelerate the training process and lots of effective
methods have been developed. The idea of these studies is
to find a small weighted training subset, whose objective
function is close to the one of the full training set at any point
in the parameter space. A typical formulation is uniform
function approximation, that is to find a small subset D̂
together with the non-negative weights Ŵ = {wi : i ∈ D̂}
from the training dataset D satisfying that
|L(θ) − L̂(θ)| ≤ ϵL(θ), for any θ ∈ Rp ,
1
where L(θ) = |D|

1. Introduction
In the last decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved tremendous successes in multiple areas such as
computer vision (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; He et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Tong Zhang
<tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(1)

P

i∈D ℓ(θ; xi , yi ) is the objective funcP
1
tion on the full dataset and L̂(θ) = |D̂|
i∈D̂ wi ℓ(θ; xi , yi )

is the one on the selected subset D̂, ϵ is a small number to
control the approximation error. When ϵ is small enough,
the comparable performance of the model learned from L̂
can be guaranteed. Nevertheless, it has been shown that
these methods cannot be applied to DNNs directly (Borsos
et al., 2020). The reason is that as DNNs are always highly
nonconvex and the hypothesis set is significantly larger than
traditional models, to obtain small uniform approximation
error ϵ, one has to select a very large coreset D̂.
More recently, bilevel optimization (Borsos et al., 2020) has

