Online Continual Learning through Mutual Information Maximization

Yidou Guo 1 2 Bing Liu 3 Dongyan Zhao 1 2

Abstract
This paper proposes a new online continual learning technique called OCM based on mutual information maximization. It achieves two objectives
that are critical in dealing with catastrophic forgetting (CF). (1) It reduces feature bias caused
by cross entropy (CE) as CE learns only discriminative features for each task, but these features
may not be discriminative for another task. To
learn a new task well, the network parameters
learned before have to be modified, which causes
CF. The new approach encourages the learning
of each task to make use of holistic representations or the full features of the task training
data. (2) It encourages preservation of the previously learned knowledge when training a new
batch of incrementally arriving data. Empirical
evaluation shows that OCM substantially outperforms the online CL baselines. For example, for
CIFAR10, OCM improves the accuracy of the
best baseline by 13.1% from 64.1% (baseline) to
77.2% (OCM). The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/gydpku/OCM.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) incrementally learns a sequence
of tasks < 1, 2, ..., t, ... >. Each task consists of a set of
classes to be learned. Learning can be done in the batch
mode and the online mode. In batch CL, when a new task t
arrives, all its training data is available and training may go
through the data any number of epochs. In online CL, the
data for each task comes gradually in a stream and learning
is done whenever a small batch of training examples is
accumulated. Due to the fast speed of the data stream, for
each data batch, the learning algorithm can see it only once
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University. 2 Artificial Intelligence Institute, Peking University.
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at
Chicago. Correspondence to: Bing Liu <liub@uic.edu>,
Dongyan Zhao <zhaody@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

like one training iteration. It is well-known that CL suffers
from catastrophic forgetting (CF) (McCloskey & Cohen,
1989), i.e., the training of a new task needs to update the
existing network parameters, which may cause accuracy
degradation of the tasks learned earlier. There are also three
CL settings. This paper works in the challenging setting of
class incremental learning (CIL), in which only one model
is incrementally learned for all classes of the tasks seen so
far.1 In testing, the model can classify a test instance from
any class without the task information. This paper focuses
on dealing with CF in the CIL setting of the online CL mode.
One popular approach for dealing with CF is experience
replay or simply replay. In this approach, a small subset of
the previous training data is saved in a memory buffer. In
learning a new task (batch CL) or a small batch (online CL),
the system trains on both the new data and the saved data to
re-adjust the features and decision boundaries between both
the old and the new classes. We will discuss the difference
between replay approaches in batch and online CL in Sec. 2.
Almost all online CL methods are based on replay. This
work uses the replay approach as well. However, we propose
a more principled solution based on mutual information
(MI) maximization. The proposed approach is called OCM
(Online Continual learning based on Mutual information
maximization), which deals with CF in three ways.
(1). It prevents information loss in feature learning. In
learning a task, cross entropy (CE) loss learns only discriminative (or biased) features that can separate the classes of
the task. However, these discriminative features may not be
sufficiently discriminative for a new task. To learn the new
task well, the model parameters have to be modified, which
causes CF for previous tasks. To deal with this, the system
should learn holistic representations of the input data. The
proposed solution precisely encourages learning all features
(i.e., holistic representations) of the input data for each task.
Then features that may not be discriminative for the current
task but are useful for some future tasks are also learned.
(2). It encourages preservation of the previously learned
knowledge when learning a new batch of data X new from
an existing task or a new task. This is also important for
preventing CF. We note that without achieving (1), (2) will
1
See (Ke et al., 2021; van de Ven & Tolias, 2019) for task
incremental learning and domain incremental learning settings.

