Linear Complexity Randomized Self-attention Mechanism

Lin Zheng 1 * Chong Wang 2 Lingpeng Kong 1 3

Abstract
Recently, random feature attentions (RFAs) are
proposed to approximate the softmax attention in
linear time and space complexity by linearizing
the exponential kernel. In this paper, we first propose a novel perspective to understand the bias
in such approximation by recasting RFAs as selfnormalized importance samplers. This perspective further sheds light on an unbiased estimator
for the whole softmax attention, called randomized attention (RA). RA constructs positive random features via query-specific distributions and
enjoys greatly improved approximation fidelity,
albeit exhibiting quadratic complexity. By combining the expressiveness in RA and the efficiency
in RFA, we develop a novel linear complexity selfattention mechanism called linear randomized attention (LARA). Extensive experiments across
various domains demonstrate that RA and LARA
significantly improve the performance of RFAs
by a substantial margin.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are powerful neural networks for sequence modeling. They have been successfully
applied in various domains, such as natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dehghani et al., 2019; Devlin
et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020), computer vision (Carion
et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021), bioinformatics (Rives et al., 2021; Jumper et al., 2021) and reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021c). The core building
block of transformer models is the self-attention mechanism, which captures complex interactions among sequence
elements (Vaswani et al., 2017).
*

The majority of this work was done while the first author
was interning at Bytedance. 1 Department of Computer Science,
The University of Hong Kong 2 ByteDance Inc. 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Correspondence to: Lin Zheng
<linzheng@connect.hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

However, the computational complexity of attention mechanism is quadratic in the number of tokens, making it prohibitive to process long sequences. In the past two years,
there has been a community effort towards developing efficient attention architectures with improved computation
complexity and memory usage (Tay et al., 2020b). Among
them, one prominent is to view the attention mechanism
through kernelization (Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2021b, inter alia). In this
work, we focus on random feature attentions (RFAs) (Peng
et al., 2021b; Choromanski et al., 2021), which approximate
softmax attention by linearizing the exponential kernel into
a dot product of random feature maps. Despite achieving linear time and space complexity, this approximation is biased
to the softmax attention as a whole.1
In this work, we revisit RFA and show that it can be reinterpreted as a self-normalized importance sampler to softmax
attention. This insight reveals that the source of the approximation bias in RFAs comes from the self-normalization in
estimation (Owen, 2013). We further show softmax attention can be written as an expectation of linearized attention
over an input-dependent mixture distribution. These findings suggest that we can in principle construct an unbiased
estimator for the softmax attention as a whole, as opposed to
merely exponential kernels in previous work. We call such
unbiased estimation randomized attention or RA. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first unbiased approximation
of the whole softmax attention via kernel linearization.
RA constructs positive random features via distributions
exclusive to each query. Since RFAs only employ an inputagnostic standard Gaussian as the importance sampling
proposal, RA enables a finer-grained treatment for queryspecific information and greatly improves the approximation fidelity; however, it is as expensive as softmax attention
computationally with quadratic complexity, because the keyvalue statistics are different for each query, unlike the ones
in RFAs.
1
There are several variants of random feature maps that yield
an unbiased estimate of the exponential kernel (Peng et al., 2021b;
Choromanski et al., 2021). Nevertheless, RFAs still run a biased
approximation to the whole softmax attention, since the softmax
attention involves a ratio of these exponential kernels. Although
the estimator is still consistent, the bias in question is elusive and
might impair the approximation fidelity of random features.

