Federated Reinforcement Learning: Linear Speedup Under Markovian
Sampling

Sajad Khodadadian 1 Pranay Sharma 2 Gauri Joshi 2 Siva Theja Maguluri 1

Abstract

Since reinforcement learning algorithms are notoriously data-intensive, the task of sampling observations from the environment is usually split
across multiple agents. However, transferring
these observations from the agents to a central
location can be prohibitively expensive in terms
of the communication cost, and it can also compromise the privacy of each agent’s local behavior
policy. In this paper, we consider a federated
reinforcement learning framework where multiple agents collaboratively learn a global model,
without sharing their individual data and policies. Each agent maintains a local copy of the
model and updates it using locally sampled data.
Although having N agents enables the sampling
of N times more data, it is not clear if it leads to
proportional convergence speedup. We propose
federated versions of on-policy TD, off-policy TD
and Q-learning, and analyze their convergence.
For all these algorithms, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to consider Markovian noise
and multiple local updates, and prove a linear
convergence speedup with respect to the number
of agents. To obtain these results, we show that
federated TD and Q-learning are special cases of
a general framework for federated stochastic approximation with Markovian noise, and we leverage this framework to provide a unified convergence analysis that applies to all the algorithms.

1

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA
2
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA,. Correspondence to: Sajad
Khodadadian <skhodadadian3@gatech.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is an online sequential
decision-making paradigm that is typically modeled as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Sutton & Barto, 2018). In
an RL task, the agent aims to learn the optimal policy of the
MDP that maximizes long-term reward, without knowledge
of its parameters. The agent performs this task by repeatedly
interacting with the environment according to a behavior
policy, which in turn provides data samples that can be used
to improve the policy. This MDP-based RL framework
has a vast array of applications including self-driving cars
(Yurtsever et al., 2020), robotic systems (Kober et al., 2013),
games (Silver et al., 2016), UAV-based surveillance (Yun
et al., 2022), and Internet of Things (IoT) (Lim et al., 2020).
Due to the high-dimensional state and action spaces that are
typical in these applications, RL algorithms are extremely
data hungry (Duan et al., 2016; Kalashnikov et al., 2018;
Akkaya et al., 2019), and training RL models with limited
data can result in low accuracy and high output variance
(Islam et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2021). However, generating
massive amounts of training data sequentially can be extremely time consuming (Nair et al., 2015). Hence, many
practical implementations of RL algorithms from Atari domain to Cyber-Physical Systems rely on parallel sampling of
the data from the environment using multiple agents (Mnih
et al., 2016; Espeholt et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021a; Xu
et al., 2021). It was empirically shown in (Mnih et al., 2016)
that the federated version of these algorithms yields faster
training time and improved accuracy. A naive approach
would be to transfer all the agents’ locally collected data to
a central server that uses it for training. However, in applications such as IoT (Chen & Giannakis, 2018), autonomous
driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016) and robotics (Kalashnikov et al., 2018), communicating high-dimensional data
over low bandwidth network link can be prohibitively slow.
Moreover, sharing individual data of the agents with the
server might also be undesirable due to privacy concerns
(Yang et al., 2019; Mothukuri et al., 2021).
Federated Learning (FL) (Kairouz et al., 2019) is an emerging distributed learning framework, where multiple agents
seek to collaboratively train a shared model, while complying with the privacy and data confidentiality requirements

