Kernelized Multiplicative Weights for 0/1-Polyhedral Games: Bridging the Gap
Between Learning in Extensive-Form and Normal-Form Games

Gabriele Farina 1 Chung-Wei Lee 2 Haipeng Luo 2 Christian Kroer 3

Abstract
While extensive-form games (EFGs) can be converted into normal-form games (NFGs), doing so
comes at the cost of an exponential blowup of
the strategy space. So, progress on NFGs and
EFGs has historically followed separate tracks,
with the EFG community often having to catch up
with advances (e.g., last-iterate convergence and
predictive regret bounds) from the larger NFG
community. In this paper we show that the Optimistic Multiplicative Weights Update (OMWU)
algorithm—the premier learning algorithm for
NFGs—can be simulated on the normal-form
equivalent of an EFG in linear time per iteration
in the game tree size using a kernel trick. The resulting algorithm, Kernelized OMWU (KOMWU),
applies more broadly to all convex games whose
strategy space is a polytope with 0/1 integral vertices, as long as the kernel can be evaluated efficiently. In the particular case of EFGs, KOMWU
closes several standing gaps between NFG and
EFG learning, by enabling direct, black-box transfer to EFGs of desirable properties of learning
dynamics that were so far known to be achievable
only in NFGs. Specifically, KOMWU gives the
first algorithm that guarantees at the same time
last-iterate convergence, lower dependence on the
size of the game tree than all prior algorithms, and
Õ(1) regret when followed by all players.

1. Introduction
Online learning in the context of normal-form games (NFGs)
has been studied extensively. A classic motivation for this
1
Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Computer Science Department, University of Southern California 3 IEOR Department, Columbia University. Correspondence to: Gabriele Farina <gfarina@cs.cmu.edu>, Chung-Wei
Lee <leechung@usc.edu>, Haipeng Luo <haipengl@usc.edu>,
Christian Kroer <christian.kroer@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

study is that when every player in an NFG learns from T
rounds of repeated play using a no-regret learning algorithm
such as multiplicative weights update (MWU),
the average
√
product distribution of play is a O(1/ T )-approximate
Nash √
equilibrium in two-player zero-sum games, and a
O(1/ T )-approximate coarse-correlated equilibrium in
multiplayer general-sum games. In the last decade, much
stronger results have been obtained when each player employs an optimistic no-regret learner such as the optimistic
MWU (OMWU) algorithm (Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013a;b;
Syrgkanis et al., 2015). For example, in zero-sum NFGs
OMWU enables convergence to a Nash equilibrium at a rate
of O(1/T ) and various last-iterate guarantees (Daskalakis
& Panageas, 2019; Lei et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021). For
general-sum NFGs, polylogarithmic regret bounds have
been shown when every player uses OMWU (Daskalakis
et al., 2021), implying convergence to a coarse-correlated
equilibrium at a Õ(1/T ) rate.
In this paper we study extensive-form games (EFGs), a much
richer class of games that explicitly model sequential (or
simultaneous) interaction, stochastic outcomes, and imperfect information. Because of their sequential nature, the
number of deterministic strategies in an EFG is exponential
in the size of the game, unlike for NFGs. Computing, or
approximating, Nash equilibria of large EFGs has been a
key component of recent AI milestones where AIs were
created that beat human poker players (Bowling et al., 2015;
Brown & Sandholm, 2019; 2017; Moravčı́k et al., 2017).
These results relied on online learning algorithms for the
decision sets of the players in an EFG, where each iteration
of the algorithm is performed in linear time in the game tree
size (which is crucial due to the large size of these games).
Online learning results for EFGs are generally somewhat
harder to come by, and have often lagged behind results for
NFGs. This is due to the more complicated combinatorial
structure of the decision spaces in EFGs. For example, the
following concepts were all developed later for EFGs than
for NFGs, and sometimes with weaker guarantees: good
distance measures (Hoda et al., 2010; Kroer et al., 2015;
2020; Farina et al., 2021a), optimistic regret-minimization
algorithms (Farina et al., 2019b;a), and last-iterate convergence results (Wei et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021). Very recent

