Understanding Gradient Descent on the Edge of Stability in Deep Learning

Sanjeev Arora * 1 Zhiyuan Li * 1 Abhishek Panigrahi * 1

Abstract
Deep learning experiments by Cohen et al. (2021)
using deterministic Gradient Descent (GD) revealed an Edge of Stability (EoS) phase when
learning rate (LR) and sharpness (i.e., the largest
eigenvalue of Hessian) no longer behave as in traditional optimization. Sharpness stabilizes around
2/LR and loss goes up and down across iterations,
yet still with an overall downward trend. The current paper mathematically analyzes a new mechanism of implicit regularization in the EoS phase,
whereby GD updates due to non-smooth loss landscape turn out to evolve along some deterministic
flow on the manifold of minimum loss. This is in
contrast to many previous results about implicit
bias either relying on infinitesimal updates or
noise in gradient. Formally, for any smooth function L with certain regularity condition, this effect
is demonstrated for (1) Normalized GD, i.e., GD
η
with a varying LR ηt = k∇L(x(t))k
and loss L; (2)
p
GD with constant LR and loss L − minx L(x).
Both provably enter the Edge of Stability, with
the associated flow on the manifold minimizing
λ1 (∇2 L). The above theoretical results have been
corroborated by an experimental study.

1. Introduction
Traditional convergence analyses of gradient-based algorithms assume learning rate η is set according to the basic
relationship η < 2/λ where λ is the largest eigenvalue of the
Hessian of the objective, called sharpness. Descent Lemma
says that if this relationship holds along the trajectory of
Gradient Descent, loss drops during each iteration. In deep
learning where objectives are nonconvex and have multiple
optima, similar analyses can show convergence towards stationary points and local minima. In practice, sharpness is
*
Alphabetical order 1 Princeton University
. Correspondence to: Sanjeev Arora <arora@cs.princeton.edu>,
Zhiyuan Li <zhiyuanli@cs.princeton.edu>, Abhishek Panigrahi
<ap34@cs.princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

unknown and η is set by trial and error. Since deep learning
works, it has been generally assumed that this trial and error
allows η to adjust to sharpness so that the theory applies.
But recent empirical studies (Cohen et al., 2021; Ahn et al.,
2022) showed compelling evidence to the contrary. On a variety of popular architectures and training datasets, GD with
fairly small values of η displays following phenomena that
they termed Edge of Stability (EoS): (a) Sharpness rises beyond 2/η, thus violating the above-mentioned relationship.
(b) Thereafter sharpness stops rising but hovers noticeably
above 2/η and even decreases a little. (c) Training loss
behaves non-monotonically over individual iterations, yet
consistently decreases over long timescales.
Note that (a) was already pointed out by Li et al. (2020b).
Specifically, in modern deep nets, which use some form
of normalization combined with weight decay, training to
near-zero loss must lead to arbitrarily high sharpness. (However, Cohen et al. (2021) show that the EoS phenomenon
appears even without normalization.) Phenomena (b), (c)
are more mysterious, suggesting that GD with finite η is
able to continue decreasing loss despite violating η < 2/λ,
while at the same time regulating further increase in value
of sharpness and even causing a decrease. These striking
inter-related phenomena suggest a radical overhaul of our
thinking about optimization in deep learning. At the same
time, it appears mathematically challenging to analyze such
phenomena, at least for realistic settings and losses (as opposed to toy examples with 2 or 3 layers). The current paper
introduces frameworks for doing such analyses.
We start by formal definition of stableness, ensuring that
if a point + LR combination is stable then a gradient step
is guaranteed to decrease the loss by the local version of
Descent Lemma.
Definition 1.1 (Stableness). Given a loss function L, a parameter x ∈ Rd and LR η > 0 we define the stableness
of L at (x, η) be SL (x, η) := η · sup0≤s≤η λ1 (∇2 L(x −
s∇L(x))). We say L is stable at (x, η) iff the stableness of
L at (x, η) is smaller than or equal to 2; otherwise we say L
is unstable at (x, η).
The above defined stableness is a better indicator for EoS
than only using the sharpness at a specific point x, i.e.
ηλ1 (∇2 L(x)) < 2, because the loss can still oscillate in the

