Generalized Results for the Existence and Consistency of the MLE in the
Bradley-Terry-Luce Model

Heejong Bong 1 Alessandro Rinaldo 1

Abstract
Ranking tasks based on pairwise comparisons,
such as those arising in online gaming, often involve a large pool of items to order. In these
situations, the gap in performance between any
two items can be significant, and the smallest and
largest winning probabilities can be very close
to zero or one. Furthermore, each item may be
compared only to a subset of all the items, so
that not all pairwise comparisons are observed.
In this paper, we study the performance of the
Bradley-Terry-Luce model for ranking from pairwise comparison data under more realistic settings than those considered in the literature so
far. In particular, we allow for near-degenerate
winning probabilities and arbitrary comparison
designs. We obtain novel results about the existence of the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE)
and the corresponding ℓ2 estimation error without the bounded winning probability assumption
commonly used in the literature and for arbitrary
comparison graph topologies. Central to our approach is the reliance on the Fisher information
matrix to express the dependence on the graph
topology and the impact of the values of the winning probabilities on the estimation risk and on
the conditions for the existence of the MLE. Our
bounds recover existing results as special cases
but are more broadly applicable.

1. Introduction
The task of eliciting a ranking over a possibly large collection of items based on partially observed pairwise comparisons is of great relevance for an increasingly broader range
1
Department of Statiscis and Data Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Heejong Bong <hbong@andrew.cmu.edu>, Alessandro Rinaldo <arinaldo@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of applications, including sports analytics, multi-player online games, collection/analysis of crowdsourced data, marketing, aggregation of online search engine response queries
and social choice models, to name a few. In response to
these growing needs for theories and methods for highdimensional ranking problems, the statistical and machine
learning literature has witnessed a recent flurry of activities
and novel results concerning high-dimensional parametric
ranking models. Among them, the renown Bradley-TerryLuce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Luce, 2012) has
experienced a surge in popularity and use, due to its high
interpretability and expressive power.
Though the statistical literature on the BLT model is extensive, dating back to the seminal work on existence of the
MLE by (Ford Jr, 1957), a series of recent contributions
have led to accurate upper and lower bounds on the estimation error of the BTL model parameters under various
high-dimensional settings. See Related Work below. These
bounds, as well as most other theoretical results in the literature, are typically predicated on the key assumption that the
pairwise winning probabilities remain bounded away from
0 and 1 by a fixed and even known amount. However, in
high-dimensional ranking modeling, it is desirable to allow
for the winning probabilities to become degenerate (i.e. to
approach 0 or 1) as the number of items to be compared
grows. This feature expresses characteristics found in reallife ranking tasks, such as ratings in massive multi-player
online games. In those cases, it is expected that the maximal
performance gap – also known as dynamic range – among
different players increases with the number of players, so
that the best players will be vastly superior to those with
poor skills. Another significant complication frequently arising in real-life ranking tasks is that, due to experimental or
financial constraints, only few among all possible pairwise
comparisons are observed, resulting in a possibly irregular
or sparse comparison graph. The combined effect of a broad
gap in performance and of a possibly unfavorable comparison graph topology may have a considerable impact on the
estimability of the BTL model parameters. The main goal
of this paper is to quantify such impact in novel and explicit
ways. We will expand on some of the latest theoretical contributions to parametric ranking using the BTL model in
order to (i) formulate novel conditions for the existence of

