Sparse Double Descent: Where Network Pruning Aggravates Overfitting

Zheng He 1 Zeke Xie 2 3 Quanzhi Zhu 1 Zengchang Qin 1

Abstract
People usually believe that network pruning not
only reduces the computational cost of deep networks, but also prevents overfitting by decreasing
model capacity. However, our work surprisingly
discovers that network pruning sometimes even
aggravates overfitting. We report an unexpected
sparse double descent phenomenon that, as we
increase model sparsity via network pruning, test
performance first gets worse (due to overfitting),
then gets better (due to relieved overfitting), and
gets worse at last (due to forgetting useful information). While recent studies focused on the deep
double descent with respect to model overparameterization, they failed to recognize that sparsity
may also cause double descent. In this paper,
we have three main contributions. First, we report the novel sparse double descent phenomenon
through extensive experiments. Second, for this
phenomenon, we propose a novel learning distance interpretation that the curve of ℓ2 learning
distance of sparse models (from initialized parameters to final parameters) may correlate with the
sparse double descent curve well and reflect generalization better than minima flatness. Third, in
the context of sparse double descent, a winning
ticket in the lottery ticket hypothesis surprisingly
may not always win.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great empirical success in recent years, which are usually trained with
much more model parameters than training examples (LeCun et al., 2015). The extreme overparameterization gives
DNNs excellent approximation as well as a prohibitively
1

Intelligent Computing and Machine Learning Lab, School
of ASEE, Beihang University, Beijing, China 2 The University of Tokyo 3 RIKEN Center for AIP. Correspondence to:
Zheng He <zhenghe@buaa.edu.cn>, Zengchang Qin <zcqin@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

large model capacity (Cybenko, 1989; Funahashi, 1989;
Hornik et al., 1989; Hornik, 1993). Overparameterized
DNNs can even easily memorize entire random-labeled
dataset (Zhang et al., 2017), which suggests that DNNs are
kind of “good at” overfitting.
However, in practice, DNNs do not learn via pure memorization and often achieve higher generalization performance on many tasks than smaller models (Szegedy et al.,
2015; Neyshabur et al., 2015; Arpit et al., 2017). Recent
studies even reported an interesting deep double descent
phenomenon (Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2020;
Loog et al., 2020; d’Ascoli et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020)
that, as the model capacity increases, test performance first
gets better, then gets worse (due to classical overfitting),
and gets better at last (due to relieved overfitting). Deep
double descent motivated us to rethink the widely held viewpoint that network pruning reduces model capacity thus
mitigates overfitting (LeCun et al., 1990; Hassibi & Stork,
1992; Molchanov et al., 2017; Hoefler et al., 2021).
As the extreme overparameterization of DNNs may cause
deep double descent, may the sparsification of DNNs also
cause a double descent phenomenon symmetric to the existing “deep double descent”? Our answer is affirmative. We
call such phenomenon “sparse double descent”.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first
to report the sparse double descent phenomenon (see
Figure 1). More specifically, we demonstrate that high
model sparsities may significantly mitigate overfitting,
while moderate model sparsities may lead to severer
overfitting. And extreme model sparsities (→ 100%)
tend to lose all learned information.
• The ℓ2 learning distance of models (from initialized parameters to final parameters) may be correlated with a
double descent curve and reflects generalization better
than minima flatness for sparse models.
• Contrary to the lottery ticket hypothesis Frankle &
Carbin (2019), we find the retraining a sparse model
from its original initialization may not win at all time.
For example, in some cases, a randomly reinitialized
pruned model could largely surpass model with the

