StreamingQA: A Benchmark for Adaptation to New Knowledge over Time
in Question Answering Models

Adam Liška * 1 Tomáš Kočiský * ♠ 2 Elena Gribovskaya * ♠ 2 Tayfun Terzi * 2
Eren Sezener 2 Devang Agrawal 1 Cyprien de Masson d’Autume 2 Tim Scholtes 2 Manzil Zaheer 2
Susannah Young 2 Ellen Gilsenan-McMahon 2 Sophia Austin 2 Phil Blunsom 3 4 Angeliki Lazaridou 2

Abstract
Knowledge and language understanding of models evaluated through question answering (QA)
has been usually studied on static snapshots of
knowledge, like Wikipedia. However, our world
is dynamic, evolves over time, and our models’
knowledge becomes outdated. To study how semiparametric QA models and their underlying parametric language models (LMs) adapt to evolving knowledge, we construct a new large-scale
dataset, StreamingQA, with human written and
generated questions asked on a given date, to be
answered from 14 years of time-stamped news
articles. We evaluate our models quarterly as they
read new articles not seen in pre-training. We
show that parametric models can be updated without full retraining, while avoiding catastrophic
forgetting. For semi-parametric models, adding
new articles into the search space allows for rapid
adaptation, however, models with an outdated underlying LM under-perform those with a retrained
LM. For questions about higher-frequency named
entities, parametric updates are particularly beneficial. In our dynamic world, the StreamingQA
dataset enables a more realistic evaluation of QA
models, and our experiments highlight several
promising directions for future research.

1. Introduction
Question answering (QA) allows us to interrogate models
for their language understanding, knowledge, and reasonEqual contribution in random order ♠ Project Leads
Glyphic AI, work done at DeepMind 2 DeepMind, London, UK
3
Cohere, work done at DeepMind 4 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to:
Tomáš Kočiský <tkocisky@deepmind.com>, Elena Gribovskaya
<egribovskaya@deepmind.com>.
*

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Table 1. Example questions from StreamingQA (Eval-Written).
In addition to a question date, each question has three reference
answers, and an evidence document with its publication date.
Recent subset
Question Date: Monday, February 24, 2020
Question: How many countries have committed to the
net zero target as of today’s date?
Past subset
Question Date: Sunday, April 12, 2020
Question: In November 2016, which Netflix series set in
the United Kingdom was said to be “the most expensive
television series ever”?

ing abilities, while also being useful in various knowledgeoriented applications such as personal assistants or web
search. The questions that people ask span all our knowledge and can be about any point in the history, although
often they are about the most recent events that happened in
the last few weeks or days. Consider examples in Table 1
that ask about events as distant as 4 years before or as recent as the day when the question was asked. As the world
and knowledge evolve, we need our QA models to adapt
to new information, to not forget the past, and to maintain
an up-to-date world model to make our interaction with
such systems more meaningful. To evaluate and improve
models’ ability to adapt, we need a dataset with temporal
grounding of both questions and knowledge—dates when
questions were asked and publication dates of documents.
As the currently available QA datasets are not suitable for
this, we propose a novel dataset and subsequently perform
a systematic study of adaptation in the state-of-the-art QA
models.
Previous research has often focused on answering questions
about individual passages or books (Rajpurkar et al., 2016;
Kočiský et al., 2018), answering about static structured (Jia
et al., 2021), or unstructured knowledge corpora such as
Wikipedia (Lee et al., 2019a). More recent work has considered answering questions about knowledge with temporal
grounding of facts in a knowledge graph (Saxena et al.,
2021; Jia et al., 2021) or news articles (Wang et al., 2021;
Dhingra et al., 2021) but without grounding the questions

