Sparse Mixed Linear Regression with Guarantees: Taming an Intractable
Problem with Invex Relaxation
Adarsh Barik * 1 Jean Honorio * 1

Abstract

are sparse vectors with possibly non-overlapping supports.

In this paper, we study the problem of sparse
mixed linear regression on an unlabeled dataset
that is generated from linear measurements from
two different regression parameter vectors. Since
the data is unlabeled, our task is not only to figure
out a good approximation of the regression parameter vectors but also to label the dataset correctly.
In its original form, this problem is NP-hard. The
most popular algorithms to solve this problem
(such as Expectation-Maximization) have a tendency to stuck at local minima. We provide a
novel invex relaxation for this intractable problem
which leads to a solution with provable theoretical
guarantees. This relaxation enables exact recovery of data labels. Furthermore, we recover a
close approximation of the regression parameter
vectors which match the true parameter vectors in
support and sign. Our formulation uses a carefully
constructed primal dual witnesses framework for
the invex problem. Furthermore, we show that the
sample complexity of our method is only logarithmic in terms of the dimension of the regression
parameter vectors.

Mixed linear regression models have been extensively used
in a wide range of applications (Grün et al., 2007) which
include but are not limited to behavioral health-care (Deb &
Holmes, 2000), market segmentation (Wedel & Kamakura,
2000), music perception studies (Viele & Tong, 2002) and
vehicle merging (Li et al., 2019). The main task of the problem is to estimate the regression parameter vectors and the
unknown labels accurately from linear measurements. However, the problem is NP-hard without any assumptions (Yi
et al., 2014). Being such a difficult problem, it also lends
itself to be used as a benchmark for many non-convex optimization algorithms (Chaganty & Liang, 2013; Klusowski
et al., 2019).

Related Work. There have been many approaches to
solve the mixed linear regression problem after it was introduced by (Wedel & DeSarbo, 1995). The most popular and
natural approach has been to use Expectation-minimization
(EM) based alternate minimization algorithms (see Ghosh
& Kannan (2020) and references therein). More broadly,
the problem can be modeled under the hierarchical mixtures
of experts model (Jordan & Jacobs, 1994) and solved using
EM based algorithms. All these methods run the risk of
getting stuck at local minima (Wu, 1983) without good ini1. Introduction
tialization. (Yi et al., 2014) provides a good initialization for
the noiseless case under strict technical conditions, however
In this paper, we study sparse mixed linear regression where
their method does not provide any guarantees for the noisy
the measurements come from one of the two regression
case. Based on the recent work of (Anandkumar et al., 2014;
models depending upon the unknown label zi˚ P t0, 1u. The
Hsu & Kakade, 2013), (Chaganty & Liang, 2013) have proobservation model can be described as follows:
posed an approach which uses a third order moment method
yi “ zi˚ xXi , β1˚ y ` p1 ´ zi˚ qxXi , β2˚ y ` ei , @i P t1, ¨ ¨ ¨ , nu , based on tensor decomposition. Their approach suffers from
(1)
high sample complexity (up to Opd6 q) due to tensor decomposition. (Städler et al., 2010) proposed an `1 -regularized
where Xi P Rd , yi P R and ei P R is independent additive
approach for the sparse case and showed the existence of a
noise. The regression parameter vectors β1˚ P Rd , β2˚ P Rd
local minimizer with correct support but there are no guaran*
1
tees that EM achieves this local minima. (Chen et al., 2014)
Equal contribution Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA. Correspondence
provided a convex relaxation involving nuclear norms for
to: Adarsh Barik <abarik@purdue.edu>, Jean Honorio <jhonothe problem. They do not focus on providing guarantees for
rio@purdue.edu>.
exact label recovery and their results only hold for bounded
noise and require balanced samples (almost equal number
th
Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
of samples for both labels). Besides, the optimization probLearning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
lems involving nuclear norms are computationally heavy

