Addressing Optimism Bias in Sequence Modeling for Reinforcement Learning

Adam Villaflor 1 Zhe Huang 1 Swapnil Pande 1 John Dolan 1 Jeff Schneider 1

Abstract
Impressive results in natural language processing
(NLP) based on the Transformer neural network
architecture have inspired researchers to explore
viewing offline reinforcement learning (RL) as
a generic sequence modeling problem. Recent
works based on this paradigm have achieved stateof-the-art results in several of the mostly deterministic offline Atari and D4RL benchmarks. However, because these methods jointly model the
states and actions as a single sequencing problem, they struggle to disentangle the effects of the
policy and world dynamics on the return. Thus,
in adversarial or stochastic environments, these
methods lead to overly optimistic behavior that
can be dangerous in safety-critical systems like
autonomous driving. In this work, we propose a
method that addresses this optimism bias by explicitly disentangling the policy and world models,
which allows us at test time to search for policies
that are robust to multiple possible futures in the
environment. We demonstrate our method’s superior performance on a variety of autonomous
driving tasks in simulation.

1. Introduction
Recent works have achieved impressive results in a variety
of sequence modeling problems from NLP (Brown et al.,
2020; Radford et al., 2019; 2018) to trajectory prediction
(Ngiam et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Quintanar et al., 2021;
age) by leveraging powerful Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017) models. Inspired by these numerous successes, several recent works (Chen et al., 2021b; Janner et al., 2021)
have explored ways of reformulating sequential-decision
making problems in the offline RL framework as a single sequence modeling problem. In particular, these approaches jointly model the states, actions, and rewards as a
1

Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to:
Adam Villaflor <avillaflor@cmu.edu>, Jeff Schnedier
<jeff.schneider@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

single data stream with a high-capacity Transformer. These
Transformer-based methods are able to outperform the behavioral policy at test time by either conditioning on desired
outcomes when picking actions or leveraging the model to
search for high-reward trajectories. The main benefit of
this paradigm is that it avoids many of the complexities
involved in modern model-free and model-based offline RL
algorithms.
There are 2 major issues with treating RL as a single sequence modeling problem like the words or characters in a
NLP problem. (1) States and actions are fundamentally different concepts. The agent always has complete control over
its action sequences, but often has only limited influence on
the resulting state transitions. In adversarial or stochastic
environments, the same action in the same state can lead to
potentially different outcomes, which affects the likelihood
or feasibility of achieving a desired result. This leads to
the more practical issue (2), which is that we often need to
perform different optimizations over the policy actions and
the potential state transitions. Generally, we want to find the
action that maximizes reward, but either in expectation over
possible future states or with respect to the worst case scenario. Thus, in safety-critical domains or adversarial games
we often want to perform a maximum over potential actions
and a minimum over possible futures in the environment.
Thus in these types of environments, special considerations
are needed to ensure effective planning during deployment.
Ozair et al. (2021) demonstrates similar issues when deploying MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) with different
MCTS (Coulom, 2006) frameworks in chess. They find that
planning with a single-player variant of MuZero that treats
the other player as an unknown part of the environment
results in a catastrophic drop in performance relative to the
traditional two-player adversarial framework.
Most prior works in offline RL have focused on the mainly
deterministic D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) benchmarks and a
variety of weakly stochastic Atari (Machado et al., 2018)
benchmarks. Therefore, there has been limited focus on the
difficulties of deploying such methods in largely stochastic
domains. In this work, we instead focus specifically on
stochastic safety-critical domains, and use autonomous driving as a representative setting. Understanding the stochastic
and multi-modal nature of traffic is critical to safe and robust autonomous driving. For example, the same turning

