On the Generalization Analysis of Adversarial Learning

Waleed Mustafa 1 Yunwen Lei 2 Marius Kloft 1

Abstract
Many recent studies have highlighted the susceptibility of virtually all machine-learning models
to adversarial attacks. Adversarial attacks are
imperceptible changes to an input example of a
given prediction model. Such changes are carefully designed to alter the otherwise correct prediction of the model. In this paper, we study the
generalization properties of adversarial learning.
In particular, we derive high-probability generalization bounds on the adversarial risk in terms
of the empirical adversarial risk, the complexity
of the function class, and the adversarial noise
set. Our bounds are generally applicable to many
models, losses, and adversaries. We showcase
its applicability by deriving adversarial generalization bounds for the multi-class classification
setting and various prediction models (including
linear models and Deep Neural Networks). We
also derive optimistic adversarial generalization
bounds for the case of smooth losses. These are
the first fast-rate bounds valid for adversarial deep
learning to the best of our knowledge.

1. Introduction
Machine learning has been shown to be susceptible to a
large number of security threats (Barreno et al., 2010; Papernot et al., 2016). One such threat is adversarial examples
(Szegedy et al., 2013; Biggio et al., 2013). Adversarial examples are perturbed inputs carefully designed to alter a
model’s prediction while being imperceptible to humans.
This paper studies the generalization properties of models
trained to withstand such adversarial attacks. While much
work has been conducted on the algorithmic design of attacks (Carlini et al., 2017; Brendel et al., 2017; Awasthi
et al., 2021; Engstrom et al., 2019), and defenses (Madry
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Kaiserslautern, Germany 2 School of Computer Science, University of
Birmingham, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Yunwen Lei
<y.lei@bham.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2017; Finlay & Oberman, 2019; Kannan et al., 2018),
there is a lack of theoretical understanding of the generalization properties of adversarial learning.
The current state of the art in the generalization analysis
of adversarial learning has the following limitations to our
knowledge. First, all previous papers on adversarial generalization apply solely to additive adversaries (in which
the attacker adds a small perturbation to the input sample).
However, there is a recent trend in using non-additive adversaries (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2018; Engstrom et al.,
2019; Wong & Kolter, 2020; Awasthi et al., 2021). Previous generalization analyses are inapplicable in this setting.
Second, all previous papers consider restricted setups based
on simple models and architectures (linear model or onehidden-layer neural networks; Yin et al., 2019; Awasthi et al.,
2020) or unrealistic assumptions (Dan et al., 2020; Schmidt
et al., 2018; Farnia et al., 2018; Gao & Wang, 2021), or
they use surrogate losses (Khim & Loh, 2018; Yin et al.,
2019). However, a surrogate upper bound does not necessarily lead to a meaningful generalization bound on the original
(adversarial) loss (Awasthi et al., 2020). Next, there exists
no unified analysis applying to a large variety of models,
Moreover, there are no fast-rate bounds (Srebro et al., 2010)
for adversarial learning using √
neural networks. Finally, all
previous results scale at least O( K) in the number of label
classes K and are thus inapplicable to extreme classification,
or structured prediction (Prabhu & Varma, 2014).
We derive generalization bounds that do not suffer from
the limitations mentioned above. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows:
• We derive the first generalization bounds for adversarial learning valid for general (possibly non-additive)
noise functions (thus covering a wide array of attacks).
• Our bounds are modular and general. They can be
applied to many models, from linear models over kernel machines to neural networks. Extending it to new
models is easy: it requires simply computing the `∞ covering number of the model.
• We show the first generalization bounds for adversarial
learning of Deep Neural Networks applying to the
adversarial loss directly, not a surrogate.

