A Simple Unified Framework for High Dimensional Bandit Problems

Wenjie Li 1 Adarsh Barik 2 Jean Honorio 2

Abstract
Stochastic high dimensional bandit problems with
low dimensional structures are useful in different
applications such as online advertising and drug
discovery. In this work, we propose a simple
unified algorithm for such problems and present
a general analysis framework for the regret upper bound of our algorithm. We show that under
some mild unified assumptions, our algorithm can
be applied to different high-dimensional bandit
problems. Our framework utilizes the low dimensional structure to guide the parameter estimation
in the problem, therefore our algorithm achieves
the comparable regret bounds in the LASSO bandit as a sanity check, as well as novel bounds that
depend logarithmically on dimensions in the lowrank matrix bandit, the group sparse matrix bandit,
and in a new problem: the multi-agent LASSO
bandit.

1. Introduction
Stochastic multiarmed contextual bandits are useful models
in various application domains, such as recommendation
systems, online advertising, and personalized healthcare
(Auer, 2002b; Chu et al., 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011).
Under this setting, the agent chooses one specific arm at
each round and observes a reward, which is modeled as a
function of an unknown parameter and the context of the
arm. In practice, such problems are often high-dimensional,
but the unknown parameter is typically assumed to have
low-dimensional structure, which in turns implies a succinct
representation of the final reward.
For example, in high dimensional sparse linear bandits, also
known as the LASSO bandit problem (Bastani & Bayati,
2020), both the contexts and the unknown parameter are
1
Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN. Correspondence to: Wenjie Li
<li354@purdue.edu>, Jean Honorio <jhonorio@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

high-dimensional vectors, while the parameter is assumed to
be sparse with limited nonzero elements. There has been a
line of research on LASSO bandits, such as Abbasi-Yadkori
et al. (2011), Alexandra Carpentier (2012), Bastani & Bayati
(2020), Lattimore et al. (2015), Wang et al. (2018), Kim
& Paik (2019), Hao et al. (2020a), and Oh et al. (2021).
Different algorithms are proposed for this problem, and
different regret analyses based on various assumptions are
provided.
When the unknown parameter becomes a matrix, some recent research have worked on low-rank matrix bandits. For
example, Katariya et al. (2017a;b) and Trinh et al. (2020)
considered the rank-1 matrix bandit problems, but their results cannot be extended to higher ranks. Jun et al. (2019)
studied the bilinear bandit problems where the reward is
modelled as a bilinear product of the left arm, the parameter
matrix, and the right arm. Kveton et al. (2017) first studied
the low-rank matrix bandit, but required strong assumptions
on the mean reward matrix. Lu et al. (2021) extended the
work by Jun et al. (2019) to a more generalized low-rank
matrix bandit problem but their action set was fixed. Hao
et al. (2020b) further studied the problem of low-rank tensor
bandits.
Despite the recent progress in all the above high dimensional bandit problems, both experimentally and theoretically, prior works are scattered and different algorithms
with different assumptions are proposed for these problems.
Although in LASSO Bandits, people have already given
logarithmic dependence on the high dimension, we are surprised that such dependence has not been shown for other
problems and polynomial dependence on the high dimensions still exists. An interesting question here is: does there
exist a unified algorithm that works in all the high dimensional bandit problems, and if so, does such an algorithm
hold a desirable regret bound in the different settings in
terms of the dimensional dependence? In this work, we
provide affirmative answers to these questions.
Our work is inspired by the literature on traditional high
dimensional statistical analysis (Negahban et al., 2012) and
modern high dimensional bandit algorithms (Kim & Paik,
2019; Oh et al., 2021). The only similar prior work we are
aware of is the framework by Johnson et al. (2016), but
they analyzed a completely different problem setting. Their

