Revisiting End-to-End Speech-to-Text Translation From Scratch

Biao Zhang 1 Barry Haddow 1 Rico Sennrich 2 1

Abstract
End-to-end (E2E) speech-to-text translation (ST)
often depends on pretraining its encoder and/or
decoder using source transcripts via speech recognition or text translation tasks, without which
translation performance drops substantially. However, transcripts are not always available, and how
significant such pretraining is for E2E ST has
rarely been studied in the literature. In this paper,
we revisit this question and explore the extent to
which the quality of E2E ST trained on speechtranslation pairs alone can be improved. We reexamine several techniques proven beneficial to ST
previously, and offer a set of best practices that
biases a Transformer-based E2E ST system toward training from scratch. Besides, we propose
parameterized distance penalty to facilitate the
modeling of locality in the self-attention model
for speech. On four benchmarks covering 23 languages, our experiments show that, without using
any transcripts or pretraining, the proposed system reaches and even outperforms previous studies adopting pretraining, although the gap remains
in (extremely) low-resource settings. Finally, we
discuss neural acoustic feature modeling, where a
neural model is designed to extract acoustic features from raw speech signals directly, with the
goal to simplify inductive biases and add freedom to the model in describing speech. For the
first time, we demonstrate its feasibility and show
encouraging results on ST tasks.1

1. Introduction
End-to-end (E2E) speech-to-text translation (ST) is the task
of translating a source-language audio directly to a foreign
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh 2 Department
of Computational Linguistics, University of Zurich. Correspondence to: Biao Zhang <b.zhang@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Source code is available at https://github.com/
bzhangGo/zero.

text without any intermediate outputs (Duong et al., 2016;
Bérard et al., 2016), which has gained increasing popularity and obtained great success recently (Sung et al., 2019;
Salesky et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020;
Han et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2021; Anastasopoulos et al.,
2021). Different from the traditional cascading method
which decomposes ST into two sub-tasks – automatic speech
recognition (ASR) for transcription and machine translation
(MT) for translation, E2E ST jointly handles them in a single, large neural network. This endows E2E ST with special
advantages on reducing translation latency and bypassing
transcription mistakes made by ASR models, making it
theoretically attractive.
However, directly modeling speech-to-text mapping is nontrivial. The translation alignment between speech and text
is no longer subject to the monotonic assumption. Also,
the high variation of speech increases the modeling difficulty. Therefore, rather than training E2E ST models from
scratch, researchers often resort to pipeline-based training
with auxiliary tasks utilizing source transcripts, which first
pretrains the speech encoder on ASR data and/or the text
decoder on MT data followed by a finetuning on ST data.
Such pretraining was reported to greatly improve translation
quality (Di Gangi et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a; Zhang
et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021), and has become the de-facto
standard in recent ST studies and toolkits (Inaguma et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2020a; Zhao et al., 2021; Zheng et al.,
2021). Despite these successes, nevertheless, how significant the pretraining is for E2E ST and how far we can go
using speech-translation pairs alone are still open questions.
In this paper, we aim at exploring the extent to which the
quality of ST models trained from scratch can be improved,
whether the performance gap against pretraining-based ST
can be narrowed, and also when the pretraining really matters.23 We argue that the inferior performance of ST from
scratch is mainly a result of the dominance of pretrain2

Note there are two types of pretraining for E2E ST in general:
1) pretraining with triplet (ASR/MT) data alone, and 2) pretraining
with external unlabeled or ASR/MT data. In this study, we refer
pretraining mainly to the former case, although we also compare
our work to systems pretrained on unlabeled data.
3
By ST from scratch, we refer to the setup where ST models are
trained on speech-translation pairs alone without using transcripts
or any type of pretraining.

