Flow-Guided Sparse Transformer for Video Deblurring

Jing Lin * 1 Yuanhao Cai * 1 Xiaowan Hu 1 Haoqian Wang† 1 Youliang Yan 2
Xueyi Zou† 2 Henghui Ding 3 Yulun Zhang 3 Radu Timofte 3 Luc Van Gool 3

Abstract
Exploiting similar and sharper scene patches
in spatio-temporal neighborhoods is critical for
video deblurring. However, CNN-based methods
show limitations in capturing long-range dependencies and modeling non-local self-similarity.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework,
Flow-Guided Sparse Transformer (FGST), for
video deblurring. In FGST, we customize a selfattention module, Flow-Guided Sparse Windowbased Multi-head Self-Attention (FGSW-MSA).
For each query element on the blurry reference
frame, FGSW-MSA enjoys the guidance of the
estimated optical flow to globally sample spatially sparse yet highly related key elements corresponding to the same scene patch in neighboring frames. Besides, we present a Recurrent Embedding (RE) mechanism to transfer information
from past frames and strengthen long-range temporal dependencies. Comprehensive experiments
demonstrate that our proposed FGST outperforms
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on both DVD
and GOPRO datasets and yields visually pleasant results in real video deblurring. https://
github.com/linjing7/VR-Baseline

1. Introduction
Video deblurring is a fundamental yet challenging task in
low-level computer vision and graphics communities. It
aims to restore the latent frames from a blurry video sequence. Serving as a preprocessing technique, video deblurring has wide applications such as video stabilization (Matsushita et al., 2006), tracking (Jin et al., 2005), autonomous
driving (Yin et al., 2021), etc. Hand-held devices are more
and more popular in capturing videos of dynamic scenes,
*
1
Equal contribution
Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 ETH
Zürich.
Correspondence to: Haoqian Wang <wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Xueyi Zou <zouxueyi@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

where prevalent depth variations, abrupt camera shakes, and
high-speed object movements lead to undesirable blur in
videos. To alleviate the effect of motion blur, researchers
have put a lot of efforts into video deblurring.
Conventional methods are mainly based on hand-crafted
priors and assumptions, which limits the model capacity.
Besides, the assumptions on motion blur and latent frames
usually lead to complex energy functions that are difficult to
solve. Also, the inaccurately estimated motion blur kernel
with hand-crafted priors may easily result in severe artifacts.
In the past decade, video deblurring has witnessed significant progresses with the development of deep learning. Convolutional neural network (CNN) applies a powerful model
to learn the mapping from blurry videos to sharp videos under the supervision of a large-scale dataset of blurry-sharp
video pairs. CNN-based methods yield impressive performance but show limitations in modeling long-range spatial
dependencies and capturing non-local self-similarity.
Recently, the emergence of Transformer provides an alternative to alleviate the constraints of CNN-based methods.
Firstly, Transformer excels at modeling long-range spatial
dependencies. The contextual information and spatial correlations are critical to restoring the motion blur. Secondly,
similar and sharper scene patches from neighboring frames
provide crucial cues for video deblurring. Fortunately, the
self-attention module in Transformer is dedicated to calculating the correlations among pixels and capturing the selfsimilarity along the temporal sequence. Thus, Transformer
inherently resonates with the goal of learning similar information from spatio-temporal neighborhoods. Nevertheless,
directly using existing Transformers for video deblurring
has two issues. On one hand, when the standard global
Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) is utilized, the computational cost is quadratic to the spatio-temporal dimensions. This burden is nontrivial and sometimes unaffordable.
Meanwhile, the global Transformer attends to redundant
key elements, which may easily cause non-convergence issue (Zhu et al., 2020) and over-smoothing results (Li et al.,
2019). On the other hand, when the local window-based
Transformer (Liu et al., 2021) is used, the self-attention is
calculated within position-specific windows, causing limited receptive fields. The model may neglect some key

