Reinforcement Learning with Action-Free Pre-Training from Videos

Younggyo Seo 1 2 Kimin Lee 3 4 Stephen James 3 Pieter Abbeel 3

Abstract
Recent unsupervised pre-training methods have
shown to be effective on language and vision domains by learning useful representations for multiple downstream tasks. In this paper, we investigate if such unsupervised pre-training methods
can also be effective for vision-based reinforcement learning (RL). To this end, we introduce a
framework that learns representations useful for
understanding the dynamics via generative pretraining on videos. Our framework consists of two
phases: we pre-train an action-free latent video
prediction model, and then utilize the pre-trained
representations for efficiently learning actionconditional world models on unseen environments. To incorporate additional action inputs during fine-tuning, we introduce a new architecture
that stacks an action-conditional latent prediction
model on top of the pre-trained action-free prediction model. Moreover, for better exploration,
we propose a video-based intrinsic bonus that
leverages pre-trained representations. We demonstrate that our framework significantly improves
both final performances and sample-efficiency of
vision-based RL in a variety of manipulation and
locomotion tasks. Code is available at https:
//github.com/younggyoseo/apv.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant advance in solving various sequential decision-making problems (Mnih et al., 2015; Levine et al., 2016; Silver et al.,
2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019; Akkaya
et al., 2019; Kalashnikov et al., 2021). However, existing
RL methods often start learning tabula rasa without any
prior knowledge of the world, therefore requiring a large
amount of environment interaction for learning meaningful
1

KAIST 2 Work done while visiting UC Berkeley 3 UC Berkeley
Now at Google Research. Correspondence to: Younggyo Seo
<younggyo.seo@kaist.ac.kr>.

4

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Action-free Pre-training from Videos

Videos from
Different Domains

Action-free Video
Prediction Model

Fine-tuning

Action-conditional
World Model

Behavior
Learning

Figure 1. We pre-train an action-free latent video prediction model
using videos from different domains (left), and then fine-tune the
pre-trained model on target domains (right).

behaviors. By contrast, within the computer vision (CV) and
natural language processing (NLP) domains, recent unsupervised pre-training approaches have shown to be effective by
leveraging the pre-trained representations for fine-tuning in
downstream tasks (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al.,
2014; Noroozi & Favaro, 2016; Gidaris et al., 2018; Devlin
et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2018; He et al., 2020).
Recent works have shown promise in adopting such pretraining and fine-tuning paradigm to vision-based RL, by
demonstrating that representations pre-trained with various
unsupervised representation learning schemes can be effective in downstream tasks (Finn et al., 2016b; Dwibedi
et al., 2018; Zhan et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020b; Stooke
et al., 2021; Schwarzer et al., 2021b). Notably, Stooke et al.
(2021) show that weight initialization with contrastively pretrained representations leads to performance improvement.
These works, however, mostly focus on the setup where
pre-training datasets are collected in the target domains, or
in different domains but with very similar visuals. Instead,
we would like to leverage videos from diverse domains for
pre-training, and transfer the pre-trained representations for
solving newly encountered domains.
In this paper, we present APV: Action-Free Pre-training
from Videos, a novel framework that performs generative
pre-training on videos for improving the sample-efficiency
of vision-based RL. Since our goal is to learn the representations that can be transferred to various downstream tasks
from readily available videos, our framework do not require
the videos to be collected in the same domain of the downstream tasks, and also do not assume the datasets contain
action information. Summarized in Figure 1, our framework
comprises two phases: we first pre-train an action-free latent

