Tractable Dendritic RNNs for Reconstructing Nonlinear Dynamical Systems

Manuel Brenner * 1 2 Florian Hess * 1 2 Jonas M. Mikhaeil 1 2 Leonard Bereska 1 3 Zahra Monfared 1
Po-Chen Kuo 4 Daniel Durstewitz 1 2

Abstract
In many scientific disciplines, we are interested in
inferring the nonlinear dynamical system underlying a set of observed time series, a challenging
task in the face of chaotic behavior and noise. Previous deep learning approaches toward this goal
often suffered from a lack of interpretability and
tractability. In particular, the high-dimensional
latent spaces often required for a faithful embedding, even when the underlying dynamics lives
on a lower-dimensional manifold, can hamper
theoretical analysis. Motivated by the emerging principles of dendritic computation, we augment a dynamically interpretable and mathematically tractable piecewise-linear (PL) recurrent
neural network (RNN) by a linear spline basis
expansion. We show that this approach retains
all the theoretically appealing properties of the
simple PLRNN, yet boosts its capacity for approximating arbitrary nonlinear dynamical systems in
comparatively low dimensions. We employ two
frameworks for training the system, one combining back-propagation-through-time (BPTT) with
teacher forcing, and another based on fast and
scalable variational inference. We show that the
dendritically expanded PLRNN achieves better
reconstructions with fewer parameters and dimensions on various dynamical systems benchmarks
and compares favorably to other methods, while
retaining a tractable and interpretable structure.

*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Theoretical Neuroscience,
Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, Germany
2
Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Germany 3 University of Amsterdam, Netherlands 4 National Taiwan University, Taiwan. Correspondence to: Manuel Brenner <manuel.brenner@zi-mannheim.de>, Daniel Durstewitz
<daniel.durstewitz@zi-mannheim.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
For many complex systems in physics, biology, or the social sciences, we do not know or have only rudimentary
knowledge about the dynamical system (DS) that may underlie those quantities that we can empirically observe or
measure. Data-driven approaches aimed at automatically
inferring the generating DS from time-series observations
could therefore strongly support the scientific process, and
various such methods have been proposed in recent years
(Raissi et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2021; Yin et al., 2021; Norcliffe et al., 2021; Mohajerin & Waslander, 2018; Karl et al.,
2017; Chen et al., 2018; Strauss, 2020). However, due to the
often high-dimensional, complex, chaotic, and inherently
noisy nature of real-world DS, like the brain, weather-, or
ecosystems, this remains a formidable challenge. Moreover,
although the true DS may evolve on a lower-dimensional
manifold in its state space, the system used for approximation usually needs to be of higher dimensionality to achieve
a proper embedding (Takens, 1981; Sauer et al., 1991; Kantz
& Schreiber, 2004). This is especially true when the approximating system is of a different functional form than the
one that would most naturally describe the data generation
process (but is unknown), for instance, when we attempt
to approximate a system of exponential or trigonometric
functions by polynomials.
In this work we sought to improve the capacity and expressiveness of a specific class of recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), achieving agreeable solutions with fewer dimensions and parameters while retaining a set of desirable theoretical properties. Specifically, we build on piecewise-linear
RNNs (PLRNNs) based on ReLU activation functions, for
which fixed points, periodic orbits, and other dynamical
properties can be derived analytically (Schmidt et al., 2021;
Koppe et al., 2019), and for which dynamically equivalent
continuous-time (ordinary differential equation, ODE) systems can be constructed (Monfared & Durstewitz, 2020b).
Inspired by principles of dendritic computation in biological
neurons (Fig. 1), each PLRNN unit was endowed with a set
of nonlinear pre-processing subunits (“dendritic branches”),
such that it effectively takes on the role of an equivalent
much larger network. Mathematically, this comes down,
in our case, to enhancing each latent unit with a linear
spline basis expansion as popular in statistics (Hastie et al.,

