Reward-Free RL is No Harder Than Reward-Aware RL in Linear Markov
Decision Processes
Andrew Wagenmaker 1 Yifang Chen 1 Max Simchowitz 2 Simon S. Du 1 Kevin Jamieson 1

Abstract

Reward-free reinforcement learning (RL) considers the setting where the agent does not have access to a reward function during exploration, but
must propose a near-optimal policy for an arbitrary reward function revealed only after exploring. In the the tabular setting, it is well known
that this is a more difficult problem than rewardaware (PAC) RL—where the agent has access
to the reward function during exploration—with
optimal sample complexities in the two settings
differing by a factor of |S|, the size of the state
space. We show that this separation does not exist
in the setting of linear MDPs. We first develop
a computationally efficient algorithm for rewardfree RL in a d-dimensional linear MDP with sample complexity scaling as e
O(d2 H 5 /2 ). We then
show a lower bound with matching dimensiondependence of Ω(d2 H 2 /2 ), which holds for the
reward-aware RL setting. To our knowledge, our
approach is the first computationally efficient algorithm to achieve optimal d dependence in linear MDPs, even in the single-reward PAC setting.
Our algorithm relies on a novel procedure which
efficiently traverses a linear MDP, collecting samples in any given “feature direction”, and enjoys a
sample complexity scaling optimally in the (linear
MDP equivalent of the) maximal state visitation
probability. We show that this exploration procedure can also be applied to solve the problem of
obtaining “well-conditioned” covariates in linear
MDPs.

1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle 2 CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to: Andrew Wagenmaker <ajwagen@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Efficiently exploring unknown, stochastic environments is
a central challenge in online reinforcement learning (RL).
Whether attempting to learn a near-optimal policy or achieving large online reward, virtually all provably efficient algorithms rely on some form of exploration to guarantee
the state space of the Markov Decision Process (MDP) is
traversed. Indeed, failure to guarantee such exploration
can result in very suboptimal performance, as near-optimal
actions may be under-explored, leading to missed reward.
The reward-free RL setting highlights the role of exploration
in RL by tasking the learner with exploring their environment without access to a reward function, then revealing a
reward function, and asking the learner to produce a nearoptimal policy for that reward function. In a sense, to solve
this problem the learner must traverse the entire MDP, as
they do not know which states and actions will lead to high
reward under the yet-to-be-revealed reward function. In contrast, the reward-aware RL setting (also known as the PAC
RL setting) gives the learner access to the reward function
from the beginning. The learner must again explore the
MDP so as to learn a near-optimal policy, but now they may
direct their exploration to focus, for instance, on the regions
of the environment with large reward.
In the setting of tabular MDPs, MDPs with a finite number of states and actions, it is well known that the rewardfree problem is more difficult than the reward-aware problem. Indeed, for an MDP with |S| states and |A| actions,
to find an -optimal policy, the sample complexity in the
reward-free setting is known to scale as (ignoring H factors) Θ(|S|2 |A|/2 ), while in the reward-aware setting it
scales as Θ(|S||A|/2 ), a difference of |S|. Intuitively, this
reduction in complexity results from the above observation:
when given access to a reward function, the learner need not
learn every transition to equal precision, but can focus on
the most relevant ones, those leading to high reward.
Recently, the RL community has turned its attention to
MDPs with large state-spaces, showing that efficient learning is possible with function approximation techniques.
While much progress has been made, fundamental questions remain: the optimal rates are not known for either the

