Practical Nearly-Linear-Time Approximation Algorithms
for Hybrid and Overlapping Graph Clustering

Konstantinos Ameranis 1 Lorenzo Orecchia 1 Kunal Talwar 2 Charalampos Tsourakakis 3

Abstract
In many graph-clustering applications, overwhelming empirical evidence suggests that communities and clusters are naturally overlapping,
calling for novel overlapping graph-partitioning
algorithms (OGP). In this work, we introduce a framework based on two novel clustering objectives, which naturally extend the wellstudied notion of conductance to overlapping
clusters and to clusters with hybrid vertex- and
edge-boundary structure. Our main algorithmic contributions are nearly-linear-time algorithms O(log n)-approximation algorithms for
both these objectives. To this end, we show that
the cut-matching framework of Khandekar et al.
(2014) can be extended to overlapping partitions
and give novel cut-improvement primitives that
perform a small number of s-t maximum flow
computations over the instance graph to detect
sparse overlapping partitions near an input partition. Crucially, we implement our approximation
algorithm to produce both overlapping and hybrid
partitions for large graphs, easily scaling to tens
of millions of edges, and test our implementation
on real-world datasets against other competitive
baselines.

1. Introduction
Detecting communities in real-world networks and clustering similarity graphs are major data mining tasks with a
wide range of applications in graph mining, collaborative filtering, and bioinformatics. Ratio-cut objectives (also known
as quotient-cut objectives) constitute a well-studied and
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago,
Chicago, USA 2 Apple Inc 3 Department of Computer Science,
Boston University, Boston, USA. Correspondence to: Konstantinos Ameranis <kameranis@uchicago.edu>, Lorenzo Orecchia
<orecchia@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

commonly used family of graph partitioning problems (Hagen & Kahng, 1992; Abrahao et al., 2012). A ratio-cut
objective measures the quality of a graph cut by the ratio of the weight of the edge cutset to the volume of the
smaller side of the partition. Specifically, given a graph
|V |
|E|
G = (V, E, µ ∈ R≥0 w ∈ R≥0 ) with non-negative edge
weights w and a measure µ over vertices, the ratio-cut objective ΨG over partitions (S, S̄) of V is defined as:

ΨG (S, S̄) =


w E(S, S̄)
.
min{µ(S), µ(S̄)}

(1)

The ratio-cut minimization problem asks us to minimize
this objective over all partitions (S, S̄), i.e., determine
Ψ(G) = minS ΨG (S, S̄). Ratio-cut objectives play a major
role in graph clustering, as they include the widely used
expansion
(∀i ∈ V, µi = 1) and conductance (∀i ∈ V, µi =
P
j∼i wij ), which is often taken to be the “gestalt” notion
of graph clustering (Leskovec et al., 2009; Zahn, 1971).
In many real-world applications, it is desirable to allow
entities to belong to more than one cluster. For instance,
in biology a protein may belong to multiple protein complexes (Nepusz et al., 2012), in social networks an agent
may be part of multiple communities (Ahn et al., 2010), and
a political blog may reflect more than one party affiliation
(Latouche et al., 2011). The seminal work of Leskovec et al.
(2008) has shown, in numerous large-scale information and
social networks, the existence of a core that spans most vertices and lacks community structure (aka “expander-like”),
and the existence of numerous small communities with up
to few hundreds of nodes that overlap with the core. As a
result, standard graph clustering approaches (Abrahao et al.,
2012), based on non-overlapping objectives such as ratio
cuts, fail to recover the community structure in these ubiquitous datasets. We focus on the following fundamental open
question:
Question 1. Can we design a framework for overlapping graph partitioning (OGP) that allows for (i)
a principled and intuitive mathematical formulation,
together with (ii) solid worst-case approximation algorithms that (iii) scale gracefully to large networks?

