Rethinking Attention-Model Explainability through Faithfulness Violation Test
Attention 1
Faithfulness 3
Evaluation for BUTD 1on VQA v2
Yibing Liu 1 Haoliang Li 1 Yangyang Guo 2 Chenqi
Kong
Jing Li
Shiqi Wang
(Removing top-10% image regions w.r.t the attention scores)

1. Introduction
Recent advances in attention models (Bahdanau et al., 2015;
Vaswani et al., 2017) have raised a pressing concern for the
explainability of their black-box nature. Prior efforts target at unraveling puzzles in inherent attention explanations,
such as whether attention is directly explainable (Jain &
Wallace, 2019; Serrano & Smith, 2019; Wiegreffe & Pinter,
2019; Brunner et al., 2020), or how attention behaves (Clark
et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2021; Michel et al., 2019; Mohankumar et al., 2020). In contrast, another line of work strives to
1
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Haoliang Li <haoliang.li1991@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Att.

Att. (Removal)

Ques2: What are colorful
pieces on the doughnut?
Pred.: powder (∆C: 0.16)

Ques3: What is the girl
eating?
Pred.: donut (∆C: -0.12)

Faithfulness Supporters

Attention mechanisms are dominating the explainability of deep models. They produce probability distributions over the input, which are widely
deemed as feature-importance indicators. However, in this paper, we find one critical limitation
in attention explanations: weakness in identifying the polarity of feature impact. This would
be somehow misleading – features with higher
attention weights may not faithfully contribute to
model predictions; instead, they can impose suppression effects. With this finding, we reflect on
the explainability of current attention-based techniques, such as Attention ⊙ Gradient and LRPbased attention explanations. We first propose an
actionable diagnostic methodology (henceforth
faithfulness violation test) to measure the consistency between explanation weights and the impact
polarity. Through the extensive experiments, we
then show that most tested explanation methods
are unexpectedly hindered by the faithfulness violation issue, especially the raw attention. Empirical analyses on the factors affecting violation issues further provide useful observations for adopting explanation methods in attention models.

Original

Ques1: What type of
flower is in the vase?
Pred.: roses (∆C: 0.07)

Faithfulness Violators

Abstract

Ques4: What is the player
holding?
Pred.: bat (∆C: -0.08)

Figure 1. Data map for attention faithfulness on BUTD model over
VQA v2. The y-axis shows the confidence perturbation ∆C on the
original predicted label (e.g., donut) after removing top-10% image
regions w.r.t attention weights. ∆C < 0 indicates confidence
increases. The Red points represent the ones violating polarity
consistency since image regions with the largest positive weights
unexpectedly suppress model predictions, i.e., ∆C < 0. The xaxis shows the importance correlation for attention weights.

devise better explanation methods for attention models (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Smilkov et al., 2017; Shrikumar et al.,
2017; Chefer et al., 2021a; Hao et al., 2021; Kobayashi
et al., 2020). However, in this work, we find that they all
lack proper evaluation in explanation faithfulness (Jacovi &
Goldberg, 2020) – how accurately an explanation reflects
the reasons behind a model prediction.
We argue that a faithful explanation should at least possess
two properties: 1) importance correlation: the magnitude of
explanation weights should precisely reflect the importance
of input components; 2) polarity consistency: the sign of

