The (Un)Surprising Effectiveness of Pre-Trained Vision Models for Control

Simone Parisi∗ 1 Aravind Rajeswaran∗ 1 Senthil Purushwalkam 2 Abhinav Gupta 1 2
Environment

Abstract
Recent years have seen the emergence of pretrained representations as a powerful abstraction
for AI applications in computer vision, natural
language, and speech. However, policy learning for control is still dominated by a tabularasa learning paradigm, with visuo-motor policies often trained from scratch using data from
deployment environments. In this context, we
revisit and study the role of pre-trained visual
representations for control, and in particular representations trained on large-scale computer vision datasets. Through extensive empirical evaluation in diverse control domains (Habitat, DeepMind Control, Adroit, Franka Kitchen), we isolate and study the importance of different representation training methods, data augmentations,
and feature hierarchies. Overall, we find that
pre-trained visual representations can be competitive or even better than ground-truth state
representations to train control policies. This is
in spite of using only out-of-domain data from
standard vision datasets, without any in-domain
data from the deployment environments. Source
code and more at https://sites.google.
com/view/pvr-control.

1. Introduction
Representation learning has emerged as a key component in the success of deep learning for computer vision,
natural language processing (NLP), and speech processing. Representations trained using massive amounts of labeled (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Sun et al., 2017; Brown
et al., 2020) or unlabeled (Devlin et al., 2019; Goyal et al.,
2021) data have been used “off-the-shelf” for many downstream applications, resulting in a simple, effective, and
data-efficient paradigm. By contrast, policy learning for
*

Equal contribution 1 Meta AI 2 Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Simone Parisi <simone@robot-learning.de>,
Aravind Rajeswaran <aravraj@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Observation

PVR Model

Policy

Figure 1: (Top) In our paradigm, a pre-trained vision model
is used as a perception module for the policy. The model
is frozen and not further trained during policy updates. Its
output, namely the pre-trained visual representation (PVR),
serves as state representation and policy input. (Bottom)
Our PVR is competitive with ground-truth features for training policies with imitation learning, in spite of being pretrained on out-of-domain data. By contrast, the classic
approach of training an end-to-end visuo-motor policy from
scratch fails with the same amount of imitation data.
control is still dominated by a “tabula-rasa” paradigm where
an agent performs millions or even billions of interactions
with an environment to learn task-specific visuo-motor policies from scratch (Espeholt et al., 2018; Wijmans et al.,
2020; Yarats et al., 2021c).
In this paper, we take a step back and ask the following fundamental question. Why have pre-trained visual representations, like those trained on ImageNet, not found widespread
success in control despite their ubiquitous usage in computer
vision? Is it because control tasks are too different from
vision tasks? Or because of the domain gap in the visual
characteristics? Or is it that “the devil lies in the details”,
and we are failing to consider some key components? We

