Stochastic smoothing of the top-K calibrated hinge loss
for deep imbalanced classification

Camille Garcin 1 2 Maximilien Servajean 3 4 Alexis Joly 2 Joseph Salmon 1 5

Abstract
In modern classification tasks, the number of labels is getting larger and larger, as is the size
of the datasets encountered in practice. As the
number of classes increases, class ambiguity and
class imbalance become more and more problematic to achieve high top-1 accuracy. Meanwhile,
Top-K metrics (metrics allowing K guesses) have
become popular, especially for performance reporting. Yet, proposing top-K losses tailored for
deep learning remains a challenge, both theoretically and practically. In this paper we introduce a
stochastic top-K hinge loss inspired by recent developments on top-K calibrated losses. Our proposal is based on the smoothing of the top-K operator building on the flexible ”perturbed optimizer”
framework. We show that our loss function performs very well in the case of balanced datasets,
while benefiting from a significantly lower computational time than the state-of-the-art top-K loss
function. In addition, we propose a simple variant
of our loss for the imbalanced case. Experiments
on a heavy-tailed dataset show that our loss function significantly outperforms other baseline loss
functions.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) has recently attracted a lot of attention (Wang et al., 2022), in particular
in the biodiversity domain (Horn et al., 2018; Garcin et al.,
2021; Van Horn et al., 2015). In FGVC, one aims to classify
an image into subordinate categories (such as plant or bird
species) that contain many visually similar instances. The
1
IMAG, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France
Inria, LIRMM, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France
3
LIRMM, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France 4 AMIS,
Paul Valery University, Montpellier, France 5 Institut Universitaire de France (IUF). Correspondence to: Camille Garcin
<camille.garcin@umontpellier.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

intrinsic ambiguity among the labels makes it difficult to
obtain high levels of top-1 accuracy as is typically the case
with standard datasets such as CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky, 2009)
or MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998). For systems like Merlin
(Van Horn et al., 2015) or Pl@ntNet (Affouard et al., 2017),
due to the difficulty of the task, it is generally relevant to
provide the user with a set of classes in the hope that the true
class belongs to that set. In practical applications, the display limit of the device only allows to give a few labels back
to the user. A straightforward strategy consists in returning
a set of K classes for each input, where K is a small integer
with respect to the total number of classes. Such classifiers
are called top-K classifiers, and their performance is evaluated with the well known top-K accuracy (Lapin et al.,
2015; Russakovsky et al., 2015). While such a metric is
very popular for evaluating applications, common learning
strategies typically consist in learning a deep neural network
with the cross-entropy loss, neglecting the top-K constraint
in the learning step.
Yet, recent works have focused on optimizing the top-K
accuracy directly. Lapin et al. (2015) have introduced the
top-K hinge loss and a convex upper-bound, following techniques introduced by Usunier et al. (2009) for ranking. A
limit of this approach was raised by Berrada et al. (2018),
as they have shown that the top-K hinge loss by Lapin et al.
(2015) can not be directly used for training a deep neural
network. The main arguments put forward by the authors to
explain this practical limitation are: (i) the non-smoothness
of the top-K hinge loss and (ii), the sparsity of its gradient. Consequently, they propose a smoothed alternative
adjustable with a temperature parameter. However, their
smoothing procedure is computationally costly when K increases (as demonstrated in our experiments), despite the
efficient algorithm they provide to cope with the combinatorial nature of the loss. Moreover, this approach has the
drawback to be specific to the top-K hinge loss introduced
by Lapin et al. (2015).
In contrast, we propose a new top-K loss that relies on the
smoothing of the top-K operator (the operator returning the
K-th largest value of a vector). The smoothing framework
we consider, the perturbed optimizers (Berthet et al., 2020),
can be used to smooth variants of the top-K hinge loss but

