Federated Learning with Partial Model Personalization

Krishna Pillutla 1 Kshitiz Malik 2 Abdelrahman Mohamed 2 Michael Rabbat 2 Maziar Sanjabi 2 Lin Xiao 2
Pn
where the weights αi > 0 satisfy i=1 αi = 1. AP
common
n
practice is to choose αi = Ni /N where N = i=1 Ni ,
which corresponds
minimizing the average loss across all
Pto
n PNi
samples: (1/N ) i=1 j=1
fi (w, zi,j ).

Abstract
We consider two federated learning algorithms
for training partially personalized models, where
the shared and personal parameters are updated either simultaneously or alternately on the devices.
Both algorithms have been proposed in the literature, but their convergence properties are not fully
understood, especially for the alternating variant.
We provide convergence analyses of both algorithms in the general nonconvex setting with partial participation and delineate the regime where
one dominates the other. Our experiments on realworld image, text, and speech datasets demonstrate that (a) partial personalization can obtain
most of the benefits of full model personalization
with a small fraction of personal parameters, and,
(b) the alternating update algorithm outperforms
the simultaneous update algorithm by a small but
consistent margin.

The main motivation for minimizing the average loss over
all devices is to leverage their collective statistical power for
better generalization, because the amount of data on each
device can be very limited. This is especially important for
training modern deep learning models with large number
of parameters. However, this argument assumes that the
datasets from different devices are sampled from the same,
or at least very similar, distributions. Given the diverse characteristics of the users and increasing trend of personalized
on-device services, such an i.i.d. assumption may not hold
in practice. Thus, the one-model-fits-all formulation in (1)
can be ineffective and undesirable.
Several approaches have been proposed for personalized FL,
including ones based on multi-task learning (Smith et al.,
2017), meta learning (Fallah et al., 2020), and proximal
methods (Dinh et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021). A simple
formulation that captures their main idea is

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (McMahan et al., 2017) has emerged as
a powerful paradigm for distributed and privacy-preserving
machine learning (see Kairouz et al., 2021, and references
therein). We consider a typical setting of Federated Learning (FL) with n devices (also called clients), where each
device i has a training dataset of Ni samples zi,1 , · · · , zi,Ni .
Let w ∈ Rd represent the parameters of a machine learning
model and fi (w, zi,j ) be the loss of the model on the training example zi,j . Then the loss function associated with
PNi
device i is Fi (w) = (1/Ni ) j=1
fi (w, zi,j ). A common
objective of FL is to find model parameters that minimize
the weighted average loss across all devices
minimize
w

n
X

αi Fi (w),

(1)

i=1

1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington 2 Meta AI. Correspondence to: Krishna
Pillutla <pillutla@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

minimize
n

w0 ,{wi }i=1

n
X



λi
αi Fi (wi ) + ∥wi − w0 ∥2 ,
2
i=1

(2)

where wi for i = 1, . . . , n are personalized model parameters at the devices, w0 is a reference model, and the λi ’s are
regularization weights that control the extent of personalization. A major disadvantage of the formulation (2), which
we call full model personalization, is that it requires twice
the memory footprint of the full model, wi and w0 at each
device, which severely limits the size of trainable models.
On the other hand, full model personalization may be unnecessary for modern deep learning models, which are composed of many simple functional units, typically organized
into layers or a more general interconnected architecture.
Personalizing the “right” components, selected with domain
knowledge, may lead to substantial benefits with only a
small increase in memory footprint. In addition, partial
model personalization can be less susceptible to “catastrophic forgetting” (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989), where
a large model finetuned on a small local dataset forgets the
original (non-personalized) task, leading to degraded test
performance.

