Latent Outlier Exposure for Anomaly Detection with Contaminated Data

Chen Qiu * 1 2 Aodong Li * 3 Marius Kloft 2 Maja Rudolph 1 Stephan Mandt 3

Abstract
Anomaly detection aims at identifying data points
that show systematic deviations from the majority of data in an unlabeled dataset. A common
assumption is that clean training data (free of
anomalies) is available, which is often violated
in practice. We propose a strategy for training
an anomaly detector in the presence of unlabeled
anomalies that is compatible with a broad class
of models. The idea is to jointly infer binary labels to each datum (normal vs. anomalous) while
updating the model parameters. Inspired by outlier exposure (Hendrycks et al., 2018) that considers synthetically created, labeled anomalies,
we thereby use a combination of two losses that
share parameters: one for the normal and one for
the anomalous data. We then iteratively proceed
with block coordinate updates on the parameters
and the most likely (latent) labels. Our experiments with several backbone models on three
image datasets, 30 tabular data sets, and a video
anomaly detection benchmark showed consistent
and significant improvements over the baselines.

1. Introduction
From industrial fault detection to medical image analysis or
financial fraud prevention: Anomaly detection—the task of
automatically identifying anomalous data instances without
being explicitly taught how anomalies may look like—is
critical in industrial and technological applications.
The common approach in deep anomaly detection is to
first train a neural network on a large dataset of “normal”
samples minimizing some loss function (such as a deep oneclass classifier (Ruff et al., 2018)) and to then construct an
anomaly score from the output of the neural network (typi*
Equal contribution 1 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
TU Kaiserslautern, Germany 3 UC Irvine, USA. Correspondence to: Chen Qiu <chen.qiu@de.bosch.com>, Stephan Mandt
<mandt@uci.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

cally based on the training loss). Anomalies are then identified as data points with larger-than-usual anomaly scores
and obtained by thresholding the score at particular values.
A standard assumption in this approach is that clean training
data are available to teach the model what “normal” samples
look like (Ruff et al., 2021). In reality, this assumption is often violated: datasets are frequently large and uncurated and
may already contain some of the anomalies one is hoping to
find. For example, a dataset of medical images may already
contain cancer images, or datasets of financial transactions
could already contain unnoticed fraudulent activity. Naively
training an unsupervised anomaly detector on such data may
suffer from degraded performance.
In this paper, we introduce a new unsupervised approach
to training anomaly detectors on a corrupted dataset. Our
approach uses a combination of two coupled losses to extract learning signals from both normal and anomalous data.
We stress that these losses do not necessarily have a probabilistic interpretation; rather, many recently proposed selfsupervised auxiliary losses can be used (Ruff et al., 2018;
Hendrycks et al., 2019; Qiu et al., 2021; Shenkar & Wolf,
2022). In order to decide which of the two loss functions to
activate for a given datum (normal vs. abnormal), we use a
binary latent variable that we jointly infer while updating the
model parameters. Training the model thus results in a joint
optimization problem over continuous model parameters
and binary variables that we solve using alternating updates.
During testing, we can use threshold only one of the two
loss functions to identify anomalies in constant time.
Our approach can be applied to a variety of anomaly detection loss functions and data types, as we demonstrate on
tabular, image, and video data. Beyond detection of entire
anomalous images, we also consider the problem of anomaly
segmentation which is concerned with finding anomalous
regions within an image. Compared to established baselines
that either ignore the anomalies or try to iteratively remove
them (Yoon et al., 2021), our approach yields significant
performance improvements in all cases.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we discuss
related work. In Section 3, we introduce our main algorithm,
including the involved losses and optimization procedure.
Finally, in Section 4, we discuss experiments on both image

