Scaling Gaussian Process Optimization by
Evaluating a Few Unique Candidates Multiple Times

Daniele Calandriello 1 Luigi Carratino 2 Alessandro Lazaric 3 Michal Valko 1 Lorenzo Rosasco 2 4 5

Abstract

Computing a Gaussian process (GP) posterior has
a computational cost cubical in the number of historical points. A reformulation of the same GP
posterior highlights that this complexity mainly
depends on how many unique historical points
are considered. This can have important implication in active learning settings, where the set
of historical points is constructed sequentially by
the learner. We show that sequential black-box
optimization based on GPs (GP-Opt) can be made
efficient by sticking to a candidate solution for
multiple evaluation steps and switch only when
necessary. Limiting the number of switches also
limits the number of unique points in the history of the GP. Thus, the efficient GP reformulation can be used to exactly and cheaply compute the posteriors required to run the GP-Opt
algorithms. This approach is especially useful
in real-world applications of GP-Opt with high
switch costs (e.g. switching chemicals in wet labs,
data/model loading in hyperparameter optimization). As examples of this meta-approach, we
modify two well-established GP-Opt algorithms,
GP-UCB and GP-EI, to switch candidates as infrequently as possible adapting rules from batched
GP-Opt. These versions preserve all the theoretical no-regret guarantees while improving practical aspects of the algorithms such as runtime,
memory complexity, and the ability of batching
candidates and evaluating them in parallel.

1
DeepMind 2 MaLGa, DIBRIS, University of Genova, Italy
Meta AI 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 5 Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia. Correspondence to: Daniele Calandriello <dcalandriello@google.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Bayesian and bandit optimization (Mockus, 1989; Lattimore
& Szepesvári, 2020) are two well established frameworks
for black-box function optimization under uncertainty. They
model the optimization process as a sequential learning
problem. For an unknown function f and a decision set A
(e.g., A ⊆ Rd ) at each step t the learner:
(1) selects candidate xt ∈ A by maximizing an acquisition
function ut as a surrogate of f ;
def
(2) receives a noisy feedback 1 yt = f (xt ) + ηt from the
i.i.d.
environment, where ηt ∼ N (0, ξ 2 );
(3) uses yt to improve ut ’s approximation of f .
A common approach to measure the learner’s convergence
def PT
is to study the cumulative regret RT = t=1 f ? − f (xt )
of the learner’s choice of candidates compared to the
optimum of the function f ? = maxx f (x). A learner
is deemed no-regret when it converges on average (i.e.,
limT →∞ RT /T → 0). Thanks to their flexibility and capability of modeling uncertainty, Gaussian processes (GP)
(Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) have emerged as an effective
choice for regret minimization, jump-starting the field of GP
optimization (GP-Opt). Decision rules that leverage GPs to
estimate upper confidence bounds (GP-UCB (Srinivas et al.,
2010; Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2017)) or expected improvement (GP-EI (Wang
& de Freitas, 2014)) provably achieve
√
a regret2 e
O(γT T ) over T steps. Here, γT is the so-called
maximum information gain associated with A and the GP.
It captures in a data-adaptive way the implicit number of
parameters of the non-parametric GP model, quantifying
the effective complexity of the optimization problem. Under appropriate assumptions γT grows slowly in T making
GP based methods no-regret (Srinivas et al., 2010; Scarlett
et al., 2017). However, as most non-parametric approaches,
GP-Opt algorithms face scalability issues when T grows
large, severely limiting their applicability to large scale settings. For example, in some hyper-parameter optimization
problems the solutions can still improve even after tens of
thousands of candidate evaluations (e.g. the NAS-bench
search (Ying et al., 2019) evaluated 5 million candidates).
1
2

Actions or arms are also used for xt ; and rewards for yt .
e ignores polylog terms.
The notation O

