Adaptive Data Analysis with Correlated Observations

Aryeh Kontorovich 1 Menachem Sadigurschi 1 Uri Stemmer 2 3

Abstract
The vast majority of the work on adaptive data
analysis focuses on the case where the samples in the dataset are independent. Several approaches and tools have been successfully applied in this context, such as differential privacy,
max-information, compression arguments, and
more. The situation is far less well-understood
without the independence assumption.
We embark on a systematic study of the possibilities of adaptive data analysis with correlated observations. First, we show that, in some
cases, differential privacy guarantees generalization even when there are dependencies within
the sample, which we quantify using a notion
we call Gibbs-dependence. We complement this
result with a tight negative example. Second,
we show that the connection between transcriptcompression and adaptive data analysis can be
extended to the non-iid setting.

1. Introduction
Statistical validity is a well known crucial aspect of modern science. In the past several years, the natural science
and social science communities have come to realize that
such validity was not in fact preserved in numerous peerreviewed and widely cited studies, leading to many false
discoveries. Known as the replication crisis, this phenomenon threatens to undermine the very basis for the public’s trust in science.
One of the main explanations for the prevalence of false
discovery arises from the inherent adaptivity in the process
of data analysis. To illustrate this issue, consider a data analyst interested in testing a specific research hypothesis. The
analyst acquires relevant data, evaluates the hypothesis, and
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, BenGurion University 2 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel
Aviv University 3 Google Research. Correspondence to: Menachem Sadigurschi <sadigurs@post.bgu.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(say) learns that it is false. Based on the findings, the analyst now decides on a second hypothesis to be tested, and
evaluates it on the same data (acquiring fresh data might
be too expensive or even impossible). That is, the analyst
chooses the hypotheses adaptively, where this choice depends on previous interactions with the data. As a result,
the findings are no longer supported by classical statistical
theory, which assumes that the tested hypotheses are fixed
before the data is gathered, and the analyst runs the risk of
overfitting to the data.
Before presenting our new results, we make the setting explicit. We give here the formulation presented by Dwork
et al. (2015c). We consider a two-player game between a
mechanism M and an adversary A, defined as follows (see
Section 2 for precise definitions).
1. The adversary A fixes a measure µ over X n (satisfying
some conditions).
2. The mechanism M obtains a sample S ∼ µ containing
n (possibly correlated) observations.
3. For k rounds j = 1, 2, . . . , k:
• The adversary chooses a query hj : X → {0, 1},
possibly as a function of all previous answers
given by the mechanism.
• The mechanism obtains hj and responds with an
answer zj ∈ R, which is given to A.
We say that M is (α, β)-empirically-accurate if with probability at least 1−β for
P every j it holds that |zj −hj (S)| ≤ α,
where hj (S) = n1 x∈S hj (x) is the empirical average of
hj on the sample S. We say that M is (α, β)-statisticallyaccurate if with probability at least 1−β for every j it holds
that |zj −P
hj (µ)| ≤ α, where hj (µ) = ET ∼µ [hj (T )] =
ET ∼µ n1 x∈T hj (x) is the “true” value of the query hj
on the underlying distribution µ. Our goal is to design
mechanisms M providing statistical-accuracy.
Starting from (Dwork et al., 2015b;a), it has been demonstrated that various notions of algorithmic stability, and in
particular differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006),
allow for methods which maintain statistical validity under
the adaptive setting. The vast majority of the works in this
vein, however, strongly rely on the assumption that the data

