Structure-Aware Transformer for Graph Representation Learning

Dexiong Chen * 1 2 Leslie O’Bray * 1 2 Karsten Borgwardt 1 2

Abstract
The Transformer architecture has gained growing
attention in graph representation learning recently,
as it naturally overcomes several limitations of
graph neural networks (GNNs) by avoiding their
strict structural inductive biases and instead only
encoding the graph structure via positional encoding. Here, we show that the node representations generated by the Transformer with positional encoding do not necessarily capture structural similarity between them. To address this issue, we propose the Structure-Aware Transformer,
a class of simple and flexible graph Transformers built upon a new self-attention mechanism.
This new self-attention incorporates structural information into the original self-attention by extracting a subgraph representation rooted at each
node before computing the attention. We propose
several methods for automatically generating the
subgraph representation and show theoretically
that the resulting representations are at least as
expressive as the subgraph representations. Empirically, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on five graph prediction benchmarks.
Our structure-aware framework can leverage any
existing GNN to extract the subgraph representation, and we show that it systematically improves
performance relative to the base GNN model, successfully combining the advantages of GNNs and
Transformers. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/BorgwardtLab/SAT.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been established as
powerful and flexible tools for graph representation learning,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Biosystems Science
and Engineering, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Dexiong Chen <dexiong.chen@bsse.ethz.ch>, Leslie O’Bray
<leslie.obray@bsse.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

with successful applications in drug discovery (Gaudelet
et al., 2021), protein design (Ingraham et al., 2019), social
network analysis (Fan et al., 2019), and so on. A large class
of GNNs build multilayer models, where each layer operates on the previous layer to generate new representations
using a message-passing mechanism (Gilmer et al., 2017)
to aggregate local neighborhood information.
While many different message-passing strategies have been
proposed, some critical limitations have been uncovered in
this class of GNNs. These include the limited expressiveness of GNNs (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019), as well
as known problems such as over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018;
2019; Chen et al., 2020; Oono & Suzuki, 2020) and oversquashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021). Over-smoothing manifests as all node representations converging to a constant
after sufficiently many layers, while over-squashing occurs
when messages from distant nodes are not effectively propagated through certain “bottlenecks” in a graph, since too
many messages get compressed into a single fixed-length
vector. Designing new architectures beyond neighborhood
aggregation is thus essential to solve these problems.
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), which have proved to
be successful in natural language understanding (Vaswani
et al., 2017), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020),
and biological sequence modeling (Rives et al., 2021), offer the potential to address these issues. Rather than only
aggregating local neighborhood information in the messagepassing mechanism, the Transformer architecture is able
to capture interaction information between any node pair
via a single self-attention layer. Moreover, in contrast to
GNNs, the Transformer avoids introducing any structural
inductive bias at intermediate layers, addressing the expressivity limitation of GNNs. Instead, it encodes structural
or positional information about nodes only into input node
features, albeit limiting how much information it can learn
from the graph structure. Integrating information about the
graph structure into the Transformer architecture has thus
gained growing attention in the graph representation learning field. However, most existing approaches only encode
positional relationships between nodes, rather than explicitly encoding the structural relationships. As a result, they
may not identify structural similarities between nodes and
could fail to model the structural interaction between nodes
(see Figure 1). This could explain why their performance

