Centroid Approximation for Bootstrap: Improving Particle Quality at Inference

Mao Ye 1 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract
Bootstrap is a principled and powerful frequentist
statistical tool for uncertainty quantification. Unfortunately, standard bootstrap methods are computationally intensive due to the need of drawing
a large i.i.d. bootstrap sample to approximate the
ideal bootstrap distribution; this largely hinders
their application in large-scale machine learning,
especially deep learning problems. In this work,
we propose an efficient method to explicitly optimize a small set of high quality “centroid” points
to better approximate the ideal bootstrap distribution. We achieve this by minimizing a simple
objective function that is asymptotically equivalent to the Wasserstein distance to the ideal bootstrap distribution. This allows us to provide an
accurate estimation of uncertainty with a small
number of bootstrap centroids, outperforming the
naive i.i.d. sampling approach. Empirically, we
show that our method can boost the performance
of bootstrap in a variety of applications.

1. Introduction
Bootstrap is a simple and principled frequentist uncertainty
quantification tool and can be flexibly applied to obtain data
uncertainty estimation with strong theoretical guarantees
(Hall et al., 1988; Austern & Syrgkanis, 2020; Chatterjee
et al., 2005; Cheng et al., 2010). In particular, when combined with the maximum likelihood estimator or more general M-estimators, bootstrap provides a general-purpose,
plug-and-play non-parametric inference framework for general probabilistic models without case-by-case derivations;
this makes it a promising frequentist alternative to Bayesian
inference.
However, the standard bootstrap inference is highly expensive in both computation and memory as it typically requires
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at
Austin. Correspondence to: Mao Ye <maoye21@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

drawing a large number1 of i.i.d. bootstrap particles (samples) to obtain an accurate uncertainty estimation. In the context of this paper, as each bootstrap particle/sample/centroid
is a machine learning model, we might directly call a model
as particle/sample/centroid. With a small number of particles, bootstrap may perform poorly. As a consequence,
when applied to deep learning, we need to store a large
number of neural networks and feed the input into a tremendous number of networks every time we make inference,
which can be quite expensive and even unaffordable for
deep learning problems with huge models. While training
cost is an extra burden, it is small compared with the cost
of making prediction as we only need to train the model
once but make countless predictions at deployment. For example, in autonomous driving applications, our device can
only store a limited number of models and we need to make
decisions within a short time, which makes the standard
bootstrap with a large number of models no more feasible.
Typical ensemble methods in deep learning, such as Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017); Huang et al. (2017); Vyas et al.
(2018); Maddox et al. (2019); Liu & Wang (2016), can only
afford to use a small number (e.g., less than 20) of models.
Therefore, to make bootstrap more accessible in modern machine learning, it is essential to develop new approaches that
break the key computation and memory barriers mentioned
above. We are motivated to consider the following problem:
How to improve the accuracy of bootstrap when the number
of particles at inference is limited?
Here we emphasis that our main goal is not reducing the
training time but improve the particle quality for inference.
We attack this challenge by presenting an efficient centroid
approximation for bootstrap. Our method replaces the i.i.d.
bootstrap particles with a set of carefully optimized centroid
particles that are guaranteed to provide an accurate and
compact approximation to the ideal bootstrap distribution so
that only a smaller number of particles is needed to obtain
good performance.
Our method is based on minimizing a specially designed
objective function that is asymptotically equivalent to the
Wasserstein distance between the ideal bootstrap distribution
1

For example, thousands of, as suggested by Statistics textbooks such as Wasserman (2013).

