Sublinear-Time Clustering Oracle for Signed Graphs

Stefan Neumann 1 Pan Peng 2

Abstract
Social networks are often modeled using signed
graphs, where vertices correspond to users and
edges have a sign that indicates whether an interaction between users was positive or negative. The arising signed graphs typically contain a clear community structure in the sense that
the graph can be partitioned into a small number of polarized communities, each defining a
sparse cut and indivisible into smaller polarized
sub-communities. We provide a local clustering
oracle for signed graphs with such a clear community structure, that can answer membership
queries, i.e., “Given a vertex v, which community
does v belong to?”, in sublinear time by reading
only a small portion of the graph. Formally, when
the graph has bounded maximum degree and the
number of
√ communities is at most O(log n), then
with Õ( n poly(1/)) preprocessing time, our
oracle
√ can answer each membership query in
Õ( n poly(1/)) time, and it correctly classifies
a (1 − )-fraction of vertices w.r.t. a set of hidden
planted ground-truth communities. Our oracle
is desirable in applications where the clustering
information is needed for only a small number
of vertices. Previously, such local clustering oracles were only known for unsigned graphs; our
generalization to signed graphs requires a number
of new ideas and gives a novel spectral analysis
of the behavior of random walks with signs. We
evaluate our algorithm for constructing such an
oracle and answering membership queries on both
synthetic and real-world datasets, validating its
performance in practice.

1
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. Correspondence to:
Pan Peng <ppeng@ustc.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Finding clusters (or communities) in graphs is a well-studied
and fundamental problem in computer science. While classically this problem has been studied in unsigned graphs,
several recent works have focused on signed graphs, where
each edge has a sign indicating whether the interaction between two nodes was friendly or hostile. This setting has
been motivated by polarization in social networks, where
the users form groups that have mostly friendly interactions
within each group but there may exist hostile interactions between opposing groups (see, e.g., (Bonchi et al., 2019; Xiao
et al., 2020; Ordozgoiti et al., 2020; Atay & Liu, 2020)).
More concretely, in a signed graph G = (V, E, σ), each
edge e = (u, v) ∈ E is associated with a sign σ(e) ∈
{+, −} indicating a positive (friendly) or negative (hostile)
relation between the two vertices u and v. To model polarization, Harary (1953) proposed the notion of balanced
graphs: a graph is balanced if it can be partitioned into two
subsets V1 and V2 such that the induced subgraphs G[V1 ]
and G[V2 ] only contain positive edges, while all edges with
one endpoint in V1 and the other endpoint in V2 have a negative sign. For example, in a social network like Twitter
the groups V1 and V2 could correspond to users of opposing
opinions (e.g., Democrats and Republicans) that have a conflict but that behave nicely within their respective groups.
To detect polarization in social networks, several recent
works have aimed at finding nearly-balanced communities
inside signed graphs, i.e., their goal was to find induced
subgraphs that after the removal of only few edges become
balanced and are sparsely connected to the outside (Bonchi
et al., 2019; Mercado et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2020). Often
the resulting communities are minimal in the sense that they
are nearly-balanced and they cannot be further divided into
smaller nearly-balanced communities. We will also refer
to these communities as polarized. The main drawback of
many existing methods for finding polarized communities
is that they are inherently global, i.e., they need to process
the full graph and return a partitioning of all vertices. In
practice, however, the graphs are often so large that methods
which aim to cluster all vertices have prohibitively high
running times. Additionally, when mining social networks,
the full graph is often not available because social network
providers, such as Twitter, limit the amount of data that is

