A Regret Minimization Approach to Multi-Agent Control

Udaya Ghai 1 2 Udari Madhushani 3 Naomi Leonard 3 Elad Hazan 1 2

1

Abstract

literature exists on the design and analysis of such methods.

We study the problem of multi-agent control of
a dynamical system with known dynamics and
adversarial disturbances. Our study focuses on
optimal control without centralized precomputed
policies, but rather with adaptive control policies
for the different agents that are only equipped
with a stabilizing controller. We give a reduction from any (standard) regret minimizing control method to a distributed algorithm. The reduction guarantees that the resulting distributed
algorithm has low regret relative to the optimal
precomputed joint policy. Our methodology involves generalizing online convex optimization
to a multi-agent setting and applying recent tools
from nonstochastic control derived for a single
agent. We empirically evaluate our method on a
model of an overactuated aircraft. We show that
the distributed method is robust to failure and to
adversarial perturbations in the dynamics.

In this paper we propose a novel game-theoretic performance metric for multi-agent control (MAC), which we call
multi-agent regret. This metric measures the difference
between the total loss of the joint policy of individual agents
vs. the loss of the best joint policy in hindsight from a certain reference class of policies. Vanishing multi-agent regret
thus implies competitive performance with respect to that
of the optimal policy in a certain policy class.

Introduction

In many real-world scenarios it is desirable to apply multiagent control algorithms, as opposed to a centralized designed policy, for a number of practical reasons. First is
increased robustness: agents, serving as control actuators,
may be added or removed from an existing set, without
change to the distributed policies. This also allows for
fault-tolerance; agents can adapt on the fly to faulty actuators. Second, limited computational resources and/or system
information may limit applicability of a sophisticated centralized policy, whereas simple distributed policy agents are
feasible and can adapt to the underlying dynamics. Third,
multi-agent control allows robustness to noisy state and control observations by the individual agents. These advantages
motivate the study of distributed control, and indeed a vast
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 2 Google AI Princeton, Princeton, NJ 3 Department
of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ. Correspondence to: Udaya Ghai
<ughai@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We study a mechanism for MAC that takes individual controllers and merge them into a MAC method with vanishing
regret. For this purpose, we make use of recent advances in
online learning for control and specifically the framework
of nonstochastic control. This methodology was recently
proposed for the study of robust adaptive control algorithms
through the lens of online convex optimization. As opposed
to optimal and robust control, nonstochastic control studies
adaptive control algorithms that minimize regret, or the difference in loss/reward of the controller vs. the best policy
in hindsight from a reference class. This is a game-theoretic
performance metric, which is naturally applicable to agents
interacting in a multi-agent environment.
1.1

Our result and techniques

Our main result is a reduction from single agent to multiagent control with provable regret guarantees. More precisely, we assume that we have access to single-agent controllers with the following guarantees:
1. Each agent has sublinear regret vs. a class of policies
under adversarial perturbations and cost functions.
2. Each agent should be able to evaluate their policy given
the controls of the other agents.
3. The policy that each agent uses is independent of the
controls that the other agents play.
4. The joint cost function over all agents needs to be
jointly convex.
This set of assumptions is well motivated: we review several
well-studied control settings in the literature which provide
agents with such guarantees. Under these assumptions we
give a reduction that takes regret minimizing control agents
and guarantees low multi-agent regret of the joint control
policy, w.r.t. the optimal joint policy in hindsight.

