Error-driven Input Modulation: Solving the Credit Assignment Problem without
a Backward Pass
Giorgia Dellaferrera 1 2 3 Gabriel Kreiman 1 2

Abstract
Supervised learning in artificial neural networks
typically relies on backpropagation, where the
weights are updated based on the error-function
gradients and sequentially propagated from the
output layer to the input layer. Although this approach has proven effective in a wide domain
of applications, it lacks biological plausibility
in many regards, including the weight symmetry problem, the dependence of learning on nonlocal signals, the freezing of neural activity during
error propagation, and the update locking problem. Alternative training schemes have been introduced, including sign symmetry, feedback alignment, and direct feedback alignment, but they invariably rely on a backward pass that hinders the
possibility of solving all the issues simultaneously.
Here, we propose to replace the backward pass
with a second forward pass in which the input signal is modulated based on the error of the network.
We show that this novel learning rule comprehensively addresses all the above-mentioned issues
and can be applied to both fully connected and
convolutional models. We test this learning rule
on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100. These
results help incorporate biological principles into
machine learning.

1. Introduction
The backpropagation algorithm (BP) has proven to reach
impressive results in training Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs) on a broad range of complex cognitive tasks including speech recognition, image classification (LeCun et al.,
1

Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, Cambridge, MA,
United States 2 Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, United States 3 Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Giorgia Dellaferrera <giorgia.dellaferrera@gmail.com>, Gabriel
Kreiman <gabriel.kreiman@tch.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2015), and playing board games (Silver et al., 2016). However, BP has been criticized for relying on a biologically
unrealistic strategy of synaptic credit assignment, i.e., estimating how much each parameter has contributed to the
output error (Crick, 1989; Whittington & Bogacz, 2019; Lillicrap et al., 2020). In particular, a few aspects of BP appear
to be at odds with neurobiology. (i) The same weights are
used both in the feedforward and in the feedback pathway,
raising the weight symmetry or weight transport problem
(Burbank & Kreiman, 2012). (ii) The parameter updates
depend on the activity of all downstream nodes, while biological synapses learn based on local signals related to the
activity of the neurons they connect with (Whittington &
Bogacz, 2019). (iii) The error gradients are stored separately from the activations (Liao et al., 2016) and do not
influence the activities of the nodes produced in the forward
pass. Hence, during the backward pass, the network activity is frozen. In the brain, instead, the neural activity is
not frozen during plasticity changes and the signals travelling through feedback connections influence the neural
activities produced by forward propagation, leading to their
enhancement or suppression (Lillicrap et al., 2020). (iv)
Input signals cannot be processed in an online fashion, but
each sample needs to wait for both the forward and backward computations to be completed for the previous sample.
This is referred to as the update locking problem (Jaderberg
et al., 2017; Czarnecki et al., 2017). These considerations
have motivated the development of alternative methods for
credit assignment, each proposing solutions to some of these
criticisms (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Nokland, 2016; Liao et al.,
2016; Frenkel et al., 2019; Nøkland & Eidnes, 2019; Clark
et al., 2021; Meulemans et al., 2021). However, none of the
training schemes designed so far is able to comprehensively
address all the aforementioned challenges.
Here we introduce a novel learning rule that is able to train
ANNs on image classification tasks without incurring in
the issues described above. We name our scheme PEPITA,
Present the Error to Perturb the Input To modulate Activity.
PEPITA relies on perturbing the input signal based on errorrelated information. The difference between the network
responses to the input and to its perturbed version is used to
compute the synaptic updates. Specifically, the algorithm
is implemented by performing two forward computations

