Scalable Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithms for Mean Field Games

Mathieu Laurière * 1 Sarah Perrin * 2 Sertan Girgin * 3 Paul Muller 4 Ayush Jain 5 Theophile Cabannes 5
Georgios Piliouras 6 Julien Pérolat 4 Romuald Élie 4 Olivier Pietquin † 3 Matthieu Geist † 3

Abstract
Mean Field Games (MFGs) have been introduced to efficiently approximate games with very
large populations of strategic agents. Recently,
the question of learning equilibria in MFGs has
gained momentum, particularly using model-free
reinforcement learning (RL) methods. One limiting factor to further scale up using RL is that
existing algorithms to solve MFGs require the
mixing of approximated quantities such as strategies or q-values. This is far from being trivial in
the case of non-linear function approximation that
enjoy good generalization properties, e.g. neural
networks. We propose two methods to address
this shortcoming. The first one learns a mixed
strategy from distillation of historical data into
a neural network and is applied to the Fictitious
Play algorithm. The second one is an online mixing method based on regularization that does not
require memorizing historical data or previous
estimates. It is used to extend Online Mirror Descent. We demonstrate numerically that these
methods efficiently enable the use of Deep RL algorithms to solve various MFGs. In addition, we
show that these methods outperform SotA baselines from the literature.

1. Introduction
Despite outstanding success of machine learning in numerous applications (Goodfellow et al., 2016; 2020), learning
in games remains difficult because two or more agents require the consideration of non-stationary environments. In
particular, it is hard to scale in terms of number of agents
*

Equal contribution 1 NYU Shanghai, China 2 Univ. Lille,
CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, France 3 Google
Research 4 DeepMind 5 UC Berkeley, California, USA 6 Singapore
University of Technology and Design, Singapore. Correspondence
to: Mathieu Lauriere <mathieu.lauriere@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

because one has to keep track of all agents’ behaviors, leading to a prohibitive combinatorial complexity (Daskalakis
et al., 2006; Tuyls and Weiss, 2012). Recently, Mean Field
Games (MFGs) have brought a new perspective by replacing
the atomic agents by their distribution. Introduced concurrently by Lasry and Lions (2007) and Huang et al. (2006),
the mean field approximation relies on symmetry and homogeneity assumptions, and enables to scale to an infinite
number of agents. Solving MFGs is usually done by solving
a forward-backward system of partial (or stochastic) differential equations, which represent the dynamics of both the
state distribution and the value function. However, traditional numerical methods (see e.g. (Achdou and CapuzzoDolcetta, 2010; Carlini and Silva, 2014; Briceño Arias et al.,
2018) and (Achdou and Laurière, 2020) for a survey) do not
scale well in terms of the complexity of the state and action
spaces. Recently, several deep learning methods for MFGs
have been developed to tackle high-dimensional problems
(see e.g. (Fouque and Zhang, 2020; Carmona and Laurière,
2019; Germain et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2020) and (Carmona and Laurière, 2022) for a survey). Nevertheless, these
methods require the model (dynamics and rewards) to be
completely known.
On the other hand, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has proved
very efficient to solve Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
and games with complex structures, from e.g. chess Campbell et al. (2002) to multi-agent systems (Lanctot et al.,
2017). To tackle problems with highly complex environments, RL algorithms can be combined with efficient function approximation. Deep neural networks with suitable
architectures are arguably the most popular choice, thanks
to their ease of use and their generalization capabilities.
Deep RL has brought several recent breakthrough results,
e.g., Go (Silver et al., 2016), atari (Mnih et al., 2013),
poker (Brown and Sandholm, 2018; Moravčı́k et al., 2017)
or even video games such as Starcraft (Vinyals et al., 2019).
Many recent works have combined MFGs with RL to leverage their mutual potential – albeit mostly without deep neural nets thus far. The intertwinement of MFGs and RL happens through an optimization (or learning) procedure. The
simplest algorithm of this type is the (Banach-Picard) fixedpoint approach, consisting in alternating a best response
computation against a given population distribution with an

