Equivariant Quantum Graph Circuits

Péter Mernyei 1 2 Konstantinos Meichanetzidis 3 İsmail İlkan Ceylan 1

Abstract
We investigate quantum circuits for graph representation learning, and propose equivariant quantum graph circuits (EQGCs), as a class of parameterized quantum circuits with strong relational
inductive bias for learning over graph-structured
data. Conceptually, EQGCs serve as a unifying framework for quantum graph representation
learning, allowing us to define several interesting subclasses which subsume existing proposals.
In terms of the representation power, we prove
that the studied subclasses of EQGCs are universal approximators for functions over the bounded
graph domain. This theoretical perspective on
quantum graph machine learning methods opens
many directions for further work, and could lead
to models with capabilities beyond those of classical approaches. We empirically verify the expressive power of EQGCs through a dedicated
experiment on synthetic data, and additionally observe that the performance of EQGCs scales well
with the depth of the model and does not suffer
from barren plateu issues.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the field of quantum computing has made
significant steps towards practical usefulness, which has
sparked increasing interest in many areas, including machine learning (Perdomo-Ortiz et al., 2018; Benedetti et al.,
2019). The growing field of quantum machine learning has
since led to the development of quantum analogues (or, generalizations) of many types of classical machine learning
models, such as feedforward neural networks (Schuld et al.,
2014), convolutional neural networks (Cong et al., 2019)
and graph neural networks (Verdon et al., 2019).
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 2 Charm Therapeutics, London, UK. 3 Cambridge Quantum Computing and Quantinuum, Oxford, UK.. Correspondence
to: Péter Mernyei <pmernyei@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Many existing quantum machine learning approaches seek
advantages over classical methods by exploiting the facts
that quantum states and processes take place in the exponentially large Hilbert space, that states can be superposed,
and that quantum amplitudes can interfere. This, however,
is still being explored: encoding useful quantum states efficiently and measuring them accurately are challenges that
make straightforward speed-ups difficult (Aaronson, 2015).
Furthermore, since existing quantum devices are very limited, empirical benchmarks are often impossible at the scales
where quantum methods might lead to a real advantage. Due
to these difficulties, theoretical analysis plays a fundamental
role, and recent works focusing on characterizing the capabilities and limitations of potential quantum models have
shown significant results (Schuld et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2021; Kübler et al., 2021; Goto et al., 2021).
The goal of this paper is to establish a unifying framework for learning functions over graphs using parameterized
quantum circuits and characterize the capabilities and limitations of various circuit classes within this framework.
Classical graph machine learning techniques have been the
backbone of many key developments in machine learning,
since graphs are used to encode various forms of relational
data, including knowledge graphs (Bordes et al., 2011), social networks (Zhang & Chen, 2018), and importantly also
molecules (Wu et al., 2018), which are a particularly promising application domain of quantum computing due to their
inherent quantum properties.
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017;
Veličković et al., 2018) are prominent models for graph
representation learning, as they encode desirable properties
such as permutation invariance (resp., equivariance) relative
to graph nodes, enabling a strong inductive bias (Battaglia
et al., 2018). While broadly applied, the expressive power
of prominent GNN architectures, such as message-passing
neural networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017), is shown to
be upper bounded by the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman
graph isomorphism test (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019).
This motivated a large body of work aiming at more expressive models, including higher-order models (Morris et al.,
2019; Maron et al., 2019a), as well as extensions of MPNNs
with unique node identifiers (Loukas, 2020), or with random
node features (Sato et al., 2021; Abboud et al., 2021).

