Disentangled Federated Learning for Tackling Attributes Skew
via Invariant Aggregation and Diversity Transferring

Zhengquan Luo 1 2 Yunlong Wang 2 Zilei Wang 1 Zhenan Sun 2 Tieniu Tan 2

Abstract
Attributes skew hinders the current federated
learning (FL) frameworks from consistent optimization directions among the clients, which inevitably leads to performance reduction and unstable convergence. The core problems lie in that: 1)
Domain-specific attributes, which are non-causal
and only locally valid, are indeliberately mixed
into global aggregation. 2) The one-stage optimizations of entangled attributes cannot simultaneously satisfy two conflicting objectives, i.e.,
generalization and personalization. To cope with
these, we proposed disentangled federated learning (DFL) to disentangle the domain-specific and
cross-invariant attributes into two complementary
branches, which are trained by the proposed alternating local-global optimization independently.
Importantly, convergence analysis proves that the
FL system can be stably converged even if incomplete client models participate in the global
aggregation, which greatly expands the application scope of FL. Extensive experiments verify
that DFL facilitates FL with higher performance,
better interpretability, and faster convergence rate,
compared with SOTA FL methods on both manually synthesized and realistic attributes skew
datasets.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017), as a decentralized and privacy-preserving machine learning framework,
1

University of Science and Technology of China
(USTC) 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy
of Sciences (CASIA). Correspondence to:
Zhengquan
Luo <zhengquan.luo@cripac.ia.ac.cn>,
Yunlong Wang
<yunlong.wang@cripac.ia.ac.cn>,
Zilei
Wang
<zlwang@ustc.edu.cn>, Zhenan Sun <znsun@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>,
Tieniu Tan <tnt@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Taking bird classification as an example to illustrate the
principle of DFL. The domain-specific attributes, such as the blue
sky or trees, are stripped out and contributed locally. The invariant
aggregation employs the partial client model, which only focuses
on the invariant and causal attributes, like the bird itself. The
two-branch local model is employed in DFL to replace the singlebranch in FL, which shows in the right part.

aims to build a client-server system that can adapt to different distributions without access to local raw data. A
key challenge lies in the Non-i.i.d factors between clients’
data domains. The huge distribution shift comes from
the diverse contextual information across devices/locations,
which causes suboptimal or detrimental performance. In
addition, the aggregated global model could be unstable
and even nonconvergent due to the different optimization
directions of client models. To mitigate this problem, a
plethora of techniques are introduced to adjust the system,
such as local model adaptation, global reweighting aggregation, and optimization direction correction. These methods
make FL rapidly adapt to the local distributions and corresponding tasks. Although effective, the basic problem still
exists. Especially, the attributes skew, as one challenging
factor of Non-i.i.d, indicates the scenarios in which the representation distribution across attributes on each client is
different from each other. The domain-specific attributes
are inevitably extracted by the single-branch client model
and mixed into the global aggregation. These attributes are
decision-correlated but not causal, which is only locally
valid. It leads to essential differences in the optimization
directions of client models. Taking bird classification as
an example in the left part of Figure 1. The attributes of
the bird itself and the blue sky are extracted by the client

