Generating 3D Molecules for Target Protein Binding

Meng Liu 1 Youzhi Luo 1 Kanji Uchino 2 Koji Maruhashi 3 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract
A fundamental problem in drug discovery is to
design molecules that bind to specific proteins.
To tackle this problem using machine learning
methods, here we propose a novel and effective
framework, known as GraphBP, to generate 3D
molecules that bind to given proteins by placing
atoms of specific types and locations to the given
binding site one by one. In particular, at each
step, we first employ a 3D graph neural network
to obtain geometry-aware and chemically informative representations from the intermediate contextual information. Such context includes the
given binding site and atoms placed in the previous steps. Second, to preserve the desirable
equivariance property, we select a local reference
atom according to the designed auxiliary classifiers and then construct a local spherical coordinate system. Finally, to place a new atom, we
generate its atom type and relative location w.r.t.
the constructed local coordinate system via a flow
model. We also consider generating the variables
of interest sequentially to capture the underlying
dependencies among them. Experiments demonstrate that our GraphBP is effective to generate 3D
molecules with binding ability to target protein
binding sites. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/divelab/GraphBP.

1. Introduction
Designing molecules that can bind to a specific target protein
(a.k.a. structure-based drug design) is a fundamental and
challenging problem in drug discovery (Anderson, 2003). It
is highly promising to develop machine learning methods
for this problem since there are recently available large-scale
datasets of protein-ligand complex structures, such as PDB1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M
University, TX, USA 2 Fujitsu Research of America, INC., CA,
USA 3 Fujitsu Research, Fujitsu Limited, Kanagawa, Japan. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

bind (Liu et al., 2017) and CrossDocked2020 (Francoeur
et al., 2020). In addition, machine learning approaches
have been shown to be effective for learning from richly
structured data in biochemistry. The most representative
example is AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021), which achieves
remarkable accuracy on the problem of 3D protein structure prediction from amino acid sequence, a long-standing
challenge for decades.
However, machine learning approaches have rarely been
explored to generate molecules that bind to specific protein binding sites. We summarize the main challenges or
considerations in three folds. (i) Complicated conditional
information. When generating molecules that are capable
of binding to a specific target protein, both the 3D geometric
structure and the chemical features of the binding site are
important considerations. It is crucial to consider how to
capture such informative context effectively. (ii) Enormous
chemical space and continuous 3D space. The chemical
space of all possible molecules is enormous (estimated to be
larger than 1060 ), while the number of molecules that have
binding ability to a specific target is extremely small. In
addition, the 3D space around the binding site is continuous
by nature. In other words, it is desirable that our generative
model is capable of generating molecules in any continuous
positions without discretizing the space. (iii) Equivariance
property. Intuitively, if we rotate or translate the binding
site, the generated molecules are expected to be rotated or
translated the same way. That is, molecules generated by
our machine learning approach should be equivariant to any
rigid transformation of the binding site.
Here, we present GraphBP, a novel and effective generative
framework for structure-based drug design, that takes the
described challenges into consideration. Particularly, we
generate 3D molecules by placing atoms to the specific 3D
binding site one by one. At each step, a 3D graph neural network is firstly employed to extract the intermediate
contextual information by considering both 3D geometric
structures and chemical interactions. Afterwards, we construct a local coordinate system based on a local reference
atom selected by the designed auxiliary classifiers. Generating a new atom in this local coordinate system can ensure
the equivariance property. Finally, to place a new atom, we
generate its atom type and relative continuous position w.r.t.
the constructed local coordinate system with a flow model.

