Improved Convergence Rates for Sparse
Approximation Methods in Kernel-Based Learning

Sattar Vakili 1 Jonathan Scarlett 2 Da-shan Shiu 1 Alberto Bernacchia 1

Abstract
Kernel-based models such as kernel ridge regression and Gaussian processes are ubiquitous in
machine learning applications for regression and
optimization. It is well known that a major downside for kernel-based models is the high computational cost; given a dataset of n samples, the cost
grows as O(n3 ). Existing sparse approximation
methods can yield a significant reduction in the
computational cost, effectively reducing the actual cost down to as low as O(n) in certain cases.
Despite this remarkable empirical success, significant gaps remain in the existing results for the analytical bounds on the error due to approximation.
In this work, we provide novel confidence intervals for the Nyström method and the sparse variational Gaussian process approximation method,
which we establish using novel interpretations of
the approximate (surrogate) posterior variance of
the models. Our confidence intervals lead to improved performance bounds in both regression
and optimization problems.

1. Introduction
Kernel-based modeling is an elegant and natural technique
to extend linear models to highly general nonlinear ones
with great representation capacity. Powerful predictors and
uncertainty estimates have made this approach very common across several application domains (Shahriari et al.,
2016). It is, however, well known that regression using standard kernel-based methods incurs a high O(n3 ) computational cost in the number of data points n, which is the main
limiting factor in many applications. Fortunately, sparse approximation methods have been developed for kernel-based
models, which significantly reduce the computational cost.
In particular, the computational cost typically reduces to
1
MediaTek Research 2 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Sattar Vakili <sattr.vakili@mtkresearch.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

O(nm2 ), with m ≪ n being the number of the inducing
points that serve to summarize the model. Despite their
great popularity in practice, significant gaps remain in the
mathematical understanding of such methods’ bounds on
the error due to approximation, and the implications for regression and optimization problems. This challenging issue
is the main focus of this work.
The literature on kernel-based models has developed under
two mostly separate approaches with different terminologies (e.g., see, Kanagawa et al., 2018): kernel ridge regression (KRR) and Gaussian process (GP) models. These
two approaches are based on frequentist and Bayesian interpretations, respectively. Nonetheless, they lead to the
same solution for regression. In this work, we cover both
terminologies and provide insights into their connections.
In the GP approach, a prior (surrogate) GP distribution is
assumed for the unknown function f , and Gaussian noise
is assumed. The regressor is then the posterior mean (the
maximum likelihood estimate) of f , conditioned on the data
points. In contrast, in KRR approach, the regressor is the regularized least squares estimator of f , within a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). For further details, see (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) on the former, and (Schölkopf
et al., 2002) on the latter.
For GPs, sparse approximation methods find a Bayesian
variational interpretation and are referred to as sparse variational Gaussian processes (SVGPs) in the literature. The
SVGP method was introduced in (Titsias, 2009) and has
been studied in several works including (Hensman et al.,
2013; Matthews et al., 2016; Burt et al., 2019; Rossi et al.,
2021). See also (Liu et al., 2020) for a recent overview.
The SVGP models enjoy great popularity in practice, with
implementations in TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2015) and
GPflow (Matthews et al., 2017) libraries.
For KRR, sparse approximation methods are interpreted as
regularized least squares estimators of f within a reduced
rank RKHS. This enables a Nyström low rank matrix approximation; the corresponding sparse approximation method is
thus often referred to as the Nyström method. Representative works include (Williams & Seeger, 2001; Seeger et al.,
2003; Rudi et al., 2015; Lin & Cevher, 2018).

