Diffusion Models for Adversarial Purification
Weili Nie 1 Brandon Guo 2 Yujia Huang 2 Chaowei Xiao 1 3 Arash Vahdat 1 Anima Anandkumar 1 2

Abstract
Adversarial purification refers to a class of defense methods that remove adversarial perturbations using a generative model. These methods
do not make assumptions on the form of attack
and the classification model, and thus can defend pre-existing classifiers against unseen threats.
However, their performance currently falls behind adversarial training methods. In this work,
we propose DiffPure that uses diffusion models for adversarial purification: Given an adversarial example, we first diffuse it with a small
amount of noise following a forward diffusion
process, and then recover the clean image through
a reverse generative process. To evaluate our
method against strong adaptive attacks in an efficient and scalable way, we propose to use the
adjoint method to compute full gradients of the
reverse generative process. Extensive experiments on three image datasets including CIFAR10, ImageNet and CelebA-HQ with three classifier architectures including ResNet, WideResNet
and ViT demonstrate that our method achieves
the state-of-the-art results, outperforming current
adversarial training and adversarial purification
methods, often by a large margin. Project page:
https://diffpure.github.io.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks:
adding imperceptible perturbations to the input can mislead
trained neural networks to predict incorrect classes (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015). There have been many
works on defending neural networks against such adversarial attacks (Madry et al., 2018; Song et al., 2018; Gowal
et al., 2020). Among them, adversarial training (Madry
et al., 2018), which trains neural networks on adversarial
examples, has become a standard defense form, due to its
1
NVIDIA 2 Caltech 3 ASU. Correspondence to: Weili Nie
<wnie@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

effectiveness (Zhang et al., 2019; Gowal et al., 2021). However, most adversarial training methods can only defend
against a specific attack that they are trained with. Recent
works on defending against unseen threats add a carefully
designed threat model into their adversarial training pipeline,
but they suffer from a significant performance drop (Laidlaw et al., 2021; Dolatabadi et al., 2021). Additionally, the
computational complexity of adversarial training is usually
higher than standard training (Wong et al., 2020).
In contrast, another class of defense methods, often termed
adversarial purification (Shi et al., 2021; Yoon et al., 2021),
relies on generative models to purify adversarially perturbed
images before classification (Samangouei et al., 2018; Hill
et al., 2021). Compared to the adversarial training methods, adversarial purification can defend against unseen
threats in a plug-n-play manner without re-training the classifiers. This is because the generative purification models
are trained independently from both threat models and classifiers. Despite these advantages, their performance usually
falls behind current adversarial training methods (Croce &
Hein, 2020), in particular against adaptive attacks where the
attacker has the full knowledge of the defense method (Athalye et al., 2018; Tramer et al., 2020). This is usually attributed to the shortcomings of current generative models
that are used as a purification model, such as mode collapse
in GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), low sample quality in
energy-based models (EBMs) (LeCun et al., 2006), and the
lack of proper randomness (Pinot et al., 2020).
Recently, diffusion models have emerged as powerful generative models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b). These
models have demonstrated strong sample quality, beating
GANs in image generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Vahdat et al., 2021). They have also exhibited strong mode coverage, indicated by high test likelihood (Song et al., 2021a).
Diffusion models consist of two processes: (i) a forward
diffusion process that converts data to noise by gradually
adding noise to the input, and (ii) a reverse generative process that starts from noise and generates data by denoising
one step at a time. Intuitively in the generative process, diffusion models purify noisy samples, playing a similar role of
a purification model. Their good generation quality and diversity ensure the purified images closely follow the original
distribution of clean data. Moreover, the stochasticity in diffusion models can make a powerful stochastic defense (He

