Distributionally Robust Q-Learning

Zijian Liu 1 Qinxun Bai 2 Jose Blanchet 3 Perry Dong 4 Wei Xu 2 Zhengqing Zhou 5 Zhengyuan Zhou 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated
remarkable achievements in simulated environments. However, carrying this success to real environments requires the important attribute of robustness, which the existing RL algorithms often
lack as they assume that the future deployment environment is the same as the training environment
(i.e. simulator) in which the policy is learned.
This assumption often does not hold due to the
discrepancy between the simulator and the real
environment and, as a result, and hence renders
the learned policy fragile when deployed.
In this paper, we propose a novel distributionally robust Q-learning algorithm that learns the
best policy in the worst distributional perturbation
of the environment. Our algorithm first transforms the infinite-dimensional learning problem
(since the environment MDP perturbation lies
in an infinite-dimensional space) into a finitedimensional dual problem and subsequently uses
a multi-level Monte-Carlo scheme to approximate
the dual value using samples from the simulator.
Despite the complexity, we show that the resulting distributionally robust Q-learning algorithm
asymptotically converges to optimal worst-case
policy, thus making it robust to future environment changes. Simulation results further demonstrate its strong empirical robustness.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated remarkable
empirical success in simulated environments, with applications spanning domains such as robotics (Kober et al.,
1
New York University, Stern School of Business 2 Horizon
Robotics Inc., CA, USA 3 Department of Management Science
and Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA 4 Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley, CA,
USA 5 Arena Technologies. Correspondence to: Zhengyuan Zhou
<zzhou@stern.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2013; Gu et al., 2017), computer vision (Sadeghi & Levine,
2016; Huang et al., 2017), finance (Li et al., 2009; Choi
et al., 2009; Deng et al., 2017) and games (Silver et al.,
2016; 2018). More recently, reinforcement learning has also
been applied to economic domains such as personalized
promotions in revenue management, inventory control in
supply chains and scheduling in queueing networks. However, carrying this success to real environments requires an
attribute that is often missing in the existing literature on
policy learning: robustness, because existing RL algorithms
often make the implicit assumption that the environment in
which the policy is trained will be the same as the environment in which the policy will be deployed. In other words,
a policy is evaluated in the same environment from which
the training data has been generated.
While the above assumption is arguably a good starting
point1 for developing a rigorous understanding of algorithmic performance of policy learning, it does not capture
the complexity of real-world applications because the discrepancy between training and deployment environments
is often common and hard to anticipate (and hence account
for) in advance. Two common sources of discrepancies are:
1. Simulator model mis-specification. In many reinforcement learning (RL) applications, a policy is often
first trained in a simulator before being deployed in a
real environment. However, simulator models often
cannot capture the full complexity of the real environment, and hence will be mis-specified. Further, it is
hard to know exactly how the real environment differs
from the simulator (otherwise, the simulator would
have been augmented/modified to account for that).
2. Environment shifts. The underlying environment may
shift due to either non-stationarity or a different deployment environment (for the same task). As an example
of the latter, a personalized content recommendation
1
Much like supervised learning was first developed under the
same assumption, before adversarial training was recognized as
a valuable tool to make empirical predictions robust; see, for
instance, (Sinha et al., 2018; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Ganin
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2019; Tramèr et al., 2017). The topic of
domain adaptation (Shimodaira, 2000; Saerens et al., 2002; BenDavid et al., 2010; Courty et al., 2016; Ganin et al., 2016; Sun et al.,
2020; Arjovsky et al., 2019; Wang & Deng, 2018; Sagawa et al.,
2019) is another approach to address covariate shifts in supervised
learning, but the new domain is often assumed to be known.

