Latent Diffusion Energy-Based Model for Interpretable Text Modeling

Peiyu Yu 1 2 Sirui Xie 1 Xiaojian Ma 1 2 Baoxiong Jia 1 2 Bo Pang 3
Ruiqi Gao 4 Yixin Zhu 5 6 Song-Chun Zhu 1 2 5 6 7 8 Ying Nian Wu 7

Abstract
Latent space Energy-Based Models (EBMs), also
known as energy-based priors, have drawn growing interests in generative modeling. Fueled by its
flexibility in the formulation and strong modeling
power of the latent space, recent works built upon
it have made interesting attempts aiming at the
interpretability of text modeling. However, latent
space EBMs also inherit some flaws from EBMs
in data space; the degenerate MCMC sampling
quality in practice can lead to poor generation
quality and instability in training, especially on
data with complex latent structures. Inspired by
the recent efforts that leverage diffusion recovery
likelihood learning as a cure for the sampling issue, we introduce a novel symbiosis between the
diffusion models and latent space EBMs in a variational learning framework, coined as the latent
diffusion energy-based model. We develop a geometric clustering-based regularization jointly with
the information bottleneck to further improve the
quality of the learned latent space. Experiments
on several challenging tasks demonstrate the superior performance of our model on interpretable
text modeling over strong counterparts.

1. Introduction
Text modeling has achieved impressive progress with the
fast development of neural generative models (Serban et al.,
2016; Li et al., 2017a; Zhao et al., 2017; Gupta et al., 2018;
Zhao et al., 2018a). It allows near human-level text generCode repo and data: https://github.com/yuPeiyu98/LDEBM.
1
Department of Computer Science, UCLA, USA 2 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence, China 3 Salesforce Research, USA 4 Google Brain, USA 5 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, China 6 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Peking University, China 7 Department of Statistics, UCLA, USA
8
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China.
Correspondence to: Peiyu Yu <yupeiyu98@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

y

pα (y, z0 |z1 )

z0

zt

qϕ (z0 |x)
x
pβ (x|z0 )

q(zt+1 |zt )
zt+1
pα (zt |zt+1 )

t = 1, ..., T − 1

Figure 1. Graphical illustration of the latent diffusion process.
We construct the forward and reverse diffusion processes in the latent space. The symbolic one-hot vector is coupled with the initial
latent vector z0 . The latent and diffused latent variables are highlighted by the red and blue plates, respectively. The cyan arrows
indicate that z0 is connected with only z1 . We learn a sequence of
EBMs to model the reverse diffusion process pα (zt |zt+1 ).

ation quality and also leads to a wide range of real-world
applications such as dialog system (Young et al., 2013) and
machine translation (Brown et al., 1993). Although the quality of generation (e.g., fluency and diversity) is the primary
concern of most work, interpretability of the generation process has drawn much attention recently. Among the existing
frameworks, the Deep Latent Variable Model (DLVM) is
especially suitable for the task, as the learned latent space
could capture high-level structures with semantic meanings
like topics (Wang et al., 2019) and dialog actions (Zhao
et al., 2018b); such latent space could further enable more
interpretable text modeling, featuring unsupervised text attributes discovery (Wen et al., 2017), conditional and controllable text generation (Fang et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2020),
and semi-supervised text classification (Pang & Wu, 2021).
In essence, DLVM summarizes the observed sample (e.g.,
a piece of text) into inferred latent variables. Earlier
text-modeling methods with DLVM mostly follow the formulation of Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) (Kingma &
Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014; Bowman et al., 2016),
which assumes a continuous latent space. More recently,
Zhao et al. (2018b) explore the possibility of using a discrete
latent space to capture dialog actions; Shi et al. (2020) propose to use VAE with the mixture of Gaussians as the prior,
demonstrating promising interpretability of dialog utterance
generation. To further improve the expressivity of the latent

