VLUE: A Multi-Task Benchmark for Evaluating Vision-Language Models

Wangchunshu Zhou * 1 Yan Zeng * 1 Shizhe Diao * 2 Xinsong Zhang * 1

Abstract
Recent advances in vision-language pre-training
(VLP) have demonstrated impressive performance
in a range of vision-language (VL) tasks. However, there exist several challenges for measuring the community’s progress in building general multi-modal intelligence. First, most of the
downstream VL datasets are annotated using raw
images that are already seen during pre-training,
which may result in an overestimation of current
VLP models’ generalization ability. Second, recent VLP work mainly focuses on absolute performance but overlooks the efficiency-performance
trade-off, which is also an important indicator for
measuring progress.
To this end, we introduce the Vision-Language
Understanding Evaluation (VLUE) benchmark, a
multi-task multi-dimension benchmark for evaluating the generalization capabilities and the
efficiency-performance trade-off (“Pareto SOTA”)
of VLP models. We demonstrate that there is a sizable generalization gap for all VLP models when
testing on out-of-distribution test sets annotated
on images from a more diverse distribution that
spreads across cultures. Moreover, we find that
measuring the efficiency-performance trade-off
of VLP models leads to complementary insights
for several design choices of VLP. We release
the VLUE benchmark1 to promote research on
building vision-language models that generalize
well to more diverse images and concepts unseen
during pre-training, and are practical in terms of
efficiency-performance trade-off.

*

Equal contribution 1 ByteDance AI Lab 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Wangchunshu Zhou <wcszhou@outlook.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
The benchmark is publicly available at https://
vlue-benchmark.github.io. The data and codes used
for training baseline models are available at https://github.
com/MichaelZhouwang/VLUE.

1. Introduction
Building systems that can demonstrate their visual understanding by generating or responding to natural language in
the context of images has been a long-standing goal in the
field of artificial intelligence and cognitive science (Boden,
2008). The approaches and corresponding tasks have come
to be referred to under the common banner of ‘vision-andlanguage’ (Lu et al., 2019). Vision-Language Pre-training
(VLP), the paradigm of pre-training on large-scale parallel
image-text pairs and then fine-tuning on vision-language
(VL) tasks, has achieved state-of-the-art performance on a
wide range of VL tasks. It has transformed the landscape of
vision-and-language research and is considered to be a critical step for building general multi-modal intelligence. Over
the last two years, a great number of research studies (Lu
et al., 2019; Tan & Bansal, 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2020a; 2019; 2020b; Cho et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2021a; Jia et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021a;b; Diao et al., 2022) have been conducted in the field
of vision-language pre-training. Nevertheless, it becomes
increasingly complicated to track the real progress that the
vision-language community is actually making because of
two major problems in the common practice for evaluating
and reporting new studies in the field. We elaborate them as
follows.
First, most datasets of downstream VL tasks used for evaluating VLP models are annotated with images collected from
the COCO (Lin et al., 2014) or Visual Genome (VG) (Krishna et al., 2017) dataset2 . The problem is that most (if not
all) VLP models are pre-trained on image-text pairs from
COCO and VG datasets. Therefore, VLP models have already seen the images in the downstream datasets and their
captions before fine-tuning and evaluating on them. As such,
fine-tuning and evaluating VLP models on these datasets
only measures their transferability in the setting where at
least a part of data distribution (i.e., image distribution) remains the same while the label distribution shifts. This is
a special case of transfer learning and is unlikely to be met
in practice. Consequently, evaluating on these “in-domain”
2

A few studies exclude the images used in some downstream
datasets from their pre-training data. However, this does not fully
resolve this issue because some datasets are not annotated within
a specific subset. Also, even the images are not seen during pretraining, they are still from the same distribution.

