FriendlyCore: Practical Differentially Private Aggregation

Eliad Tsfadia 1 2 Edith Cohen 1 2 Haim Kaplan 2 1 Yishay Mansour 2 1 Uri Stemmer 2 1

Abstract
Differentially private algorithms for common metric aggregation tasks, such as clustering or averaging, often have limited practicality due to their
complexity or to the large number of data points
that is required for accurate results. We propose a
simple and practical tool, FriendlyCore, that takes
a set of points D from an unrestricted (pseudo)
metric space as input. When D has effective diameter r, FriendlyCore returns a “stable” subset
C ⊆ D that includes all points, except possibly a
few outliers, and is guaranteed to have diameter r.
FriendlyCore can be used to preprocess the input
before privately aggregating it, potentially simplifying the aggregation or boosting its accuracy.
Surprisingly, FriendlyCore is light-weight with
no dependence on the dimension. We empirically
demonstrate its advantages in boosting the accuracy of mean estimation and clustering tasks such
as k-means and k-GMM, outperforming tailored
methods.

1. Introduction
Metric aggregation tasks are at the heart of data analysis.
Common tasks include averaging, k-clustering, and learning a mixture of distributions. When the data points are
sensitive information, corresponding for example to records
or activities of particular users, we would like the aggregation to be private. The most widely accepted solution to
individual privacy is differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al.,
2006b) that limits the effect that each data point can have
on the outcome of the computation.
Differentially private algorithms, however, tend to be less
accurate and practical than their non-private counterparts.
This degradation in accuracy can be attributed, to a large
extent, to the fact that the requirement of differential priGoogle Research 2 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel
Aviv University. Correspondence to: Eliad Tsfadia <eliadtsfadia@gmail.com>.

vacy is a worst-case kind of a requirement. To illustrate
this point, consider the task of privately learning mixture of
Gaussians. In this task, the learner gets as input a sample
D ⊆ Rd , and, assuming that D was correctly sampled from
some appropriate underlying distribution, then the learner
needs to output a good hypothesis. That is, the learner is
only required to perform well on typical inputs. In contrast,
the definition of differential privacy is worst-case in the
sense that the privacy requirement must hold for any two
neighboring datasets, no matter how they were constructed,
even if they are not sampled from any distribution. This
means that in the privacy analysis one has to account for any
potential input point, including “unlikely points” that have
significant impact on the aggregation. The traditional way
for coping with this issue is to bound the worst-case effect
that a single data point can have on the aggregation (this
quantity is often called the sensitivity of the aggregation),
and then to add noise proportional to this worst-case bound.
That is, even if all of the given data points are “friendly” in
the sense that each of them has only a very small effect on
the aggregation, then still, the traditional way for ensuring
DP often requires adding much larger noise in order to account for a neighboring dataset that contains one additional
“unfriendly” point whose effect on the aggregation is large.
In this paper we present a general framework for preprocessing the data (before privately aggregating it), with the
goal of producing a guarantee that the data is “friendly”
(or well-behaved). Given that the data is guaranteed to be
“friendly”, the private aggregation step can then be executed
without accounting for “unfriendly” points that might have
a large effect on the aggregation. Hence, our guarantee
potentially allows for much less noise to be added in the
aggregation step, as it is no longer forced to operate in the
original “worst-case” setting.
1.1. Our Framework
Let us first make the notion of “friendliness” more precise.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Definition 1.1 (f -friendly and f -complete datasets). Let D
be a dataset over a domain X , and let f : X 2 → {0, 1} be
a reflexive predicate. We say that D is f -friendly if for every
x, y ∈ D, there exists z ∈ X (not necessarily in D) such
that f (x, z) = f (y, z) = 1. As a special case, we call D

