Open-Sampling: Exploring Out-of-Distribution Data for Re-balancing
Long-tailed Datasets

Hongxin Wei 1 Lue Tao 2 Renchunzi Xie 1 Lei Feng 3 Bo An 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks usually perform poorly
when the training dataset suffers from extreme
class imbalance. Recent studies found that directly training with out-of-distribution data (i.e.,
open-set samples) in a semi-supervised manner
would harm the generalization performance. In
this work, we theoretically show that out-ofdistribution data can still be leveraged to augment the minority classes from a Bayesian perspective. Based on this motivation, we propose a
novel method called Open-sampling, which utilizes open-set noisy labels to re-balance the class
priors of the training dataset. For each open-set instance, the label is sampled from our pre-defined
distribution that is complementary to the distribution of original class priors. We empirically
show that Open-sampling not only re-balances
the class priors but also encourages the neural
network to learn separable representations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed
method significantly outperforms existing data rebalancing methods and can boost the performance
of existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The success of deep neural networks (DNNs) heavily
relies on large-scale datasets with balanced distribution
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009; Russakovsky et al., 2015). However, in real-world applications like autonomous driving
and medical diagnosis, large-scale datasets naturally exhibit imbalanced and long-tailed distributions, i.e., a few
classes (majority classes) occupy most of the data while
most classes (minority classes) are under-represented (Zhou
*
Equal contribution 1 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China 3 Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.
Correspondence to: Renchunzi Xie <XIER0002@e.ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2017; Van Horn et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2014). It has
been shown that training on long-tailed datasets leads to
poor generalization performance, especially on the minority
classes (Zhou et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019a; Kang et al.,
2020). Thus, designing effective algorithms to handle class
imbalance is of great practical importance.
In the literature, a popular direction in long-tailed learning
is to re-balance the data distribution by data re-sampling
(Japkowicz & Stephen, 2002; He & Garcia, 2009). For example, Over-sampling (Byrd & Lipton, 2019; Shen et al.,
2016) repeats samples from under-presented classes, but
it usually causes over-fitting to the minority classes. To
alleviate the over-fitting issue, synthesized novel samples
are introduced to augment the minority classes without repetition (Chawla et al., 2002). As a result, the model is still
error-prone due to noise in the synthesized samples (Cui
et al., 2019) A recent work (Yang & Xu, 2020) introduced
unlabeled-in-distribution data to compensate for the lack of
training samples, and showed that directly adding unlabeled
data from mismatched classes (i.e., out-of-distribution data)
by semi-supervised learning hurts the generalization performance. These data augmentation methods normally require
in-distribution data with precise labels for selected classes.
However, such kind of data would be extremely hard to collect in real-world scenarios, due to the expensive labeling
cost. This fatal weakness of previous methods motivates us
to explore the possibility of using out-of-distribution (OOD)
data for long-tailed imbalanced learning.
In this paper, we theoretically show that out-of-distribution
data (i.e., open-set samples) could be leveraged to augment
the minority classes from a Bayesian perspective. Based on
this motivation, we propose a simple yet effective method
called Open-sampling, which uses open-set noisy labels to
re-balance the label priors of the training dataset. For each
OOD instance, the label is sampled from our pre-defined distribution that is complementary to the original class priors.
To alleviate the over-fitting issue on the minority classes, a
class-dependent weight is used in the training objective to
provide stronger regularization on the minority classes than
the majority classes. In this way, the open-set noisy labels
could be used to re-balance the class priors while retaining
their non-toxicity.

