Implicit Bias of the Step Size in Linear Diagonal Neural Networks

Mor Shpigel Nacson 1 Kavya Ravichandran 2 Nati Srebro 2 Daniel Soudry 1

Abstract
Focusing on diagonal linear networks as a model
for understanding the implicit bias in underdetermined models, we show how the gradient descent
step size can have a large qualitative effect on
the implicit bias, and thus on generalization ability. In particular, we show how using large step
size for non-centered data can change the implicit
bias from a ”kernel” type behavior to a ”rich”
(sparsity-inducing) regime — even when gradient flow, studied in previous works, would not
escape the ”kernel” regime. We do so by using
dynamic stability, proving that convergence to dynamically stable global minima entails a bound
on some weighted ℓ1 -norm of the linear predictor,
i.e. a ”rich” regime. We prove this leads to good
generalization in a sparse regression setting.

1. Introduction
It is becoming evident that implicit regularization guided by
the optimization procedure plays a crucial role in learning
using underdetermined (overparameterized) models, including deep networks (Neyshabur et al., 2015), and that this
optimization-induced bias can ensure learning and generalization (e.g., Moroshko et al. (2020); Li et al. (2019a);
Arora et al. (2019); Woodworth et al. (2020)). Different
optimization choices, such as using different optimization
methods (Gunasekar et al., 2018b), or different optimization
parameters can significantly change the algorithmic bias,
and thus completely change the effective inductive bias of
learning and the ability to generalize in specific scenarios. In
order to understand learning with underdetermined models,
and be able to make informed principled choices about the
optimization procedure to use, it is important to understand
how such optimization choices affect the algorithmic bias.
In this paper we focus on the effect of the gradient descent
step size on the learned predictor in an underdetermined
1
Technion, Israel 2 TTI Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Mor
Shpigel Nacson < mor.shpigel@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

model. We do so in the squared parameterization linear
regression (diagonal linear network) model.
The squared parameterization linear regression model
(Woodworth et al., 2020) is perhaps the simplest non-linear
(in the parameters) model that displays rich, non-trivial algorithmic bias. It can also be thought of as the simplest
possible “deep” (that is, deeper than a single unit) model,
namely a diagonal linear network (a depth two network
with linear activation and diagonal weight matrices). As
such, it has been used to study the implicit regularization
phenomenon, and in particular the effect of different optimization choices on the algorithmic bias. Even this very
simple model displays rich inductive bias that depend on
optimization choices: although no explicit ℓ1 regularization is imposed, under certain optimization choices (but not
others!), optimization biases us to a low ℓ1 -norm predictor, which is sufficient for ensuring generalization, e.g. in
a sparse regression setting. But under other optimization
choices, the model behaves as a kernel machine, leading
to implicit ℓ2 regularization, which is useless in a sparse
regression setting and does not lead to generalization.
What are these choices that switch between a kernel regime
and a regime where sparse regression is possible? Previous work studied how initialization scale (Woodworth
et al., 2020), stochasticity (Damian et al., 2021; Pesme et al.,
2021; Blanc et al., 2020), and relative scale between layers (Azulay et al., 2021) affect the algorithmic bias in the
squared parametrization model, can take optimization outside the kernel regime and allow generalization. In particular, (Woodworth et al., 2020) showed how with infinitesimal
step size, generalization in a sparse regression model is
possible only with small initialization scale, while a larger
initialization scale forces us into the kernel regime and does
not allow generalization. This is problematic since very
small initialization scales, particularly those required for
leaving the kernel regime in wide models, correspond to
initializing very close to a saddle point which might be difficult to escape. Unlike this previous analysis which focused
on infinitesimal step size (like much of the implicit regularization analysis), here we consider gradient descent (GD)
with different (positive, finite) step sizes, to study the effect of step size on the implicit regularization. In particular,
our results demonstrate and elucidate how a large step size
can also allow us to escape the kernel regime, biasing opti-

