Rethinking Fano’s Inequality in Ensemble Learning

Terufumi Morishita 1 Gaku Morio * 1 Shota Horiguchi * 1 Hiroaki Ozaki 1 Nobuo Nukaga 1

Abstract
We propose a fundamental theory on ensemble
learning that evaluates a given ensemble system
by a well-grounded set of metrics. Previous studies used a variant of Fano’s inequality of information theory and derived a lower bound of the
classification error rate on the basis of the accuracy and diversity of models. We revisit the
original Fano’s inequality and argue that the studies did not take into account the information lost
when multiple model predictions are combined
into a final prediction. To address this issue, we
generalize the previous theory to incorporate the
information loss. Further, we empirically validate
and demonstrate the proposed theory through extensive experiments on actual systems. The theory
reveals the strengths and weaknesses of systems
on each metric, which will push the theoretical
understanding of ensemble learning and give us
insights into designing systems.

1. Introduction
Ensemble learning has had great success in various fields of
machine learning. Bagging (Breiman, 1996) trains diverse
models from artificial datasets built by random sub-sampling
on the original one. It is common to train models with different weight initializations (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) or
models with different network architectures (Qummar et al.,
2019; Morishita et al., 2020b). While models are usually
combined by voting on predictions, other methods focus on
how to combine them cleverly (Omari & Figueiras-Vidal,
2015; Morio et al., 2020a). Stacking (Wolpert, 1992) trains
meta-estimators that make final predictions from model predictions as their inputs. Mixture of Experts (Jacobs et al.,
1991; Shazeer et al., 2017) focuses more on the models that
are best specialized for a given dataset instance.
*

Equal contribution 1 Hitachi, Ltd. Research and Development
Group, Kokubunji, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Terufumi
Morishita <terufumi.morishita.wp@hitachi.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

It has been widely believed that accurate and diverse models
lead to better performance for ensemble systems. Guided by
this intuition, many heuristical metrics have been proposed
to measure accuracy and diversity (Kohavi et al., 1996;
Skalak et al., 1996; Cunningham & Carney, 2000; Shipp
& Kuncheva, 2002). However, these metrics lack theoretical grounding, and indeed, Kuncheva & Whitaker (2003)
empirically showed that there are no connections between
the metrics and system performance through a broad range
of experiments. Turning to theoretical viewpoints, Geman
et al. (1992) decomposed the squared error loss used in regression tasks into the bias and covariance of models. Bias
here corresponds to accuracy and covariance diversity. For
classification tasks, Tumer & Ghosh (1995) showed that
the error rate reductions obtained by unweighted voting is a
decreasing function of models’ correlations, indicating that
diverse models lead to better performance.
While the theory of Tumer & Ghosh (1995) deals with classification tasks under a limited setting, Brown (2009); Zhou
& Li (2010) first derived accuracy and diversity in a general
setting. Using Fano’s inequality of information theory, they
derived a lower bound to the error rate of a given system.
Then, they decomposed the lower bound into relevance Irelev
and redundancy Iredun (Lemma 2.3, illustrated in Figure 1).
Irelev is the information theoretical version of accuracy and
Iredun diversity. Their framework is promising as a fundamental theory of ensemble learning since it derives wellbelieved metrics in a general setting. However, the validity
of the framework has not been examined much from both
theoretical and empirical perspectives. Theoretically, we
find that the framework rests on implicit assumptions used
by a variant of Fano’s inequality, which generally do not
hold in ensemble learning. As a result, the framework fails
in capturing important aspects of ensemble learning. Empirically, the experiments of the studies were not extensive
enough to justify the framework. In particular, they did
not check whether the framework can predict representative
phenomena in ensemble learning.
In this paper, we rethink the theoretical framework from
both perspectives. We first revisit the theory (Sections 2
and 3). We argue that the framework does not take into
account the information lost when multiple model predictions are combined into a single final prediction. We call
this information loss combination loss. To address the issue,

