The Role of Deconfounding in Meta-learning

Yinjie Jiang * 1 Zhengyu Chen * 1 Kun Kuang 1 Luotian Yuan 1
Xinhai Ye 1 Zhihua Wang 2 Fei Wu 1 2 3 Ying Wei 4

Abstract
Meta-learning has emerged as a potent paradigm
for quick learning of few-shot tasks, by leveraging
the meta-knowledge learned from meta-training
tasks. Well-generalized meta-knowledge that facilitates fast adaptation in each task is preferred;
however, recent evidence suggests the undesirable
memorization effect where the meta-knowledge
simply memorizing all meta-training tasks discourages task-specific adaptation and poorly generalizes. There have been several solutions to
mitigating the effect, including both regularizerbased and augmentation-based methods, while
a systematic understanding of these methods in
a single framework is still lacking. In this paper, we offer a novel causal perspective of metalearning. Through the lens of causality, we conclude the universal label space as a confounder to
be the causing factor of memorization and frame
the two lines of prevailing methods as different
deconfounder approaches. Remarkably, derived
from the causal inference principle of front-door
adjustment, we propose two frustratingly easy
but effective deconfounder algorithms, i.e., sampling multiple versions of the meta-knowledge via
Dropout and grouping the meta-knowledge into
multiple bins. The proposed causal perspective
not only brings in the two deconfounder algorithms that surpass previous works in four benchmark datasets towards combating memorization,
but also opens a promising direction for metalearning.
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Shanghai
Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University, Shanghai,
China 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Zhejiang University, Shanghai,
China 4 Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Ying Wei <yingwei@cityu.edu.hk>, Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been renewed interest in meta-learning
which empowers more human-like machines that suffice to
learn a wide range of tasks with minimal supervision (Bengio et al., 1991; Thrun & Pratt, 2012; Finn et al., 2017;
Raghu et al., 2020). While metric-based meta-learning
algorithms (Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell et al., 2017) only
solve few-shot classification problems, we focus on gradientbased meta-learning algorithms in this work that are more
flexible (Finn et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017). Gradient-based
meta-learning algorithms formulate the meta-knowledge as
the initialization for a base learner and learn the initialization by a bi-level optimization procedure during the metatraining phase. Concretely, the initialization is adapted to
each meta-training task by its support set, while the performance of the adapted model on its query set in turn serves
as feedback to update the initialization.
This bi-level optimization scheme, though designed to learn
a well-generalized initialization, runs a high risk of inducing a sufficiently expressive initialization that memorizes
all meta-training tasks. This kind of overfitting is named
memorization overfitting (Yin et al., 2020), where the initialization solves the query set even without relying on the
support set for adaptation. As a consequence, such an initialization poorly generalizes to meta-testing tasks. As suggested in Yin et al. (2020), the more non-mutually exclusive
meta-training tasks are and the more powerful the model
initialization is, the higher risk of memorization arises. To
combat the memorization overfitting, Yin et al. (2020) proposed to regularize the capacity of the initialization, and
task augmentation strategies have been recently explored
in Rajendran et al. (2020); Yao et al. (2021).
Despite the effectiveness of the three algorithms, understanding their benefits rigorously within a unified analytic
tool remains a mystery. To bridge the gap, we develop a
causal perspective on meta-learning, as illustrated by the
causal graph in Figure 1. We argue that the universal label
space of the base learner turns to be a confounder causing a
spurious correlation between the initializations learned in
different steps of meta-training. Such a spurious correlation
biases the meta-knowledge that should be only updated by
the performance of task-specific models. Fortunately, the

