Refined Convergence Rates for Maximum Likelihood Estimation under Finite
Mixture Models
Tudor Manole 1 Nhat Ho 2

Abstract
We revisit the classical problem of deriving convergence rates for the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) in finite mixture models. The
Wasserstein distance has become a standard loss
function for the analysis of parameter estimation
in these models, due in part to its ability to circumvent label switching and to accurately characterize the behaviour of fitted mixture components
with vanishing weights. However, the Wasserstein
distance is only able to capture the worst-case
convergence rate among the remaining fitted mixture components. We demonstrate that when the
log-likelihood function is penalized to discourage
vanishing mixing weights, stronger loss functions
can be derived to resolve this shortcoming of the
Wasserstein distance. These new loss functions accurately capture the heterogeneity in convergence
rates of fitted mixture components, and we use
them to sharpen existing pointwise and uniform
convergence rates in various classes of mixture
models. In particular, these results imply that a
subset of the components of the penalized MLE
typically converge significantly faster than could
have been anticipated from past work. We further
show that some of these conclusions extend to
the traditional MLE. Our theoretical findings are
supported by a simulation study to illustrate these
improved convergence rates.

1. Introduction
Finite mixture models form a celebrated tool for modelling
heterogeneous data, and are used pervasively in the life
and physical sciences (Bechtel et al., 1993; Kuusela et al.,
2012; McLachlan & Peel, 2004). The primary goal in many
1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas, Austin. Correspondence to: Tudor Manole
<tmanole@stat.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

such applications is to perform statistical inference for the
mixture parameters. This raises the classical question of
characterizing the optimal convergence rates for parameter
estimation in finite mixture models. Though this topic has
been the subject of considerable investigation in past literature, the aim of our work is to show how these existing
results may be refined through a careful choice of the loss
function used in their analyses.
Mixture distributions do not enjoy the standard regularity
conditions that are typically presumed in parametric models,
such as non-degeneracy of the Fisher information. As a
result, optimal rates of estimation in mixtures are strictly
slower than the usual parametric rate of convergence. This
observation dates back at least to the seminal work of Chen
(1995), who analyzed univariate mixtures satisfying a regularity condition known as strong identifiability, which we
formally define in Section 2 below. A long line of recent
work has further analyzed convergence rates in mixtures of
general dimension, under varying degrees of strong identifiability. In particular, Nguyen (2013) proposed the Wasserstein distance as a natural tool for metrizing convergence
of parameters in finite mixtures, via their mixing measure.
The Wasserstein metric was then used to analyze convergence rates for the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE)
and related procedures, under various classes of finite mixture models (Ho & Nguyen, 2016a;b; Heinrich & Kahn,
2018; Ho & Nguyen, 2019). Moment-based estimators
were also studied by Wu & Yang (2020); Doss et al. (2020),
and Bayesian estimators by Ohn & Lin (2020); Guha et al.
(2021), to name a few.
A broad conclusion of these works is that slow convergence
rates are pervasive to parameter estimation in finite mixture models. This observation contrasts the fact that the
minimax rate of estimating the density of a finite mixture
model is typically the standard parametric rate of convergence (Genovese & Wasserman, 2000; Ghosal & van der
Vaart, 2001; Doss et al., 2020; Ashtiani et al., 2020). For
example, Heinrich & Kahn (2018) show that the minimax
rate for parameter estimation in a strongly identifiable mixture degrades exponentially as the number of components
increases, when no separation conditions are placed on these
components. This result suggests that the estimation of mixture parameters can be prohibitive, even when the number

