How to Stay Curious while avoiding Noisy TVs
using Aleatoric Uncertainty Estimation

Augustine N. Mavor-Parker 1 Kimberly A. Young 2 3 Caswell Barry 2 * Lewis D. Griffin 4 *

Abstract
When extrinsic rewards are sparse, artificial
agents struggle to explore an environment. Curiosity, implemented as an intrinsic reward for prediction errors, can improve exploration but it is
known to fail when faced with action-dependent
noise sources (‘noisy TVs’). In an attempt to
make exploring agents robust to noisy TVs, we
present a simple solution: aleatoric mapping
agents (AMAs). AMAs are a novel form of curiosity that explicitly ascertain which state transitions of the environment are unpredictable, even
if those dynamics are induced by the actions of
the agent. This is achieved by generating separate
forward predictions for the mean and aleatoric uncertainty of future states, with the aim of reducing
intrinsic rewards for those transitions that are unpredictable. We demonstrate that in a range of environments AMAs are able to circumvent actiondependent stochastic traps that immobilise conventional curiosity driven agents. Furthermore,
we demonstrate empirically that other common
exploration approaches—previously thought to
be immune to agent-induced randomness—can
be trapped by stochastic dynamics. Code to reproduce our experiments is provided.

1. Introduction
Efficient exploration is a central problem in reinforcement
learning. Agents need to be capable of finding novel information without depending on extrinsic rewards to shepherd
them through the state space of a given environment (e.g.
*

Equal contribution 1 Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University College London, UK 2 Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University College London, UK 3 Boston University, Center for Systems Neuroscience, Graduate Program for Neuroscience,
USA 4 Department of Computer Science, University College London, UK. Correspondence to: Augustine Mavor-Parker <a.mavorparker@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Sutton & Barto, 2018; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al.,
2019b), see (Weng, 2020) for a review). A notable exploration method that effectively deals with sparse rewards is
curiosity driven learning—where agents are equipped with
a self-supervised forward prediction model that employs
prediction errors as intrinsic rewards (Schmidhuber, 1991b;
Pathak et al., 2017; Schmidhuber, 1991a). Curiosity is built
upon the intuition that in unexplored regions of the environment, the forward prediction error of the agent’s internal
model will be large (Schmidhuber, 1991b; Pathak et al.,
2017). As a result, agents are rewarded for visiting regions
of the state space that they have not previously occupied. If,
however, a particular state transition is impossible to predict,
it will trap a curious agent (Burda et al., 2019b; Schmidhuber, 1991a). This is referred to as the noisy TV problem
(e.g. (Burda et al., 2019b; Schmidhuber, 1991a)), the etymology being that a naively curious agent could dwell on
the unpredictability of a noisy TV screen.
Several existing curiosity-like methods (Burda et al., 2019b;
Pathak et al., 2017; 2019) aim to avoid noisy TVs or
“stochastic traps” (Shyam et al., 2019). Nevertheless, employing dynamics based prediction errors as intrinsic rewards is difficult as current methods either fail when stochastic traps are action-dependent, or require an ensemble of
dynamics models (Pathak et al., 2017; 2019; Shyam et al.,
2019; Burda et al., 2019a). Even if ensemble methods are
available, we demonstrate that they cannot reliably overcome the allure of observing random observations. Additionally, we find that random network distillation—a dynamicsfree exploration technique usually assumed to be robust to
stochasticity—is also susceptible to noisy TVs. Fundamentally, popular intrinsic reward approaches are vulnerable to
the never ending novelty of a noisy TV.
We present a simple solution to the noisy TV problem—
instead of only predicting the next state, we also predict
its variance (i.e it’s aleatoric uncertainty (Kendall & Gal,
2017)). The uncertainty of a statistical model can be described as the sum of two theoretically distinct types of
uncertainty: epistemic uncertainty and aleatoric uncertainty
(e.g. (Hora, 1996), see (Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021)
for a review). Epistemic uncertainty measures the errors
of a model’s prediction that can be minimised with addi-

