COLA: Consistent Learning with Opponent-Learning Awareness

Timon Willi * 1 Alistair Letcher * Johannes Treutlein * 2 3 Jakob Foerster 1

Abstract
Learning in general-sum games is unstable and
frequently leads to socially undesirable (Paretodominated) outcomes. To mitigate this, Learning with Opponent-Learning Awareness (LOLA)
introduced opponent shaping to this setting, by
accounting for each agent’s influence on their
opponents’ anticipated learning steps. However,
the original LOLA formulation (and follow-up
work) is inconsistent because LOLA models other
agents as naive learners rather than LOLA agents.
In previous work, this inconsistency was suggested as a cause of LOLA’s failure to preserve stable fixed points (SFPs). First, we formalize consistency and show that higher-order LOLA (HOLA)
solves LOLA’s inconsistency problem if it converges. Second, we correct a claim made in the literature by Schäfer and Anandkumar (2019), proving that Competitive Gradient Descent (CGD)
does not recover HOLA as a series expansion (and
fails to solve the consistency problem). Third, we
propose a new method called Consistent LOLA
(COLA), which learns update functions that are
consistent under mutual opponent shaping. It
requires no more than second-order derivatives
and learns consistent update functions even when
HOLA fails to converge. However, we also prove
that even consistent update functions do not preserve SFPs, contradicting the hypothesis that this
shortcoming is caused by LOLA’s inconsistency.
Finally, in an empirical evaluation on a set of
general-sum games, we find that COLA finds
prosocial solutions and that it converges under
a wider range of learning rates than HOLA and
LOLA. We support the latter finding with a theoretical result for a simple game.
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Toronto, Canada 3 Vector Institute, Toronto,
Canada. Correspondence to: <timon.willi@eng.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Much research in deep multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) has focused on zero-sum games like Starcraft and
Go (Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019) or fully cooperative settings (Oroojlooyjadid & Hajinezhad, 2019).
However, many real-world problems, e.g. self-driving cars,
contain both cooperative and competitive elements, and are
thus better modeled as general-sum games. One such game
is the famous Prisoner’s Dilemma (Axelrod & Hamilton,
1981), in which agents have an individual incentive to defect
against their opponent, even though they would prefer the
outcome in which both cooperate to the one where both defect. A strategy for the infinitely iterated version of the game
(IPD) is tit-for-tat, which starts out cooperating and otherwise mirrors the opponent’s last move. It achieves mutual
cooperation when chosen by both players and has proven
to be successful at IPD tournaments (Axelrod & Hamilton,
1981). If MARL algorithms are deployed in the real world,
it is essential that they are able to cooperate with others and
entice others to cooperate with them, using strategies such
as tit-for-tat (Dafoe et al., 2021). However, naive gradient
descent and other more sophisticated methods (Korpelevich,
1977; Mescheder et al., 2017; Balduzzi et al., 2018; Mazumdar et al., 2019; Schäfer & Anandkumar, 2019) converge
to the mutual defection policy under random initialization
(Letcher et al., 2019b).
An effective paradigm to improve learning in general-sum
games is opponent shaping, where agents take into account
their influence on the anticipated learning step of the other
agents. LOLA (Foerster et al., 2018a) was the first work
to make explicit use of opponent shaping and is one of the
only general learning methods designed for general-sum
games that obtains mutual cooperation with the tit-for-tat
strategy in the IPD. While LOLA discovers these prosocial equilibria, the original LOLA formulation is inconsistent because LOLA agents assume that their opponent is a
naive learner. This assumption is clearly violated if two
LOLA agents learn together. It has been suggested that this
inconsistency is the cause for LOLA’s main shortcoming,
which is not maintaining the stable fixed points (SFPs) of
the underlying game, even in some simple quadratic games
(Letcher 2018, pp. 2, 26; see also Letcher et al. 2019b).

