A State-Distribution Matching Approach to Non-Episodic Reinforcement
Learning

Archit Sharma * 1 Rehaan Ahmad * 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract
While reinforcement learning (RL) provides a
framework for learning through trial and error,
translating RL algorithms into the real world has
remained challenging. A major hurdle to realworld application arises from the development of
algorithms in an episodic setting where the environment is reset after every trial, in contrast with
the continual and non-episodic nature of the realworld encountered by embodied agents such as
humans and robots. Enabling agents to learn behaviors autonomously in such non-episodic environments requires that the agent to be able to conduct its own trials. Prior works have considered
an alternating approach where a forward policy
learns to solve the task and the backward policy
learns to reset the environment, but what initial
state distribution should the backward policy reset
the agent to? Assuming access to a few demonstrations, we propose a new method, MEDAL,
that trains the backward policy to match the state
distribution in the provided demonstrations. This
keeps the agent close to the task-relevant states,
allowing for a mix of easy and difficult starting
states for the forward policy. Our experiments
show that MEDAL matches or outperforms prior
methods on three sparse-reward continuous control tasks from the EARL benchmark, with 40%
gains on the hardest task, while making fewer assumptions than prior works. Code and videos are
at: https://sites.google.com/view/medal-arl/home

1. Introduction
A cornerstone of human and animal intelligence is the ability
to learn autonomously through trial and error. To that extent,
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Archit Sharma <architsh@stanford.edu>, Rehaan
Ahmad <rehaan@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. An overview of our proposed method MEDAL (right)
contrasting it with forward-backward RL (Han et al., 2015; Eysenbach et al., 2017) (left). MEDAL trains a backward policy
πb to pull the agent back to the state distribution defined by the
demonstrations, enabling the forward policy πf to the learn the
task efficiently in contrast to FBRL that retrieves the agent to the
initial state distribution before every trial of πf .

reinforcement learning (RL) presents a natural framework to
develop learning algorithms for embodied agents. Unfortunately, the predominant emphasis on episodic learning represents a departure from the continual non-episodic nature
of the real-world, which presents multiple technical challenges. First, episodic training undermines the autonomy of
the learning agent by requiring repeated extrinsic interventions to reset the environment after every trial, which can be
both time-consuming and expensive as these interventions
may have to be conducted by a human. Second, episodic
training from narrow initial state distributions can lead to
less robust policies that are reliant on environment resets to
recover; e.g. Sharma et al. (2022) show that policies learned
in episodic settings with narrow initial state distributions
are more sensitive to perturbations than those trained in
non-episodic settings.
Prior works have found that conventional RL algorithms
substantially depreciate in performance when applied in nonepisodic settings (Co-Reyes et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020a;
Sharma et al., 2022). Why do such algorithms struggle
to learn in non-episodic, autonomous RL (ARL) settings?
Resetting the environment after every single episode allows
for natural repetition: the agent can repeatedly practice the
task under a narrow set of initial conditions to incrementally
improve the policy. Critically, algorithms developed for

