p-Laplacian Based Graph Neural Networks

Guoji Fu 1 Peilin Zhao 1 Yatao Bian 1

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated superior performance for semi-supervised
node classification on graphs, as a result of their
ability to exploit node features and topological information. However, most GNNs implicitly assume that the labels of nodes and their
neighbors in a graph are the same or consistent, which does not hold in heterophilic graphs,
where the labels of linked nodes are likely to
differ. Moreover, when the topology is noninformative for label prediction, ordinary GNNs
may work significantly worse than simply applying multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) on each
node. To tackle the above problem, we propose
a new p-Laplacian based GNN model, termed
as p GNN, whose message passing mechanism
is derived from a discrete regularization framework and can be theoretically explained as an
approximation of a polynomial graph filter defined on the spectral domain of p-Laplacians.
The spectral analysis shows that the new message passing mechanism works as low-high-pass
filters, thus rendering p GNNs effective on both
homophilic and heterophilic graphs. Empirical
studies on real-world and synthetic datasets validate our findings and demonstrate that p GNNs
significantly outperform several state-of-the-art
GNN architectures on heterophilic benchmarks
while achieving competitive performance on homophilic benchmarks. Moreover, p GNNs can
adaptively learn aggregation weights and are robust to noisy edges.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we explore the usage of graph neural networks (GNNs) for semi-supervised node classification on
1

Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence
to:
Guoji Fu <guoji.leo.fu@gmail.com>, Yatao Bian
<yatao.bian@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

graphs, especially when the graphs admit strong heterophily or noisy edges. Semi-supervised learning on
graphs is ubiquitous in a lot of real-world scenarios, such
as user classification in social media (Kipf & Welling,
2017), protein classification in biology (Velickovic et al.,
2018), molecular property prediction in chemistry (Duvenaud et al., 2015), and many others (Marcheggiani & Titov,
2017; Satorras & Estrach, 2018). Recently, GNNs have become the de facto choice for processing graph structured
data. They can exploit the node features and the graph
topology by propagating and transforming the features over
the topology in each layer and thereby learn refined node
representations. A series of GNN architectures have been
proposed, including graph convolutional networks (Bruna
et al., 2014; Henaff et al., 2015; Niepert et al., 2016; Kipf
& Welling, 2017; Wu et al., 2019), graph attention networks (Velickovic et al., 2018; Thekumparampil et al.,
2018), and other representatives (Hamilton et al., 2017; Xu
et al., 2018; Pei et al., 2020).
Most of the existing GNN architectures work under the
homophily assumption, i.e. the labels of nodes and their
neighbors in a graph are the same or consistent, which is
also commonly used in graph clustering (Bach & Jordan,
2004; von Luxburg, 2007; Liu & Han, 2013) and semisupervised learning on graphs (Belkin et al., 2004; Hein,
2006; Nadler et al., 2009). However, recent studies (Zhu
et al., 2020; 2021; Chien et al., 2021) show that in contrast to their success on homophilic graphs, most GNNs
fail to work well on heterophilic graphs, in which linked
nodes are more likely to have distinct labels. Moreover,
GNNs could even fail on graphs where their topology is
not helpful for label prediction. In these cases, propagating and transforming node features over the graph topology could lead to worse performance than simply applying
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) on each of the nodes independently. Several recent works were proposed to deal with
the heterophily issues of GNNs. Zhu et al. (2020) finds that
heuristically combining ego-, neighbor, and higher-order
embeddings improves GNN performance on heterophilic
graphs. Zhu et al. (2021) uses a compatibility matrix to
model the graph homophily or heterphily level. Chien et al.
(2021) incorporates the generalized PageRank algorithm
with graph convolutions so as to jointly optimize node feature and topological information extraction for both ho-

