Blocks Assemble! Learning to Assemble with
Large-Scale Structured Reinforcement Learning

Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour 1 Daniel Freeman 1 Byron David 1 Shixiang Shane Gu 1

Satoshi Kataoka 1 * Igor Mordatch 1 *

Abstract
Assembly of multi-part physical structures is both
a valuable end product for autonomous robotics,
as well as a valuable diagnostic task for openended training of embodied intelligent agents. We
introduce a naturalistic physics-based environment with a set of connectable magnet blocks
inspired by children’s toy kits. The objective is
to assemble blocks into a succession of target
blueprints. Despite the simplicity of this objective, the compositional nature of building diverse
blueprints from a set of blocks leads to an explosion of complexity in structures that agents
encounter. Furthermore, assembly stresses agents’
multi-step planning, physical reasoning, and bimanual coordination. We find that the combination of large-scale reinforcement learning and
graph-based policies – surprisingly without any
additional complexity – is an effective recipe for
training agents that not only generalize to complex unseen blueprints in a zero-shot manner,
but even operate in a reset-free setting without
being trained to do so. Through extensive experiments, we highlight the importance of largescale training, structured representations, contributions of multi-task vs. single-task learning, as
well as the effects of curriculums, and discuss
qualitative behaviors of trained agents. Our accompanying project webpage can be found at:
sites.google.com/view/learning-direct-assembly

1. Introduction
Robotic assembly of objects from a given set of parts is an
incredibly intriguing avenue for research in artificial intelligence (AI). Not only is it a valuable capability we would
*
Equal supervision 1 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour <kamyar@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

like autonomous robots to possess, but it is a challenging
problem statement with open-ended complexity, touching
upon many fruitful avenues of AI research. Agents that can
assemble structures can reshape their surroundings, which
creates dynamic environments with more possibilities for
open-ended learning (Baker et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019;
Co-Reyes et al., 2020). A key feature of assembly is that due
to its compositional and modular nature, given a set of parts,
one can create objects on a broad spectrum of complexity.
Furthermore, in order to solve the assembly problem, agents
must acquire a diverse set of skills and capabilities. They
must learn to grasp and attach components in an order that
is amenable to successful completion. They must develop
physical reasoning capabilities to avoid collision, and they
need to learn bi-manual coordination. In addition, once
agents have acquired such skills, it is expected that they can
rapidly learn to create new desired objects.
To study assembly, we create a simulated but naturalistic
environment which consists of blocks of varying shapes
that can be magnetically attached to one-another. Agents
are then tasked with constructing a desired structure from
one of almost 200 pre-designed blueprints (although generative models can be used to automate this process (Thompson et al., 2020)). In this environment, in lieu of grasping
robotic arms, we enable agents to directly move desired
blocks. Such direct manipulation and the use of magnetic
connections (instead of more complex joining mechanisms)
abstracts away some details of the assembly problem while
retaining many of the challenges that make the problem hard
and interesting. Compared robot manipulation tasks which
emphasize rearrangement and stacking (Li et al., 2020; OpenAI et al., 2021), the compositional nature of assembly from
a set of blocks leads to an agent continually encountering
new structures of varying complexities, which necessitates
developing a richer representation of what constitutes an
“object” (Spelke, 1990). In addition, our magnetic assembly
benchmark stresses multi-step planning, physical reasoning,
and bimanual coordination.
Despite the complexity of this problem, we find that it is
possible to train a single agent that can simultaneously assemble all given blueprint tasks, generalize to complex un-

