Reachability Constrained Reinforcement Learning

Dongjie Yu * 1 Haitong Ma * 1 2 Shengbo Eben Li 1 Jianyu Chen 3 4

Abstract

State space
Safe set

Constrained reinforcement learning (CRL) has
gained significant interest recently, since safety
constraints satisfaction is critical for real-world
problems. However, existing CRL methods constraining discounted cumulative costs generally
lack rigorous definition and guarantee of safety.
In contrast, in the safe control research, safety
is defined as persistently satisfying certain state
constraints. Such persistent safety is possible only
on a subset of the state space, called feasible set,
where an optimal largest feasible set exists for a
given environment. Recent studies incorporate
feasible sets into CRL with energy-based methods such as control barrier function (CBF), safety
index (SI), and leverage prior conservative estimations of feasible sets, which harms the performance of the learned policy. To deal with this
problem, this paper proposes the reachability CRL
(RCRL) method by using reachability analysis
to establish the novel self-consistency condition
and characterize the feasible sets. The feasible
sets are represented by the safety value function,
which is used as the constraint in CRL. We use the
multi-time scale stochastic approximation theory
to prove that the proposed algorithm converges
to a local optimum, where the largest feasible set
can be guaranteed. Empirical results on different benchmarks validate the learned feasible set,
the policy performance, and constraint satisfaction of RCRL, compared to CRL and safe control
baselines.

Inevitably unsafe states

Persistently
safe states

A conservative feasible
set (energy function)
The largest
feasible set (RCRL)

Figure 1. The intuitive relationship among the state space, the safe
states, feasible sets and the largest feasible set.

1. Introduction
Constrained reinforcement learning (CRL) has gained growing attention due to the safety requirements in the practical
applications of RL. The safety specifications in common
CRL methods are expected discounted cumulative costs
(Altman, 1999; Achiam et al., 2017; Tessler et al., 2019;
Yang et al., 2020). However, the main deficiency of expected
costs is averaging the potential danger at a state to the whole
trajectory. For example, the autonomous vehicle should
always keep a safe distance to other traffic participants but
not keep the cumulative or average distance during a period
when the collision might happen at a single time step. Therefore, constraints imposed on expected cumulative costs lack
rigorous definition and guarantee of safety.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. This work was conducted during Haitong’s
graduate study at Tsinghua University. 3 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Shanghai Qizhi Institute, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to:
Shengbo Eben Li <lishbo@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Meanwhile, the persistent state constraint satisfaction in the
safe control research clarifies the safety of states with rigorous definitions (Liu & Tomizuka, 2014; Ames et al., 2019;
Choi et al., 2021). Rich theoretical and practical techniques
for ensuring safety in such settings are provided, where an
important fact is that only a subset of states can be guaranteed safe persistently, called the feasible set. Outside of the
feasible set, even temporally safe states will violate the constraints inevitably in the future, no matter what policies to
choose, as shown in Figure 1. For example, if a vehicle with
high speed is too close to a front obstacle, it is doomed to
crash since the deceleration capability is limited. Therefore,
accurately identifying feasible sets in CRL can significantly
affect the performance and safety of the learned policy.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Some recent RL studies adopt energy-based methods to
handle persistent safety and characterize feasible sets. Representatives include control barrier function (CBF) (Ames

