Measuring Representational Robustness of Neural Networks
Through Shared Invariances

Vedant Nanda 1 2 Till Speicher 2 Camila Kolling 3 John P. Dickerson 1 Krishna P. Gummadi 2 Adrian Weller 4 5

Abstract
A major challenge in studying robustness in deep
learning is defining the set of “meaningless” perturbations to which a given Neural Network (NN)
should be invariant. Most work on robustness
implicitly uses a human as the reference model
to define such perturbations. Our work offers
a new view on robustness by using another reference NN to define the set of perturbations a
given NN should be invariant to, thus generalizing the reliance on a reference “human NN”
to any NN. This makes measuring robustness
equivalent to measuring the extent to which two
NNs share invariances. We propose a measure
called STIR, which faithfully captures the extent
to which two NNs share invariances. STIR repurposes existing representation similarity measures to make them suitable for measuring shared
invariances. Using our measure, we are able to
gain insights about how shared invariances vary
with changes in weight initialization, architecture,
loss functions, and training dataset. Our implementation is available at: https://github.
com/nvedant07/STIR.

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks are increasingly deployed in realworld scenarios, robustness of their automatically learned
feature representations has emerged as a key desideratum.
Prior works have defined many measures of robustness corresponding to different types of synthetically-generated or
naturally-occurring perturbations that can be applied to the
inputs and their distributions (e.g., adversarial inputs (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2013; Papernot et al., 2016)
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Max Planck Institute for Software Systems 3 PUCRS 4 University of Cambridge
5
The Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to: Vedant Nanda
<vedant@cs.umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

or distributional shifts (Geirhos et al., 2018; Hendrycks &
Dietterich, 2019; Engstrom et al., 2019; Fawzi & Frossard,
2015; Taori et al., 2020)). The common property underlying
the different robustness measures is that they all attempt
to capture the extent to which the learned representations
remain invariant (i.e., unchanged) under some defined set
of perturbations.
In this paper, we propose a new way to study, understand,
and characterize robustness of neural networks. Our key
insight is that the set of input perturbations against which
a neural network’s robustness is measured, can itself be
defined by another reference neural network. Specifically,
given a reference neural network, we first obtain a set of
input perturbations that are imperceptible to the reference
network (i.e., find inputs with invariant reference representations), and then check the extent to which representations
of other neural networks are invariant to these perturbations.
Our proposal allows us to measure relative invariance of
two neural network representations and estimate the degree
to which the two neural networks share representational
invariance. Intuitively, our proposal generalizes the often
unstated, but implicit assumption behind all interesting sets
of perturbations used in robustness studies today: they are
perturbations that are imperceptible to a particular reference
neural network, the human brain.
Comparing representational invariance of two neural networks is an important aspect of determining their representational (or perceptual) alignment. Assessing representational
alignment is crucial for a future society with interacting
agents controlled by neural networks (e.g., cars driven by
different deep learning systems). Additionally, the ability
to measure relative invariance, and therefore robustness,
of deep neural network representations can offer insights
into interesting questions such as: when updating a model,
to what extent are invariances preserved (which may be
crucial to regulators for safety assurance)? How does representational invariance vary with the choice of network
architectures, loss functions, random weight initialization,
and datasets used in the training process?
Our work is inspired by and builds upon previous studies investigating similarity between deep neural network
representations (Raghu et al., 2017; Morcos et al., 2018;

