Learning to Solve PDE-constrained Inverse Problems with Graph Networks

Qingqing Zhao 1 David B. Lindell 1 Gordon Wetzstein 1

1. Introduction
Understanding and modeling the dynamics of physical systems is crucial across science and engineering. Among
the most popular approaches to solving partial differential
equations (PDEs) are mesh-based finite element simulations,
which are widely used in electromagnetism (Pardo et al.,
2007), aerodynamics (Economon et al., 2016; Ramamurti
& Sandberg, 2001), weather prediction (Bauer et al., 2015),
and geophysics (Schwarzbach et al., 2011). Learning-based
methods for mesh-based simulations have recently made
much progress (Pfaff et al., 2021), offering faster runtimes
than principled solvers, better adaptivity to the simulation
domain compared to grid-based convolutional neural network (CNNs) (Thürey et al., 2020; Wandel et al., 2021), and
generalization across simulations. State-of-the-art learningbased mesh simulators operate on adaptive meshes using
1
Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Qingqing
Zhao <cyanzhao@stanford.edu>,
David B. Lindell
<lindell@stanford.edu>,
Gordon
Wetzstein
<gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

GNN

y

x

e

𝒖𝒙 (𝒙𝒊 )

Predicted
dynamics

Learned
Forward
Model

tim

Learned Prior

y

tim

x

e

𝒖𝒚 (𝒙𝒊 )

b) Inverse Problem Results

Observations
Wave Equation

Learned graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently been established as fast and accurate alternatives for principled solvers in simulating the dynamics of physical systems. In many application
domains across science and engineering, however,
we are not only interested in a forward simulation
but also in solving inverse problems with constraints defined by a partial differential equation
(PDE). Here we explore GNNs to solve such PDEconstrained inverse problems. We demonstrate
that GNNs combined with autodecoder-style priors are well-suited for these tasks, achieving more
accurate estimates of initial conditions or physical
parameters than other learned approaches when
applied to the wave equation or Navier–Stokes
equations. We also demonstrate computational
speedups of up to 90× using GNNs compared to
principled solvers.

a) Pipeline

Predicted dynamics

GT dynamics

tim
e

Navier Stokes
Equations

Abstract

Figure 1. (a) Pipeline for our approach: we first pre-train the prior
and a Graph Neural Network (GNN) for a given class of problems
in a supervised manner using a dataset generated from classical
FEM solvers. Here, the GNN is a fully-differentiable forward
simulator and the prior is a generative model learned over the
space of physics parameters of interest. At test time, the generative
model maps the latent code to the estimated physics parameter that
is passed to the GNN to obtained the predicted dynamics. The
latent code is then optimized to minimize the difference between
predicted and observed dynamics on the graph. (b) We demonstrate the proposed method for solving inverse problems governed
by the wave equation or Navier–Stokes equations. From sparse
observations, the method recovers the complete evolution of the
dynamics.

graph networks (Pfaff et al., 2021). While this approach
has been successful in simulating the dynamics of physical
systems, it remains unclear how to leverage these network
architectures to efficiently solve PDE-constrained inverse
problems of the form in Eq. (1).
minimize L (H (ut=1...T ) , yt=1...T ) ,
{u0 ,θ}

(1)

s.t. ut+1 = Mθ (ut ) ,
where ut ∈ CN is the state of the simulation modeled at
N nodes of the mesh at time t = 1 . . . T ; the operator H :

