Off-Policy Fitted Q-Evaluation with Differentiable Function Approximators:
Z-Estimation and Inference Theory

Ruiqi Zhang 1 Xuezhou Zhang 2 Chengzhuo Ni 2 Mengdi Wang 2 3

Abstract
Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE) serves as one of the
cornerstones in Reinforcement Learning (RL). Fitted Q Evaluation (FQE) with various function approximators, especially deep neural networks, has
gained practical success. While statistical analysis has proved FQE to be minimax-optimal with
tabular, linear and several nonparametric function
families, its practical performance with more general function approximator is less theoretically
understood. We focus on FQE with general differentiable function approximators, making our theory applicable to neural function approximations.
We approach this problem using the Z-estimation
theory and establish the following results: The
FQE estimation error is asymptotically normal
with explicit variance determined jointly by the
tangent space of the function class at the ground
truth, the reward structure, and the distribution
shift due to off-policy learning; The finite-sample
FQE error bound is dominated by the same variance term, and it can also be bounded by function
class-dependent divergence, which measures how
the off-policy distribution shift intertwines with
the function approximator. In addition, we study
bootstrapping FQE estimators for error distribution inference and estimating confidence intervals,
accompanied by a Cramer-Rao lower bound that
matches our upper bounds. The Z-estimation analysis provides a generalizable theoretical framework for studying off-policy estimation in RL and
provides sharp statistical theory for FQE with differentiable function approximators.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking
University 2 Department of Electrical Computer Engineering,
Princeton University 3 Deepmind. Correspondence to: Mengdi
Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE) studies the problem where
one aims to estimate the expected cumulative rewards of a
target policy in a Markov decision process, by using only
off-policy data, e.g. data generated from some possibly
unknown behavior policy different from the one to be evaluated. OPE plays a central role in sample-efficient reinforcement learning, both in online RL where it helps off-policy
algorithms achieve superior sample efficiency through data
reuse, and in offline RL such as medical applications where
online experimentation becomes prohibited.
Among various approaches to OPE (more discussed in Section 2), we focus on a specific family of algorithms known
as Fitted Q-Evaluation (FQE), that performs iterative regressions to estimate the Q function of the target policy
(Munos & Szepesvári, 2008; Le et al., 2019). Q or value
function approximation is widely used in RL practice in
conjunction with neural networks, and has been a key component in many empirically successful RL algorithms, such
as the Deep-Q-Network (DQN) and its variants (Mnih et al.,
2013), and Actor-Critic and its variants (Mnih et al., 2016).
For neural networks, their differentiability is arguably a
most important feature that contributes to its generalizability, computation efficiency, and versatility. While most statistical analyses for OPE or FQE focus on specific tabular,
parametric (linear, finite) or non-parametric (kernel, Hölder)
function classes, we wish to establish theories that are flexible enough to capture most commonly used differential
function approximators, including neural networks.
Statistical theory of OPE is nontrivial due to the distribution
shift from off-policy data to the target policy’s unknown
state-action occupancy measures. When a function approximator is employed, the effect of distribution shift becomes
more subtle.
In this paper we adopt a substantially more powerful theoretical tool, i.e. the Z-estimation theory, to analyze statistical
properties of FQE with general differentiable function class.
Roughly speaking, we can view the FQE estimator as the
root to a system of equations (i.e. Karush–Kuhn–Tucker
conditions for least-square regression), whose parameters
come from an empirical process. We study the statistical

