Large-scale Stochastic Optimization of NDCG Surrogates for
Deep Learning with Provable Convergence

Zi-Hao Qiu * 1 Quanqi Hu * 2 Yongjian Zhong 2 Lijun Zhang 1 Tianbao Yang 2

Abstract

NDCG, namely Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain, is a widely used ranking metric in
information retrieval and machine learning. However, efficient and provable stochastic methods for
maximizing NDCG are still lacking, especially
for deep models. In this paper, we propose a
principled approach to optimize NDCG and its
top-K variant. First, we formulate a novel compositional optimization problem for optimizing
the NDCG surrogate, and a novel bilevel compositional optimization problem for optimizing
the top-K NDCG surrogate. Then, we develop
efficient stochastic algorithms with provable convergence guarantees for the non-convex objectives. Different from existing NDCG optimization methods, the per-iteration complexity of our
algorithms scales with the mini-batch size instead
of the number of total items. To improve the
effectiveness for deep learning, we further propose practical strategies by using initial warmup and stop gradient operator. Experimental results on multiple datasets demonstrate that our
methods outperform prior ranking approaches in
terms of NDCG. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first time that stochastic algorithms
are proposed to optimize NDCG with a provable convergence guarantee. Our proposed methods are implemented in the LibAUC library at
https://libauc.org/.

*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 the University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA. Correspondence to: Lijun
Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Tianbao Yang <tianbaoyang@uiowa.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
NDCG is a performance metric of primary interest for learning to rank in information retrieval (Liu, 2011), and is also
adopted in many machine learning tasks where ranking is of
foremost importance (Liu & Yang, 2008; Bhatia et al., 2015).
In the following, we use the terminologies from information
retrieval to describe NDCG and our methods. The goal is to
rank the relevant items higher than irrelevant items for any
given query. For a query q and a list of n items, the ranking
model assigns a score for each item, and then we obtain an
ordered list by sorting these scores in descending order. The
NDCG score for q can be computed by:
n
2yi − 1
1 X
,
(1)
NDCGq =
Zq i=1 log2 (1 + r(i))
where yi denotes the relevance score of the i-th item, r(i)
denotes the rank of the i-th item in the ordered list, and Zq
is a normalization factor that is the Discounted Cumulative
Gain (DCG) score (Järvelin & Kekäläinen, 2002) of the
optimal ranking for q. The top-K variant of NDCG can
be defined similarly by summing over items whose ranks
are in the top K positions of the ordered list. In many realworld applications, e.g., recommender systems, we want to
recommend a small set of K items from a large collection
of items (Cremonesi et al., 2010), thus top-K NDCG is a
popular metric in these applications.
There are several challenges for optimizing NDCG and
its top-K variant. First, computing the rank of each item
among all n items is expensive. Second, the rank operator is non-differentiable in terms of model parameters. To
tackle non-differentiability, surrogate functions have been
proposed in the literature for approximating NDCG and its
top-K variant (Taylor et al., 2008; Qin et al., 2010; Swezey
et al., 2021; Pobrotyn & Bialobrzeski, 2021). However, to
the best of our knowledge, the computational challenge of
computing the gradient of (1) that involves sorting n items
has never been addressed. All existing gradient-based methods have a complexity of O(nd) per-iteration, where d is the
number of model parameters, which is prohibitive for deep
learning tasks with big n and big d. A naive approach is to
update the model parameters by the gradient of the NDCG
surrogate over a mini-batch of samples, however, since the

