Blurs Behave Like Ensembles:
Spatial Smoothings to Improve Accuracy, Uncertainty, and Robustness

Namuk Park 1 Songkuk Kim 2
Observed
data

1

NAVER AI Lab 2 Yonsei University. Correspondence to:
Namuk Park <namuk.park@navercorp.com>, Songkuk Kim
<songkuk@yonsei.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

t=-1

t=-2

x0

x1

x0

x-1

x-2

x2

x3

p0

p1

p2

p3

x0
p1

p2

p0

p-1

p-2

Importance

Prediction

p0

✕
✕

✕

✕

✕

✕

✕

1/N

1/N

1/N

π0

π-1

π-2

π0

π1

π2

π3

✕

In a real-world environment where many unexpected events
occur, machine learning systems cannot be guaranteed to

t=0

✕

1. Introduction

Temporally proximate Spatially proximate
data stream
data points

✕

Neural network ensembles, such as Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), have shown success in the
areas of uncertainty estimation and robustness.
However, a crucial challenge prohibits their use
in practice. BNNs require a large number of predictions to produce reliable results, leading to a
significant increase in computational cost. To alleviate this issue, we propose spatial smoothing, a
method that spatially ensembles neighboring feature map points of convolutional neural networks.
By simply adding a few blur layers to the models, we empirically show that spatial smoothing
improves accuracy, uncertainty estimation, and
robustness of BNNs across a whole range of ensemble sizes. In particular, BNNs incorporating
spatial smoothing achieve high predictive performance merely with a handful of ensembles. Moreover, this method also can be applied to canonical
deterministic neural networks to improve the performances. A number of evidences suggest that
the improvements can be attributed to the stabilized feature maps and the smoothing of the loss
landscape. In addition, we provide a fundamental
explanation for prior works—namely, global average pooling, pre-activation, and ReLU6—by addressing them as special cases of spatial smoothing. These not only enhance accuracy, but also
improve uncertainty estimation and robustness by
making the loss landscape smoother in the same
manner as spatial smoothing.

Input

Abstract

Canonical BNN

Temporal smoothing

Spatial smoothing

Figure 1: Comparison of three different neural network
ensembles: canonical BNN inference, temporal smoothing
(Park et al., 2021), and spatial smoothing (ours). In this
figure, x0 is observed data, pi is predictions p(y|x0 , wi ) or
p(y|xi , wi ), πi is importances π(xi |x0 ), and N is ensemble size.
always produce accurate predictions. In order to handle
this issue, we make system decisions more reliable by considering estimated uncertainties, in addition to predictions.
Uncertainty quantification is particularly crucial in building
a trustworthy system in the field of safety-critical applications, including medical analysis and autonomous vehicle
control. However, canonical deep neural networks (NNs)—
or deterministic NNs—cannot produce reliable estimations
of uncertainties (Guo et al., 2017), and their accuracy is often severely compromised by natural data corruptions from
noise, blur, and weather changes (Engstrom et al., 2019;
Azulay & Weiss, 2019).
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), such as Monte Carlo
(MC) dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), provide a probabilistic representation of NN weights. They aggregate a
number of models selected based on weight probability to
make predictions of desired results. Thanks to this feature,
BNNs have been widely used in the areas of uncertainty
estimation (Kendall & Gal, 2017) and robustness (Ovadia

