Private Frequency Estimation via Projective Geometry

Vitaly Feldman * 1 Jelani Nelson * 2 Huy Nguyen * 3 Kunal Talwar * 1

Abstract
In this work, we propose a new algorithm ProjectiveGeometryResponse (PGR) for locally
differentially private (LDP) frequency estimation. For a universe size of k and with n
users, our -LDP algorithm has communication
cost dlog2 ke bits in the private coin setting
and  log2 e + O(1) in the public coin setting,
and has computation cost O(n + k exp() log k)
for the server to approximately reconstruct the
frequency histogram, while achieving optimal
privacy-utility tradeoff (not just asymptotically).
In many parameter settings used in practice this is
a significant improvement over the O(n + k 2 )
computation cost that is achieved by the recent PI-RAPPOR algorithm (Feldman and Talwar; 2021). Our empirical evaluation shows a
speedup of over 50x over PI-RAPPOR while
using approximately 75x less memory for practically relevant parameter settings. In addition,
the running time of our algorithm is within an
order of magnitude of HadamardResponse
(Acharya, Sun, and Zhang; 2019) and RecursiveHadamardResponse (Chen, Kairouz, and
Ozgur; 2020) which have significantly worse reconstruction error. The error of our algorithm essentially matches that of the communication- and
time-inefficient but utility-optimal SubsetSelection (SS) algorithm (Ye and Barg; 2017). Our new
algorithm is based on using Projective Planes over
a finite field to define a small collection of sets
that are close to being pairwise independent and a
dynamic programming algorithm for approximate
histogram reconstruction on the server side. We
also give an extension of PGR that allows trading
off computation time with utility smoothly.
*

Equal contribution 1 Apple, Cupertino, CA, USA 2 UC
Berkeley, CA, USA 3 Northeastern University, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Vitaly Feldman <vitaly.edu@gmail.com>,
Jelani Nelson <minilek@berkeley.edu>, Huy Nguyen
<hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu>,
Kunal
Talwar
<kunal@kunaltalwar.org>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In the so-called federated setting, user data is distributed
over many devices that each communicate to some central
server, after some local processing, for downstream analytics and/or machine learning tasks. We desire such schemes
which (1) minimize communication cost, (2) maintain privacy of the user data while still providing utility to the
server, and (3) support efficient algorithms for the server to
extract knowledge from messages sent by the devices. Such
settings have found applications to training language models for such applications as autocomplete and spellcheck,
and other analytics applications in Apple iOS (Thakurta
et al., 2017) and analytics on settings in Google Chrome
(Erlingsson et al., 2014).
The gold standard for protecting privacy is for a scheme to
satisfy differential privacy. In the so-called local model that
is relevant to the federated setting, there are n users with
each user i holding some data di ∈ D. Each user then uses
its own private randomness ri and data di to run a local
randomizer algorithm that produces a random message Mi
to send to the server. We say the scheme is -differentially
private if for all users i, any possible message m, and any
d 6= d0 ,
Pr(Mi = m|di = d) ≤ e Pr(Mi = m|di = d0 ).
Note a user could simply send an unambiguous encoding
of di , which allows the server to learn di exactly (perfect
utility), but privacy is not preserved; such a scheme does
not preserve -DP for any finite . On the opposite extreme,
the user could simply send a uniformly random message
that is independent of di , which provides zero utility but
perfect privacy ( = 0). One can hope to develop schemes
that smoothly increase utility by relaxing privacy (i.e., by
increasing ).
This work addresses the problem of designing efficient
schemes for locally differentially private frequency estimation. In this problem, one defines a histogram x ∈ Rk
where xd is the number of users i with di = d, and k = |D|.
From the n randomized messages it receives, the server
would like to approximately reconstruct the histogram, i.e.,
compute some x̃ such that kx − x̃k is small with good probability over the randomness r = (r1 , . . . , rn ), for some
norm k · k. Our goal is to design schemes that obtain the

