Exact Optimal Accelerated Complexity for Fixed-Point Iterations

Jisun Park 1 Ernest K. Ryu 1

Abstract
Despite the broad use of fixed-point iterations
throughout applied mathematics, the optimal convergence rate of general fixed-point problems with
nonexpansive nonlinear operators has not been
established. This work presents an acceleration
mechanism for fixed-point iterations with nonexpansive operators, contractive operators, and
nonexpansive operators satisfying a Hölder-type
growth condition. We then provide matching complexity lower bounds to establish the exact optimality of the acceleration mechanisms in the nonexpansive and contractive setups. Finally, we provide experiments with CT imaging, optimal transport, and decentralized optimization to demonstrate the practical effectiveness of the acceleration mechanism.

of Lieder (2021); Kim (2021); Yoon & Ryu (2021), and is
distinct from Nesterov’s acceleration.
1.1. Preliminaries and notations
We review standard definitions and set up the notation.
Monotone and set-valued operators. We follow standard notation of Bauschke & Combettes (2017); Ryu & Yin
(2020). For the underlying space, consider Rn with standard
inner product ⟨·, ·⟩ and norm ∥ · ∥, although our results can
be extended to infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces.
We say 𝔸 is an operator on Rn and write 𝔸 : Rn ⇒ Rn if
𝔸 maps a point in Rn to a subset of Rn . For notational simplicity, also write 𝔸x = 𝔸(x). Write Gra 𝔸 = {(x, u) |
u ∈ 𝔸x} for the graph of 𝔸. Write 𝕀 : Rn → Rn for the
identity operator. We say 𝔸 : Rn ⇒ Rn is monotone if
⟨𝔸x − 𝔸y, x − y⟩ ≥ 0,

1. Introduction
n

n

The fixed-point iteration with 𝕋 : R → R computes
xk+1 = 𝕋xk
for k = 0, 1, . . . with some starting point x0 ∈ Rn . The
general rubric of formulating solutions of a problem at hand
as fixed points of an operator and then performing the fixedpoint iterations is ubiquitous throughout applied mathematics, science, engineering, and machine learning.
Surprisingly, however, the iteration complexity of the abstract fixed-point iteration has not been thoroughly studied.
This stands in sharp contrast with the literature on convex optimization algorithms, where convergence rates and
matching lower bounds are carefully studied.
In this paper, we establish the exact optimal complexity of
fixed-point iterations by providing an accelerated method
and a matching complexity lower bound. The acceleration is
based on a Halpern mechanism, which follows the footsteps
1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Ernest K. Ryu <ernestryu@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

∀x, y ∈ Rn ,

i.e., if ⟨u − v, x − y⟩ ≥ 0 for all u ∈ 𝔸x and v ∈ 𝔸y. For
µ ∈ (0, ∞), say 𝔸 : Rn ⇒ Rn is µ-strongly monotone if
⟨𝔸x − 𝔸y, x − y⟩ ≥ µ∥x − y∥2 ,

∀x, y ∈ Rn .

An operator 𝔸 is maximally monotone if there is no other
monotone 𝔹 such that Gra 𝔸 ⊂ Gra 𝔹 properly, and is
maximally µ-strongly monotone if there is no other µstrongly monotone 𝔹 such that Gra 𝔸 ⊂ Gra 𝔹 properly.
For L ∈ (0, ∞), single-valued operator 𝕋 : Rn → Rn is
L-Lipschitz if
∥𝕋x − 𝕋y∥ ≤ L∥x − y∥,

∀x, y ∈ Rn .

𝕋 is contractive if it is L-Lipschitz with L < 1 and nonexpansive if it is 1-Lipschitz. For θ ∈ (0, 1), an operator
𝕊 : Rn → Rn is θ-averaged if 𝕊 = (1 − θ)𝕀 + θ𝕋 and a
nonexpansive operator 𝕋.
Write 𝕁𝔸 = (𝕀 + 𝔸)−1 for the resolvent of 𝔸, and ℝ𝔸 =
2𝕁𝔸 −𝕀 for the reflected resolvent of 𝔸. When 𝔸 is maximal
monotone, it is well known that 𝕁𝔸 is single-valued with
dom 𝕁𝔸 = Rn , ℝ𝔸 is a nonexpansive operator, and 𝕁𝔸 =
1
1
2 𝕀 + 2 ℝ𝔸 is 1/2-averaged.
We say x⋆ ∈ Rn is a zero of 𝔸 if 0 ∈ 𝔸x⋆ . We say y⋆
is a fixed-point of 𝕋 if 𝕋y⋆ = y⋆ . Write Zer 𝔸 for the set

