Learning Symmetric Embeddings for Equivariant World Models

Jung Yeon Park * 1 Ondrej Biza * 1 Linfeng Zhao 1 Jan Willem van de Meent 2 1 Robin Walters 1

Abstract
Incorporating symmetries can lead to highly dataefficient and generalizable models by defining
equivalence classes of data samples related by
transformations. However, characterizing how
transformations act on input data is often difficult, limiting the applicability of equivariant models. We propose learning symmetric embedding
networks (SENs) that encode an input space (e.g.
images), where we do not know the effect of transformations (e.g. rotations), to a feature space that
transforms in a known manner under these operations. This network can be trained end-to-end
with an equivariant task network to learn an explicitly symmetric representation. We validate this
approach in the context of equivariant transition
models with 3 distinct forms of symmetry. Our
experiments demonstrate that SENs facilitate the
application of equivariant networks to data with
complex symmetry representations. Moreover,
doing so can yield improvements in accuracy and
generalization relative to both fully-equivariant
and non-equivariant baselines.

1. Introduction
Symmetry has proved to be a powerful inductive bias for
improving generalization in supervised and unsupervised
learning. A symmetry group defines equivalence classes
of inputs and outputs in terms of transformations that can
be performed on the input along with corresponding transformations for the output. Recent years have seen many
proposed equivariant models that incorporate symmetries
into deep neural networks (Cohen & Welling, 2016; 2017;
Cohen et al., 2019; Weiler & Cesa, 2019; Weiler et al., 2018;
*
Equal contribution 1 Khoury College of Computer Sciences,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA 2 Informatics Institute,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Jung Yeon Park <park.jungy@northeastern.edu>,
Ondrej Biza <biza.o@northeastern.edu>, Robin Walters
<r.walters@northeastern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Equivariant networks consider transformations of
inputs that are easy to compute, such as in-plane rotations
for MNIST digits. This paper considers transformations
that are difficult to compute, such as rotations of 3D objects
like cars (Carvana, 2017). Symmetric embedding networks
learn representations which are transformed simply.

Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Bao & Song, 2019; Worrall et al.,
2017). This results in models that are often more parameter
efficient, more sample efficient, and safer to use by behaving
more consistently in new environments.
However, the applicability of equivariant models is impeded
in that it is not always obvious how a symmetry group acts
on input data. For example, consider the pairs of images in
Figure 1. On the left, we have MNIST digits where a 2D
rotation in pixel space induces a corresponding rotation in
feature space. Here an E(2)-equivariant network achieves
state of the art accuracy (Weiler & Cesa, 2019). In contrast,
exploiting the underlying symmetry is challenging for the
images on the right, which are of the same object in two orientations. While there is also an underlying symmetry group
of rotations, it is not easy to characterize the transformation
in pixel space associated with a particular rotation.
In this paper, we consider the task of learning symmetric
representations of data in domains where transformations
cannot be hard-coded, i.e. the group action is unknown. We
train a network that maps an input space, for which the
group action is difficult to characterize, onto a latent space,

