Adaptive Best-of-Both-Worlds Algorithm for Heavy-Tailed Multi-Armed
Bandits
Jiatai Huang * 1 Yan Dai * 1 Longbo Huang 1

Abstract
In this paper, we generalize the concept of heavytailed multi-armed bandits to adversarial environments, and develop robust best-of-both-worlds
algorithms for heavy-tailed multi-armed bandits
(MAB), where losses have α-th (1 < α ≤ 2) moments bounded by σ α , while the variances may
not exist. Specifically, we design an algorithm
HTINF, when the heavy-tail parameters α and σ
are known to the agent, HTINF simultaneously
achieves the optimal regret for both stochastic and
adversarial environments, without knowing the
actual environment type a-priori. When α, σ are
unknown, HTINF achieves a log T -style instancedependent regret in stochastic cases and o(T ) noregret guarantee in adversarial cases. We further develop an algorithm AdaTINF, achieving
O(σK 1−1/α T 1/α ) minimax optimal regret even
in adversarial settings, without prior knowledge
on α and σ. This result matches the known regret lower-bound (Bubeck et al., 2013), which
assumed a stochastic environment and α and σ
are both known. To our knowledge, the proposed
HTINF algorithm is the first to enjoy a best-ofboth-worlds regret guarantee, and AdaTINF is
the first algorithm that can adapt to both α and σ
to achieve optimal gap-indepedent regret bound
in classical heavy-tailed stochastic MAB setting
and our novel adversarial formulation.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we focus on the multi-armed bandit problem
with heavy-tailed losses. Specifically, in our setting, there is
an agent facing K feasible actions (called bandit arms) to
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Longbo Huang <longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

sequentially make decisions on. For each time step t ∈ [T ],1
each arm i ∈ [K] is associated with a loss distribution νt,i
which is unknown to the agent. The only constraint on νt,i
is that the α-th moment (α ∈ (1, 2]) is bounded by some
constant σ α , i.e., E`∼νt,i [|`|α ] ≤ σ α for all t ∈ [T ] and
i ∈ [K]. However, neither α nor σ is known to the agent.
At each step t, the agent picks an arm it and observes a loss
`t,it drawn from the distribution νt,it , which is independent
to all previous steps. The goal of the agent is to minimize
the pseudo-regret, which is defined by the expected difference between the loss he suffered and the loss of always
pulling the best arm in hindsight (formally defined in Definition 3.2), where the expectation is taken with respect to
the randomness both in the algorithm and the environment.
Prior MAB literature mostly studies settings where the loss
distributions are supported on a bounded interval I (e.g.,
I = [0, 1]) known to the agent before-hand, which is a special case of our setting where all νt,i ’s are Dirac measures
centered within I (Seldin & Slivkins, 2014; Zimmert &
Seldin, 2019). By constrast, there is another common existing MAB setting called scale-free MAB (De Rooij et al.,
2014; Orabona & Pál, 2018), where the range of losses are
not known. In this case, the loss range itself can even depend
on other scale parameter of the problem instance (e.g., T and
K) rather than being a constant. Our heavy-tailed setting
can be seen as an intermediate setting between boundedloss MAB and scale-free MAB, where loss feedback can
be indefinitely large, but not in a completely arbitrary manner. This setting naturally extends classical MAB settings,
including bounded-loss MAB and sub-Gaussian-loss MAB.
Following the convention of prior MAB literature, we further distinguish the environment into two typical types.
Environment of the first type consists with time homogeneous distributions, i.e., for each i ∈ [K], νt,i = ν1,i
holds for all t ∈ [T ]. We call them stochastic environments. Bubeck et al. (2013) proved that, for heavy-tailed
stochastic bandits, even when α and σ are both known to the
agent, an Ω(σK 1−1/α T 1/α ) instance-independent regret and
P
α
− 1
Ω(σ α−1 i6=i∗ log T ∆i α−1 ) instance-dependent regret is
1
Throughout the paper, we use [n] to denote the set
{1, 2, . . . , n}.

