Branching Reinforcement Learning

Yihan Du 1 Wei Chen 2

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel Branching Reinforcement Learning (Branching RL) model, and
investigate both Regret Minimization (RM) and
Reward-Free Exploration (RFE) metrics for this
model. Unlike standard RL where the trajectory
of each episode is a single H-step path, branching
RL allows an agent to take multiple base actions
in a state such that transitions branch out to multiple successor states correspondingly, and thus it
generates a tree-structured trajectory. This model
finds important applications in hierarchical recommendation systems and online advertising. For
branching RL, we establish new Bellman equations and key lemmas, i.e., branching value difference lemma and branching law of total variance,
and also bound the total variance by only O(H 2 )
under an exponentially-large trajectory. For RM
and RFE metrics, we propose computationally efficient algorithms BranchVI and BranchRFE, respectively, and derive nearly matching upper and
lower bounds. Our regret and sample complexity
results are polynomial in all problem parameters
despite exponentially-large trajectories.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Burnetas & Katehakis, 1997;
Sutton & Barto, 2018) models a fundamental sequential
decision making problem, where an agent interacts with the
environment over time in order to maximize the obtained
rewards. Standard RL (Jaksch et al., 2010; Agrawal &
Jia, 2017; Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Zanette &
Brunskill, 2019) considers taking only a single action in a
state and formulates a single H-step path model. However,
in many real-world applications such as recommendation
systems (Fu et al., 2021) and online advertising (Kang et al.,
2020), we often need to select multiple options at a time, and
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to: Yihan Du <duyh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Wei Chen <weic@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

each option can trigger a corresponding successor state. For
example, in category-based shopping recommendation (Fu
et al., 2021), the recommendation system often displays a
list of main categories at the first step, where each one has
a probability to be clicked. If a main category is clicked,
at the second step, the system further provides a list of
sub-categories according to the clicked main category. By
analogy, at the last step, the system provides a list of items
according to the chosen category path. In this process, users
can select (trigger) more than one category-item paths, e.g.,
one may buy IT accessories-printers-laser printers and IT
accessories-scanners-document scanners at once.
To handle such scenarios involving multiple actions and successor states, we propose a novel Branching Reinforcement
Learning (Branching RL) framework, which is an episodic
tree-structured forward model. In each episode, an agent
starts from an initial state and takes a super action that contains multiple base actions, where each base action in this
state has a probability to be triggered. For each state-base
action pair, if triggered successfully, the agent receives a
reward and transitions to a next state; Otherwise, if it is
not triggered, the agent receives zero reward and transitions
to an absorbing state associated with zero reward. Thus,
the transitions branch out to multiple successor states. At
the second step, for each branched-out state, the agent also
selects a super action that contains multiple base actions
with trigger probabilities. She only obtains rewards from the
triggered state-base action pairs, and each state-base action
pair transitions to a corresponding next state. Then, the
transitions at the second step branch out to more successor
states. By analogy, till the last step, she traverses an H-layer
tree-structured trajectory, and only collects rewards at the
triggered state-base action pairs.
Different from standard episodic RL (Azar et al., 2017; Jin
et al., 2018; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019) where each trajectory is a single H-step path, the trajectory of branching RL
is an H-layer triggered tree with exponentially increasing
states and actions in each layer. This model allows an agent
to take multiple base actions at once and handle multiple successor states. It can be applied to many hierarchical decision
making scenarios, such as category-based recommendation
systems (Fu et al., 2021) and online advertising (Kang et al.,
2020).

