Convolutional and Residual Networks Provably Contain Lottery Tickets

Rebekka Burkholz 1

Abstract
The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis continues to have
a profound practical impact on the quest for small
scale deep neural networks that solve modern
deep learning tasks at competitive performance.
These lottery tickets are identified by pruning
large randomly initialized neural networks with
architectures that are as diverse as their applications. Yet, theoretical insights that attest their
existence have been mostly focused on deep fullyconnected feed forward networks with ReLU activation functions. We prove that also modern architectures consisting of convolutional and residual
layers that can be equipped with almost arbitrary
activation functions can contain lottery tickets
with high probability.

1. Introduction
The Lottery ticket (LT) Hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019)
has fueled the interest in deep neural network pruning to a
reduce the number of trainable parameters with the purpose
to save computational resources, regularize, and perform
meaningful structure learning. Most newly developed algorithms are benchmarked and evaluated in the imaging
domain. Naturally, most architectures that are pruned in
practice contain therefore convolutional layers. In particular residual blocks, and skip connections in general, seem
to provide iterative pruning algorithms an advantage over
less computationally cumbersome approaches (Ma et al.,
2021). It is subject of an ongoing debate to which degree
different algorithms are successful in finding task specific
computational neural network structures (Su et al., 2020;
Ma et al., 2021; Fischer & Burkholz, 2022) and whether
LTs are identifiable by contemporary pruning algorithms
to solve complex problems with large scale architectures
(Frankle et al., 2020; Renda et al., 2020). Theoretical insights into the conditions when we can expect to find LTs
*

Equal contribution 1 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information
Security, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Rebekka
Burkholz <burkholz@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

can provide guidance regarding when improvements could
be feasible.
Our work contributes to the discussion with the assurance
that LTs likely exist under realistic conditions in convolutional networks with or without residual blocks even when
pruning algorithms are currently challenged to find them.
This is in line with the Strong Lottery Ticket Hypothesis
(SLTH), which has been posed by (Ramanujan et al., 2020)
based on experiments in inspiration of (Zhou et al., 2019). It
suggests that a sufficiently large neural network with random
parameters contains, with high probability, for each target
network (of certain maximal size) a sub-network that can
approximate the target network with high accuracy. Such a
sub-network is also called strong LT and does not need to be
trained in order to achieve a performance that is competitive
with the one of the target network.
The existence of such strong LTs has been proven for fullyconnected feed forward architectures and ReLU activation
functions by providing a probabilistic lower bound on the
required width of the larger random network. First proven
by (Malach et al., 2020), the width requirements have succinctly been improved to a logarithmic factor in the relevant
variables (Pensia et al., 2020; Orseau et al., 2020) and extended to nonzero biases (Fischer & Burkholz, 2021). The
only results for convolutional architectures are provided by
(Burkholz et al., 2022; da Cunha et al., 2022) but either apply to specific targets (Burkholz et al., 2022) or are restricted
to positive inputs (da Cunha et al., 2022) and do not cover
common data transformations. Furthermore, all of these
results rely on random networks that have at least twice the
depth of the target network. This excludes constructions,
in which the LTs can have residual blocks of the same size
as in the target network, and reduces the expressiveness of
the target networks, as they cannot utilize a large part of
the available depth for a sparser representation (Yarotsky,
2018; Mhaskar et al., 2017). To overcome these limitations,
we follow a similar strategy as (Burkholz, 2022) to extend
existence results to a larger class of activation functions
and random networks that have a similar depth as the target
network (L + 1). We solve the additional challenge to prune
and construct convolutional filters with and without skip
connections and residual blocks. In doing so, we propose
a different construction than (da Cunha et al., 2022) that is
not restricted to positive inputs.

