Linear Bandit Algorithms with Sublinear Time Complexity

Shuo Yang 1 Tongzheng Ren 1 Sanjay Shakkottai 2 Eric Price 1 Inderjit S. Dhillon 1 Sujay Sanghavi 2

Abstract
We propose two linear bandits algorithms with
per-step complexity sublinear in the number of
arms K. The algorithms are designed for applications where the arm set is extremely large
and slowly changing. Our key realization is
that choosing an arm reduces to a maximum inner product search (MIPS) problem, which can
be solved approximately without breaking regret guarantees. Existing approximate MIPS
solvers run in sublinear time. We extend those
solvers and present theoretical guarantees for online learning problems, where adaptivity (i.e., a
later step depends on the feedback in previous
steps) becomes a unique challenge. We then explicitly characterize the tradeoff between the perstep complexity and regret. For sufficiently large
K, our algorithms
√ have sublinear per-step come T ) regret. Empirically, we evalplexity and O(
uate our proposed algorithms in a synthetic environment and a real-world online movie recommendation problem. Our proposed algorithms
can deliver a more than 72 times speedup compared to the linear time baselines while retaining
similar regret.

1. Introduction
Linear bandits problem is one of the most fundamental online learning problems, with wide applications in recommender systems, online advertisements, etc. (Deshpande
& Montanari, 2012). Such applications usually have an
extremely large set of items (e.g., millions of products to
be recommended), which also changes over time. Specifically, we focus on two types of changes: (1) some new
arms are added from time to time (e.g., new movies added
to the database); and more generally (2) some new arms are
1
Department of CS, The University of Texas at Austin,
TX, USA. 2 Department of ECE, The University of Texas at
Austin, TX, USA.. Correspondence to: Shuo Yang <yangshuo ut@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

added, and some old arms deleted (e.g., some new advertisements to be shown and some old ones expired). Such
an extremely large arm set typically changes slowly, in the
sense that a relatively small number of arms are added or
deleted at every time step.
A linear scan is slow for an extremely large arm set. It is
thus demanding to design linear bandit algorithms that have
per-step time complexity sublinear in the number of arms
K, for an extremely large and slowly changing arm set.
Common algorithms for linear bandits have per-step time
complexity linear in K. For instance, Thompson Sampling
(TS) draws a random parameter estimate and selects the
best arm accordingly (Abeille & Lazaric, 2017). It needs
to scan the entire set of arms to choose the most promising
arm, which leads to time complexity linear in K.
In this paper, we propose two algorithms with per-step time
complexity sublinear in K, based on the observation below:
Key observation: The arm selection step in many linear
bandits algorithms reduces to an (exact) maximum inner
product search (MIPS) problem. The right way to approximately solve the MIPS problem, coupled with careful analysis, allows us to achieve sublinear per-step complexity and
desired regret guarantees.
Formally, given a set P ∈ Rd , |P | = K, and a query
q ∈ Rd , the MIPS problem aims to find the point p ∈ P
that maximizes p> q. The TS algorithm is an immediate example of selecting arms by solving a MIPS problem. For
arms a with embedding xa , TS algorithm chooses the arm
e
e
that maximizes x>
a θ, for the random θ drawn by TS.
More importantly, the exact solution of
√ the MIPS problem is not necessary for obtaining an O( T ) regret bound.
Take TS algorithm again as an example, the estimate θe has
an estimation error (i.e., θe 6= θ∗ , where θ∗ is the true environment parameter that determines reward expectation).
By properly controlling the approximate MIPS accuracy,
the error of approximately solving MIPS can be smaller
than the estimation error of e
θ. The regret will therefore
stay in the same order as solving the MIPS exactly.
Many approaches were previously established to approximately solve MIPS with time complexity sublinear in K.
While it seems promising to adopt those approximate MIPS

