Coordinated Attacks against Contextual Bandits: Fundamental Limits
and Defense Mechanisms
Jeongyeol Kwon 1 Yonathan Efroni 2 Constantine Caramanis 1 Shie Mannor 3 4

Abstract
Motivated by online recommendation systems, we
propose the problem of finding the optimal policy in multitask contextual bandits when a small
fraction α < 1/2 of tasks (users) are arbitrary
and adversarial. The remaining fraction of good
users share the same instance of contextual bandits with S contexts and A actions (items). Naturally, whether a user is good or adversarial is
not known in advance. The goal is to robustly
learn the policy that maximizes rewards for good
users with as few user interactions as possible.
Without adversarial users, established results in
collaborative filtering show that O(1/ϵ2 ) per-user
interactions suffice to learn a good policy, precisely because information can be shared across
users. This parallelization gain is fundamentally
altered by the presence of adversarial users: unless there are super-polynomial number of users,
we show a lower bound of Ω̃(min(S, A) · α2 /ϵ2 )
per-user interactions to learn an ϵ-optimal policy for the good users. We then show we can
achieve an Õ(min(S, A) · α/ϵ2 ) upper-bound, by
employing efficient robust mean estimators for
both uni-variate and high-dimensional random
variables. We also show that this can be improved
depending on the distributions of contexts.

1. Introduction
Online recommendation systems (Adomavicius & Tuzhilin,
2005; Li et al., 2010) are ubiquitous, and used in diverse
platform applications including video streaming, online
shopping, travel and restaurant recommendations. These
are large-scale systems, designed for millions of users and
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, USA 2 Microsoft Research, New
York 3 Technion, Israel 4 Nvidia Research. Correspondence to:
Jeongyeol Kwon <kwonchungli@utexas.edu>, Yonathan Efroni
<jonathan.efroni@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

items. Thus, successful algorithms exploit shared preferences across different users (as in collaborative filtering).
This naturally leads to a multitask contextual bandit framework (Sarwar et al., 2001; Maillard & Mannor, 2014; Sen
et al., 2017; Chawla et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Ghosh
et al., 2021b). Manipulation of collaborative filtering recommendation engines is well documented e.g., (O’Mahony
et al., 2004; Mobasher et al., 2007; Burke et al., 2015), and
various approaches to building resilient algorithms have
been considered e.g., (Olsen, 2002; Van Roy & Yan, 2010;
Chen et al., 2015). The ability to learn across users changes
dramatically even in the presence of a small fraction of adversarial users, thus posing fundamental new challenges.
This is precisely the problem we address.
Problem Setup. We consider a multitask contextual bandit framework where the majority of users share preferences
over all contexts and items. We call these the “good” users.
Some α-fraction of users (α < 1/2), however, may have
arbitrary preferences or may even attempt to manipulate
the recommendation system; we call these the “adversarial”
users.
Formally, our system consists of L users, a set of contexts
S, and a set of actions A. Contexts are the temporal status
of the user such as browsing histories, keywords, categories,
etc. and the key assumption is that the good users share preferences across contexts, thus enabling cross-user learning
(collaborative filtering). We note that, in particular, the user
ID is a unique identifier, and not part of the context (in contrast to, e.g., (Sen et al., 2017; Deshmukh et al., 2017)). At
each step, a user i ∈ [L] arrives and reveals its current status
(context) s ∈ S. Then, based on the context, we select an
action a ∈ A and get a reward (feedback) from the user. If
the user is good, then the mean-reward returned by this user
is µ(s, a) ∈ R. If the user is adversarial, it can return any
reward based on all interaction histories.
Goal of the Paper. Our goal is to find a provablyapproximately-correct (PAC) policy for the majority of good
users, with the minimum per-user interactions. Without adversarial users, i.e., assuming all users are share preferences
across items and contexts, the problem is the well-studied
contextual bandit problem (Lu et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011).

