Understanding Clipping for Federated Learning:
Convergence and Client-Level Differential Privacy

Xinwei Zhang 1 Xiangyi Chen 1 Mingyi Hong 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 2 Jinfeng Yi 3

Abstract
Providing privacy protection has been one of
the primary motivations of Federated Learning
(FL). Recently, there has been a line of work
on incorporating the formal privacy notion of
differential privacy with FL. To guarantee the
client-level differential privacy in FL algorithms,
the clients’ transmitted model updates have
to be clipped before adding privacy noise.
Such clipping operation is substantially different
from its counterpart of gradient clipping in the
centralized differentially private SGD and has
not been well-understood. In this paper, we
first empirically demonstrate that the clipped
FedAvg can perform surprisingly well even
with substantial data heterogeneity when training
neural networks, which is partly because the
clients’ updates become similar for several
popular deep architectures. Based on this key
observation, we provide the convergence analysis
of a differential private (DP) FedAvg algorithm
and highlight the relationship between clipping
bias and the distribution of the clients’ updates.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work that rigorously investigates theoretical and
empirical issues regarding the clipping operation
in FL algorithms.

1. Introduction
First proposed by Konečnỳ et al. (2016), Federated Learning
(FL) is a distributed learning framework that aims to
reduce communication complexity and to provide privacy
protection during training. The popular FedAvg algorithm
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Minnesota, MN, United States 2 School of Computer
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, PA, United States 3 JD.com,
Inc., Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Xinwei Zhang
<zhan6234@umn.edu>, Mingyi Hong <mhong@umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Konečnỳ et al., 2016) has been proposed to reduce the
communication cost by using periodic averaging and client
sampling. There have been many extensions of this
algorithm, mostly by modifying the local update directions
(Karimireddy et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Liang et al.,
2019). Even though FL algorithms have the goal of privacy
protection, recent works have shown that they are vulnerable
to inference attacks and leak local information during
training (Zhao et al., 2020; Zhu & Han, 2020; Wei et al.,
2020b). As a result, striking a balance between formal
privacy guarantees and desirable optimization performance
remains one of the fundamental challenges in FL.
Recently, various FL algorithms (Geyer et al., 2017;
Truex et al., 2020; 2019; Wang et al., 2020b; Triastcyn
& Faltings, 2019) have been proposed to provide the
formal guarantees of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al.,
2006). In these algorithms, the clients perform multiple
local updates between two communication steps, and then
perturbation mechanisms are applied to aggregate updates
across individual clients. In order for the perturbation
mechanism to have formal privacy guarantees, each client’s
model update needs to have a bounded norm, which is
ensured by applying a clipping operation that shrinks
individual model updates when their norm exceeds a given
threshold. While there has been prior work that studies the
clipping effects on stochastic gradients (Bassily et al., 2014;
Chen et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021) in the differentially
private SGD (Abadi et al., 2016), there has not been any
work on providing understanding how clipping the model
updates affect the optimization performance of FL subject
to DP. Our work provides the first in-depth study on such
clipping effects.
Contributions. In this work, we will conduct rigorous
theoretical analysis and provide extensive empirical
evidence to understand how to best protect client-level DP
for FL algorithms. Specifically, we make the following
contributions:
1) We analyze the existing model and difference clipping
strategies for clipping-enabled FedAvg and prove that
difference clipping outperforms model clipping. Our result
provides theoretical insight into designing FL algorithms
with clipping operation.

