Bregman Neural Networks

Jordan Frecon 1 Gilles Gasso 1 Massimiliano Pontil 2 3 Saverio Salzo 2

Abstract
We present a framework based on bilevel optimization for learning multilayer, deep data representations. On the one hand, the lower-level
problem finds a representation by successively
minimizing layer-wise objectives made of the sum
of a prescribed regularizer, a fidelity term and a
linear function depending on the representation
found at the previous layer. On the other hand,
the upper-level problem optimizes over the linear functions to yield a linearly separable final
representation. We show that, by choosing the fidelity term as the quadratic distance between two
successive layer-wise representations, the bilevel
problem reduces to the training of a feedforward
neural network. Instead, by elaborating on Bregman distances, we devise a novel neural network
architecture additionally involving the inverse of
the activation function reminiscent of the skip
connection used in ResNets. Numerical experiments suggest that the proposed Bregman variant
benefits from better learning properties and more
robust prediction performance.

1. Introduction
The past decades have seen an overwhelming interest in neural networks due to their empirical success in numerous and
disparate applications, ranging from medical imaging (Zhou
et al., 2019; Lassau et al., 2021) to self driving vehicles (Blin
et al., 2019; Grigorescu et al., 2020), among others. Consequently, they have received a great interest from the machine
learning community (see, e.g.. (Maggu et al., 2020) and references therein). A key aspect of deep neural networks is
their ability to learn a representation from raw inputs by
alternating linear transformations and non-linear operations.
1 Normandie Univ, INSA Rouen UNIROUEN, UNIHAVRE,
LITIS, Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray, France 2 Computational Statistics and Machine Learning, IIT, Genova, Italy 3 Departement of
Computer Science, UCL, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Jordan Frecon <jordan.frecon@insa-rouen.fr>.

Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this paper, rather than directly writing the representation
mapping as a prescribed compositional form, we present a
framework to learn the functional form of the representation
from the perspective of bilevel optimization (see Franceschi
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Grazzi et al., 2020, and references therein). Within this framework, the lower-level
problem performs feature representation while the upperlevel problem optimizes the representation mapping. A
main insight is to define the representation as the successive
minimization of multiple learnable objective functions. The
latter are formed by summing a bilinear parametric function
and prescribed convex functions. We show how this iterative scheme naturally includes standard feed-forward neural
networks and gives rise to novel multilayer networks.
Previous Work. Bilevel optimization formulations have
recently been devised in the setting of meta-learning and hyperparameter optimization (Grazzi et al., 2020; Franceschi
et al., 2018). Probably most related to our work is (Combettes & Pesquet, 2020) where the authors have shown that
a wide range of activation operators are actually proximity
operators. In addition, the authors have provided a thorough
analysis with tools from monotone operator theory in order to study a class of neural networks and their asymptotic
properties. Feedforward networks have been studied by Bibi
et al. (2019) who have also established that the forward pass
through one feedforward layer is equivalent to a single step
of a forward-backward algorithm. In addition, recent studies
have built deep models by unrolling particular optimization
algorithms (Monga et al., 2020; Bertocchi et al., 2020).
Contributions and Organization. In Section 2, we present
the proposed multilayered bilevel framework and in particular the class of layerwise objectives addressed throughout
the paper. The latter are formed by summing a linear term, a
convex regularizer and a divergence measuring the closeness
with the representation found at the previous layer. From
this, we show in Section 3 that, for an appropriate regularizer and a divergence chosen as a quadratic distance, the
representation found at each layer reduces to a feedforward
update. Next, by elaborating on Bregman distances, in Section 4 we propose the Bregman feedforward layer, a new
type of neural network layer, which additionally involves
the inverse of the activation operator. This setting provides a
novel view on neural networks which allows us to interpret
activation operators as Bregman projections as opposed to

