Sample Efficient Learning of Predictors that Complement Humans

Mohammad-Amin Charusaie * 1 Hussein Mozannar * 2 David Sontag 2 Samira Samadi 1

Abstract
One of the goals of learning algorithms is to complement and reduce the burden on human decision
makers. The expert deferral setting wherein an
algorithm can either predict on its own or defer
the decision to a downstream expert helps accomplish this goal. A fundamental aspect of this setting is the need to learn complementary predictors
that improve on the human’s weaknesses rather
than learning predictors optimized for average error. In this work, we provide the first theoretical
analysis of the benefit of learning complementary
predictors in expert deferral. To enable efficiently
learning such predictors, we consider a family
of consistent surrogate loss functions for expert
deferral and analyze their theoretical properties.
Finally, we design active learning schemes that
require minimal amount of data of human expert
predictions in order to learn accurate deferral systems.

1. Introduction
How do we combine AI systems and human decision makers
to both reduce error and alleviate the burden on the human?
AI systems are starting to be frequently used in combination with human decision makers, including in high-stakes
settings like healthcare (Beede et al., 2020) and content
moderation (Gillespie, 2020). A possible way to combine
the human and the AI is to learn a ’rejector’ that queries
either the human or the AI to predict on each input. This
allows us to route examples to the AI model, where it outperforms the human, so as to simultaneously reduce error
and human effort. Moreover, this formulation allows us to
jointly optimize the AI so as to complement the human’s
weaknesses, and to optimize the rejector to allow the AI
*

Equal contribution 1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany. 2 CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Hussein
Mozannar <mozannar@mit.edu>, Mohammad-Amin Charusaie
<mcharusaie@tuebingen.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

to defer when it is unable to predict well. This type of interaction is typically referred to as expert deferral and the
learning problem is that of jointly learning the AI classifier
and the rejector. Empirically this approach has been shown
to outperform either the human or the AI when predicting
by their own (Kamar et al., 2012; Tan et al., 2018). One hypothesis is that humans and machines make different kinds
of errors. For example humans may have bias on certain
features (Kleinberg et al., 2018) while AI systems may have
bounded expressive power or limited training data. On the
other hand, humans may outperform AI systems as they
may have side information that is not available to the AI, for
example due to privacy constraints.
Existing deployments tend to ignore that the system has two
components: the AI classifier (henceforth, the classifier)
and the human. Typically the AI is trained without taking
int account the human—and deferral is done using post-hoc
approaches like model confidence (Raghu et al., 2019). The
main problem of this approach, that we refer to as staged
learning, is that it ignores the possibility of learning a better
combined system by accounting for the human (and its
mistakes) during training. More recent work has developed
joint training strategies for the AI and the rejector based on
surrogate losses and alternating minimization (Mozannar
& Sontag, 2020; Okati et al., 2021). However, we lack a
theoretical understanding of the fundamental merits of joint
learning compared to the staged approach. In this work,
we study three main challenges in expert deferral from a
theoretical viewpoint: 1) model capacity constraints, 2) lack
of data of human expert’s prediction and 3) optimization
using surrogate losses.
When learning a predictor and rejector in a limited hypothesis class, it becomes more valuable to allocate model capacity to complement the human. We prove a bound on the
gap between the approach that learns a predictor that complements human and the approach that learns the predictor
ignoring the presence of the human in Section 4. To practically learn to complement the human, the literature has
shown that surrogate loss functions are successful (Madras
et al., 2018; Mozannar & Sontag, 2020). We propose a
family of surrogate loss functions that generalizes existing
surrogates such as the surrogate in (Mozannar & Sontag,
2020), and we further prove surrogate excess risk bounds
and generalization properties of these surrogates in Section

