DynaMixer: A Vision MLP Architecture with Dynamic Mixing

Ziyu Wang 1 Wenhao Jiang 1 Yiming Zhu 2 Li Yuan 3 Yibing Song 4 Wei Liu 1

Abstract
84

1

Data Platform, Tencent 2 Graduate school at ShenZhen,
Tsinghua university 3 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Peking University 4 Tencent AI Lab. Correspondence to: Wenhao Jiang <cswhjiang@gmail.com>, Wei Liu
<wl2223@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

83
Top1 Accuracy (%)

Recently, MLP-like vision models have achieved
promising performances on mainstream visual
recognition tasks. In contrast with vision transformers and CNNs, the success of MLP-like models shows that simple information fusion operations among tokens and channels can yield a
good representation power for deep recognition
models. However, existing MLP-like models fuse
tokens through static fusion operations, lacking
adaptability to the contents of the tokens to be
mixed. Thus, customary information fusion procedures are not effective enough. To this end,
this paper presents an efficient MLP-like network
architecture, dubbed DynaMixer, resorting to dynamic information fusion. Critically, we propose
a procedure, on which the DynaMixer model relies, to dynamically generate mixing matrices
by leveraging the contents of all the tokens to
be mixed. To reduce the time complexity and
improve the robustness, a dimensionality reduction technique and a multi-segment fusion mechanism are adopted. Our proposed DynaMixer
model (97M parameters) achieves 84.3% top-1
accuracy on the ImageNet-1K dataset without extra training data, performing favorably against
the state-of-the-art vision MLP models. When
the number of parameters is reduced to 26M,
it still achieves 82.7% top-1 accuracy, surpassing the existing MLP-like models with a similar capacity. The code is available at https:
//github.com/ziyuwwang/DynaMixer.

82
81
MLP-Mixer
gMLP
Cycle-MLP
Hire-MLP
sMLPNet
S^2-MLPv2
ViP
DynaMixer

80
79
78
77

10

20

30

40
50
60
70
Number of Parameters (M)

80

90

100

Figure 1. ImageNet accuracy v.s. model capacity. All models
are trained on ImageNet-1K without extra data. DynaMixer outperforms all the existing MLP-like models, such as MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021), Hire-MLP (Guo et al., 2021), S 2 -MLP-v2 (Yu
et al., 2021a), ViP (Hou et al., 2021), and Cycle-MLP (Chen et al.,
2021b).

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been the dominating solution for a wide range of computer vision tasks
for a long time, e.g., visual recognition and segmentation.
CNNs aim at training the whole network end-to-end to remove hand-crafted visual features and inductive biases. And
they heavily rely on convolution operators and pooling operators, which introduce locality and spatial invariances.
Recently, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), which have
achieved overwhelming success in natural language processing, have also been introduced into the compute vision field.
The Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)
have achieved state-of-the-art performances on visual recognition tasks. In ViT, images are first divided into a sequence
of non-overlapping patches, which can be seen as word tokens in the natural language processing field. Those patches
are then fed into a stack of blocks based on self-attention
to obtain the contextualized output tokens. ViT removes
the convolution and pooling operators from CNNs, and employs a self-attention mechanism to model the relationships
among image patches. Inspired by ViTs, many efforts have

