Pure Noise to the Rescue of Insufficient Data:
Improving Imbalanced Classification by Training on Random Noise Images

Shiran Zada 1 Itay Benou 1 Michal Irani 1

Abstract
Despite remarkable progress on visual recognition
tasks, deep neural-nets still struggle to generalize well when training data is scarce or highly
imbalanced, rendering them extremely vulnerable to real-world examples. In this paper, we
present a surprisingly simple yet highly effective
method to mitigate this limitation: using pure
noise images as additional training data. Unlike the common use of additive noise or adversarial noise for data augmentation, we propose an
entirely different perspective by directly training
on pure random noise images. We present a new
Distribution-Aware Routing Batch Normalization
layer (DAR-BN), which enables training on pure
noise images in addition to natural images within
the same network. This encourages generalization and suppresses overfitting. Our proposed
method significantly improves imbalanced classification performance, obtaining state-of-the-art
results on a large variety of long-tailed image classification datasets (CIFAR-10-LT, CIFAR-100-LT,
ImageNet-LT, Places-LT, and CelebA-5). Furthermore, our method is extremely simple and easy to
use as a general new augmentation tool (on top of
existing augmentations), and can be incorporated
in any training scheme. It does not require any
specialized data generation or training procedures,
thus keeping training fast and efficient.

1. Introduction
Large-scale annotated datasets play a vital role in the success
of deep neural networks for visual recognition tasks. While
popular benchmark datasets are usually well-balanced (e.g.,
1

Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics,
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Correspondence to: Shiran Zada <shiran.elyahuzada@weizmann.ac.il>,
Itay Benou <itay.benou@weizmann.ac.il>, Michal Irani
<michal.irani@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

CIFAR (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), Places (Zhou et al., 2017),
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)), data in the real world often
follows a long-tail distribution. Namely, most of the data
belongs to several majority classes, while the rest is spread
across a large number of minority classes (Buda et al., 2018;
Reed, 2001; Liu et al., 2019). Training on such imbalanced
datasets results in models that are biased towards majority classes, demonstrating poor generalization on minority
classes. There are two common approaches to compensate
for class imbalance during training: (i) re-weighting the loss
term so that prediction errors on minority samples are given
higher penalties (Huang et al., 2016; Cui et al., 2019; Hong
et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2020), and (ii) resampling the dataset
to re-balance the class distribution during training (Chawla
et al., 2002; Kim et al., 2020; Mullick et al., 2019). This can
be done by under-sampling majority classes (Drummond
et al., 2003), or by over-sampling of minority classes (Shen
et al., 2016; Haixiang et al., 2017; Kang et al., 2019).
However, re-weighting methods typically suffer from overfitting the minority classes (Kim et al., 2020). Resampling
techniques also suffer from well-known limitations: undersampling majority classes may impair classification accuracy due to loss of information, while over-sampling leads
to overfitting on minority classes (Buda et al., 2018). Several methods have been proposed to alleviate these limitations, including augmentation-based methods (Chu et al.,
2020; Mullick et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020), learning from
majority classes (Kim et al., 2020) and evolutionary undersampling (Galar et al., 2013).
The data scarcity in minority classes thus poses a very challenging problem (Kim et al., 2020). This is especially true in
highly imbalanced datasets, where minority classes contain
very few samples (e.g., 5 images per class, vs. thousands
of images in majority classes). In such cases, overfitting
is almost inevitable, even with extensive data augmentation, since the ability to produce a significant variety of new
observations from just a few samples is extremely limited.
In this work, we directly address this problem by taking a
new perspective on data re-balancing for imbalanced classification. Unlike traditional resampling approaches, we
do not restrict ourselves to training strictly on existing images and their augmentations, thus bypassing this limitation.

