Large-Scale Graph Neural Architecture Search

Chaoyu Guan 1 Xin Wang 1 Hong Chen 1 Ziwei Zhang 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract
Graph Neural Architecture Search (GNAS) has
become a powerful method in automatically discovering suitable Graph Neural Network (GNN)
architectures for different tasks. However, existing approaches fail to handle large-scale graphs
because current performance estimation strategies
in GNAS are computationally expensive for largescale graphs and suffer from consistency collapse
issues. To tackle these problems, we propose the
Graph ArchitectUre Search at Scale (GAUSS)
method that can handle large-scale graphs by designing an efficient light-weight supernet and the
joint architecture-graph sampling. In particular, a
graph sampling-based single-path one-shot supernet is proposed to reduce the computation burden.
To address the consistency collapse issues, we
further explicitly consider the joint architecturegraph sampling through a novel architecture peer
learning mechanism on the sampled sub-graphs
and an architecture importance sampling algorithm. Our proposed framework is able to smooth
the highly non-convex optimization objective and
stabilize the architecture sampling process. We
provide theoretical analyses on GAUSS and empirically evaluate it on five datasets whose vertex sizes range from 104 to 108 . The experimental results demonstrate substantial improvements of GAUSS over other GNAS baselines on
all datasets. To the best of our knowledge, the
proposed GAUSS method is the first graph neural architecture search framework that can handle
graphs with billions of edges within 1 GPU day1 .

1
Media and Network Lab, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. Correspondence
to: Wenwu Zhu <wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Xin Wang
<xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://www.github.com/
THUMNLab/GAUSS.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) become more and more
popular for their abilities to analyze structural relation data
in various real-world applications such as recommender systems (Zhu et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2022),
knowledge graphs (Vrandecic & Krötzsch, 2014; Lovelace
et al., 2021; Cao et al., 2021), medical property prediction (Szklarczyk et al., 2019; Wishart et al., 2018), image
processing (Yang et al., 2019), etc. To customize GNN architectures for diverse downstream tasks, more and more
research attentions have been paid to develop Graph Neural
Architecture Search (GNAS) methods (Gao et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021; Guan et al., 2021a) in order
to automatically search for the optimal GNN architectures.
Architectures of many recent GNNs are thus automatically
designed via GNAS to further benefit downstream tasks.
However, current GNAS methods can only handle graphs
at a relatively small scale with at most million-scale nodes
and edges. In real-world scenarios, many applications require handling large-scale graphs with billion-scale nodes
and edges (Lovelace et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2020). Existing GNAS methods fail to handle such large-scale graphs
because of the severe scalability issues.
In this paper, we study Graph Neural Architecture Search
(GNAS) for large-scale graphs. The bottleneck of the existing GNAS approaches in terms of scalability is that they depend on computationally expensive performance estimation
strategies with a high time/space complexity for large-scale
graphs. For example, Gao et al.’s (2020) work needs to train
every single model until convergence to derive accurate rewards for the Reinforcement Learning (RL) controller, Li
et al.’s (2021) and Zhao et al.’s (2021) works require calculating the output of every operation within the supernet
on the whole graph to estimate reliable architecture parameters. All these performance estimation strategies in existing
works fail to handle large-scale graphs, e.g., graphs with
billion-scale nodes and edges. A straight-forward approach
to solve the above issues is leveraging graph sampling techniques (Chiang et al., 2019; Hamilton et al., 2017; Zeng
et al., 2020). However, directly applying these techniques to
the current supernet training in GNAS will result in consistency collapse issues. Specifically, if we train the supernet
by independently adopting an architecture sampling and a
graph sampling process, the supernet will have poor rank-

