Robust Meta-learning with Sampling Noise and Label Noise via Eigen-Reptile

Dong Chen 1 Lingfei Wu 2 Siliang Tang∗ 1 Xiao Yun 2 Bo Long 2 Yueting Zhuang 1

Abstract
Recent years have seen a surge of interest in
meta-learning techniques for tackling the fewshot learning (FSL) problem. However, the metalearner is prone to overfitting since there are only
a few available samples, which can be identified
as sampling noise on a clean dataset. Besides,
when handling the data with noisy labels, the
meta-learner could be extremely sensitive to label
noise on a corrupted dataset. To address these
two challenges, we present Eigen-Reptile (ER)
that updates the meta-parameters with the main
direction of historical task-specific parameters.
Specifically, the main direction is computed in a
fast way, where the scale of the calculated matrix is related to the number of gradient steps
for the specific task instead of the number of
parameters. Furthermore, to obtain a more accurate main direction for Eigen-Reptile in the
presence of many noisy labels, we further propose Introspective Self-paced Learning (ISPL).
We have theoretically and experimentally demonstrated the soundness and effectiveness of the proposed Eigen-Reptile and ISPL. Particularly, our
experiments on different tasks show that the proposed method is able to outperform or achieve
highly competitive performance compared with
other gradient-based methods with or without
noisy labels. The code and data for the proposed method are provided for research purposes
https://github.com/Anfeather/Eigen-Reptile.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning, also known as learning to learn, is one of the
keys to few-shot learning (FSL) (Vinyals et al., 2016; Chi
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhe Jiang
University, Hang Zhou, China 2 JD.COM Silicon Valley Research
Center, 675 E Middlefield Rd, Mountain View, CA 94043 USA.
∗
Siliang Tang is the corresponding author. Correspondence to:
Siliang Tang <siliang@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2021), which usually trains meta-parameters as initialization that can fast adapt to new tasks with few samples.
One line of the meta-learning is gradient-based methods
that optimize meta-parameters by bi-level loop, i.e., inner
loop and outer loop, which update task-specific parameters
and meta-parameters, respectively. However, fewer samples often lead to a higher risk of overfitting (Zintgraf et al.,
2019), due to the ubiquitous sampling noise and label noise.
Particularly, a popular first-order method, Reptile (Nichol
et al., 2018), updates the meta-parameters towards the inner
loop direction, which is from the current initialization to the
last task-specific parameters.
Sampling noise is a trend for models to overfit the randomly
selected samples. As shown in Figure 1, the model tends to
fit the selected sample in every gradient update and results in
a high risk of overfitting (Zintgraf et al., 2019). Specifically,
in (a) of Figure 1, if we sample the cat 1, the meta-learner
will have a bias to the left (i.e. overfit cat 1 and the left,
bold line is the corresponding update direction) and vice
versa, which is an update direction disturbance caused by
overfitting sampling noise. Many prior works have proposed
different solutions for the aforementioned meta-overfitting
problem, such as using dropout (Bertinetto et al., 2018; Lee
et al., 2020), and modifying the loss function (Jamal & Qi,
2019) etc. As the disturbance is a random deviation deviated
from the unbiased direction according to the selected sample,
we regard disturbance as gradient noise (Wu et al., 2019).
In other words, we cast the meta-overfitting problem as a
disturbance of gradient noise. (Neelakantan et al., 2015) and
other works have proved that introducing additional gradient
noise can improve the generalization of neural networks
with a large number of samples. However, for FSL, there
are only a few samples of each task; thus, the model will
overfit the noise (Zhang et al., 2016) and degrade the model.
Meta-learner is also inevitably affected by label noise because of the required large number of tasks. Specifically,
high-quality manual labeling data is often time-consuming
and expensive. And low-cost approaches to collect lowquality annotated data, such as from search engines, will introduce noisy labels. Conceptually, the initialization learned
by existing meta-learning algorithms can severely degrade
in the presence of noisy labels. As shown in (b) of Figure 1,
noisy labels cause a significant disturbance in the update
direction, which is overfitting on corrupted samples (Han

