Iterative Double Sketching for Faster Least-Squares Optimization

Rui Wang 1 Yanyan Ouyang 1 Wangli Xu 1
where ∇f (x; A, y) := A> (Ax − y) is the gradient of f
at x, and A> A is the Hessian of f . Thus, from any initial
point x0 , one can obtain the exact solution to the problem
(1) in just one Newton iteration. And the formula (2) is the
output of one Newton iteration with x0 = 0d .

Abstract
This work is concerned with the overdetermined
linear least-squares problem for large scale data.
We generalize the iterative Hessian sketching
(IHS) algorithm and propose a new sketching
framework named iterative double sketching
(IDS) which uses approximations for both the
gradient and the Hessian in each iteration. To understand the behavior of the IDS algorithm and
choose the optimal hyperparameters, we derive
the exact limit of the conditional prediction error
of the IDS algorithm in the setting of Gaussian
sketching. Guided by this theoretical result, we
propose an efficient IDS algorithm via a new class
of sequentially related sketching matrices. We
give a non-asymptotic analysis of this efficient
IDS algorithm which shows that the proposed
algorithm achieves the state-of-the-art trade-off
between accuracy and efficiency.

When N and d are large, the direct computation via the
formula (2) may be time-consuming. In this case, sketching
methods are often used to obtain approximate solutions to
the problem (1). For the classical sketching methods, the
data (A, y) is projected to (SA, Sy) via certain random
sketching matrix S ∈ Rr×N with d ≤ r  N , and the
sketched least-squares problem


1
xCS := arg min f (x; SA, Sy) = kSAx − Syk2
2
x∈Rd

is considered as a surrogate of the original problem; see
Mahoney (2011); Woodruff (2014); Drineas & Mahoney
(2016) for reviews of classical sketching methods. If the
matrix A> S> SA is invertible, then we have
xCS = x0 − (A> S> SA)−1 ∇f (x0 ; SA, Sy).

1. Introduction
We consider the overdetermined least-squares problem


1
2
x := arg min f (x; A, y) := kAx − yk ,
2
x∈Rd
∗

(1)

where A = (a1 , . . . , aN )> ∈ RN ×d is a given data matrix
and y = (y1 , . . . , yN )> ∈ RN is a vector of observations.
Throughout the paper, it is assumed that A has full column
rank, that is, Rank(A) = d.
The solution to the problem (1) has the explicit expression

(3)

Once the sketched data (SA, Sy) is obtained, the direct
computation of xCS via the formula (3) only costs O(rd2 )
time which can be much faster than the direct computation
of x∗ . With a small r, however, the classical sketching
method can only produce a low-precision approximation of
x∗ . Recently, Pilanci & Wainwright (2016) introduced the iterative Hessian sketch (IHS) algorithm which uses sketching
methods in conjunction with an iteration method to achieve
high-precision approximations of x∗ . They considered the
following iteration formula:
−1
xt+1 = xt − (A> S>
∇f (xt ; A, y),
t St A)

(4)

Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin
University of China, Beijing 100872, China. Correspondence to:
Wangli Xu <wlxu@ruc.edu.cn>.

where S0 , S1 , . . . are independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) r×N random sketching matrices. Compared with the
classical sketching methods, the formula (4) of the IHS algorithm has two new features. First, the IHS algorithm only
sketches the Hessian and does not sketch the gradient. Second, the IHS algorithm applies multiple Newton iterations
to refine the solution. The theoretical results of Pilanci &
Wainwright (2016) guarantee that with high probability, the
IHS algorithm can produce a high-precision approximation
of x∗ .

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Since the publication of Pilanci & Wainwright (2016), the
IHS algorithm has drawn much attention and several improvements are proposed. In the original iteration formula

∗

>

x = (A A)

−1

>

A y.

(2)

∗

The direct computation of x using this formula costs
O(N d2 ) time. Note that for any initial point x0 ∈ Rd ,
x∗ = x0 − (A> A)−1 ∇f (x0 ; A, y),
1

