What Can Linear Interpolation of Neural Network Loss Landscapes Tell Us?

Tiffany Vlaar 1 Jonathan Frankle 2

Abstract
Studying neural network loss landscapes provides
insights into the nature of the underlying optimization problems. Unfortunately, loss landscapes
are notoriously difficult to visualize in a humancomprehensible fashion. One common way to
address this problem is to plot linear slices of the
landscape, for example from the initial state of the
network to the final state after optimization. On
the basis of this analysis, prior work has drawn
broader conclusions about the difficulty of the
optimization problem. In this paper, we put inferences of this kind to the test, systematically
evaluating how linear interpolation and final performance vary when altering the data, choice of
initialization, and other optimizer and architecture
design choices. Further, we use linear interpolation to study the role played by individual layers
and substructures of the network. We find that
certain layers are more sensitive to the choice of
initialization, but that the shape of the linear path
is not indicative of the changes in test accuracy of
the model. Our results cast doubt on the broader
intuition that the presence or absence of barriers
when interpolating necessarily relates to the success of optimization.

1. Introduction
Neural network loss landscapes are difficult to visualize
due to their high-dimensionality and the complicated nature
of the actual optimization path. This motivated the use
of the loss along the linear path between the initial and
final parameters of a neural network as a crude yet simple
measure of the loss landscape (Goodfellow et al., 2015). In
this work we revisit this 1D linear interpolation technique
and address whether the shape of the path reflects the test
1
Department of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom 2 MosaicML. Correspondence to:
Tiffany Vlaar <Tiffany.Vlaar@ed.ac.uk>, Jonathan Frankle
<jonathan@mosaicml.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

accuracy of the model and can inform training.
Linear interpolation from beginning to end. Goodfellow
et al. (2015) observed that for fully-connected and convolutional networks with maxout (Goodfellow et al., 2013)
trained on MNIST data the loss decays monotonically along
the linear path between their initial and final state. The
absence of obstacles along the linear path led them to conclude that “these tasks are relatively easy to optimize.” This
result has been cited widely as an indication of the ease of
training (e.g., Li et al. (2018a); McCandlish et al. (2018);
Fort et al. (2019)) and the linear interpolation technique
itself was used in many papers (Huang et al., 2017; Keskar
et al., 2017; Izmailov et al., 2018; Jastrzȩbski et al., 2018;
Hao et al., 2019). In this paper we address empirically how
meaningful the use of this linear path actually is. The exact
definition of training tasks being “easy to optimize” is an
open question and optimization choices directly influence
which linear path we observe. It is also arguable whether
we actually want tasks to be easier to optimize; lowering the
amount of training data or reducing regularization simplifies
training but lowers test accuracy.
The work by Goodfellow et al. (2015) was recently revisited
and extended by Frankle (2020) and Lucas et al. (2021) for
a range of modern neural network models, such as ResNet
and VGG architectures, on image data sets. Frankle (2020)
observed for default parameter settings that the loss often
remained at the level of random chance until close to the
optimum for these models, different than the behavior observed by Goodfellow et al. (2015). In addition to concurrently confirming this result, Lucas et al. (2021) found that
the monotonic decay property observed by Goodfellow et al.
(2015) was often maintained when BatchNorm was removed
and non-adaptive optimizers were used. On this basis, they
hypothesized that “large distances moved in weight space
encourage non-monotonic interpolation.”
In our work, we interrogate conjectures stated in prior work
that the shape of loss along the linear path relates to the
“success” of optimization (which we measure in terms of
test accuracy) or other aspects of optimization (e.g., distance
travelled). We systematically study the influence of various
optimizer and architecture design choices on the shape of
the linear path and the test accuracy of the final model, and
examine interpolation for individual layers in addition to

