Simplex Neural Population Learning:
Any-Mixture Bayes-Optimality in Symmetric Zero-sum Games

Siqi Liu 1 2 Marc Lanctot 2 Luke Marris 1 2 Nicolas Heess 2

Abstract
Learning to play optimally against any mixture
over a diverse set of strategies is of important
practical interests in competitive games. In this
paper, we propose simplex-NeuPL that satisfies
two desiderata simultaneously: i) learning a population of strategically diverse basis policies, represented by a single conditional network; ii) using the same network, learn best-responses to
any mixture over the simplex of basis policies.
We show that the resulting conditional policies
incorporate prior information about their opponents effectively, enabling near optimal returns
against arbitrary mixture policies in a game with
tractable best-responses. We verify that such policies behave Bayes-optimally under uncertainty
and offer insights in using this flexibility at test
time. Finally, we offer evidence that learning bestresponses to any mixture policies is an effective
auxiliary task for strategic exploration, which, by
itself, can lead to more performant populations.

1. Introduction
How could we train agents to perform optimally against
arbitrary mixtures over diverse opponent policies? Population learning offers one potential answer: generate a
diverse set of opponents and train the agent to respond
to mixtures of opponents over the population. The question then becomes how the population is generated and
what properties it should have. In two-player zero-sum
games, there is a well-known solution to this problem based
on game-theoretic foundations: a Nash equilibrium distribution (NE, Nash (1951)) over a population of policies
maximizes an agent’s worst-case return against all possible
opponent policies. Despite its theoretical appeal, searching the entire policy space quickly becomes intractable for
1
University College London, UK 2 DeepMind, UK. Correspondence to: Siqi Liu <liusiqi@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

most games. To this end, empirical game-theoretic analysis
(EGTA, Wellman (2006)) proposed to study strategic exploration in games by investigating empirical (meta-)games,
where each player considers only a small subset of possible
policies. Policy-Space Response Oracles (PSRO, Lanctot
et al. (2017)), further proposed a general, iterative framework towards constructing such empirical games. At each
iteration, the policy population incorporates a new basis
policy that is trained to best-respond to a mixture over its
predecessors, following a meta-strategy solver (MSS). Importantly, when the best-response operator is exact, certain
meta-strategy solvers produce meta-strategies known to converge to an NE of the game.
One property of the NE target distribution is that it optimizes
a safe objective: it maximizes the expected payoff in the
worst-case, with the assumption that the opponents would
play minimax-optimally. This assumption, however, rarely
holds in practice — real-world agents could play arbitrarily far from NE, a phenomenon frequently observed among
human players (Wright & Leyton-Brown, 2017), due to inadequate training or simply, to the overwhelming complexity
of the game. This translates to the unfortunate situation
where NE, though unexploitable, often leads to sub-optimal
decision making at test time. The flexibility for players to
express subjective beliefs over the opponent and to play optimally, based on such beliefs is thus of interests. We refer
to this ability to play optimally against any mixture over a
diverse set of policies as any-mixture optimality. Indeed,
skilled human players are observed to resort to such flexibility when competing in games, adjusting their behaviours
based on assumptions about their opponents so as to play
optimally, if their assumptions prove correct (King-Casas
et al., 2005; Schlicht et al., 2010).
Unfortunately, existing population learning algorithms such
as PSRO precisely lack such flexibility. The choice of
MSS not only controls the strategic diversity of the resulting
population, but also, restricts the set of basis policies that
can be executed at test time. In particular, the output of
population learning is a set of best-responses to specific
mixture policies, enumerated by the MSS at each iteration.
Consequently, a player can only play optimally against a few
sets of opponents, or forgo optimality entirely and execute

