GraphFM: Improving Large-Scale GNN Training via Feature Momentum

Haiyang Yu* 1 Limei Wang* 1 Bokun Wang* 2 Meng Liu 1 Tianbao Yang 2 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract
Training of graph neural networks (GNNs) for
large-scale node classification is challenging. A
key difficulty lies in obtaining accurate hidden
node representations while avoiding the neighborhood explosion problem. Here, we propose a
new technique, named feature momentum (FM),
that uses a momentum step to incorporate historical embeddings when updating feature representations. We develop two specific algorithms,
known as GraphFM-IB and GraphFM-OB, that
consider in-batch and out-of-batch data, respectively. GraphFM-IB applies FM to in-batch sampled data, while GraphFM-OB applies FM to
out-of-batch data that are 1-hop neighborhood of
in-batch data. We provide a convergence analysis for GraphFM-IB and some theoretical insight
for GraphFM-OB. Empirically, we observe that
GraphFM-IB can effectively alleviate the neighborhood explosion problem of existing methods. In addition, GraphFM-OB achieves promising performance on multiple large-scale graph
datasets.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) achieve promising performance on many graph learning tasks, such as node classification (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017;
Velickovic et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020), graph classification (Xu et al., 2018; Gao & Ji, 2019; Gao et al., 2021),
link prediction (Zhang & Chen, 2018; Cai & Ji, 2020),
and molecular property prediction (Gilmer et al., 2017;
Liu et al., 2022a). In general, GNNs learn from graphs
by the popular message passing framework (Gilmer et al.,
2017). Specifically, we usually perform a recursive aggregation scheme in which each node aggregates representa*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University, TX, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science, The University of Iowa, IA, USA. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tions from all 1-hop neighbors. Various GNNs (Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018;
Li et al., 2019) mainly differ in the employed aggregation
functions. Such recursive aggregation scheme has been
shown to be effective for learning graph representations.
However, it leads to the inherent neighborhood explosion
problem (Hamilton et al., 2017), since the number of neighbors grows exponentially with the depth of GNNs.
Due to such inherent problem, we have difficulties to apply GNNs to large-scale graphs. Notably, many real-world
graphs, such as citation networks, social networks, and
co-purchasing networks, are large-scale graphs (Hu et al.,
2021) with massive numbers of nodes and edges. Thus, it
is hard to obtain the complete computational graph, which
contains the exploded neighborhood, with limited GPU
memory when training on large-scale graphs. To tackle
this, efficient training algorithms (Huang et al., 2018; Gao
et al., 2018; Bojchevski et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a;
Huang et al., 2021; You et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Wan
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022b) have been developed to
update model parameters with reasonable computational
complexity and memory consumption. They aim to obtain
accurate hidden node representations and gradient estimations while avoiding the neighborhood explosion problem.
The mainstream efficient training algorithms are sampling
methods. They perform node-wise, layer-wise, or graph
sampling to alleviate the neighborhood explosion problem.
However, sampling incurs unavoidable errors in estimation
on hidden node embedding and gradients. In section 3, we
formulate GNNs as recursive nonlinear functions and show
that the gradients of the sampling methods suffer from estimation error due to the nonlinearity. In addition, establishing a convergence guarantee of Adam-style algorithms is
another challenge for sampling based methods (Cong et al.,
2021).
In this work, we propose a novel technique, known as feature momentum (FM), to address these problems. FM applies a momentum step on historical node embeddings for
estimating accurate hidden node representations. Based
on FM, we develop two algorithms based on sub-sampled
node estimation and pseudo-full neighborhood estimation,
respectively. The first algorithm, known as GraphFM-IB,
applies FM after sampling the in-batch nodes. GraphFMIB samples the 1-hop neighbors of target nodes recursively

