Neurocoder: General-Purpose Computation Using Stored Neural Programs

Hung Le 1 Svetha Venkatesh 1

Abstract
Artificial Neural Networks are functionally equivalent to special-purpose computers. Their interneuronal connection weights represent the learnt
Neural Program that instructs the networks on
how to compute the data. However, without storing Neural Programs, they are restricted to only
one, overwriting learnt programs when trained
on new data. Here we design Neurocoder, a
new class of general-purpose neural networks in
which the neural network “codes” itself in a dataresponsive way by composing relevant programs
from a set of shareable, modular programs stored
in external memory. This time, a Neural Program
is efficiently treated as data in memory. Integrating Neurocoder into current neural architectures,
we demonstrate new capacity to learn modular
programs, reuse simple programs to build complex ones, handle pattern shifts and remember
old programs as new ones are learnt, and show
substantial performance improvement in solving
object recognition, playing video games and continual learning tasks.

1. Introduction
From its inception in 1943 until recently, the fundamental
architectures of Artificial Neural Networks remained largely
unchanged - a program is executed by passing data through
a network of artificial neurons whose inter-neuronal connection weights are learnt through training with data. These
inter-neuronal connection weights, or Neural Programs, correspond to a program in modern computers (Schmidhuber,
1990). Memory Augmented Neural Networks (MANN) are
an innovative solution allowing networks to access external memory for manipulating data (layer’s output vectors)
(Graves et al., 2014; 2016). But they were still unable to
store Neural Programs (weight matrices) in such external
1
Applied AI Institute, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.
Correspondence to: Hung Le <thai.le@deakin.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

memory, and this severely limits machine learning. Storing inter-neuronal connection weights only in their network
does not permit modular separation of Neural programs and
is analogous to a computer with one fixed program. Recent
works introduce conditional computation via adjusting or
activating parts of a network in an input-dependent manner
(von der Malsburg, 1981; Schmidhuber, 1992; Bengio et al.,
2013; Ha et al., 2017; Perez et al., 2018), but networks remain monolithic. Current networks forget when retrained,
old inter-neuronal connection weights are merged with new
ones or erased.
The brain is modular, not a monolithic system, and is divided into functional modules (Hubel, 1988). If the neural
program for each module is kept in separate networks, networks proliferate. Modular neural networks, another form
of conditional computation, combine the output of multiple expert networks, but as the experts grow, the networks
grow drastically (Jacobs et al., 1991; Happel & Murre, 1994;
Shazeer et al., 2017; Rosenbaum et al., 2018). This requires
huge storage and introduces redundancy as these experts do
not share common basic programs.
A pathway out of this bind is to keep such basic programs in
memory and combine them as required. This brings neural
networks towards modern general-purpose computers that
use the stored-program principle (Turing, 1936; Von Neumann, 1993) to efficiently access reusable programs in external memory. Here we show how Neurocoder, a new neural
framework, introduces a new class of general-purpose conditional computation machines in which a neural network
can be “coded” in an input-dependent manner. Efficient decomposition of Neural Programs creates shareable modular
components that can reconstruct the whole program space.
These components change their “shapes” based on training
and are stored in an external Program Memory. Then, in a
data-responsive way, a Program Controller retrieves relevant
components to build the Neural Program.
Using adaptive modular components vastly increases the
learning capacity of the neural network by allowing
re-utilisation of parameters, effectively curbing network
growth as programs increase. More importantly, unlike
pre-defined sub-networks or modules (Jacobs et al., 1991;
Andreas et al., 2016) that combine at activation level, the
construction of our modular components is dynamic and

