NOMU: Neural Optimization-based Model Uncertainty

Jakob Heiss * 1 2 Jakob Weissteiner * 2 3 Hanna Wutte * 1 2 Sven Seuken 2 3 Josef Teichmann 1 2

Abstract
We study methods for estimating model uncertainty for neural networks (NNs) in regression.
To isolate the effect of model uncertainty, we focus on a noiseless setting with scarce training data.
We introduce five important desiderata regarding
model uncertainty that any method should satisfy.
However, we find that established benchmarks often fail to reliably capture some of these desiderata, even those that are required by Bayesian theory. To address this, we introduce a new approach
for capturing model uncertainty for NNs, which
we call Neural Optimization-based Model Uncertainty (NOMU). The main idea of NOMU is
to design a network architecture consisting of
two connected sub-NNs, one for model prediction and one for model uncertainty, and to train it
using a carefully-designed loss function. Importantly, our design enforces that NOMU satisfies
our five desiderata. Due to its modular architecture, NOMU can provide model uncertainty for
any given (previously trained) NN if given access
to its training data. We evaluate NOMU in various
regressions tasks and noiseless Bayesian optimization (BO) with costly evaluations. In regression,
NOMU performs at least as well as state-of-theart methods. In BO, NOMU even outperforms all
considered benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) are becoming increasingly important in machine learning applications (LeCun et al., 2015).
In many domains, it is essential to be able to quantify the
model uncertainty (epistemic uncertainty) of NNs (Neal,
2012; Ghahramani, 2015). Good estimates of model uncertainty are indispensable in Bayesian optimization (BO) and
active learning, where exploration is steered by (functions
*

Equal contribution 1 ETH Zurich 2 ETH AI Center 3 University
of Zurich. Correspondence to: Jakob Weissteiner <weissteiner@ifi.uzh.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1

0

−1

NOMU: f ̂ ± 2⋅σ̂f
MCDO: f ̂ ± 4⋅σ̂f
−1.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

Figure 1. Visualization of estimated model uncertainty σ̂f . The
unknown true function is depicted as a black solid line with training
points as black dots. NOMU’s model prediction fˆ is shown as
a solid blue line and its uncertainty bounds are shown as a blue
shaded area. As a benchmark, MC Dropout is shown in green.

of) these uncertainty estimates. In recent years, BO has
been successfully applied in practice to a wide range of
problems, including robotics (Martinez-Cantin et al., 2009),
sensor networks (Srinivas et al., 2012), and drug development (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018). Better model uncertainty estimates for BO directly translate to improvements
in these applications.
However, estimating model uncertainty well for NNs is still
an open research problem. For settings with scarce training
data and negligible data noise, where model uncertainty is
the main source of uncertainty, we uncover deficiencies of
widely used state-of-the-art methods for estimating model
uncertainty for NNs. Prior work often only measures the
performance in data noise dominant settings, and thus does
not adequately isolate the pure model uncertainty, thereby
overlooking the algorithms’ deficiencies. However, in tasks
such as BO with costly evaluations, where accurate estimates of model uncertainty are of utmost importance, these
deficiencies can drastically decrease performance.
In this paper, we study the problem of estimating model
uncertainty for NNs to obtain uncertainty bounds (UBs)
that estimate Bayesian credible bounds in a setting with
negligible data noise and scarce training data. For this, we
propose a novel algorithm (NOMU) that is specialized to
such a setting. Figure 1 shows UBs for NOMU and the
benchmark method MC Dropout.

