More Efficient Sampling for Tensor Decomposition With Worst-Case Guarantees

Osman Asif Malik 1

Abstract
Recent papers have developed alternating least
squares (ALS) methods for CP and tensor ring
decomposition with a per-iteration cost which is
sublinear in the number of input tensor entries
for low-rank decomposition. However, the periteration cost of these methods still has an exponential dependence on the number of tensor
modes when parameters are chosen to achieve
certain worst-case guarantees. In this paper, we
propose sampling-based ALS methods for the CP
and tensor ring decompositions whose cost does
not have this exponential dependence, thereby
significantly improving on the previous state-ofthe-art. We provide a detailed theoretical analysis
and also apply the methods in a feature extraction
experiment.

1. Introduction
Tensor decomposition has recently emerged as an important
tool in machine learning and data mining (Papalexakis et al.,
2016; Cichocki et al., 2016; 2017; Ji et al., 2019). Examples of applications include parameter reduction in neural
networks (Novikov et al., 2015; Garipov et al., 2016; Yang
et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2017; Ye et al., 2018), understanding
expressiveness of deep neural networks (Cohen et al., 2016;
Khrulkov et al., 2018), supervised learning (Stoudenmire &
Schwab, 2017; Novikov et al., 2016), filter learning (Hazan
et al., 2005; Rigamonti et al., 2013), image factor analysis
and recognition (Vasilescu & Terzopoulos, 2002; Liu et al.,
2019), multimodal feature fusion (Hou et al., 2019), natural
language processing (Lei et al., 2014), feature extraction
(Bengua et al., 2015), and tensor completion (Wang et al.,
2017). Due to their multidimensional nature, tensors are
inherently plagued by the curse of dimensionality. Indeed,
simply storing an N -way tensor with each dimension equal
to I requires I N numbers. Tensors are also fundamentally
1

Applied Mathematics & Computational Research Division,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Osman Asif Malik <oamalik@lbl.gov>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

more difficult to decompose than matrices (Hillar & Lim,
2013). Many tensor decompositions correspond to difficult
non-convex optimization problems. A popular approach for
tackling these optimization problems is to use alternating
least squares (ALS). While ALS works well for smaller
tensors, the per-iteration cost for an N -way tensor of size
I × · · · × I is Ω(I N ) since each iteration requires solving a
number of least squares problems with the data tensor entries
as the dependent variables. To address this issue, several
recent works have developed sampling-based ALS methods for the CP decomposition (Cheng et al., 2016; Larsen
& Kolda, 2020) and tensor ring decomposition (Malik &
Becker, 2021). When the target rank is small enough, they
have a per-iteration cost which is sublinear in the number
of input tensor entries while still retaining approximation
guarantees for each least squares solve with high probability.
However, the cost of these methods still has an exponential
dependence on N : Ω(RN +1 ) for the CP decomposition and
Ω(R2N +2 ) for the tensor ring decomposition, where R is
the relevant notion of rank. Unlike matrix rank, both the
CP and tensor ring ranks of a tensor can exceed the mode
dimension I, in which case the previous methods would no
longer have sublinear per-iteration cost. This leads us to the
following question:
Can we construct ALS algorithms for tensor decomposition with a per-iteration cost which does
not depend exponentially on N and which has
guarantees for each least squares solve?
In this paper, we show that this is indeed possible for both
the CP and tensor ring1 decompositions with high probability relative error guarantees. Like the previous works
mentioned above, we also use approximate leverage score
sampling. Unlike those previous works which use quite
coarse approximations to the leverage scores, we are able
to sample from a distribution which is much closer to the
exact one. We do this by using ideas for fast leverage score
estimation from Drineas et al. (2012) combined with the
recently developed recursive sketch by Ahle et al. (2020).
We also design sampling schemes for both the CP and tensor
ring decompositions which allow us to avoid computing the
whole sampling distribution which otherwise would cost
1

Our results are also relevant for the popular tensor train decomposition (Oseledets, 2010; 2011) since it is a special case of
the tensor ring decomposition.

