BabelTower: Learning to Auto-parallelized Program Translation

Yuanbo Wen 1 2 3 Qi Guo 2 4 Qiang Fu 1 2 3 Xiaqing Li 2 Jianxing Xu 1 2 3 Yanlin Tang 2 4 Yongwei Zhao 2 3
Xing Hu 2 Zidong Du 2 3 Ling Li 5 Chao Wang 1 Xuehai Zhou 1 Yunji Chen 2 4

Abstract
GPUs have become the dominant computing platforms for many applications, while programming
GPUs with the widely-used CUDA parallel programming model is difficult. As sequential C
code is relatively easy to obtain either from legacy
repositories or by manual implementation, automatically translating C to its parallel CUDA
counterpart is promising to relieve the burden
of GPU programming. However, because of
huge differences between the sequential C and
the parallel CUDA programming model, existing approaches fail to conduct the challenging
auto-parallelized program translation. In this paper, we propose a learning-based framework, i.e.,
BabelTower, to address this problem. We first
create a large-scale dataset consisting of computeintensive function-level monolingual corpora. We
further propose using back-translation with a discriminative reranker to cope with unpaired corpora and parallel semantic conversion. Experimental results show that BabelTower outperforms
state-of-the-art by 1.79, 6.09, and 9.39 in terms
of BLEU, CodeBLEU, and specifically designed
ParaBLEU, respectively. The CUDA code generated by BabelTower attains a speedup of up to
347× over the sequential C code, and the developer productivity is improved by at most 3.8×.

1. Introduction
Massively parallel architectures such as GPUs have become
the dominant computing platforms for a wide range of applications, such as graphical processing, high-performance
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 State Key
Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences 3 Cambricon Technologies, Beijing, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Institute of Software,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Yunji Chen
<cyj@ict.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

C programming model

Vector addition with sequential loops

CUDA programming model

Parallelized

Vector addition using multiple parallel
threads with SIMT rules

Figure 1. Both syntax and semantics are inherently different between sequential C and parallel CUDA programming model.

computing (HPC), and machine learning. To exploit their
highly parallel computation ability, practitioners typically
leverage the CUDA parallel programming model (Sanders
& Kandrot, 2010). However, writing parallel CUDA code
is quite hard since the programmers should be aware of
complicated architectural characteristics of GPUs, e.g.,
thread/block data organization, on-chip shared memory, and
warp synchronization.
As sequential C code is relatively easy to obtain, it is very
promising to alleviate the burden of GPU programming
by automatically translating from C to CUDA. Concretely,
there already exist vast repositories of legacy C code, which
can be directly utilized or slightly modified for generating
their parallel CUDA counterpart. Even if appropriate C
code cannot be obtained from existing repositories, it is still
much easier to write the sequential C code than the parallel
CUDA code given the same functional specification.
However, such program translation is greatly challenging in
practice. The main reason is that the CUDA programming
model, which follows the SIMT (Single Instruction, Multiple Threads) model to partition the data into different parts
with the same code, is quite different from conventional C
programming in syntax and particularly semantics. Figure 1
shows an example of the key differences between the C and
CUDA programming model, where the vector addition with
sequential loops of C is parallelized using multiple indexed
threads with religious SIMT rules of CUDA. Apparently,
automating such process requires not only syntax-level translation (e.g., generating the CUDA-specific keywords such
as threadIdx.x), but also loop detection, parallel semantic
analysis, and sequential-to-parallel conversion. Essentially,
this problem can be modeled as auto-parallelized program
translation, which is harder than either traditional automatic

