A Convergent and Dimension-Independent Min-Max Optimization Algorithm

Vijay Keswani 1 Oren Mangoubi 2 Sushant Sachdeva 3 Nisheeth K. Vishnoi 4

Abstract
We study a variant of a recently introduced minmax optimization framework where the maxplayer is constrained to update its parameters
in a greedy manner until it reaches a first-order
stationary point. Our equilibrium definition for
this framework depends on a proposal distribution which the min-player uses to choose directions in which to update its parameters. We show
that, given a smooth and bounded nonconvexnonconcave objective function, access to any proposal distribution for the min-player’s updates,
and stochastic gradient oracle for the max-player,
our algorithm converges to the aforementioned
approximate local equilibrium in a number of iterations that does not depend on the dimension.
The equilibrium point found by our algorithm
depends on the proposal distribution, and when
applying our algorithm to train GANs we choose
the proposal distribution to be a distribution of
stochastic gradients. We empirically evaluate our
algorithm on challenging nonconvex-nonconcave
test-functions and loss functions arising in GAN
training. Our algorithm converges on these test
functions and, when used to train GANs, trains
stably on synthetic and real-world datasets and
avoids mode collapse.

1. Introduction
For a loss function f : X × Y → R on some (convex)
domain X × Y ⊆ Rd × Rd , we consider:
min max f (x, y).
(1)
x∈X y∈Y

1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University,
US 2 Department of Mathematical Sciences, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, US 3 Department of Computer Science, University
of Toronto, Canada 4 Department of Computer Science, Yale
University, US. Correspondence to: Oren Mangoubi <omangoubi@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

This min-max optimization problem has several applications
to machine learning, including GANs (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) and adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018). In many
of these applications, only first-order access to f is available
efficiently, and gradient-based algorithms are widely used.
Unfortunately, there is a lack of gradient-based algorithms
with convergence guarantees for this min-max framework
if one allows for loss functions f (x, y) which are nonconvex/nonconcave in x and y. This lack of convergence guarantees can be a serious problem in practice, since popular algorithms such as gradient descent-ascent (GDA) oftentimes
fail to converge, and GANs trained with these algorithms
can suffer from issues such as cycling (Arjovsky & Bottou,
2017) and “mode collapse” (Dumoulin et al., 2017; Che
et al., 2017; Santurkar et al., 2018).
Since min-max optimization includes minimization (and
maximization) as special cases, it is intractable for general
nonconvex/nonconcave functions. Motivated by the success
of a long line of results which show efficient convergence
of minimization algorithms to various (approximate) local minimum notions (e.g., (Nesterov & Polyak, 2006; Ge
et al., 2015; Agarwal et al., 2017)), previous works have
sought to extend these ideas of local minima to various (approximate) notions of local min-max point–that is, a point
(x⋆ , y ⋆ ) where x⋆ is a local minimum of f (·, y ⋆ ) and y ⋆
is a local maximum of f (x⋆ , ·)– in the hope that this will
allow for algorithms with convergence guarantees to such
points. Unfortunately, to prove convergence, these works
(e.g., Nemirovski (2004); Lu et al. (2020)) make strong
assumptions on f , e.g. assume f (x, y) is concave in y,
or that their algorithm is given a starting point such that
its underlying dynamical system converges (Heusel et al.
(2017); Mescheder et al. (2017)). It is a challenge to develop
gradient-based algorithms which converge efficiently to an
equilibrium for even a local variant of the min-max framework under less restrictive assumptions comparable to those
required for convergence of algorithms to local minima.
Our Contributions. We study a variant of the min-max
framework which allows the max-player to update y in a
“greedy” manner (Section 3). This greedy restriction models
first-order maximization algorithms such as gradient ascent,
popular in machine learning applications, which can make
updates far from the current value of y when run for multiple

