Policy Diagnosis via Measuring Role Diversity in Cooperative Multi-agent RL

Siyi Hu 1 2 Chuanlong Xie 3 4 Xiaodan Liang 5 Xiaojun Chang 2

Abstract
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) is making rapid progress for solving
tasks in a grid world and real-world scenarios,
in which agents are given different attributes and
goals, resulting in different behavior through the
whole multi-agent task. In this study, we quantify the agent’s behavior difference and build its
relationship with the policy performance via Role
Diversity, a metric to measure the characteristics of MARL tasks. We define role diversity
from three perspectives: action-based, trajectorybased, and contribution-based to fully measure
a multi-agent task. Through theoretical analysis,
we find that the error bound in MARL can be
decomposed into three parts that have a strong
relation to the role diversity. The decomposed factors can significantly impact policy optimization
on three popular directions including parameter
sharing, communication mechanism, and credit
assignment. The main experimental platforms
are based on Multiagent Particle Environment
(MPE) and The StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC). Extensive experiments clearly
show that role diversity can serve as a robust measurement for the characteristics of a multi-agent
cooperation task and help diagnose whether the
policy fits the current multi-agent system for a
better policy performance.

1. Introduction
Recently, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has
attracted researchers attention due to its impressive achievements with super human-level intelligence in video games
[3, 6, 53, 58], card games [7, 26, 45, 60], and real-world
applications [63–65]. These achievements have benefited
1
Monash University 2 The ReLER Lab, University of Technology Sydney 3 Beijing Normal University 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark
Lab 5 Sun Yat-sen University. Correspondence to: Xiaojun Chang
<Xiaojun.Chang@uts.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

substantially from the success of single-agent reinforcement
learning (RL) [14, 15, 31, 43, 44] and rapid progress of
MARL [5, 17, 18, 28, 30, 57].
In MARL, one of the most attracting sub-tasks is the
multi-agent cooperation tasks, where agents are required to
achieve their common goals by collaborating with teammates [29, 40, 62]. However, the achievements on the
cooperative MARL are more based on empirical results
[4, 22, 47, 52] than theoretical analysis. And one key problem of cooperative MARL is how to fairly compare different
algorithms as shown in Fig. 1a. Current researches focus
on developing algorithms on the tasks they are good at but
lack the study of why the performance declines on other
tasks [16, 36, 56, 56, 59]. Sometimes, even adopting the
state-of-the-art algorithms does not guarantee an optimized
performance [13, 36, 49, 56, 59]. This may be due to the
varying characteristic (e.g agent’s attributes and goals) of
MARL tasks and scenarios, one single algorithm is not able
to cover them all, which means we have to change the policy
or the training strategy in order to guarantee that the policy
we used fits for the current MARL task.
From this perspective, a metric to help measure the characteristic of different MARL tasks is desirable. This metric
can be used to choose a better policy or training strategy for
the current task, which is illustrated in Fig. 1b. We name this
measurement as Role Diversity, which aims at quantifying
the difference of agents’ behavior in a MARL task. We then
analyze how the role diversity impacts learning performance
both theoretically and empirically. For theoretical analysis,
we decompose the estimation error of the joint action-value
function to discuss how role diversity impacts the policy
optimization process. The experiment further verifies the
theoretical analysis that the role diversity is strongly related
to the model performance and can serve as a good measurement of a MAS. As shown in Fig. 1, with the role diversity
measurement of each task, we can diagnose the improper
training strategies used in current policy or find a better
training strategy combination.
More specifically, we define role distance and role diversity from three aspects: action-based, trajectory-based, and
contribution-based. Each type of role diversity is measured
by a unified variable called role distance. Theoretical analysis shows that different types of role diversity have a differ-

