Smoothed Adversarial Linear Contextual Bandits with Knapsacks

Vidyashankar Sivakumar 1 Shiliang Zuo 2 Arindam Banerjee 2

Abstract

Many bandit problems are characterized by the
learner making decisions under constraints. The
learner in Linear Contextual Bandits with Knapsacks (LinCBwK) receives a resource consumption vector in addition to a scalar reward in each
time step which are both linear functions of the
context corresponding to the chosen arm. For a
fixed time horizon T , the goal of the learner is to
maximize rewards while ensuring resource consumptions do not exceed a pre-specified budget.
We present algorithms and characterize regret for
LinCBwK in the smoothed setting where base
context vectors are assumed to be perturbed by
Gaussian noise. We consider both the stochastic and adversarial settings for the base contexts,
and our analysis of stochastic LinCBwK can be
viewed as a warm-up to the more challenging adversarial LinCBwK.
For the stochastic setting, we
?
obtain Op T q additive regret bounds compared
to the best context dependent fixed policy. The
analysis combines ideas for greedy parameter estimation in (Kannan et al., 2018; Sivakumar et al.,
2020) and the primal-dual paradigm first explored
in (Agrawal & Devanur, 2016; 2014a). Our main
contribution is an algorithm with Oplog T q competitive ratio relative to the best context dependent
fixed policy for the adversarial setting. The algorithm for the adversarial setting employs ideas
from the primal-dual framework (Agrawal & Devanur, 2016; 2014a) and a novel adaptation of the
doubling trick (Immorlica et al., 2019).

1

Amazon 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence
to: Vidyashankar Sivakumar
<shankar861@gmail.com>,
Shiliang Zuo <szuo3@illinois.edu>, Arindam Banerjee
<arindamb@illinois.edu>. All work by VS done prior to starting
employment with Amazon.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The contextual bandits framework (Langford & Zhang,
2007; Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2019; Slivkins, 2021) is a
popular sequential decision making framework used in multiple practical applications such as clinical trials, web search,
and content optimization. Contextual bandit problems have
multiple rounds where in each round a learner watches a set
of context vectors corresponding to K arms and chooses an
arm with the goal of maximizing cumulative rewards. In
linear contextual bandits (LinCB) (Chu et al., 2011; Li et al.,
2010), the rewards for an arm are a linear function of the
context vector. Algorithms for contextual bandit problems
typically have to balance between exploration, choosing potentially sub-optimal arms for acquiring more information,
and exploitation, choosing arms to optimize immediate rewards. Motivated by fairness and ethics considerations (Bird
et al., 2016; Raghavan et al., 2018; Kannan et al., 2018) or to
avoid inefficient exploration strategies (Bastani et al., 2018),
recent work has studied settings where an exploration free
greedy algorithm can be employed. The crux of all such
prior work is an assumption of inherent randomness in context vectors aiding exploration. In the smoothed bandits
framework (Kannan et al., 2018) the inherent randomness
is due to stochastic perturbations of the context vectors.
Often a learner has to operate under constraints while
maximizing rewards (Babaioff et al., 2015; Badanidiyuru
et al., 2012; Besbes & Zeevi, 2012; Singla & Krause, 2013;
Combes et al., 2015). For example clinical trials are constrained by available medical resources or optimizing for ad
placements should account for advertisers budget and user
reach. There is now a body of work under the theme bandits
with knapsacks (BwK) addressing the tension between maximizing rewards while satisfying constraints (Badanidiyuru
et al., 2013; Agrawal & Devanur, 2014a; 2016; Immorlica
et al., 2019; Agrawal et al., 2016; Badanidiyuru et al., 2014).
Smoothed LinCBwK. In this work, we consider the linear
contextual bandits with knapsacks (LinCBwK) problem
(Agrawal & Devanur, 2016) under the smoothed assumption
on context vectors. The LinCBwK problem has d resources
with budget B P R` for each resource. In each round
m
t, there are K context vectors txt paquK
a“1 , xt paq P R ,
one corresponding to each arm a P rKs. The smoothed
context vectors are of the form xt paq “ νt paq ` gt paq,

