Learning Stable Classifiers by Transferring Unstable Features

Yujia Bao 1 Shiyu Chang 2 Regina Barzilay 1

Abstract
While unbiased machine learning models are essential for many applications, bias is a humandefined concept that can vary across tasks. Given
only input-label pairs, algorithms may lack sufficient information to distinguish stable (causal)
features from unstable (spurious) features. However, related tasks often share similar biases – an
observation we may leverage to develop stable
classifiers in the transfer setting. In this work,
we explicitly inform the target classifier about unstable features in the source tasks. Specifically,
we derive a representation that encodes the unstable features by contrasting different data environments in the source task. We achieve robustness
by clustering data of the target task according
to this representation and minimizing the worstcase risk across these clusters. We evaluate our
method on both text and image classifications.
Empirical results demonstrate that our algorithm
is able to maintain robustness on the target task
for both synthetically generated environments and
real-world environments. Our code is available at
https://github.com/YujiaBao/Tofu.

1. Introduction
Automatic de-biasing (Sohoni et al., 2020; Creager et al.,
2021; Sanh et al., 2021) has emerged as a promising direction for learning stable classifiers. The key premise here
is that no additional annotations for the bias attribute are
required. However, bias is a human-defined concept and
can vary from task to task. Provided with only input-label
pairs, algorithms may not have sufficient information to
distinguish stable (causal) features from unstable (spurious)
features.
To address this challenge, we note that related tasks are often
fraught with similar spurious correlations. For instance,
1
MIT CSAIL 2 Computer Science, UC Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Yujia Bao <yujia@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

when classifying animals such as camels vs. cows, their
backgrounds (desert vs. grass) may constitute a spurious
correlation (Beery et al., 2018). The same bias between
the label and the background also persists in other related
classification tasks (such as sheep vs. antelope). In the
resource-scarce target task, we only have access to the inputlabel pairs. However, in the source tasks, where training
data is sufficient, identifying biases may be easier. For
instance, we may have examples collected from multiple
environments, in which correlations between bias features
and the label are different (Arjovsky et al., 2019). These
source environments help us define the exact bias features
that we want to regulate.
One obvious approach to utilize the source task is direct
transfer. Specifically, given multiple source environments,
we can train an unbiased source classifier and then apply its
representation to the target task. However, we empirically
demonstrate that while the source classifier is not biased
when making its final predictions, its internal continuous
representation can still encode information about the unstable features. Figure 1 shows that in Colored MNIST,
where the digit label is spuriously correlated with the image
color, direct transfer by either re-using or fine-tuning the
representation learned on the source task fails in the target
task, performing no better than the majority baseline.
In this paper, we propose to explicitly inform the target classifier about unstable features from the source data. Specifically, we derive a representation that encodes these unstable
features using the source environments. Then we identify
distinct subpopulations by clustering examples based on
this representation and apply group DRO (Sagawa et al.,
2019) to minimize the worst-case risk over these subpopulations. As a result, we enforce the target classifier to
be robust against different values of the unstable features.
In the example above, animals would be clustered according to backgrounds, and the classifier should perform well
regardless of the clusters (backgrounds).
The remaining question is how to compute the unstable
feature representation using the source data environments.
Following Bao et al. (2021), we hypothesize that unstable
features are reflected in mistakes observed during classifier
transfer across environments. For instance, if the classifier
uses the background to distinguish camels from cows, the

