Continuous-Time Modeling of Counterfactual Outcomes Using Neural
Controlled Differential Equations

Nabeel Seedat * 1 Fergus Imrie * 2 Alexis Bellot 3 Zhaozhi Qian 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 4

Abstract
Estimating counterfactual outcomes over time has
the potential to unlock personalized healthcare
by assisting decision-makers to answer “what-if”
questions. Existing causal inference approaches
typically consider regular, discrete-time intervals
between observations and treatment decisions and
hence are unable to naturally model irregularly
sampled data, which is the common setting in
practice. To handle arbitrary observation patterns,
we interpret the data as samples from an underlying continuous-time process and propose to model
its latent trajectory explicitly using the mathematics of controlled differential equations. This leads
to a new approach, the Treatment Effect Neural
Controlled Differential Equation (TE-CDE), that
allows the potential outcomes to be evaluated at
any time point. In addition, adversarial training
is used to adjust for time-dependent confounding
which is critical in longitudinal settings and is an
added challenge not encountered in conventional
time-series. To assess solutions to this problem,
we propose a controllable simulation environment
based on a model of tumor growth for a range of
scenarios with irregular sampling reflective of a
variety of clinical scenarios. TE-CDE consistently
outperforms existing approaches in all simulated
scenarios with irregular sampling.

1. Introduction
Decision-makers must answer several critical questions before taking an action. In the clinical setting, before a treatment is given, clinicians must evaluate whether a treatment
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Mathematics and
Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK 2 University of
California, Los Angeles, USA 3 Columbia University, USA 4 The
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to: Nabeel
Seedat <ns741@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

should be given and, if so, both what treatment is best for
their patient and when the treatment should be administered.
Answering such questions requires reliably estimating the
effect of a treatment or sequence of treatments. While from
a causal inference perspective, clinical trials represent the
gold standard to answer these questions, it is highly desirable to estimate treatment effects from observational data.
This is due to the significant expense, relatively small sample sizes, and narrow inclusion criteria of clinical trials.
There are several causal inference methods proposed in the
static setting (e.g. Shalit et al., 2017; Alaa & van der Schaar,
2017; Yoon et al., 2018). However, estimating the effects
of treatments over time is of paramount importance for
real-world administration of complex treatment plans and
personalized healthcare. Only in the longitudinal setting can
we understand how diseases evolve under different treatment
plans, how individual patients respond to treatment over
time, or the optimal timing for treatment.
However, estimating counterfactual outcomes in the longitudinal setting introduces additional challenges, the most
significant of which is that the observed treatment assignment may depend on confounding variables that vary over
time (time-dependent confounding, Platt et al., 2009). For
example, not all cancer patients are equally likely to be offered the same chemotherapy regimen. In particular, the
history of patients’ covariates and their response to past
treatments affects future treatments (Bica et al., 2021). This
can introduce bias in causal effects and variance in the estimation of counterfactuals due to the systematic differences
in the distribution of confounding variables between any
two sets of treatments over time.
This issue of time-dependent confounding and distribution
shift is the primary challenge of causal inference over time,
not encountered in standard time-series. Hence, conventional time-series models are not applicable to our setting
as they do not adjust for bias introduced by time-varying
confounders and hence are sensitive to the policy in the
observational data (Schulam & Saria, 2017).
While prior work in causal inference has sought to mitigate
such confounding bias (Robins et al., 2000; Lim et al., 2018;
Bica et al., 2020b), the setting considered is overly restric-

