Towards Theoretical Analysis of Transformation Complexity of ReLU DNNs
Jie Ren * 1 Mingjie Li * 1 Meng Zhou 2 Shih-Han Chan 3 Quanshi Zhang 4

Abstract
This paper aims to theoretically analyze the complexity of feature transformations encoded in
piecewise linear DNNs with ReLU layers. We
propose metrics to measure three types of complexities of transformations based on the information theory. We further discover and prove the
strong correlation between the complexity and the
disentanglement of transformations. Based on the
proposed metrics, we analyze two typical phenomena of the change of the transformation complexity during the training process, and explore the
ceiling of a DNN’s complexity. The proposed metrics can also be used as a loss to learn a DNN with
the minimum complexity, which also controls
the over-fitting level of the DNN and influences
adversarial robustness, adversarial transferability, and knowledge consistency. Comprehensive
comparative studies have provided new perspectives to understand the DNN. The code is released
at https://github.com/sjtu-XAI-lab/transformationcomplexity.

1. Introduction
Understanding the black-box of deep neural networks
(DNNs) has attracted increasing attention in recent years.
Previous studies usually interpret DNNs by either explaining DNNs visually/semantically (Lundberg & Lee, 2017;
Ribeiro et al., 2016), or analyzing the feature representation
capacity of a DNN (Higgins et al., 2017; Achille & Soatto,
2018a;b; Fort et al., 2019). To this end, in this paper, we
aim to explain the representation capacity of a DNN by
analyzing its complexity of feature representations.
*

Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2 Carnegie
Mellon University. 3 University of California San Diego. 4 Quanshi
Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, the John Hopcroft Center,
and the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, at
the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to:
Quanshi Zhang <zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A simple DNN: ℝ2 → ℝ

A complex DNN: ℝ2 → ℝ

𝑦 = DNN(𝑥)

𝑦 = DNN(𝑥)

𝑥2

𝑥1
samples
activating
the same
gating state 𝝈

𝑥2
𝑥1

samples activating
another gating state 𝝈
linear subspaces

Figure 1. The change of gating states in an ReLU DNN divides
the input space into lots of linear subspaces. In this paper, we aim
to quantify the complexity of linear subspaces encoded in ReLU
DNNs.

In fact, there have been many studies (Arora et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2016; Raghu et al., 2017; Manurangsi & Reichman, 2018) on the representation complexity of a DNN.
However, unlike traditional studies on the theoretic maximum complexity of a DNN, we investigate this problem
from a new perspective, i.e., the complexity of piecewise
linear representations of a ReLU network. In fact, most
DNNs with ReLU activation functions are piecewise linear models. As Figure 1 shows, for such piecewise linear models, the number of piecewise linear subspaces
in the model is the distinctive perspective to analyze
the representation complexity of the model. A complex
DNN usually uses countless linear subspaces for regression/classification. Such a complexity reveals new insights
into typical problems, such as the feature disentanglement,
over-fitting, adversarial robustness, adversarial transferability, and knowledge consistency.
Therefore, in this paper, we define three new metrics in
information theory to quantify the diversity of gating states
in gating layers (e.g., ReLU, max-Pooling, and Dropout
layers). Such gating states directly determine the complexity
of linear subspaces that are encoded by a piecewise linear
ReLU network. For example, as Figure 1 shows, the change
of gating states in a DNN divides the entire input space
into lots of linear subspaces. Compared with intermediatelayers neural activations, gating states can better reflect the
diversity of transformations in a piecewise linear DNN.
Thus, the first metric is defined as the entropy of the gating states of nonlinear operations. Specifically, let us con-

