UniRank: Unimodal Bandit Algorithms for Online Ranking

Camille-Sovanneary Gauthier * 1 2 Romaric Gaudel * 3 Elisa Fromont 4 5 2

Abstract
We tackle, in the multiple-play bandit setting, the
online ranking problem of assigning L items to
K predefined positions on a web page in order
to maximize the number of user clicks. We propose a generic algorithm, UniRank, that tackles
state-of-the-art click models. The regret bound
of this algorithm is a direct consequence of the
unimodality-like property of the bandit setting
with respect to a graph where nodes are ordered
sets of indistinguishable items. The main contribution of UniRank is its O (L/∆ log T ) regret
for T consecutive assignments, where ∆ relates
to the reward-gap between two items. This regret bound is based on the usually implicit condition that two items may not have the same attractiveness. Experiments against state-of-the-art
learning algorithms specialized or not for different click models, show that our method has better
regret performance than other generic algorithms
on real life and synthetic datasets.

1. Introduction
We consider Online Recommendation Systems (ORS) which
choose K relevant items among L potential ones (L ≥ K),
such as songs, ads or movies to be displayed on a website. The user feedbacks, such as listening time, clicks,
rates, etc., reflecting the user’s appreciation with respect to
each displayed item, are collected after each recommendation. As these feedbacks are only available for the items
which were actually presented to the user, this setting corresponds to an instance of the multi-armed bandit problem
with semi-bandit feedback (Gai et al., 2012; Chen et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Louis Vuitton, F-75001 Paris, France
IRISA UMR 6074 / INRIA rba, F-35000 Rennes, France
3
Univ Rennes, Ensai, CNRS, CREST - UMR 9194, F-35000
Rennes, France 4 Univ. Rennes 1, F-35000 Rennes, France
5
Institut Universitaire de France, M.E.S.R.I., F-75231 Paris.
Correspondence to: Camille-Sovanneary Gauthier <camillesovanneary.gauthier@louisvuitton.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2013). Besides, some displayed items are not looked at and
lead to a negative feedback while they would be appreciated
by the user. It raises a specific challenge related to ranking: the attention toward a displayed item is impacted by
its position. Numerous approaches have been proposed to
handle this partial attention (Radlinski et al., 2008; Combes
et al., 2015; Lagrée et al., 2016) referred to as multiple-play
bandit or online learning to rank. Several models of partial
attention, a.k.a. click models, are considered in the state of
the art (Richardson et al., 2007; Craswell et al., 2008) and
have been transposed to the bandit framework (Kveton et al.,
2015a; Komiyama et al., 2017). In current paper, in the same
line as (Zoghi et al., 2017; Lattimore et al., 2018) we propose an algorithm which handles multiple state-of-the-art
click models.
The main contribution of our work is a new bandit algorithm, UniRank, dedicated to a generic online learning to
rank setting. UniRank takes inspiration from unimodal
bandit algorithms (Combes & Proutière, 2014; Gauthier
et al., 2021b): we implicitly consider a graph G on the partitions of the item-set such that the considered bandit setting
is unimodal w.r.t. G, and UniRank chooses each recommendation in the G-neighborhood of an elicited partition.
Thanks to this restricted exploration, UniRank is the first algorithm dedicated to a generic setting with a O(L/∆ log T )
regret upper-bound, while previous state-of-the-art algorithms were suffering a O(LK/∆ log T ) regret. Note that
this O(L/∆ log T ) upper-bound requires all items’ attractiveness to be different, which is a usual assumption satisfied
by real world applications. Otherwise, UniRank recovers
the O(LK/∆ log T ) bound. From an application point of
view, UniRank has several interesting features: it handles
multiple state-of-the-art click models altogether; it is simple
to implement and efficient in terms of computation time; it
does not require the knowledge of the time horizon T ; and
it exhibits a smaller empirical regret than other generic algorithms by leaning on the different attractiveness property
when this property is satisfied.
As an indirect contribution, UniRank demonstrates that unimodality is a key tool to analyze the intrinsic complexity of
some combinatorial semi-bandit problems. We also demonstrate the flexibility of unimodal bandit algorithms and of the
proof of their regret upper-bound. In particular, we extend
(Combes & Proutière, 2014)’s analysis to a graph which is

