On the Convergence of Inexact Predictor-Corrector Methods
for Linear Programming

Gregory Dexter 1 Agniva Chowdhury 2 Haim Avron 3 Petros Drineas 1

Abstract
Interior point methods (IPMs) are a common approach for solving linear programs (LPs) with
strong theoretical guarantees and solid empirical
performance. The time complexity of these methods is dominated by the cost of solving a linear
system of equations at each iteration. In common
applications of linear programming, particularly
in machine learning and scientific computing, the
size of this linear system can become prohibitively
large, requiring the use of iterative solvers, which
provide an approximate solution to the linear system. However, approximately solving the linear
system at each iteration of an IPM invalidates the
theoretical guarantees of common IPM analyses.
To remedy this, we theoretically and empirically
analyze (slightly modified) predictor-corrector
IPMs when using approximate linear solvers: our
approach guarantees that, when certain conditions
are satisfied, the number of IPM iterations does
not increase and that the final solution remains
feasible. We also provide practical instantiations
of approximate linear solvers that satisfy these
conditions for special classes of constraint matrices using randomized linear algebra.

suit (BP) (Yang & Zhang, 2011), sparse inverse covariance
matrix estimation (SICE) (Yuan, 2010), the nonnegative
matrix factorization (NMF) (Recht et al., 2012), MAP inference (Meshi & Globerson, 2011), compressed sensing
(Donoho, 2006), and adversarial deep learning (Wong &
Kolter, 2018). The central importance of this problem has
resulted in substantial research on provably accurate algorithms for linear programming. At the same time, practically
efficient algorithms are critically needed.
The two major families of algorithms used to solve linear
programs are simplex methods and interior point methods
(IPMs), with combinations of the two (e.g., IPMs used in the
early stages and simplex methods used once approximately
optimal solutions have been reached) being useful in practice (Wright, 1997). Predictor-corrector methods, a special
type of IPMs, have been particularly useful in solving linear
programs accurately and are perhaps the most successful
example of theoretically provable yet practically efficient
approaches for linear programs.
More precisely, consider a linear program (LP) of the following (standard) form. Let A ∈ Rm×n be the constraint
matrix and x ∈ Rn be the free variable:
min cT x, subject to Ax = b, x ≥ 0.

(1)

The associated dual problem is

1. Introduction
Linear programming is a ubiquitous problem appearing
across applied mathematics and computer science, with
extensive applications in both theory and practice. Modern machine learning applications of linear programming
include ℓ1 -regularized SVMs (Zhu et al., 2004), basis pur1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA 2 Computer Science and Mathematics Division,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN, USA 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence
to: Gregory Dexter <gdexter@purdue.edu>, Agniva Chowdhury
<chowdhurya@ornl.gov>, Haim Avron <haimav@tauex.tau.ac.il>,
Petros Drineas <pdrineas@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

max bT y, subject to AT y + s = c, s ≥ 0,

(2)

where y ∈ Rm is the dual variable and s ∈ Rn is the slack
variable. The first (weakly) polynomial time algorithm for
linear programming is the ellipsoid method, as proved by
Khachiyan in 1979 (Khachiyan, 1979). While the ellipsoid
method was deemed to be inefficient in practice, it provided
inspiration for the first IPM, developed by Karmarkar in
1984 (Karmarkar, 1984). Karmarkar’s initial work was
followed by an explosion of research on IPMs that led to
numerous algorithms with various theory-practice tradeoffs.
Predictor-corrector IPMs achieve nearly optimal theoretical
guarantees, while being commonly used in popular linear
optimization packages (Schork & Gondzio, 2020; Almeida
& Teixeira, 2015). More precisely, predictor-corrector algorithms are primal-dual path-following IPMs. They compute

