Random Gegenbauer Features for Scalable Kernel Methods

Insu Han * 1 Amir Zandieh * 2 Haim Avron 3

Abstract
We propose efficient random features for approximating a new and rich class of kernel functions
that we refer to as Generalized Zonal Kernels
(GZK). Our proposed GZK family, generalizes the
zonal kernels (i.e., dot-product kernels on the unit
sphere) by introducing radial factors in the Gegenbauer series expansion of these kernel functions.
The GZK class of kernels includes a wide range
of ubiquitous kernel functions such as the entirety
of dot-product kernels as well as the Gaussian
and the recently introduced Neural Tangent kernels. Interestingly, by exploiting the reproducing
property of the Gegenbauer (Zonal) Harmonics,
we can construct efficient random features for the
GZK family based on randomly oriented Gegenbauer harmonics. We prove subspace embedding
guarantees for our Gegenbauer features which
ensures that our features can be used for approximately solving learning problems such as kernel
k-means clustering, kernel ridge regression, etc.
Empirical results show that our proposed features
outperform recent kernel approximation methods.

1. Introduction
Kernel methods are an important family of learning algorithms, which are applicable for a wide range of tasks, e.g.
regression (Saunders et al., 1998), clustering (Dhillon et al.,
2004), graph learning (Vishwanathan et al., 2010), nonparametric modeling (Rasmussen, 2004) as well as wide
deep neural networks analysis (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al.,
2019). However, unfortunately, they suffer from scalability issues, often due to the fact that applying the aforementioned methods requires operating on the kernel matrix
(Gram matrix) of the data, whose size scales quadratically
in the number of training samples. For example, solving
*
Equal contribution 1 Yale University 2 Max-Planck-Institut
für Informatik 3 Tel Aviv University. Correspondence to: Insu
Han <insu.han@yale.edu>, Amir Zandieh <azandieh@mpiinf.mpg.de>, Haim Avron <haimav@tauex.tau.ac.il>.

kernel ridge regression generally requires a prohibitively
large quadratic memory and at least quadratic runtime. To
alleviate this issue, there has been a long line of efforts
on efficiently approximating kernel matrices by low-rank
factors (Williams & Seeger, 2001; Rahimi & Recht, 2009;
Avron et al., 2014; Alaoui & Mahoney, 2015; Musco &
Musco, 2017; Avron et al., 2017b; Zandieh et al., 2020;
Ahle et al., 2020; Woodruff & Zandieh, 2020). Most relevant
to this work is the widely used random features approach,
originally proposed by Rahimi & Recht (2009).
In this work, we propose efficient random features for approximating a new and rich class of kernel functions that
we refer to as Generalized Zonal Kernels (GZK) (see Definition 3). Our proposed class of kernels extends the zonal
kernels (i.e., dot-product kernels restricted to the unit sphere)
to entire Rd space, and includes a wide range of ubiquitous
kernels, e.g. the entire family of dot-product kernels, the
Gaussian kernel, and the recently introduced Neural Tangent kernels (Jacot et al., 2018). We start by considering the
series expansion of zonal kernel functions in terms of the
Gegenbauer polynomials, which are central in our analysis.
Then we generalize these kernels by allowing radial factors
in the Gegenbauer expansion. We construct the GZK family of kernels in Section 3.2. We design efficient random
features for this class of kernels by exploiting various properties of Gegenbauer polynomials and using leverage scores
sampling techniques (Li et al., 2013).
Specifically, for a given GZK function and its corresponding
kernel matrix K ∈ Rn×n , we seeks to find a low-rank
matrix that can serve as a proxy to the kernel matrix K.
We present an algorithm that for given ε, λ > 0, computes
a matrix Z ∈ Rm×n such that Z > Z is an (ε, λ)-spectral
approximation to the GZK kernel matrix K, meaning that
K + λI
K + λI
 Z > Z + λI 
.
1+ε
1−ε

(1)

The spectral approximation guarantee can be directly used
to obtain statistical guarantees for downstream kernel-based
learning applications, such as bounds on the empirical risk
of kernel ridge regression (Avron et al., 2017b).
1.1. Overview of Our Contributions

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The Gegenbauer polynomials are a family of orthogonal
polynomials that include Chebyshev and Legendre poly-

