Failure and success of the spectral bias prediction for
Laplace Kernel Ridge Regression: the case of low-dimensional data

Umberto M. Tomasini 1 Antonio Sclocchi 1 Matthieu Wyart 1

Abstract

where λ is the ridge parameter which controls the regularisation of the kernel norm ||.||K of fP .

Recently, several theories including the replica
method made predictions for the generalization error of Kernel Ridge Regression. In some regimes,
they predict that the method has a ‘spectral bias’:
decomposing the true function f ∗ on the eigenbasis of the kernel, it fits well the coefficients associated with the O(P) largest eigenvalues, where P is
the size of the training set. This prediction works
very well on benchmark data sets such as images,
yet the assumptions these approaches make on
the data are never satisfied in practice. To clarify
when the spectral bias prediction holds, we first focus on a one-dimensional model where rigorous
results are obtained and then use scaling arguments to generalize and test our findings in higher
dimensions. Our predictions include the classification case f (x) =sign(x1 ) with a data distribution
that vanishes at the decision boundary p(x) ∼ xχ1 .
For χ > 0 and a Laplace kernel, we find that (i)
1
there exists a cross-over ridge λ∗d,χ (P ) ∼ P − d+χ
such that for λ ≫ λ∗d,χ (P ), the replica method
applies, but not for λ ≪ λ∗d,χ (P ), (ii) in the ridgeless case, spectral bias predicts the correct training
curve exponent only in the limit d → ∞.

Minimising (1) is a convex problem, which yields the following explicit solution:
fP (x) = ⃗k(x)(K + λ1)−1 ⃗y ,

where k(x)i = K(x, xi ), Kij = K(xi , xj ) is the P × P
Gram matrix, in the noiseless setting we consider yi =
f ∗ (xi ), λ is the ridge regularization parameter and 1 is the
P × P identity matrix.
The generalization properties of KRR are an active field of
research. In recent years, interest in the subject has been
further increased by the discovery that for certain initializations, deep-learning behaves as a kernel method used in
the ridge-less case (Jacot et al., 2018). The key quantity
of interest is the generalization error εt , namely how much
error the predictor function fP (x) does on average on the
data distribution p(x), with x in some space D. Using the
mean square loss, εt is given by:
Z
εt =
p(dd x)(fP (x) − f ∗ (x))2 .
(3)
D

1. Introduction and Motivations
Given the task of learning an unknown function f ∗ , a widely
used algorithm is Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) (Smola
& Scholkopf, 2002). Given a set of P training points
{xi , f ∗ (xi )}i=1,...,P , KRR builds a predictor function fP
that is linear in a given kernel K, such that it minimizes the
following training loss:
P
X

2

|f ∗ (xi ) − fP (xi )| + λ||fP ||2K ,

(2)

(1)

i=1
1

Department of Physics, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland..
Correspondence to: Umberto M. Tomasini <umberto.tomasini@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

It is crucial to characterize εt with respect to the number
P of training points since it allows quantification of how
many samples are needed to achieve a given test error. It
is empirically observed that, asymptotically for large P , εt
often behaves as a power law in P , with a certain exponent
β: εt (P ) ∼ P −β (Hestness et al., 2017; Spigler et al., 2020).
The exponent β depends on the data distribution, the task,
and the choice of kernel.
Recent theoretical efforts have characterized the test error
in the noiseless setting considered here. In (Spigler et al.,
2020), f ∗ was assumed to be Gaussian and the training
set was assumed to be on a lattice. In (Bordelon et al.,
2020; Canatar et al., 2021; 2020; Loureiro et al., 2021; Cui
et al., 2021), the replica method (Mezard et al., 1987) was
used, assuming that the predictor fP is self-averaging (i.e.
concentrates) and using a Gaussian assumption: a tuple
of kernel eigenfunctions (ϕ1 , ..., ϕP ), once evaluated on
P training points, behaves as a Gaussian vector. Random
matrix theory was used in (Jacot et al., 2020) with the same

