Tackling covariate shift with node-based Bayesian neural networks

Trung Trinh 1 Markus Heinonen 1 Luigi Acerbi 2 Samuel Kaski 1 3

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) promise improved generalization under covariate shift by
providing principled probabilistic representations
of epistemic uncertainty. However, weightbased BNNs often struggle with high computational complexity of large-scale architectures and
datasets. Node-based BNNs have recently been
introduced as scalable alternatives, which induce
epistemic uncertainty by multiplying each hidden
node with latent random variables, while learning a point-estimate of the weights. In this paper, we interpret these latent noise variables as
implicit representations of simple and domainagnostic data perturbations during training, producing BNNs that perform well under covariate
shift due to input corruptions. We observe that the
diversity of the implicit corruptions depends on
the entropy of the latent variables, and propose a
straightforward approach to increase the entropy
of these variables during training. We evaluate
the method on out-of-distribution image classification benchmarks, and show improved uncertainty
estimation of node-based BNNs under covariate
shift due to input perturbations. As a side effect,
the method also provides robustness against noisy
training labels.

1. Introduction
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) induce epistemic uncertainty over predictions by placing a distribution over the
weights (MacKay, 1992; 1995; Hinton & van Camp, 1993;
Neal, 1996). However, it is challenging to infer the weight
posterior due to the high dimensionality and multi-modality
of this distribution (Wenzel et al., 2020; Izmailov et al.,
2021b). Alternative BNN methods have been introduced
1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, UK.
Correspondence to: Trung Trinh <trung.trinh@aalto.fi>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

to avoid the complexity of weight-space inference, which
include combining multiple maximum-a-posteriori (MAP)
solutions (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), performing inference in the function-space (Sun et al., 2019), or performing
inference in a lower dimensional latent space (Karaletsos
et al., 2018; Pradier et al., 2018; Izmailov et al., 2020; Dusenberry et al., 2020).
A recent approach to simplify BNNs is node stochasticity,
which assigns latent noise variables to hidden nodes of the
network (Kingma et al., 2015; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016;
Karaletsos et al., 2018; Karaletsos & Bui, 2020; Dusenberry
et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2021). By restricting inference to
the node-based latent variables, node stochasticity greatly reduces the dimension of the posterior, as the number of nodes
is orders of magnitude smaller than the number of weights
in a neural network (Dusenberry et al., 2020). Within this
framework, multiplying each hidden node with its own random variable has been shown to produce great predictive
performance, while having dramatically smaller computational complexity compared to weight-space BNNs (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016; Kingma et al., 2015; Dusenberry et al.,
2020; Nguyen et al., 2021).
In this paper, we focus on node-based BNNs, which represent epistemic uncertainty by inferring the posterior distribution of the multiplicative latent node variables while
learning a point-estimate of the weight posterior (Dusenberry et al., 2020; Trinh et al., 2020). We show that node
stochasticity simulates a set of implicit corruptions in the
data space during training, and by learning in the presence
of such corruptions, node-based BNNs achieve natural robustness against some real-world input corruptions. This
is an important property because one of the key promises
of BNNs is robustness under covariate shift (Ovadia et al.,
2019; Izmailov et al., 2021b), defined as a change in the
distribution of input features at test time with respect to that
of the training data. Based on our findings, we derive an entropy regularization approach to improve out-of-distribution
generalization for node-based BNNs.
In summary, our contributions are:
1. We demonstrate that node stochasticity simulates dataspace corruptions during training. We show that the diversity of these corruptions corresponds to the entropy

