Neural Fisher Discriminant Analysis: Optimal Neural Network Embeddings in
Polynomial Time

Burak Bartan 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract
Fisher’s Linear Discriminant Analysis (FLDA) is
a statistical analysis method that linearly embeds
data points to a lower dimensional space to maximize a discrimination criterion such that the variance between classes is maximized while the variance within classes is minimized. We introduce
a natural extension of FLDA that employs neural networks, called Neural Fisher Discriminant
Analysis (NFDA). This method finds the optimal
two-layer neural network that embeds data points
to optimize the same discrimination criterion. We
use tools from convex optimization to transform
the optimal neural network embedding problem
into a convex problem. The resulting problem
is easy to interpret and solve to global optimality. We evaluate the method’s performance on
synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
In this work, we develop a novel natural extension of
Fisher’s Linear Discriminant Analysis (FLDA) using neural
network embeddings. The method of FLDA is used to find
a linear combination of features that separates two or more
classes (Fisher, 1936). An advantage of FLDA is that it does
not make any distribution assumptions on the data. This is
in contrast to the method of Linear Discriminant Analysis
(LDA), which makes multivariate Gaussian assumptions for
the class conditional probabilities. FLDA aims to find a projection that minimizes the sample variance within classes
and maximizes the sample variance across classes in the
projected space. The resulting projection has various useful
interpretations for dimension reduction and classification
problems.
In this work, we develop a non-linear neural network based
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Burak Bartan <bbartan@stanford.edu>, Mert Pilanci <pilanci@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

variant of FLDA, which we term Neural Fisher Discriminant Analysis (NFDA). Our method aims to combine the
representation power of neural networks with the optimal
separation criterion of the FLDA method. We provide algorithms for finding the optimal weights for the two-layer
neural network transformation that maximizes the ratio of
between-class variance to within-class variance for binary
and multiclass problems. We show by proving matching
lower and upper bounds that our algorithms find the global
optimum of this objective.
The proposed NFDA method involves different algorithms
depending on the activation function considered. We consider ReLU activation g(t) = max(0, t) and degree-two
polynomial activations g(t) = at2 + bt + c in this work.
Furthermore, we present the NFDA method for both binary
class and multiclass problems. We start by introducing the
binary case, since the multiclass case requires a more sophisticated analysis due to the vector valued second layer
weights. This results in the multiclass NFDA method generating K − 1 times more neurons for a multiclass problem
with K classes compared to the binary class NFDA method.
Furthermore, the resulting algorithms correspond to the
standard FLDA problem on a modified version of the input. Specifically, we apply feature lifting to the input. The
goal of feature lifting is to transform the input to a higher
dimension where non-linear relations between features are
included as features. The type of feature lifting depends on
the activation function.
1.1. Related Work
Degree-two polynomial activations have a significant computational advantage over other activation functions. In
particular, it is possible to reformulate the training problem
with degree-two activations into a tractable convex program
that is solvable in fully-polynomial time as shown in (Bartan
& Pilanci, 2021a;b). Moreover, a compact parameterization
of the neural network parameter space considerably simplifies the neural network training problem. In this work, we
explore a similar parameterization approach. The NFDA
method for polynomial activation returns a more compact
neural network compared to the NFDA method for ReLU.
Furthermore, polynomial activation functions have found

