The Neural Race Reduction: Dynamics of Abstraction in Gated Networks

Andrew M. Saxe* 1 2 3 Shagun Sodhani* 2 Sam Lewallen 1

Abstract
Our theoretical understanding of deep learning
has not kept pace with its empirical success.
While network architecture is known to be critical, we do not yet understand its effect on learned
representations and network behavior, or how this
architecture should reflect task structure.In this
work, we begin to address this gap by introducing the Gated Deep Linear Network framework
that schematizes how pathways of information
flow impact learning dynamics within an architecture. Crucially, because of the gating, these networks can compute nonlinear functions of their input. We derive an exact reduction and, for certain
cases, exact solutions to the dynamics of learning. Our analysis demonstrates that the learning
dynamics in structured networks can be conceptualized as a neural race with an implicit bias towards shared representations, which then govern
the model’s ability to systematically generalize,
multi-task, and transfer. We validate our key insights on naturalistic datasets and with relaxed
assumptions. Taken together, our work gives rise
to general hypotheses relating neural architecture
to learning and provides a mathematical approach
towards understanding the design of more complex architectures and the role of modularity and
compositionality in solving real-world problems.
The code and results are available at https:
//www.saxelab.org/gated-dln.

1. Introduction
While neural networks have led to numerous impressive
breakthroughs (He et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017;
Amodei et al., 2016; Baevski et al., 2020; Mnih et al., 2015;
Silver et al., 2017), our theoretical understanding of these
*
Equal contribution 1 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
& Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, UCL 2 FAIR, Meta AI 3 CIFAR
Azrieli Global Scholar, CIFAR. Correspondence to: Andrew Saxe
<a.saxe@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Object
Speaker
Next Frame Sentiment
Recognition Prediction Classification Identification

Video

Image

Text

Audio

Figure 1. A multi-modal network composed of simple modules
shared across modalities and tasks. How do shared modules and
pathways impact representation learning and generalization?

models has not advanced at the same pace. Although we
have gained some insight into general principles of network
optimization (Patel et al., 2015; Carleo et al., 2019; Bahri
et al., 2020; Arora et al., 2020; Roberts et al., 2021), we
have a limited understanding of how the specific choice of
architecture—that is, the mesoscale pattern of connectivity
between hidden layers (Fig. 1)—affects a network’s behavior (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016; Raghu et al., 2017;
Chizat et al., 2019; Saxe et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2019). For
example, when training networks on the ImageNet dataset,
wide networks perform slightly better on classes reflecting
scenes, whereas deep networks are slightly more accurate on
classes related to consumer goods (Nguyen et al., 2020). Understanding the reasons behind these behaviors may lead to
more systematic techniques for designing neural networks.
Here, we address this gap by introducing and analyzing the
Gated Deep Linear Network (GDLN) framework, which
illuminates the interplay between data statistics, architecture, and learning dynamics. We ground the framework in
the Deep Linear Network (DLN) setting as it is amenable
to mathematical analysis, and previous works (Saxe et al.,
2014; Lampinen & Ganguli, 2019; Arora et al., 2018; Saxe
et al., 2019) have observed that DLNs exhibit several nonlinear phenomena that are observed in deep neural networks.
Because of the gating mechanism, however, GDLNs can
compute nonlinear functions of their input, making them
more expressive than standard deep linear networks.
Our main contributions are: (i) We introduce the GDLN
framework (Section 2), which schematizes how pathways
of information flow impact learning dynamics within an
architecture. (ii) We derive an exact reduction and, for
certain cases, exact solutions to the dynamics of learning

