Lagrangian Method for Q-Function Learning
(with Applications to Machine Translation)

Huang Bojun 1

Abstract
This paper discusses a new approach to the fundamental problem of learning optimal Q-functions.
In this approach, optimal Q-functions are formulated as saddle points of a nonlinear Lagrangian
function derived from the classic Bellman optimality equation. The paper shows that the Lagrangian enjoys strong duality, in spite of its nonlinearity, which paves the way to a general Lagrangian method to Q-function learning. As a
demonstration, the paper develops an imitation
learning algorithm based on the duality theory,
and applies the algorithm to a state-of-the-art machine translation benchmark. The paper then turns
to demonstrate a symmetry breaking phenomenon
regarding the optimality of the Lagrangian saddle points, which justifies a largely overlooked
direction in developing the Lagrangian method.

1. Introduction
Machine learning methods can be broadly categorized into
two classes: policy learning, and Q-function learning. In
policy learning, the goal is to learn a policy function that
directly encodes the desired mapping between task inputs
and outputs. An imitation learning example is behavior
cloning, which tunes a parametric policy toward the desired
policy function based on example input-output pairs of the
latter. A reinforcement learning example is policy gradient,
which iteratively improves the parametric policy function
following the gradient direction of the task performance.
Alternatively, one can try to learn a Q-function that encodes
a preferential score for each candidate output given an input.
An optimal Q-function would induce a greedy policy that
identifies the optimal output simply by comparing the Qvalues, rather than the precise consequences of the outputs.
1
Rakuten Institute of Technology, Rakuten Group Inc., Japan.
Correspondence to: Huang Bojun <bojhuang@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Implicitly or explicitly, the majority of statistical supervised learning practices nowadays fall in the category of
Q-function learning, where the general strategy is to make
the Q-value of each output equal to the conditional probability that an expert would choose this output. Note that
although the learned Q-function represents a desired probability distribution, this distribution is not used to sample
the outputs at decision time (which contrasts with behavior
cloning), but is used to power a greedy and deterministic
decision policy. The resulted policy is provably optimal in
many simple yet common scenarios, such as for maximizing
prediction accuracy in classification tasks (Bishop, 2006).
In more complex scenarios, such as in sequential decision
making or structured prediction tasks, Q-functions that simply follow the expert probabilities are generally not optimal,
and learning optimal Q-functions becomes a more challenging problem. In this case, the standard paradigm at the moment is to learn the Bellman optimal value function (Sutton
and Barto, 2018), which is a special optimal Q-function that
complies with a particular constraint known as the Bellman
equation. The Bellman equation also immediately implies
a value iteration method to find/approximate the optimal
Q-function that the equation defined, leading to the many
variants of Q-Learning algorithms (Watkins, 1989).
In this paper, we propose a new method for Q-function learning. Our method is based on a variational (re-)formulation
of the Bellman equation for optimal Q-function. The variational formulation induces a nonlinear Lagrangian function
whose saddle points correspond to a class of optimal Qfunctions (but not necessarily the Bellman optimal value).
The Q-function learning problem can then be reduced to
saddle-point optimization for the Lagrangian.
This high-level idea is known as the Lagrangian method in
a wide variety of engineering domains (Boyd et al., 2004),
including machine learning (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and
more specifically, has been recently applied to related valuefunction learning problems (Dai et al., 2018; Lee and He,
2018; Nachum et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020). There is
however a key obstacle to apply the Lagrangian method to
Q-function learning: To admit effective and efficient algorithms, it is typically required that the Lagrangian function
has a strong duality property. When the Lagrangian is linear,

