Optimally Controllable Perceptual Lossy Compression

Zeyu Yan 1 Fei Wen 1 Peilin Liu 1

Abstract
Recent studies in lossy compression show that
distortion and perceptual quality are at odds with
each other, which put forward the tradeoff between distortion and perception (D-P). Intuitively,
to attain different perceptual quality, different decoders have to be trained. In this paper, we present
a nontrivial finding that only two decoders are
sufficient for optimally achieving arbitrary (an
infinite number of different) D-P tradeoff. We
prove that arbitrary points of the D-P tradeoff
bound can be achieved by a simple linear interpolation between the outputs of a minimum MSE
decoder and a specifically constructed perfect perceptual decoder. Meanwhile, the perceptual quality (in terms of the squared Wasserstein-2 distance
metric) can be quantitatively controlled by the
interpolation factor. Furthermore, to construct
a perfect perceptual decoder, we propose two
theoretically optimal training frameworks. The
new frameworks are different from the distortionplus-adversarial loss based heuristic framework
widely used in existing methods, which are not
only theoretically optimal but also can yield
state-of-the-art performance in practical perceptual decoding. Finally, we validate our theoretical finding and demonstrate the superiority of
our frameworks via experiments. Code is available at: https://github.com/ZeyuYan/ControllablePerceptual-Compression

1. Introduction
Lossy compression is an essential technique for digital data
storage and transport. For decades, the goal of lossy compression is to achieve the lowest possible distortion at a
given bit rate, which is bounded by Shannon’s rate-distortion
1
Brain-inspired Application Technology Center (BATC),
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence
to: Fei Wen <wenfei@sjtu.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

function (Shannon, 1959; Cover & Thomas, 2006). However, recent studies show that typical distortion measures,
e.g., MSE, PSNR and SSIM/MS-SSIM (Wang et al., 2003;
Zhou Wang et al., 2004), are not fully consistent with human’s subjective judgement on perceptual quality (Johnson
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018; Blau & Michaeli, 2018).
The work (Blau & Michaeli, 2018) lays a first theoretical
foundation for understanding the distortion-perception (DP) tradeoff, revealing that distortion and perception quality
are at odds with each other. It accords well with empirical results that improving perceptual quality by adversarial
learning and/or deep features based perceptual loss would
lead to an increase of the distortion (Galteri et al., 2017;
M Tschannen, 2018; Santurkar et al., 2018; Agustsson et al.,
2019; Iwai et al., 2020; Mentzer et al., 2020; Ohayon et al.,
2021; Prakash et al., 2021).
For lossy compression, the “classic” rate-distortion theory
has been recently expanded in (Blau & Michaeli, 2019)
to take the perceptual quality into consideration, resulting
in a rate-distortion-perception three-way tradeoff. Using
a divergence from the source distribution to measure the
perceptual quality, the monotonicity and convexity of the
rate-distortion-perception function have been established.
More recently, (Yan et al., 2021) shows that an optimal
encoder for the “classic” rate-distortion problem is also optimal for the perceptual compression problem with perception
constraint. Hence, a minimum MSE (MMSE) encoder is
universal for perceptual lossy compression. In light of this,
to obtain different perceptual quality, a natural way is to use
a fixed MMSE encoder whilst train different decoders to
fulfill different D-P tradeoff (Zhang et al., 2021).
In this paper, we present a nontrivial theoretical finding
that it is unnecessary to train different decoders for different perceptual quality, and two specifically constructed
decoders are enough for achieving arbitrary D-P tradeoff.
Furthermore, we propose two optimal training frameworks
for perfect perceptual decoding to enable the realization of
this kind of convenient D-P tradeoff.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• A theoretical finding for optimal D-P tradeoff in lossy
compression. We prove that, with distortion measured
by squared error and perceptual quality measured by
squared Wasserstein-2 distance, arbitrary points of the

