Fully-Connected Network on Noncompact Symmetric Space
and Ridgelet Transform based on Helgason-Fourier Analysis

Sho Sonoda 1 Isao Ishikawa 2 1 Masahiro Ikeda 1

Abstract
Neural network on Riemannian symmetric space
such as hyperbolic space and the manifold of
symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices is an
emerging subject of research in geometric deep
learning. Based on the well-established framework of the Helgason-Fourier transform on the
noncompact symmetric space, we present a fullyconnected network and its associated ridgelet
transform on the noncompact symmetric space,
covering the hyperbolic neural network (HNN)
and the SPDNet as special cases. The ridgelet
transform is an analysis operator of a depth-2 continuous network spanned by neurons, namely, it
maps an arbitrary given function to the weights of
a network. Thanks to the coordinate-free reformulation, the role of nonlinear activation functions
is revealed to be a wavelet function. Moreover,
the reconstruction formula is applied to present
a constructive proof of the universality of finite
networks on symmetric spaces.

1. Introduction
Geometric deep learning is an emerging research direction
that aims to devise neural networks on non-Euclidean spaces
(Bronstein et al., 2021). In this study, we focus on devising
a fully-connected layer on a noncompact symmetric space
X “ G{K (Helgason, 1984; 2008). In general, it is more
challenging to devise a fully-connected layer on a manifold
than to devise a convolution layer because neither the scalar
product, bias translation, nor pointwise activation can be
trivially defined. A noncompact symmetric space is a Riemannian manifold X with nonpositive curvature, as well
as a homogeneous space G{K of Lie groups G and K. It
covers several important spaces in the recent literature of
1

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP),
Tokyo, Japan 2 Ehime University, Ehime, Japan. Correspondence
to: Sho Sonoda <sho.sonoda@riken.jp>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

representation learning, such as the hyperbolic space and the
manifold of symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices, or
the SPD manifold. On those spaces, several neural networks
have been developed such as hyperbolic neural networks
(HNNs) and SPDNets.
Neural Network on Hyperbolic Space. The hyperbolic
space is a symmetric space with a constant negative curvature. Following the success of Poincaré embedding (Krioukov et al., 2010; Nickel & Kiela, 2017; 2018; Sala et al.,
2018), the hyperbolic space has been recognized as an effective space for embedding tree-structured data; and hyperbolic neural networks (HNNs) (Ganea et al., 2018; Gulcehre
et al., 2019; Shimizu et al., 2021) have been developed to
promote effective use of hyperbolic geometry for saving parameters against Euclidean counterparts. The previous studies such as HNN (Ganea et al., 2018) and HNN++ (Shimizu
et al., 2021) have replaced each operation with gyrovector
calculus, but there are still rooms for arguments such as on
the expressive power of the proposed network and on the
role of nonlinear activation functions.
Neural Network on SPD Manifold. The SPD manifold
equipped with the standard Riemannian metric has nonconstant nor nonpositive curvature. The metric is isomorphic
to the Fisher information metric for multivariate centered
normal distributions. Since covariance matrices are positive
definite, the SPD manifold has been investigated and applied
in a longer and wider literature than the hyperbolic space.
Besides, the SPD manifold has also attracted attention as
a space for graph embedding (Lopez et al., 2021; Cruceru
et al., 2021). To reduce the computational cost without
harming the Riemannian geometry, several distances have
been proposed such as the affine-invariant Riemannian metric (AIRM) (Pennec et al., 2006), the Stein metric (Sra,
2012), the Bures–Wasserstein metric (Bhatia et al., 2019),
the Log-Euclidean metric (Arsigny et al., 2006; 2007), and
the vector-valued distance (Lopez et al., 2021). Furthermore,
neural networks on SPD manifolds have been developed,
such as SPDNet (Huang & Gool, 2017; Dong et al., 2017;
Gao et al., 2019; Brooks et al., 2019b;a), deep manifold-tomanifold transforming network (DMT-Net) (Zhang et al.,
2018), and ManifoldNet (Chakraborty et al., 2018; 2022).

