A New Perspective on the Effects of Spectrum in Graph Neural Networks

Mingqi Yang 1 Yanming Shen 1 Rui Li 1 Heng Qi 1 Qiang Zhang 1 Baocai Yin 1 2

Abstract
Many improvements on GNNs can be deemed
as operations on the spectrum of the underlying graph matrix, which motivates us to directly
study the characteristics of the spectrum and their
effects on GNN performance. By generalizing
most existing GNN architectures, we show that
the correlation issue caused by the unsmooth
spectrum becomes the obstacle to leveraging
more powerful graph filters as well as developing deep architectures, which therefore restricts
GNNs’ performance. Inspired by this, we propose the correlation-free architecture which naturally removes the correlation issue among different channels, making it possible to utilize
more sophisticated filters within each channel.
The final correlation-free architecture with more
powerful filters consistently boosts the performance of learning graph representations. Code is
available at https://github.com/qslim/
gnn-spectrum.

1. Introduction
Although graph neural network (GNN) communities are in
a rapid development of both theories and applications, there
is still a lack of a generalized understanding of the effects
of the graph’s spectrum in GNNs. As we can see, many
improvements can finally be unified into different operations on the spectrum of the underlying graph, while their
effectiveness is interpreted by several well-accepted isolated concepts: (Wu et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2021; Klicpera
et al., 2019a;b; Chien et al., 2021; Balcilar et al., 2021) explain it in the perspective of simulating low/high pass filters;
(Ming Chen et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2018) interpret it as ways of alleviating oversmoothing phenomenon in deep architectures; (Cai et al., 2021)
adopts the conception of normalization operation in neural
1

Dalian University of Technology, China 2 Peng Cheng
Laboratory, China.
Correspondence to: Yanming Shen
<shen@dlut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

networks and applies it to graph data. Since these improvements all indirectly operate on the spectrum, it motivates us
to study the potential connections between the GNN performance and the characteristics of the graph’s spectrum. If we
can find such a connection, it would provide a deeper and
generalized insight into these seemingly unrelated improvements associated with the graph’s spectrum (low/high pass
filter, oversmoothing, graph normalization, etc), and further
identify potential issues in existing architectures. To this
end, we first consider the simple correlation metric: cosine
similarity among signals, and study the relations between it
and the graph’s spectrum in the graph convolution operation.
It provides a new perspective that in existing GNN architectures, the distribution of eigenvalues of the underlying graph
matrix controls the cosine similarity among signals. An
ill-posed unsmooth spectrum would easily make signals
over-correlated which is evidence of information loss.
Compared with oversmoothing studies (Li et al., 2018; Oono
& Suzuki, 2020; Rong et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020), the
correlation analysis associated with the graph’s spectrum further indicates that the correlation issue is essentially caused
by the graph’s spectrum. In other words, for graph topologies with an unsmooth spectrum, the issue can appear even
with a shallow architecture, and a deep model further makes
the spectrum less smooth and eventually exacerbates this
issue. Meanwhile, the correlation analysis also provides
a unified interpretation of the effectiveness of various existing improvements associated with the graph’s spectrum
since they all implicitly impose some constraints on the
spectrum to alleviate the correlation issue. However, these
improvements are trade-offs between alleviating the correlation issue and applying more powerful graph filters: since
a filter implementation directly reflects on the spectrum, a
more appropriate filter for relevant signal patterns may correspond to an ill-posed spectrum, which in return will not
gain performance improvements. Hence, in general GNN
architectures, the correlation issue becomes the obstacle to
applying more powerful filters. As we can see, although
one can approximate more sophisticated graph filters by
increasing the order k of the polynomial theoretically (Shuman et al., 2013), in the popular models, simple filters, e.g.
low-pass filter (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Wu et al., 2019), or
the fixed filter coefficients (Klicpera et al., 2019a;b) serve
as the practical applicable choice.

