Rethinking Graph Neural Networks for Anomaly Detection

Jianheng Tang 1 2 Jiajin Li 3 Ziqi Gao 1 2 Jia Li 1 2

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely applied for graph anomaly detection. As one of the
key components for GNN design is to select a
tailored spectral filter, we take the first step towards analyzing anomalies via the lens of the
graph spectrum. Our crucial observation is the
existence of anomalies will lead to the ‘rightshift’ phenomenon, that is, the spectral energy
distribution concentrates less on low frequencies
and more on high frequencies. This fact motivates us to propose the Beta Wavelet Graph
Neural Network (BWGNN). Indeed, BWGNN
has spectral and spatial localized band-pass filters to better handle the ‘right-shift’ phenomenon
in anomalies. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of BWGNN on four large-scale anomaly detection datasets. Our code and data are released
at https://github.com/squareRoot3/
Rethinking-Anomaly-Detection.

1. Introduction
An anomaly or an outlier is a data object that deviates significantly from the majority of the objects, as if it was generated by a different mechanism (Han et al., 2011). As a
well-established problem, anomaly detection has received
much attention due to its vast applicable tasks, e.g., cyber security (Ten et al., 2011), fraud detection (Ngai et al., 2011),
health monitoring (Bao et al., 2019), device failure detection
(Sipple, 2020), to name a few. As graph data becomes ubiquitous in the Web era, graph information often plays a vital
role in identifying fraudulent users or activities, e.g., friendship relations in a social network and transaction records
on a financial platform. Consequently, as a crucial research
direction, graph-based anomaly detection is necessary to be
further explored (Noble & Cook, 2003; Ma et al., 2021).
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou) 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Jia Li <jialee@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Nowadays, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) act as popular approaches for mining structural data, and are naturally
applied for the graph anomaly detection task (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2018). Unfortunately, the
vanilla GNNs are not well-suited for anomaly detection and
suffer from the over-smoothing issue (Li et al., 2018; Wu
et al., 2019). When GNN aggregates information from the
node neighborhoods, it also averages the representations
of anomalies and makes them less distinguishable. Thus,
by intentionally connecting with large amounts of benign
neighborhoods, the anomalous nodes may attenuate their
suspiciousness, which results in the poor performance of
the plain GNNs.
To remedy the issue, several GNN models have been proposed. We categorize the existing methods into three classes.
That is, (1) applying attention mechanisms to correlate different neighbors through various views (Wang et al., 2019a;
Cui et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a), (2) using the resampling
strategy to aggregate neighborhood information selectively
(Dou et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; 2021b), (3) designing auxiliary losses to enhance the network training power (Ding
et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2020; 2021). All these methods analyze the anomaly detection from the graph spatial domain.
There are few works that address this problem from the
spectral domain. Nevertheless, choosing a tailored spectral
filter is a key component of GNN design, as the spectral
filter determines the expressive power of GNN (Balcilar
et al., 2020; He et al., 2021).
To fill the above gap, we want to answer the question in
this paper— how to choose a tailored spectral filter in GNN
for anomaly detection? We take the first step towards analyzing anomalies via the lens of the graph spectrum (i.e.,
after the graph Fourier transform of node attributes). From
Figure 1, we observe that low-frequency energy is gradually
transferred to the high-frequency part, when the degree of
anomaly becomes larger. We summarize this phenomenon
as the ‘right-shift’ of spectral energy distribution, and further
prove it on a Gaussian anomaly model in a rigorous manner.
We validate the ‘right-shift’ phenomenon in a variety of
graphs with synthetic or real-world anomalies. Through
our analysis, we justify the necessity of spectral localized
band-pass filters in graph anomaly detection.
Based on these findings, we propose Beta Wavelet Graph

