A Theoretical Comparison of Graph Neural Network Extensions

Pál András Papp 1 Roger Wattenhofer 1

Abstract
We study and compare different Graph Neural
Network extensions that increase the expressive
power of GNNs beyond the Weisfeiler-Leman
test. We focus on (i) GNNs based on higher order WL methods, (ii) GNNs that preprocess small
substructures in the graph, (iii) GNNs that preprocess the graph up to a small radius, and (iv)
GNNs that slightly perturb the graph to compute
an embedding. We begin by presenting a simple
improvement for this last extension that strictly
increases the expressive power of this GNN variant. Then, as our main result, we compare the
expressiveness of these extensions to each other
through a series of example constructions that can
be distinguished by one of the extensions, but not
by another one. We also show negative examples
that are particularly challenging for each of the
extensions, and we prove several claims about the
ability of these extensions to count cliques and
cycles in the graph.

1. Introduction
Due to the prominence of graph-structured data in numerous
applications, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been one
of the main success stories in machine learning in the past
few years. GNNs have produced state-of-the-art results in a
wide range of areas, including quantum chemistry, molecule
recognition, recommendation systems or social networks
(Gilmer et al., 2017; Fout et al., 2017; Ying et al., 2018;
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020).
From a theoretical perspective, one of the most fundamental
questions about GNNs is their expressive power, i.e. what
are the things that GNNs can and cannot compute. In this
sense, the most important limitation of standard GNNs is
that their expressiveness is upper bounded by the so-called
1

Distributed Computing Group, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Pál András Papp <apapp@ethz.ch>,
Roger Wattenhofer <wattenhofer@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Weisfeiler-Leman (or 1-WL) test. This implies that GNNs
can sometimes not even distinguish very simple graphs.
Hence there were various suggestions to develop GNN extensions with expressive power beyond 1-WL, e.g. by augmenting the GNN with subgraph counts, or by letting the
GNN also observe perturbed variants of the graph.
However, many open questions remain regarding the expressive power of these GNN extensions, and in particular,
about how the different extensions relate to each other in
terms of expressiveness. Whenever a new GNN variant is
introduced, the corresponding theoretical analysis usually
shows it to be more powerful than 1-WL, and sometimes
also compares it to the classical k-WL hierarchy. However,
it is unclear whether the WL hierarchy is the correct tool
to measure the expressiveness of these extensions, since
in contrast to the locality of GNNs, k-WL is a concept of
global comparison over two graphs. Furthermore, the hierarchy is too coarse to be useful in practice: any meaningful
GNN extension is already beyond 1-WL, whereas 3-WL is
already so powerful that it essentially recognizes all graphs
apart from some highly artificial counterexamples. Indeed,
many GNN extensions are only compared directly to 2-WL
(Bouritsas et al., 2022; Bodnar et al., 2021b; Cotta et al.,
2021).
This raises a natural question: Can we find a more meaningful way to measure the expressiveness of GNN extensions? In fact, the ideas behind the extensions themselves
already point out a straightforward way to do this. That
is, if we focus on approaches that preserve the locality
and permutation-equivariance of standard GNNs, we find
that GNN extensions in the literature are essentially based
around three main ideas, and each of these ideas provides a
natural way to define an alternative hierarchy of expressiveness for GNNs.
Our main goal in the paper is to study and compare these alternative hierarchies, and hence indirectly to compare the expressive power of the different GNN extensions themselves.
In particular, we consider: (i) GNNs where subgraphs up to
size k are preprocessed initially (Sk ), (ii) GNNs where the
k-hop induced neighborhood of each node is preprocessed
initially (Nk ), and (iii) GNNs where k nodes are removed
or marked for symmetry breaking (Mk ). Each of these is a
prominent approach to increase the expressiveness of GNNs,

