MAE-DET: Revisiting Maximum Entropy Principle in Zero-Shot NAS for
Efficient Object Detection

Zhenhong Sun * 1 Ming Lin * 1 Xiuyu Sun 1 Zhiyu Tan 1 Hao Li 1 Rong Jin 1

Abstract
In object detection, the detection backbone consumes more than half of the overall inference
cost. Recent researches attempt to reduce this
cost by optimizing the backbone architecture with
the help of Neural Architecture Search (NAS).
However, existing NAS methods for object detection require hundreds to thousands of GPU
hours of searching, making them impractical in
fast-paced research and development. In this
work, we propose a novel zero-shot NAS method
to address this issue. The proposed method,
named MAE-DET, automatically designs efficient detection backbones via the Maximum Entropy Principle without training network parameters, reducing the architecture design cost to
nearly zero yet delivering the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance. Under the hood, MAEDET maximizes the differential entropy of detection backbones, leading to a better feature extractor for object detection under the same computational budgets. After merely one GPU day
of fully automatic design, MAE-DET innovates
SOTA detection backbones on multiple detection benchmark datasets with little human intervention. Comparing to ResNet-50 backbone,
MAE-DET is +2.0% better in mAP when using
the same amount of FLOPs/parameters, and is
1.54 times faster on NVIDIA V100 at the same
mAP. Code and pre-trained models are available
at https://github.com/alibaba/lightweight-neuralarchitecture-search.

1. Introduction
Seeking better and faster deep models for object detection is
never an outdated task in computer vision. The performance
*
Equal contribution 1 Alibaba Group. Correspondence to: Xiuyu Sun <xiuyu.sxy@alibaba-inc.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of a deep object detection network heavily depends on the
feature extraction backbone (Li et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2019b). Currently, most state-of-the-art (SOTA) detection
backbones (He et al., 2016; Xie et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2021a) are designed manually by human experts,
which can take years to develop. Since the detection backbone consumes more than half of the total inference cost
in many detection frameworks, it is critical to optimize the
backbone architecture for better speed-accuracy trade-off
on different hardware platforms, ranging from server-side
GPUs to mobile-side chipsets. To reduce time cost and human labor, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has emerged
to facilitate the architecture design. Various NAS methods
have demonstrated their efficacy in designing SOTA image
classification models (Zoph et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018;
Cai et al., 2019; Tan & Le, 2019; Fang et al., 2020). These
successful stories inspire recent researchers to use NAS to
design detection backbones (Chen et al., 2019b; Peng et al.,
2019; Xiong et al., 2021; Du et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020)
in an end-to-end way.
To date, existing NAS methods for detection task are all
training-based, meaning they need to train network parameters to evaluate the performance of network candidates
on the target dataset, a process that consumes enormous
hardware resources. This makes the training-based NAS
methods inefficient in modern fast-paced research and development. To reduce the searching cost, training-free methods
are recently proposed, also known as zero-shot NAS in some
literatures (Tanaka et al., 2020; Mellor et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2021c; Lin et al., 2021). The zero-shot NAS predicts
network performance without training network parameters,
and is therefore much faster than training-based NAS. As
a relatively new technique, existing zero-shot NAS methods are mostly validated on classification tasks. Applying
zero-shot NAS to detection task is still an intact challenge.
In this work, we present the first effort to introduce zero-shot
NAS technique to design efficient object detection backbones. We show that directly transferring existing zero-shot
NAS methods from image classification to detection backbone design will encounter fundamental difficulties. While
image classification network only needs to predict the class
probability, object detection network needs to additionally

