A Deep Learning Approach for the Segmentation of
Electroencephalography Data in Eye Tracking Applications

Lukas Wolf 1 2 Ard Kastrati 3 Martyna Beata Płomecka 2 Jie-Ming Li 1 Dustin Klebe 1 Alexander Veicht 1
Roger Wattenhofer 3 Nicolas Langer 2

Abstract
The collection of eye gaze information provides
a window into many critical aspects of human
cognition, health and behaviour. Additionally,
many neuroscientific studies complement the behavioural information gained from eye tracking
with the high temporal resolution and neurophysiological markers provided by electroencephalography (EEG). One of the essential eye-tracking
software processing steps is the segmentation of
the continuous data stream into events relevant to
eye-tracking applications, such as saccades, fixations, and blinks. Here, we introduce DETRtime,
a novel framework for time-series segmentation
that creates ocular event detectors that do not require additionally recorded eye-tracking modality
and rely solely on EEG data. Our end-to-end deeplearning-based framework brings recent advances
in Computer Vision to the forefront of the times
series segmentation of EEG data. DETRtime
achieves state-of-the-art performance in ocular
event detection across diverse eye-tracking experiment paradigms. In addition to that, we provide
evidence that our model generalizes well in the
task of EEG sleep stage segmentation.

1. Introduction and Motivation
Eye gaze information is widely used in cognitive neuroscience and psychology. Moreover, many neuroscientific
studies complement scientific methods such as functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG) with eye-tracking technology to identify variations in attention, arousal, and the participant’s compliance
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland 2 Department of Psychology, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland 3 Information Technology Department, ETH
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Lukas
Wolf <wolflu@ethz.ch>, Ard Kastrati <kard@ethz.ch>, Martyna
Plomecka <martyna.plomecka@uzh.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

with the task demands (Hanke et al., 2019). This way, the
combined EEG and eye-tracking studies can provide an
“ideal neuroscience model” to investigate brain-behaviour
associations (Luna et al., 2008). Nowadays, infrared videobased eye trackers are the most common approach in scientific studies. Although costs for infrared video-based are
slowly becoming less prohibitive, these devices remain outside the range of access for many researchers due to the
added layers of complexity (e.g., operator training, setup
time, synchronization of eye-tracking data with fMRI or
EEG, and analysis of an additional data type) that can be
burdensome (Holmqvist et al., 2011). In addition, once installed, setup and calibration for each scanning session also
can be time-consuming (Fuhl et al., 2016).
Nonetheless, recent evidence (Kastrati et al., 2021c;a) suggests that gaze position can be computed by using the combination of EEG and deep learning. Our benchmark and a
dataset for estimation of gaze position intending to simulate
a purely EEG-based eye-tracker shows that this task is challenging to solve with high accuracy.
However, even the segmentation of continuous EEG data
stream into ocular events (i.e. fixations, saccades and
blinks), the prerequisite for an EEG based eye-tracker, can
provide meaningful insights into human behaviour (Toivanen et al., 2015). For instance, blinks can indicate various
human states, including fatigue or drowsiness (Schmidt
et al., 2018). Moreover, the analysis of the gaze activity
recognition allows us to study changes in cognitive workload (Buettner, 2013), recognize the context from gaze pattern behaviour (Bulling & Roggen, 2011), and even detect
microsleep episodes in eye movement data while driving a
car (Behrens et al., 2010). Despite these benefits, no deeplearning based approach that segments the EEG signal into
meaningful ocular events is available in daily research and
clinical practice.
To address this shortcoming, we developed the first neural
network-based segmentation method to identify and differentiate ocular events from continuous EEG data. In this
paper, we introduce DETRtime, a novel time series network
architecture that can be used for the segmentation of events
in a unified manner. The DETRtime is based on the DETR
architecture (Carion et al., 2020b) that was initially pro-

