Universal Joint Approximation of Manifolds and Densities by Simple Injective
Flows
Michael Puthawala 1 Matti Lassas 2 Ivan Dokmanić 3 Maarten de Hoop 1

Abstract
We study approximation of probability measures
supported on n-dimensional manifolds embedded in Rm by injective flows—neural networks
composed of invertible flows and injective layers. We show that in general, injective flows between Rn and Rm universally approximate measures supported on images of extendable embeddings, which are a subset of standard embeddings: when the embedding dimension m
is small, topological obstructions may preclude
certain manifolds as admissible targets. When
the embedding dimension is sufficiently large,
m ≥ 3n + 1, we use an argument from algebraic topology known as the clean trick to prove
that the topological obstructions vanish and injective flows universally approximate any differentiable embedding. Along the way we show that
the studied injective flows admit efficient projections on the range, and that their optimality can
be established ”in reverse,” resolving a conjecture made in (Brehmer & Cranmer, 2020)

1. Introduction
Invertible flow networks emerged as powerful deep learning models to learn maps between distributions (Durkan
et al., 2019a; Grathwohl et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2018;
Jaini et al., 2019; Kingma et al., 2016; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018; Kobyzev et al., 2020; Kruse et al., 2019; Papamakarios et al., 2019). They generate high-quality samples
(Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018) and facilitate solving scientific inference problems (Brehmer & Cranmer, 2020; Kruse
et al., 2021).
1
Department of Computational and Applied Math, Rice
University, Houston, TX, USA 2 Department of Mathematics
and Statistics, University of Helsinki, Finland 3 Department
of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Michael Puthawala
<map19@rice.edu>.

By design, however, invertible flows are bijective and may
not be a natural choice when the target distribution has
low-dimensional support. This problem can be overcome
by combining bijective flows with expansive, injective layers, which map to higher dimensions (Brehmer & Cranmer,
2020; Cunningham et al., 2020; Kothari et al., 2021). Despite their empirical success, the theoretical aspects of such
globally injective architectures are not well understood.
In this work, we address approximation-theoretic properties of injective flows. We prove that under mild conditions these networks universally approximate probability
measures supported on low-dimensional manifolds and describe how their design enables applications to inference
and inverse problems.
1.1. Prior Work
The idea to combine invertible (coupling) layers with expansive layers has been explored by (Brehmer & Cranmer, 2020) and (Kothari et al., 2021). Brehmer & Cranmer
(2020) combine two flow networks with a simple expansive
element (in the sense made precise in Section 2.1) and obtain a network that parameterizes probability distributions
supported on manifolds.1
Kothari et al. (2021) propose expansive coupling layers
and build networks similar to that of Brehmer & Cranmer (2020) but with an arbitrary number of expressive and
expansive elements. They observe that the resulting network trains very fast with a small memory footprint, while
producing high-quality samples on a variety of benchmark
datasets.
While (to the best of our knowledge) there are no
approximation-theoretic results for injective flows, there
exists a body of work on universality of invertible flows;
see Kobyzev et al. (2020) for an overview. Several works
show that certain bijective flow architectures are distributionally universal. This was proved for autoregressive
flows with sigmoidal activations by Huang et al. (2018)
and for sum-of-squares polynomial flows (Jaini et al.,
1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

More precisely, distributions on manifolds are parameterized
by the pushforward (via their network) of a simple probability
measure in the latent space.

