Wide Neural Networks Forget Less Catastrophically

Seyed Iman Mirzadeh * 1 Arslan Chaudhry 2 † Dong Yin 2
Huiyi Hu 2 Razvan Pascanu 2 Dilan Gorur 2 Mehrdad Farajtabar 2 †

Abstract
A primary focus area in continual learning research is alleviating the “catastrophic forgetting”
problem in neural networks by designing new algorithms that are more robust to the distribution
shifts. While the recent progress in continual
learning literature is encouraging, our understanding of what properties of neural networks contribute to catastrophic forgetting is still limited.
To address this, instead of focusing on continual
learning algorithms, in this work, we focus on the
model itself and study the impact of “width” of
the neural network architecture on catastrophic
forgetting, and show that width has a surprisingly
significant effect on forgetting. To explain this
effect, we study the learning dynamics of the network from various perspectives such as gradient
orthogonality, sparsity, and lazy training regime.
We provide potential explanations that are consistent with the empirical results across different
architectures and continual learning benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is relying more and more on training
large models on large static datasets to reach impressive
results (Kaplan et al., 2020; Lazaridou et al., 2021; Hombaiah et al., 2021). However, the real world is changing
over time, and new information is becoming available at
an unprecedented rate (Lazaridou et al., 2021; Hombaiah
et al., 2021). In such real-world problems, the learning
agent is exposed to a continuous stream of data, with potentially changing data distribution, and it has to absorb new
information efficiently while not being able to iterate on
previous data as freely as wanted due to time, sample, compute, privacy, or environmental complexity issues (Parisi
*
Work done during an internship at DeepMind. † Equal advising. 1 Washington State University 2 DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Seyed Iman Mirzadeh <seyediman.mirzadeh@wsu.edu>,
Mehrdad Farajtabar <farajtabar@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2019). To overcome these inefficiencies, fields, such
as continual learning (CL) (Ring, 1995) or lifelong learning (Thrun, 1995) are gaining a lot of attention recently.
One of the key challenges in continual learning models is
the abrupt erasure of previous knowledge, referred to as
catastrophic forgetting (CF) (McCloskey and Cohen, 1989).
Alleviating catastrophic forgetting has attracted a lot of attention lately, and many interesting solutions are proposed to
partly overcome the issue (e.g., Toneva et al., 2019; Nguyen
et al., 2019; Hsu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Wallingford
et al., 2020). These solutions vary in degree of complexity
from simple replay-based methods to complicated regularization or network expansion-based methods. Unfortunately,
however, there is not much fundamental understanding of
the intrinsic properties of neural networks that affect continual learning performance through catastrophic forgetting or
forward/backward transfer (Mirzadeh et al., 2020b). Moreover, most of the continual learning works focus on the
algorithmic side of alleviating the forgetting rather than the
architecture being used throughout the learning experience.
This motivated our work to study one of the most important
aspects of neural network architectures: the structure of the
neural networks (e.g., width and depth).
In contrast to the orthodox importance of the depth for
network performance, such as in AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012), Inception (Szegedy et al., 2016), ResNets (He et al.,
2016) or GPT family of models (Brown et al., 2020), we
study how the width of the network affects the continual
learning performance – aligned with the recent research on
infinite width networks and the neural tangent kernel (NTK)
regime (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019; Arora et al.,
2019; Chizat et al., 2019). We empirically demonstrate that
increasing the width alone reduces catastrophic forgetting
significantly, while it’s not the case for depth.
Concretely, Figures 1 and 2 depict our findings on two
popular continual learning benchmarks. Figure 1 shows that
by increasing the width of a 2-layer MLP from 32 to 2048
the amount of forgetting of task 1 (after learning the 5th
task) decreases from 62 to 48 percent. On Split CIFAR-100,
by multiplying the width of a WideResNet-10 by 8 we can
decrease forgetting of the first task (after learning the 20th
task) from 42 to 31 percent.

