Flashlight: Enabling Innovation in Tools for Machine Learning

Jacob Kahn 1 Vineel Pratap 1 Tatiana Likhomanenko† 1 Qiantong Xu 1 Awni Hannun 2 Jeff Cai 1
Paden Tomasello 1 Ann Lee 1 Edouard Grave 3 Gilad Avidov 4 Benoit Steiner 1 Vitaliy Liptchinsky 1
Gabriel Synnaeve 3 Ronan Collobert† 1

Abstract
As the computational requirements for machine
learning systems and the size and complexity of
machine learning frameworks increases, essential framework innovation has become challenging. While computational needs have driven recent compiler, networking, and hardware advancements, utilization of those advancements by machine learning tools is occurring at a slower pace.
This is in part due to the difficulties involved in
prototyping new computational paradigms with
existing frameworks. Large frameworks prioritize
machine learning researchers and practitioners as
end users and pay comparatively little attention
to systems researchers who can push frameworks
forward — we argue that both are equally important stakeholders. We introduce Flashlight,
an open-source library built to spur innovation
in machine learning tools and systems by prioritizing open, modular, customizable internals and
state-of-the-art, research-ready models and training setups across a variety of domains. Flashlight
allows systems researchers to rapidly prototype
and experiment with novel ideas in machine learning computation and has low overhead, competing
with and often outperforming other popular machine learning frameworks. We see Flashlight as a
tool enabling research that can benefit widely used
libraries downstream and bring machine learning
and systems researchers closer together. Flashlight is available at this URL.

1

Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, CA, U.S.A. 2 Zoom AI,
San Jose, CA, U.S.A. 3 Facebook AI Research, Paris, France
4
Facebook, Menlo Park, CA, U.S.A. † Currently at Apple, Cupertino, CA, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Jacob Kahn <jacobkahn@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The recent rise of deep learning-based techniques has been
accompanied and sustained by the wide availability of dedicated frameworks such as TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016)
and PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). These frameworks have
enabled the democratization of machine learning research
by providing extensive collections of high level primitives
to support common use cases. Lowering the barrier to entry
for end users has boosted the popularity of both neural networks and the frameworks in which they are implemented.
However, in order to support what are now vast ecosystems
and a diverse user base, framework size and complexity
have increased dramatically over time. As a result, deep,
groundbreaking framework research has become onerous
and time consuming, precluding rapid innovation. Given
these barriers, major deep learning frameworks have become
entrenched in their existing operating modes.
Innovation in this area remains as important as ever. Indeed,
framework innovation accelerates machine learning (ML)
and artificial intelligence (AI) research. Frameworks that are
easier to use reduce the engineering burden on researchers,
and frameworks that are higher-performance decrease the
time required to iterate on experimental work and validate
hypotheses. Even more critically, tooling plays a fundamental role in deciding which ideas succeed or fail. For
example, LeCun et al. (1989) pioneered the use of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Fukushima & Miyake,
1982) trained using backpropagation for computer vision
tasks in the late 1980s, which was subsequently applied to
handwriting recognition. However, widespread success for
CNNs was achieved two decades later when Krizhevsky
et al. (2012a) leveraged the CUDA programming model to
take advantage of graphics processing units (GPUs) to train
a much deeper model (AlexNet).
While deep learning frameworks have been optimized to
leverage existing hardware paradigms for common neural
network architectures, they often fail to deliver similar efficiencies on designs that diverge from the mainstream. For
example, Barham & Isard (2019) explain how the design
of these frameworks results in poor hardware utilization for
a novel type of neural network, known as a capsule net-

