Nonparametric Factor Trajectory Learning for Dynamic Tensor Decomposition

Zheng Wang 1 Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract
Tensor decomposition is a fundamental framework to analyze data that can be represented by
multi-dimensional arrays. In practice, tensor data
is often accompanied with temporal information,
namely the time points when the entry values
were generated. This information implies abundant, complex temporal variation patterns. However, current methods always assume the factor
representations of the entities in each tensor mode
are static, and never consider their temporal evolution. To fill this gap, we propose NONparametric FActor Trajectory learning for dynamic
tensor decomposition (NONFAT). We place Gaussian process (GP) priors in the frequency domain
and conduct inverse Fourier transform via GaussLaguerre quadrature to sample the trajectory functions. In this way, we can overcome data sparsity
and obtain robust trajectory estimates across long
time horizons. Given the trajectory values at specific time points, we use a second-level GP to sample the entry values and to capture the temporal
relationship between the entities. For efficient and
scalable inference, we leverage the matrix Gaussian structure in the model, introduce a matrix
Gaussian posterior, and develop a nested sparse
variational learning algorithm. We have shown
the advantage of our method in several real-world
applications.

1. Introduction
Data involving interactions between multiple entities can often be represented by multidimensional arrays, i.e., tensors,
and are ubiquitous in practical applications. For example,
a four-mode tensor (user, advertisement, web-page, device)
can be extracted from logs of an online advertising system,
and three-mode (patient, doctor, drug) tensor from medical
1
School of Computing, University of Utah. Correspondence to:
Shandian Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

databases. As a powerful approach for tensor data analysis, tensor decomposition estimates a set of latent factors
to represent the entities in each mode, and use these factors to reconstruct the observed entry values and to predict
missing values. These factors can be further used to explore
hidden structures from the data, e.g., via clustering analysis, and provide useful features for important applications,
such as personalized recommendation, click-through-rate
prediction, and disease diagnosis and treatment.
In practice, tensor data is often accompanied with valuable
temporal information, namely the time points at which each
interaction took place to generate the entry value. These
time points signify that underlying the data can be rich, complex temporal variation patterns. To leverage the temporal
information, existing tensor decomposition methods usually
introduce a time mode (Xiong et al., 2010; Rogers et al.,
2013; Zhe et al., 2016a; 2015; Du et al., 2018) and arrange
the entries into different time steps, e.g., hours or days. They
estimate latent factors for time steps, and may further model
the dynamics between the time factors to better capture
the temporal dependencies (Xiong et al., 2010). Recently,
Zhang et al. (2021) introduced time-varying coefficients in
the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) framework (Harshman,
1970) to conduct continuous-time decomposition. While
successful, current methods always assume the factors of entities are static and invariant. However, along with the time,
these factors, which reflect the entities’ hidden properties,
can evolve as well, such as user preferences, commodity
popularity and patient health status. Existing approaches are
not able to capture such variations and therefore can miss
important temporal patterns.
To overcome this limitation, we propose NONFAT, a novel
nonparametric dynamic tensor decomposition model to estimate time-varying factors. Our model is robust, flexible
enough to learn various complex trajectories from sparse,
noisy data, and capture nonlinear temporal relationships
of the entities to predict the entry values. Specifically, we
use Gaussian processes (GPs) to sample frequency functions in the frequency domain, and then generate the factor
trajectories via inverse Fourier transform. Due to the nice
properties of Fourier bases, we can robustly estimate the
factor trajectories across long-term time horizons, even under sparse and noisy data. We use Gauss-Laguerre quadrature to efficiently compute the inverse Fourier transform.

