Generative Modeling for Multi-task Visual Learning

Zhipeng Bao 1 Martial Hebert 1 Yu-Xiong Wang 2

Abstract
Generative modeling has recently shown great
promise in computer vision, but it has mostly focused on synthesizing visually realistic images.
In this paper, motivated by multi-task learning of
shareable feature representations, we consider a
novel problem of learning a shared generative
model that is useful across various visual perception tasks. Correspondingly, we propose a
general multi-task oriented generative modeling
(MGM) framework, by coupling a discriminative multi-task network with a generative network.
While it is challenging to synthesize both RGB
images and pixel-level annotations in multi-task
scenarios, our framework enables us to use synthesized images paired with only weak annotations (i.e., image-level scene labels) to facilitate
multiple visual tasks. Experimental evaluation
on challenging multi-task benchmarks, including
NYUv2 and Taskonomy, demonstrates that our
MGM framework improves the performance of
all the tasks by large margins, consistently outperforming state-of-the-art multi-task approaches in
different sample-size regimes.

1. Introduction
Seeing with the mind’s eye – creating internal images of
objects and scenes not actually present to the senses – is
perhaps one of the hallmarks in human cognition (Pelaprat
& Cole, 2011). For humans, this visual imagination integrates learning experience and facilitates learning by solving different problems (Egan, 1989; Pelaprat & Cole, 2011;
Egan, 2014; Pearson, 2019). Inspired by such ability, there
has been increasing interest in building generative models
that can synthesize images (Goodfellow et al., 2014; SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Kingma &
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence to: Zhipeng Bao
<zbao@cs.cmu.edu>, Martial Hebert <hebert@cs.cmu.edu>,
Yu-Xiong Wang <yxw@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Dhariwal, 2018; Wiles et al., 2020). Yet, most of the effort
has focused on generating visually realistic images (Brock
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019), which are still far from
being useful for machine perception tasks (Wu et al., 2017;
Shmelkov et al., 2018; Borji, 2019). Even though recent
work has started improving the “usefulness” of synthesized
images, this line of investigation is often limited to a single
specific task (Souly et al., 2017; Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2018;
Zhu et al., 2018; Sitzmann et al., 2019). Could we guide
generative models to benefit multiple visual tasks?
While similar spirits of shareable feature representations
have been widely studied as multi-task learning or metalearning (Finn et al., 2017; Zamir et al., 2018), here we
take a different perspective – learning a shareable generative model across various tasks (as illustrated in Figure 1).
Leveraging multiple tasks allows us to capture the underlying image generation mechanism for more comprehensive
object and scene understanding than being done within individual tasks. Taking simultaneous semantic segmentation,
depth estimation, and surface normal prediction as an example (Figure 1), successful generative modeling requires
understanding not only the semantics but also the 3D geometric structure and physical property of the input image.
Meanwhile, a learned generative model facilitates the flow
of knowledge across tasks, so that they benefit one another.
For instance, the synthesized images provide meaningful
variations in existing images and could work as additional
training data to build better task-specific models. These
variations are especially critical when the data is limited.
This paper thus explores multi-task oriented generative modeling (MGM), by coupling a discriminative multi-task network with a generative network. To make them cooperate with each other, a straightforward solution would be
to synthesize both RGB images and corresponding pixellevel annotations (e.g., pixel-wise class labels for semantic
segmentation and depth map for normal prediction). In
the single task scenario, existing work trains a separate
generative model to synthesize paired pixel-level labeled
data (Choi et al., 2019; Sandfort et al., 2019) and produce
an augmented set. However, these models are still highly
task-dependant, and extending them to multi-task scenarios
becomes difficult. A natural question then is: Do we actually need to synthesize paired image and multi-annotation
data to be useful for multi-task visual learning?

