Efficient Distributionally Robust Bayesian Optimization with
Worst-case Sensitivity

Sebastian Shenghong Tay 1 2 Chuan Sheng Foo 2 Daisuke Urano 3 Richalynn Chiu Xian Leong 3
Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract
In distributionally robust Bayesian optimization
(DRBO), an exact computation of the worst-case
expected value requires solving an expensive convex optimization problem. We develop a fast
approximation of the worst-case expected value
based on the notion of worst-case sensitivity that
caters to arbitrary convex distribution distances.
We provide a regret bound for our novel DRBO
algorithm with the fast approximation, and empirically show it is competitive with that using
the exact worst-case expected value while incurring significantly less computation time. In order
to guide the choice of distribution distance to be
used with DRBO, we show that our approximation implicitly optimizes an objective close to an
interpretable risk-sensitive value.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a powerful paradigm for efficiently optimizing an unknown/black-box objective function
f (x) (Garnett, 2022) w.r.t. action/decision variable x with
a limited budget of costly function evaluations. As a result,
there is a fast growing interest in the application of BO to
many complex real-world optimization problems like hyperparameter optimization of machine learning models (Chen
et al., 2018), molecule search in automated chemical design (Griffiths & Hernández-Lobato, 2020), to name a few.
In practice, the black-box objective function often depends
on a random context/environment variable c beyond our
control s.t. the goal now is to maximize the expected
value Ep [f (x, c)] w.r.t. some distribution p of c (ToscanoPalmerin & Frazier, 2018). For example, consider the prob1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR,
Singapore 3 Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, Singapore. Correspondence to: Sebastian Shenghong Tay <seb.tsh@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lem of optimizing the expected size of a crop where x represents the soil nutrient concentrations and can be controlled,
while c represents the average temperature in a month and
is uncontrolled. The introduction of the random context c
gives rise to new BO problem settings that aim to be riskaverse and avoid worst-case scenarios by optimizing risk
measures of f (x, c) instead (Cakmak et al., 2020; Nguyen
et al., 2021a;b). Such works assume that the distribution of
c is stationary and is either known or can be estimated well.
Distributionally robust BO (DRBO) was concurrently introduced by Kirschner et al. (2020) and Nguyen et al. (2020)
and adapts the framework of distributionally robust optimization (DRO) in operations research (Rahimian & Mehrotra, 2019) to BO. DRBO considers the setting where c is
subject to distribution shift, i.e., its distribution may be
different from our prior knowledge. To be distributionally
robust is thus to select the action x that maximizes the worstcase expected value, i.e., Eq [f (x, c)] under the worst-case
distribution q of c selected by an adversary from some set of
possible distributions. Such an approach provides another
form of robustness, specifically, to an incorrect knowledge
of the distribution of c rather than to the undesirable outcomes of c. In the earlier crop example, this corresponds to
being robust to an incorrect knowledge of the distribution of
the average temperature in a month which may be constantly
shifting due to climate change.
A complex real-world optimization problem usually has
several sources of randomness, so context c is multidimensional. For instance, the average temperature in a
month, fertilizer composition, and crop genotypes may all
be subject to distribution shift. If the outcomes of the multidimensional c are discretized into a finite set C and a reasonable discretization density is used for each dimension, then
|C| can grow large quickly. This work allows DRBO to be
scaled to a large |C|. In contrast, existing DRBO algorithms
scale poorly in |C|: The algorithm of Kirschner et al. (2020)
has to solve a convex optimization problem with |C| variables to obtain the worst-case expected value, which incurs
up to O(|C|3 ) time. Nguyen et al. (2020) have devised an
efficient method to do so based on Lagrange multipliers, but
it is tied to a specific choice of distribution distance used to

