Curriculum Reinforcement Learning via Constrained Optimal Transport

Pascal Klink 1 Haoyi Yang 1 Carlo D’Eramo 1 Joni Pajarinen 1 2 Jan Peters 1

Abstract
Curriculum reinforcement learning (CRL) allows
solving complex tasks by generating a tailored
sequence of learning tasks, starting from easy
ones and subsequently increasing their difficulty.
Although the potential of curricula in RL has
been clearly shown in a variety of works, it is less
clear how to generate them for a given learning
environment, resulting in a variety of methods
aiming to automate this task. In this work, we
focus on the idea of framing curricula as interpolations between task distributions, which has
previously been shown to be a viable approach to
CRL. Identifying key issues of existing methods,
we frame the generation of a curriculum as a constrained optimal transport problem between task
distributions. Benchmarks show that this way of
curriculum generation can improve upon existing CRL methods, yielding high performance in
a variety of tasks with different characteristics.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998) has
celebrated great successes as a framework for autonomous
acquisition of desired behavior. With ever-increasing computational power, this framework and the algorithms developed under it have allowed to create learning agents capable of solving non-trivial long-horizon planning (Mnih
et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017) and control tasks (Akkaya
et al., 2019). However, these successes have highlighted
the need for certain forms of regularization, such as leagues
in the context of board games (Silver et al., 2017), a gradual diversification of simulated training environments for
robotic manipulation (Akkaya et al., 2019) or a tailored
training pipeline in the context of humanoid control for soccer (Liu et al., 2021). These regularizations can overcome
1

Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Technical University of
Darmstadt, Germany 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Automation, Aalto University, Finland. Correspondence to: Pascal Klink <pascal.klink@tu-darmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

shortcomings of modern RL agents, like poor exploratory
behavior – an active topic of research (Bellemare et al.,
2016; Ghavamzadeh et al., 2015; Machado et al., 2020).
One can view the aforementioned regularizations under
the umbrella term of curriculum reinforcement learning
(Narvekar et al., 2020), which aims to avoid the shortcomings of modern (deep) RL agents by learning on a tailored
sequence of tasks. Such task sequences can materialize in a
variety of ways and they are motivated from many perspectives in the literature (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Florensa
et al., 2017; Portelas et al., 2019; Wöhlke et al., 2020).
A perspective of particular interest for this paper is to interpret a curriculum as a sequence of task distributions that
interpolate between an auxiliary task distribution – with
the sole purpose of facilitating learning – and a distribution of target tasks (Klink et al., 2021). While algorithmic
realizations of this perspective have been successfully evaluated in the literature (Klink et al., 2020a;b; Chen et al.,
2021a), there also exist evaluations attesting those methods
a rather poor learning performance (Romac et al., 2021).
This discrepancy calls for a better understanding of why
these methods perform well in some scenarios - and why
they do not in others.
In this paper, we investigate the shortcomings of methods
that realize curricula as an interpolation between task distributions using the KL divergence as a measure of distributional similarity. Based on the resulting insights, we propose to realize curricula as an optimal transport problem in
a parameterized task space subject to a performance constraint on the tasks probable under the curriculum. As we
discuss in the paper, this high-level concept implicitly introduces empirically successful concepts observed in existing curriculum RL algorithms. Nevertheless, we also show
how it differs from these existing algorithms.
In experiments, we show that the proposed method matches
or surpasses the performance of existing baselines on a variety of tasks. To summarize, this paper
1) highlights shortcomings of current curriculum RL algorithms that realize curricula as interpolations between task distributions;
2) proposes to generate curricula by solving a constrained optimal transport problem;
3) discusses and evaluates the resulting algorithm in a variety of experiments.

