History Compression via Language Models in Reinforcement Learning

Fabian Paischer 1 2 * Thomas Adler 1 * Vihang Patil 1 Angela Bitto-Nemling 1 2 3 Markus Holzleitner 1
Sebastian Lehner 1 2 Hamid Eghbal-zadeh 1 Sepp Hochreiter 1 2 3

Abstract
In a partially observable Markov decision process
(POMDP), an agent typically uses a representation of the past to approximate the underlying
MDP. We propose to utilize a frozen Pretrained
Language Transformer (PLT) for history representation and compression to improve sample efficiency. To avoid training of the Transformer, we
introduce FrozenHopfield, which automatically
associates observations with pretrained token embeddings. To form these associations, a modern
Hopfield network stores these token embeddings,
which are retrieved by queries that are obtained
by a random but fixed projection of observations.
Our new method, HELM, enables actor-critic network architectures that contain a pretrained language Transformer for history representation as
a memory module. Since a representation of the
past need not be learned, HELM is much more
sample efficient than competitors. On Minigrid
and Procgen environments HELM achieves new
state-of-the-art results. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ml-jku/helm.

1. Introduction
Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) for partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs; Åström, 1964;
Kaelbling et al., 1998) became popular and attracted a lot of
attention through mastering complex games such as DotA
(Berner et al., 2019) or Starcraft (Vinyals et al., 2019). In
POMDPs, only observations are available but the state of the
underlying Markov decision process (MDP) is not known.
To approximate the state most methods use the current observation together with a memory mechanism, such as an
*

Equal contribution 1 LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria 2 ELLIS Unit Linz
3
Institute of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence (IARAI),
Vienna, Austria. Correspondence to: Fabian Paischer <paischer@ml.jku.at>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), that stores past
observations. The memory stores only abstractions of the
raw observations to allow for generalization and effective
processing. Abstractions are also used in human language
when describing objects, their mutual relations, events, situations, concepts and ideas. Human language is tailored to
represent and compress the past via abstraction to convey
past experiences and events from one generation to the next.
History compression only stores observations that are relevant, i. e., contain new information (Schmidhuber, 1992).
Abstraction is a form of compression that maps segments
of constituent information to a single segment of information (Chaitin, 2006; Gell-Mann, 1995). During evolution,
human language has been optimized with respect to compression and abstraction for being effective in storing past
experiences of one human to pass them on to other humans
(Nowak & Krakauer, 1999). Thus, language is inherently
well-suited for constructing abstractions and representing
the past. Language models are usually scaled up and pretrained on large-scale text corpora. During pretraining, language models learn to compress information to represent
abstract concepts prevalent in natural language. This motivates us to leverage pretrained language models for history
compression.
The Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) proved to be very
effective for language modeling (Brown et al., 2020; Dai
et al., 2019). Further, it has been successfully applied for
sequence modeling in the domain of RL (Janner et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2021). Therefore, it is very well suited to represent and store past observations. The gated TransformerXL
(Parisotto et al., 2020) is a Transformer architecture tailored
to on-policy reinforcement learning and trained from scratch.
However, it tends to overfit on the usually scarce data generated by the current policy. The same problem appears
when finetuning a large pretrained Transformer model. To
avoid these overfitting problems, we use a Transformer pretrained on a large text corpora without finetuning or weight
adjustments. To enable the usage of a fixed transformer, we
propose our new FrozenHopfield that maps observations and
actions to the input space of the Transformer, without any
training, by associating them with token embeddings. These
associations are obtained by first randomly projecting observations and actions to state patterns (queries) and then using

