Partial and Asymmetric Contrastive Learning for
Out-of-Distribution Detection in Long-Tailed Recognition

Haotao Wang 1 Aston Zhang 2 Yi Zhu 2 Shuai Zheng 2 Mu Li 2 Alex Smola 2 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract
Existing out-of-distribution (OOD) detection
methods are typically benchmarked on training
sets with balanced class distributions. However,
in real-world applications, it is common for the
training sets to have long-tailed distributions.
In this work, we first demonstrate that existing
OOD detection methods commonly suffer from
significant performance degradation when the
training set is long-tail distributed. Through
analysis, we posit that this is because the models
struggle to distinguish the minority tail-class
in-distribution samples, from the true OOD
samples, making the tail classes more prone to be
falsely detected as OOD. To solve this problem,
we propose Partial and Asymmetric Supervised
Contrastive Learning (PASCL), which explicitly
encourages the model to distinguish between
tail-class in-distribution samples and OOD
samples. To further boost in-distribution classification accuracy, we propose Auxiliary Branch
Finetuning, which uses two separate branches
of BN and classification layers for anomaly
detection and in-distribution classification,
respectively. The intuition is that in-distribution
and OOD anomaly data have different underlying
distributions. Our method outperforms previous
state-of-the-art method by 1.29%, 1.45%, 0.69%
anomaly detection false positive rate (FPR) and
3.24%, 4.06%, 7.89% in-distribution classification accuracy on CIFAR10-LT, CIFAR100-LT,
and ImageNet-LT, respectively.
Code and
pre-trained models are available at https:
//github.com/amazon-research/
Work done during the first author’s internship at Amazon Web Services. 1 University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
USA 2 Amazon Web Services, Santa Clara, USA. Correspondence to: Haotao Wang <htwang@utexas.edu>, Aston Zhang <astonz@amazon.com>, Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

long-tailed-ood-detection.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely known to be overconfident on what they do not know. Given a test sample
that does not belong to any training class, DNNs tend to
recklessly predict this out-of-distribution (OOD) test sample
as one of the training classes with high confidence, which is
doomed to be wrong (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Hein
et al., 2019). Numerous OOD detection methods have
been proposed to solve this problem with promising results (Hendrycks et al., 2019; Mohseni et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2020). The goal of OOD detection is two-fold: (i) to
distinguish OOD samples from in-distribution samples (i.e.,
anomaly detection), and (ii) to still achieve high accuracy
on the in-distribution sample classification.
Existing OOD detection methods are typically evaluated on
balanced training sets. However, the training sets in realworld applications often follow a long-tailed distribution
(Van Horn & Perona, 2017; Liu et al., 2019; Cui et al., 2019;
Menon et al., 2021). In view of this, we benchmark existing
OOD detection methods (including both widely used classic
methods and recently published ones) on the long-tailed
training sets. We observe significant performance drop in
terms of both anomaly detection and in-distribution classification, when compared with the results obtained on the
balanced training sets (Table 1). This shows the challenge
of OOD detection on long-tailed recognition (LTR) task.
Moreover, we show that it cannot be easily fixed by naive
solutions such as combining state-of-the-art OOD detection
and long-tailed recognition methods (Table 2). Through
feature visualization (Fig. 1), we further unveil the underlying cause for such performance drop: The model struggles
to distinguish tail-class in-distribution samples from OOD
samples. In contrast, the head-class in-distribution samples
can be easily distinguished from OOD samples.
Motivated by such observations, we propose Partial and
Asymmetric Supervised Contrastive Learning (PASCL) as
the solution for OOD detection in long-tailed recognition.
The key intuition is to push tail-class in-distribution samples away from OOD samples in the feature space through

