ModLaNets: Learning Generalisable Dynamics via Modularity and Physical
Inductive Bias
Yupu Lu 1 2 Shijie Lin 1 2 Guanqi Chen 1 Jia Pan 1 2

Abstract
Deep learning models are able to approximate one
specific dynamical system but struggle at learning generalisable dynamics, where dynamical systems obey the same laws of physics but contain
different numbers of elements (e.g., double- and
triple-pendulum systems). To relieve this issue,
we proposed the Modular Lagrangian Network
(ModLaNet), a structural neural network framework with modularity and physical inductive bias.
This framework models the energy of each element using modularity and then construct the
target dynamical system via Lagrangian mechanics. Modularity is beneficial for reusing trained
networks and reducing the scale of networks and
datasets. As a result, our framework can learn
from the dynamics of simpler systems and extend
to more complex ones, which is not feasible using
other relevant physics-informed neural networks.
We examine our framework for modelling doublependulum or three-body systems with small training datasets, where our models achieve the best
data efficiency and accuracy performance compared with counterparts. We also reorganise our
models as extensions to model multi-pendulum
and multi-body systems, demonstrating the intriguing reusable feature of our framework.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been widely implemented in various kinds
of physical problems such as flow control using reinforcement learning (Verma et al., 2018), nuclear learning and
simulation (Pfau et al., 2020; Hermann et al., 2020), and
super-resolution of combustion process (Kipf et al., 2018).
1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China 2 Centre for Garment Production
Limited (TransGP), Hong Kong SAR, China. Correspondence to:
Yupu Lu <jpan@cs.hku.hk>, Jia Pan <jpan@cs.hku.hk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Even though deep learning models have demonstrated outstanding performance in various high-dimensional tasks,
these models are still statistical models driven by data, so
nonphysical behaviours are inevitably likely to occur in
simulation tasks.
The fusion of physical knowledge and neural networks casts
a light on this problem, which leads to physics-informed neural networks such as Hamiltonian Neural Networks (HNNs,
Greydanus et al., 2019) or Lagrangian Neural Networks
(LNNs, Cranmer et al., 2020). These models treated systems
as a whole and regressed central quantities like Lagrangian
or Hamiltonian to represent dynamics, which preserves part
of physical properties such as energy conservation.
Despite the strengths, though deep learning models can
approximate one whole system, they cannot generalise other
systems with the same laws of physics. There are two
weaknesses. First, users need to train different networks
for these systems. For instance, considering the motions
of multi-pendulum systems, the same laws govern their
motions; the only difference is the number of pendulums.
However, they cannot be generalised by one network. This
example means these models only focus on approximating
the physical quantities of one system. Second, as the scale of
the system grows, quantities' forms become more complex,
which requires larger networks and more data for training.
The training difficulties will also increase. Table 1 provides
an example of how the scale of these networks grows from
single-pendulum to double-pendulum systems, where the
size of networks grows by ten times.
Table 1. The scale of networks and datasets used for modelling
pendulum systems2 .
PARAMETERS
DATASET S IZE

S INGLE P ENDULUM
41.2 K
2.25 K

D OUBLE P ENDULUM
364.2 K
307.2 M

To solve these problems, we introduce modularity into our
framework. We use multiple light neural networks to model
the properties, potential and kinetic energies of elements
in the system. These modular networks represent the basic
features of each element. Then we can use these elements
to construct a group of systems by adding or removing
2
Two cases are separately estimated from previous works
Hamiltonian Neural Networks and Lagrangian Neural Networks.

