Implicit Bias of Linear Equivariant Networks

Hannah Lawrence 1 Kristian Georgiev 1 Andrew Dienes 1 Bobak T. Kiani 1

Abstract
Group equivariant convolutional neural networks
(G-CNNs) are generalizations of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) which excel in a wide
range of technical applications by explicitly encoding symmetries, such as rotations and permutations, in their architectures. Although the success of G-CNNs is driven by their explicit symmetry bias, a recent line of work has proposed
that the implicit bias of training algorithms on
particular architectures is key to understanding
generalization for overparameterized neural nets.
In this context, we show that L-layer full-width
linear G-CNNs trained via gradient descent for binary classification converge to solutions with lowrank Fourier matrix coefficients, regularized by
the 2/L-Schatten matrix norm. Our work strictly
generalizes previous analysis on the implicit bias
of linear CNNs to linear G-CNNs over all finite
groups, including the challenging setting of noncommutative groups (such as permutations), as
well as band-limited G-CNNs over infinite groups.
We validate our theorems via experiments on a
variety of groups, and empirically explore more
realistic nonlinear networks, which locally capture similar regularization patterns. Finally, we
provide intuitive interpretations of our Fourier
space implicit regularization results in real space
via uncertainty principles.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning algorithms typically have many more
parameters than data points, and their ability to achieve good
generalization in this overparameterized setting is largely unexplained by current theory. Classic generalization bounds,
which bound the generalization error when models are not
overly “complex,” are vacuous for neural networks that can
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139,
USA. Correspondence to: Bobak T. Kiani <bkiani@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

perfectly fit random training labels (Zhang et al., 2017).
More recent work analyzes the complexity of deep learning algorithms by instead characterizing the properties of
the functions they output. Notably, prior work has shown
that training via gradient descent implicitly regularizes towards certain hypothesis classes with low complexity, which
may generalize better as a result. For example, in underdetermined least squares regression, gradient descent converges to the `2 -norm minimizer, while a pointwise-square
reparametrization converges to the `1 -norm minimizer (Gunasekar et al., 2018a). For separable linear regression,
Soudry et al. (2018) proved that the learned predictor under
gradient descent converges in direction to the max-margin
solution. Such phenomena are consistent with certain linear neural networks, e.g., Lyu and Li (2020) extended this
max-margin result to gradient descent on any homogeneous
neural network, and Gunasekar et al. (2018b) showed that
learned linear fully-connected and convolutional networks
implicitly regularize the `2 norm and a depth-dependent
norm in Fourier space, respectively.
From a more applied perspective, a large body of work
imposes structured inductive biases on deep learning algorithms to exploit symmetry patterns (Kondor, 2007; Reisert,
2008; Cohen and Welling, 2016b). One prominent method
parameterizes models over functions that are equivariant
with respect to a symmetry group (i.e., outputs transform
predictably in response to input transformation). In fact,
Kondor and Trivedi (2018) showed that any group equivariant network can be expressed as a series of group convolutional layers interwoven with pointwise nonlinearities,
demonstrating that group convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) are the most general family of equivariant networks.
Our Contributions: The explicit inductive bias of G-CNNs
is the main reason for their usage. Yet, to the best of our
knowledge, the implicit bias imposed by equivariant architectures has not been explored. Here, we greatly generalize
the results of Yun et al. (2020) and Gunasekar et al. (2018b)
to linear G-CNNs whose hidden layers perform group equivariant transformations. We show, surprisingly, that L-layer
G-CNNs are implicitly regularized by the 2/L-Schatten
norm, which is the 2/L norm of a matrix’s singular values,
over the irreducible representations in the Fourier basis. As
a result, convergence is biased towards sparse solutions in
the Fourier regime, as summarized in Theorem 1 and il-

