A Stochastic Multi-Rate Control Framework For Modeling Distributed
Optimization Algorithms

Xinwei Zhang 1 Mingyi Hong 1 Sairaj Dhople 1 Nicola Elia 1

Abstract
In modern machine learning systems, distributed
algorithms are deployed across applications to
ensure data privacy and optimal utilization of
computational resources. This work offers a
fresh perspective to model, analyze, and design
distributed optimization algorithms through the
lens of stochastic multi-rate feedback control.
We show that a substantial class of distributed
algorithms—including popular Gradient Tracking for decentralized learning, and FedPD and
Scaffold for federated learning—can be modeled
as a certain discrete-time stochastic feedbackcontrol system, possibly with multiple sampling
rates. This key observation allows us to develop
a generic framework to analyze the convergence
of the entire algorithm class. It also enables one
to easily add desirable features such as differential privacy guarantees, or to deal with practical
settings such as partial agent participation, communication compression, and imperfect communication in algorithm design and analysis.

1. Introduction
Distributed optimization has played an important role in
several traditional system-theoretic domains such as control and signal processing, and more recently, in machine
learning (ML). Some contemporary applications where
distributed optimization finds useful include large-scale
decentralized neural network training, federated learning
(FL), and multi-agent reinforcement learning. In a typical
distributed optimization setting, the agents in the network
jointly solve a system-level optimization problem, with the
constraint that they only utilize local data, local computa1
Department of Electric and Computer Engineering, Minnesota University, MN, United States.
Correspondence
to: Xinwei Zhang <zhan6234@umn.edu>, Mingyi Hong
<mhong@umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tion, and local communication resources.
1.1. Design Considerations and Challenges
A few key design considerations for contemporary distributed algorithms are listed below:
Efficient Computation. Since local agents may contend
with computational-resource and power limitations, it is
desirable that they perform computation in a cost-effective
manner. In practice, state-of-the-art distributed algorithms
in ML applications typically utilize stochastic gradient descent (SGD) based algorithm as their local computation engine (Chang et al., 2020). So a key design consideration is
to reduce the total number of data sample access, or equivalently, to improve sample efficiency.
Efficient Communication. Frequent inter-agent message
exchanges can present several bottlenecks to system performance in addition to consuming power. In applications
such as decentralized training (DT) and federated learning (FL), communication links may not have high enough
bandwidth (Bonawitz et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020). Therefore, it is desirable that the local communication between
the agents happen only when necessary, and when it happens, as little information is exchanged as possible.
Flexibility based on Practical System Considerations.
Since distributed algorithms are often implemented in different environments, and they are used in applications
across different domains, it is desirable that they are flexible and can take into consideration practical requirements (e.g., preserving user privacy), accommodate desired
communication patterns, and allow for the possibility of
agents participating occasionally (McMahan et al., 2018;
Koloskova et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2021).
Guaranteed Performance. The performance of distributed algorithms can be very different compared with
their centralized counterpart, and if not designed carefully,
distributed algorithms can diverge easily (Lian et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2020). So, it is important that algorithms offer
convergence guarantees at a minimum. Further, it is desirable if such guarantees can characterize the efficiency in
computation and communication.
There has been remarkably high interest in distributed algorithms in recent years across applications. These algo-

