Adaptive Gaussian Process Change Point Detection

Edoardo Caldarelli * 1 Philippe Wenk 2 Stefan Bauer 3 Andreas Krause 2

Abstract
Detecting change points in time series, i.e., points
in time at which some observed process suddenly
changes, is a fundamental task that arises in many
real-world applications, with consequences for
safety and reliability. In this work, we propose
ADAGA, a novel Gaussian process-based solution to this problem, that leverages a powerful
heuristics we developed based on statistical hypothesis testing. In contrast to prior approaches,
ADAGA adapts to changes both in mean and covariance structure of the temporal process. In
extensive experiments, we show its versatility and
applicability to different classes of change points,
demonstrating that it is significantly more accurate than current state-of-the-art alternatives.

1. Introduction
Many real-world scenarios, such as quality control (Page,
1954), network analysis (Kurt et al., 2018) and finance (Lavielle & Teyssiere, 2007), posit the problem of
detecting sudden changes in a data-generating process, especially in time series (Chandola et al., 2009; van den Burg &
Williams, 2020). Finding such changes allows for isolating
different patterns in the data, and has pivotal consequences
in terms of safety and reliability of the predictive algorithms
used, e.g., for risk or malfunction monitoring (Basseville
et al., 1993; Skates et al., 2001; Galceran et al., 2017). In
particular, the notion of change point (CP) refers to a point
at which the hyperparameters of the model used to represent
the data change suddenly.
CP detection in time series has been extensively studied over
the years, e.g., by Scott & Knott (1974), Killick et al. (2012).
In particular, a classical solution to the problem of CP detec*
This work was done while the author was at ETH Zurich
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC,
Barcelona, Spain 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland 3 Department of Intelligent Systems, KTH,
Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Edoardo Caldarelli
<ecaldarelli@iri.upc.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tion is offered by Adams & MacKay (2007). They propose a
Bayesian message-passing algorithm, called BOCPD, that
relies on the concept of run length, i.e., time between subsequent CPs. In its original form, however, this algorithm
assumes i.i.d. data between CPs. This is problematic in
many time series applications, where temporal correlation
between samples is the norm, as discussed by Saatçi et al.
(2010). In particular, Saatçi et al. (2010) suggest to combine
BOCPD with Gaussian processes (GPs), so as to model
the time series. As a flexible and powerful tool to directly
model the mapping from time to the signal (Williams &
Rasmussen, 2006), GPs are well suited for this task.
Although extremely flexible, these BOCPD-based detection schemes heavily rely on the choice of the prior hyperparameters, and this might worsen their performance, as
discussed by Han et al. (2019). In particular, Han et al.
(2019) observe that statistical hypothesis testing offers a
more robust, yet effective way of dealing with CPs, as it
allows for error thresholds to be derived. These thresholds
can in turn be used to control false positive and false negative rates, which is crucial if the CP detection algorithm
is to be used in a real-world scenario (Tartakovsky et al.,
2014). These test-based approaches can be combined with
deep learning methods, as done, e.g., by Chang et al. (2019),
or with Gaussian processes. In particular, in the latter case,
finding CPs translates into finding points at which the mean
or covariance function of the underlying GP model changes.
In particular, Keshavarz et al. (2018) devise a hypothesis
testing procedure based on a generalized likelihood ratio
test, to detect a single CP in the mean function of a Gaussian
process with a fixed covariance function. Conversely, Han
et al. (2019) propose a similar test, in combination with
BOCPD, for a fixed mean function, which detects CPs in
the covariance.
However, assuming either constant mean or a global covariance structure might reduce the class of anomalies that
a CP detection algorithm can find, reducing in turn its applicability. We will show this in our experiments, where
different types of CPs are considered. In particular, it will
be clear that some phenomena, such as a gradual increase
in the frequency of a sinusoidal signal, cannot be detected
by an algorithm that only considers shifts in the mean.
In our work, we tackle the problem of GP-based CP detection from a heuristic point of view, designing a powerful

