Learning Bellman Complete Representations for Offline Policy Evaluation

Jonathan D. Chang * 1 Kaiwen Wang * 1 Nathan Kallus 2 Wen Sun 1

Abstract
We study representation learning for Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL), focusing on the important task of Offline Policy Evaluation (OPE).
Recent work shows that, in contrast to supervised
learning, realizability of the Q-function is not
enough for learning it. Two sufficient conditions
for sample-efficient OPE are Bellman completeness and coverage. Prior work often assumes
that representations satisfying these conditions
are given, with results being mostly theoretical in
nature. In this work, we propose BCRL, which
directly learns from data an approximately linear Bellman complete representation with good
coverage. With this learned representation, we
perform OPE using Least Square Policy Evaluation (LSPE) with linear functions in our learned
representation. We present an end-to-end theoretical analysis, showing that our two-stage algorithm
enjoys polynomial sample complexity provided
some representation in the rich class considered
is linear Bellman complete. Empirically, we extensively evaluate our algorithm on challenging,
image-based continuous control tasks from the
Deepmind Control Suite. We show our representation enables better OPE compared to previous
representation learning methods developed for
off-policy RL (e.g., CURL, SPR). BCRL achieves
competitive OPE error with the state-of-the-art
method Fitted Q-Evaluation (FQE), and beats
FQE when evaluating beyond the initial state distribution. Our ablations show that both linear
Bellman complete and coverage components of
our method are crucial.
*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY, USA 2 Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell Tech, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Jonathan D. Chang <https://jdchang1.github.io>,
Kaiwen Wang <https://kaiwenw.github.io>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has developed agents
that solve complex sequential decision making tasks, achieving new state-of-the-art results and surpassing expert human
performance. Despite these impressive results, these algorithms often require a prohibitively large number of online
interactions to scale to higher dimensional inputs.
To address these sample complexity demands, a recent line
of work (van den Oord et al., 2018; Anand et al., 2019;
Mazoure et al., 2020; Yang & Nachum, 2021) has incorporated advances in unsupervised representation learning
from the supervised learning literature into developing RL
agents. For example, CURL (Laskin et al., 2020) and SPR
(Schwarzer et al., 2020) utilize contrastive representation objectives as auxiliary losses within an existing RL framework.
These efforts are motivated by the tremendous success such
self-supervised techniques have offered in computer vision,
natural language processing, speech processing, and beyond.
While these formulations have shown sample complexity
improvements empirically, it remains an open question
whether these approaches successfully address the unique
challenges from RL that usually do not appear in supervised
learning, such as exploration and exploitation, credit
assignments, long horizon prediction, and distribution shift.
In particular, recent work (Wang et al., 2021; Amortila et al.,
2020; Foster et al., 2021) has shown that realizability of the
learning target in RL (namely, the Q-function) is insufficient
to avoid exponential dependence on problem parameters.
In this paper, we study representation learning for an
important subtask of off-policy RL: offline policy evaluation
(OPE). OPE is a critical component for any off-policy
policy optimization approach (e.g., off-policy actor critic
such as SAC, Haarnoja et al., 2018, and DDPG, Lillicrap
et al., 2016). Moreover, OPE allows us to focus on issues
arising from distribution shift and long horizon prediction.
Specifically, we propose a new approach that leverages
rich function approximation (e.g., deep neural networks)
to learn a representation that is both Bellman complete
and exploratory. A linear Bellman complete representation
means that linear functions in the representation have zero
inherent Bellman error (Antos et al., 2008), i.e., applying
the Bellman operator on a linear function results in a new
linear function. An exploratory representation means that

