Symmetric Machine Theory of Mind

Melanie Sclar 1 * Graham Neubig 2 Yonatan Bisk 2

Abstract
Theory of mind, the ability to model others’
thoughts and desires, is a cornerstone of human
social intelligence. This makes it an important
challenge for the machine learning community,
but previous works mainly attempt to design
agents that model the “mental state” of others
as passive observers or in specific predefined
roles, such as in speaker-listener scenarios. In
contrast, we propose to model machine theory of
mind in a more general symmetric scenario. We
introduce a multi-agent environment SymmToM
where, like in real life, all agents can speak,
listen, see other agents, and move freely through
the world. Effective strategies to maximize an
agent’s reward require it to develop a theory
of mind. We show that reinforcement learning
agents that model the mental states of others
achieve significant performance improvements
over agents with no such theory of mind model.
Importantly, our best agents still fail to achieve
performance comparable to agents with access to
the gold-standard mental state of other agents,
demonstrating that the modeling of theory of
mind in multi-agent scenarios is very much an
open challenge. Code can be found at https:
//github.com/msclar/symmtom.

1. Introduction
Human communication is shaped by the desire to efficiently
cooperate and achieve communicative goals (Tomasello,
2009). Children quickly learn that other people have
independent mental states, and that communicating is
necessary to obtain information from or shape the intentions
of those they interact with. Remembering and reasoning
*

Work during an internship at CMU. 1 Paul G. Allen
School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of
Washington 2 Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon
University. Correspondence to: <msclar@cs.washington.edu,
{gneubig,ybisk}@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. In SymmToM, agents aim to gain all available
information (depicted as diamonds, black for known, white for
unknown). Since hearing is limited to its neighbor cells, they must
guess what happened beyond this range. Agents can see the whole
grid, but mistakes in inferences may happen (as with the red agent).

over others’ mental states ensures efficient communication
by avoiding having to repeat information, and contributes to
achieving common goals with minimal effort.
Because of this, there is growing interest in developing
agents that can exhibit this kind of behavior, referred to
as Theory of Mind (ToM) by developmental psychologists
(Premack & Woodruff, 1978). Previous work on agents
imbued with such capabilities has focused mainly on two
types of tasks. The former are tasks where the agent is a
passive observer of a scene that has to predict the future
by reasoning over others’ mental states. These tasks may
involve natural language (Nematzadeh et al., 2018) or be
purely spatial (Gandhi et al., 2021; Rabinowitz et al., 2018;
Baker et al., 2011). The latter are tasks where the theory
of mind agent has a specific role, such as “the speaker” in
speaker-listener scenarios (Zhu et al., 2021).
In contrast, human cooperation and communication is often
multi-party, and rarely assumes that people have singular
pre-specified roles. Moreover, human interlocutors are
seldom passive observers of a scene but instead active
participants. These dynamics mean human communication
has additional complexities, such as the coordination
between theory of mind, planning, and action, that are not
easily tested in previous work. Therefore, we develop a

