Distinguishing rule- and exemplar-based generalization
in learning systems

Ishita Dasgupta * 1 @ Erin Grant * 2 Thomas L. Griffiths 1

Abstract
Machine learning systems often do not share the
same inductive biases as humans and, as a result, extrapolate or generalize in ways that are
inconsistent with our expectations. The tradeoff between exemplar- and rule-based generalization has been studied extensively in cognitive
psychology; in this work, we present a protocol inspired by these experimental approaches to
probe the inductive biases that control this tradeoff in category-learning systems. We isolate two
such inductive biases: feature-level bias (differences in which features are more readily learned)
and exemplar or rule bias (differences in how
these learned features are used for generalization).
We find that standard neural network models are
feature-biased and exemplar-based, and discuss
the implications of these findings for machine
learning research on systematic generalization,
fairness, and data augmentation.

1. Introduction
Extrapolation or generalization—decisions on unseen
datapoints—is always underdetermined by data; which particular extrapolation behavior a machine learning (ML) system exhibits is determined by its inductive biases (Mitchell,
1980). When those inductive biases are opaque—as is often
the case with many modern ML systems (Geirhos et al.,
2020; D’Amour et al., 2020)—we can instead turn to empirical investigation of the behavior of a system to reveal the
system’s implicit inductive biases. Cognitive psychology
provides a rich basis for experimental designs to study the
often-opaque human cognitive system via its external behav*

Equal contribution 1 Departments of Psychology & Computer
Science, Princeton University 2 Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley. @ Now at DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Ishita Dasgupta <idg@deepmind.com>,
Erin Grant <eringrant@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

training examples
“dax”

“fep”

extrapolation
?

Figure 1. Example of a data condition: Data often underdetermines a decision boundary; here, it is unclear whether shape or
color determines object label (“dax” vs “fep”). How a learner
extrapolates to new stimuli reveals inductive bias.

ior; these designs can be leveraged to distinguish between
competing hypotheses about a machine learning system’s
inductive biases as well (e.g., Ritter et al., 2017b; Lake
et al., 2018; Dasgupta et al., 2019).
We draw on cognitive psychology to construct a protocol
that isolates the inductive biases determining how an ML
system generalizes feature-based categories such as those in
Fig. (1). A key property of such categorization problems is
the presence of a distractor dimension that does not play a
causal role in the underlying category boundary; the ground
truth categorization is determined by a discriminant dimension. Such problems are ubiquitous in machine learning
applications (e.g., Beery et al., 2018), where learned associations between the distractor and the categorization label
are termed “spurious” (Arjovsky et al., 2019). The tendency
to acquire (potentially harmful) spurious associations is an
example of a downstream consequence of implicit inductive
bias, and so characterizing such implicit inductive biases is
of both theoretical and practical interest.
We use abstract problem settings such as that in Fig. (1) to
identify and isolate two distinct inductive biases underlying
feature-based category learning. The first, feature-level bias,
expresses a preference for some features over others to support a decision boundary (e.g., preferring shape over color).
The second, exemplar bias—vs. rule bias—expresses a preference for feature-dense (vs. feature-sparse) decision boundaries (e.g., a boundary informed by both shape and color, vs.
only one of the two features). Our protocol presents data
conditions that manipulate feature co-occurrences observed
during training such that the resulting extrapolation behavior
is diagnostic of these inductive biases in the learner.
Code
at
https://github.com/eringrant/
icml-2022-rules-vs-exemplars.

