Action-Sufficient State Representation Learning for Control with Structural
Constraints
Biwei Huang * 1 Chaochao Lu * 2 3 Liu Leqi 1 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 2 Clark Glymour 1
Bernhard Schölkopf 3 Kun Zhang 4 1

Abstract
Perceived signals in real-world scenarios are usually high-dimensional and noisy, and finding and
using their representation that contains essential and sufficient information required by downstream decision-making tasks will help improve
computational efficiency and generalization ability in the tasks. In this paper, we focus on
partially observable environments and propose
to learn a minimal set of state representations
that capture sufficient information for decisionmaking, termed Action-Sufficient state Representations (ASRs). We build a generative environment model for the structural relationships among
variables in the system and present a principled
way to characterize ASRs based on structural constraints and the goal of maximizing cumulative
reward in policy learning. We then develop a
structured sequential Variational Auto-Encoder
to estimate the environment model and extract
ASRs. Our empirical results on CarRacing and
VizDoom demonstrate a clear advantage of learning and using ASRs for policy learning. Moreover,
the estimated environment model and ASRs allow learning behaviors from imagined outcomes
in the compact latent space to improve sample
efficiency.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
leveraging deep neural networks are usually data hungry
and lack interpretability. For example, to attain expert-level
performance on tasks such as chess or Atari games, deep
RL systems usually require many orders of magnitude more
*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of
Cambridge 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence.
Correspondence to: Kun Zhang <kunz1@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

training data than human experts (Tsividis et al., 2017). One
of the reasons is that our perceived signals in real-world scenarios, e.g., images, are usually high-dimensional and may
contain much irrelevant information for decision-making of
the task at hand. This makes it difficult and expensive for
an agent to directly learn optimal policies from raw observational data. Fortunately, the underlying states that directly
guide decision-making could be much lower-dimensional
(Schölkopf, 2019; Bengio, 2019). One example is that when
crossing the street, our decision on when to cross relies on
the traffic lights. The useful state of traffic lights (e.g., its
color) can be represented by a single binary variable, while
the perceived image is high-dimensional. It is essential to
extract and exploit such lower-dimensional states to improve
the efficiency and interpretability of the decision-making
process.
Recently, representation learning algorithms have been designed to learn abstract features from high-dimensional and
noisy observations. Exploiting the abstract representations,
instead of the raw data, has been shown to perform subsequent decision-making more efficiently (Lesort et al., 2018).
Representative methods along this line include deep Kalman
filters (Krishnan et al., 2015), deep variational Bayes filters (Karl et al., 2016), world models (Ha & Schmidhuber,
2018), PlaNet (Hafner et al., 2018), DeepMDP (Gelada
et al., 2019), stochastic latent actor-critic (Lee et al., 2019),
SimPLe (Kaiser et al., 2019), Bisimulation-based methods
(Zhang et al., 2021), Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2019; 2020),
and others (Srinivas et al., 2020; Shu et al., 2020). Moreover, if we can properly model and estimate the underlying
transition dynamics, then we can perform model-based RL
or planning, which can effectively reduce interactions with
the environment (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al.,
2018; 2019; 2020).
Despite the effectiveness of the above approaches to learning
abstract features, current approaches usually fail to take into
account whether the extracted state representations are sufficient and necessary for downstream policy learning. State
representations that contain insufficient information may
lead to sub-optimal policies, while those with redundant
information may require more samples and more complex
models for training. We address this problem by modeling the generative process and selection procedure induced

