Contextual Information-Directed Sampling

Botao Hao 1 Tor Lattimore 1 Chao Qin 2

Abstract
Information-directed sampling (IDS) has recently
demonstrated its potential as a data-efficient reinforcement learning algorithm (Lu et al., 2021).
However, it is still unclear what is the right form
of information ratio to optimize when contextual
information is available. We investigate the IDS
design through two contextual bandit problems:
contextual bandits with graph feedback and sparse
linear contextual bandits. We provably demonstrate the advantage of contextual IDS over conditional IDS and emphasize the importance of considering the context distribution. The main message is that an intelligent agent should invest more
on the actions that are beneficial for the future unseen contexts while the conditional IDS can be
myopic. We further propose a computationallyefficient version of contextual IDS based on ActorCritic and evaluate it empirically on a neural network contextual bandit.

1. Introduction
Information-directed sampling (IDS) (Russo & Van Roy,
2018) is a promising approach to balance the exploration
and exploitation tradeoff (Lu et al., 2021). Its theoretical
properties have been systematically studied in a range of
problems (Kirschner & Krause, 2018; Liu et al., 2018a;
Kirschner et al., 2020a;b; Hao et al., 2021a). However, the
aforementioned analysis1 is limited to the fixed action set.
In this work, we study the IDS design for contextual bandits (Langford & Zhang, 2007), which can be viewed as a
simplified case of full reinforcement learning. The context
*

Equal contribution 1 Deepmind 2 Columbia University. Correspondence to: Botao Hao <haobotao000@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
One exception is Kirschner et al. (2020a) who has extended
IDS to contextual partial monitoring.

at each round is generated independently, rather than determined by the actions. Contextual bandits are widely used in
real-world applications, such as recommender systems (Li
et al., 2010).
A natural generalization of IDS to the contextual case is
conditional IDS. Given the current context, conditional IDS
acts as if it were facing a fixed action set. However, this design ignores the context distribution and can be myopic. We
mainly want to address the question of what is the right form
of information ratio in the contextual setting and highlight
the necessity of utilizing the context distribution.
Contributions

Our contribution is four-fold:

• We introduce a version of contextual IDS that takes the
context distribution into consideration for contextual
bandits with graph feedback and sparse linear contextual bandits.
• For contextual bandits with graph feedback,
we
p
prove that conditional IDS suffers Ω( β(G)n)
Bayesian regret lower bound for a particular
prior and
contextual IDS can achieve
pgraph while1/3
e
O(min{ β(G)n, δ(G) n2/3 )} Bayesian regret upper bound for any prior. Here, n is the time horizon,
G is a directed feedback graph over the set of actions,
β(G) is the independence number and δ(G) is the weak
domination number of the graph. In the regime where
β(G) ≳ (δ(G)2 n)1/3 , contextual IDS achieves better
regret bound than conditional IDS.
• For sparse linear contextual
√ bandits, we prove that conditional IDS suffers Ω( nds) Bayesian regret lower
bound for a particular sparse
while contextual
√ prior2/3
e
IDS can achieve O(min{ nds, sn }) Bayesian regret upper bound for any sparse prior. Here, d is the
feature dimension and s is the sparsity. In the data-poor
regime where d ≳ sn1/3 , contextual IDS achieves better regret bound than conditional IDS.
• We further propose a computationally-efficient algorithm to approximate contextual IDS based on Actor-

