Continuous Control with Action Quantization from Demonstrations

Robert Dadashi * 1 Léonard Hussenot * 1 2 Damien Vincent 1 Sertan Girgin 1
Anton Raichuk 1 Matthieu Geist 1 Olivier Pietquin 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel Reinforcement
Learning (RL) framework for problems with
continuous action spaces: Action Quantization
from Demonstrations (AQuaDem). The proposed
approach consists in learning a discretization of
continuous action spaces from human demonstrations. This discretization returns a set of
plausible actions (in light of the demonstrations)
for each input state, thus capturing the priors of
the demonstrator and their multimodal behavior.
By discretizing the action space, any discrete
action deep RL technique can be readily applied
to the continuous control problem. Experiments
show that the proposed approach outperforms
state-of-the-art methods such as SAC in the
RL setup, and GAIL in the Imitation Learning
setup. We provide a website with interactive
videos:
https://google-research.
github.io/aquadem/ and make the
code available:
https://github.com/
google-research/google-research/
tree/master/aquadem.

1. Introduction
With several successes on highly challenging tasks including
strategy games such as Go (Silver et al., 2016), StarCraft
(Vinyals et al., 2019) or Dota 2 (Berner et al., 2019) as
well as robotic manipulation (Andrychowicz et al., 2020),
Reinforcement Learning (RL) holds a tremendous potential
for solving sequential decision making problems. RL relies
on Markov Decision Processes (MDP) (Puterman, 2014)
as its cornerstone, a general framework under which vastly
different problems can be casted.
There is a clear separation in the class of MDPs between
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team 2 Univ. de
Lille, CNRS, Inria Scool, UMR 9189 CRIStAL. Correspondence
to: Robert Dadashi <dadashi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the discrete action setup, where an agent faces a countable
set of actions, and the continuous action setup, where an
agent faces an uncountable set of actions. When the number
of actions is finite and small, computing the maximum of
the action-value function is straightforward (and implicitly
defines a greedy policy). In the continuous action setup, the
parametrized policy either directly optimizes the expected
value function that is estimated through Monte Carlo rollouts (Williams, 1992), which makes it demanding in interactions with the environment, or optimizes a parametrized
state-action value function (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2000) hence
introducing additional sources of approximations.
Therefore, a workaround consists in turning a continuous
control problem into a discrete one. The simplest approach
is to naively (e.g. uniformly) discretize the action space,
an idea which dates back to the “bang-bang” controller
(Bushaw, 1953). However, such a discretization scheme suffers from the curse of dimensionality. Various methods have
addressed this limitation by making the strong assumption of
independence (Tavakoli et al., 2018; Tang & Agrawal, 2020;
Andrychowicz et al., 2020) or of causal dependence (Metz
et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Sakryukin et al., 2020;
Tavakoli et al., 2021) between the action dimensions which
are typically complex and task-specific (e.g. autoregressive
policies, pointer networks based architectures).
In this work, we introduce a novel approach leveraging the
prior of human demonstrations for reducing a continuous
action space to a discrete set of meaningful actions. Demonstrations typically consist of transitions experienced by a
human in the targeted environment, performing the task
at hand or interacting without any specific goal i.e. play.
The side effect of using demonstrations to discretize the
action space is to filter out useless/hazardous actions, thus
focusing the search on relevant actions and possibly facilitating exploration. Besides, using a set of actions rather
than a single one (Behavioral Cloning) enables to capture
the multimodality of behaviors in the demonstrations.
We thus propose Action Quantization from Demonstrations,
or AQuaDem, a novel paradigm where we learn a state dependent discretization of a continuous action space using
demonstrations, enabling the use of discrete-action deep RL
methods. We formalize this paradigm, provide a neural im-

