Proximal and Federated Random Reshuffling

Konstantin Mishchenko 1 Ahmed Khaled 2 Peter Richtárik 3

Abstract

Random Reshuffling (RR), also known as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) without replacement,
is a popular and theoretically grounded method
for finite-sum minimization. We propose two
new algorithms: Proximal and Federated Random Reshuffling (ProxRR and FedRR). The first
algorithm, ProxRR, solves composite finite-sum
minimization problems in which the objective is
the sum of a (potentially non-smooth) convex regularizer and an average of n smooth objectives.
ProxRR evaluates the proximal operator once per
epoch only. When the proximal operator is expensive to compute, this small difference makes
ProxRR up to n times faster than algorithms that
evaluate the proximal operator in every iteration,
such as proximal (stochastic) gradient descent.
We give examples of practical optimization tasks
where the proximal operator is difficult to compute and ProxRR has a clear advantage. One
such task is federated or distributed optimization,
where the evaluation of the proximal operator corresponds to communication across the network.
We obtain our second algorithm, FedRR, as a special case of ProxRR applied to federated optimization, and prove it has a smaller communication
footprint than either distributed gradient descent
or Local SGD. Our theory covers both constant
and decreasing stepsizes, and allows for importance resampling schemes that can improve conditioning, which may be of independent interest.
Our theory covers both convex and nonconvex
regimes. Finally, we corroborate our results with
experiments on real data sets.

1. Introduction
Modern theory and practice of training supervised machine
learning models is based on the paradigm of regularized
empirical risk minimization (ERM) (Shalev-Shwartz & BenDavid, 2014). While the ultimate goal of supervised learning is to train models that generalize well to unseen data,
in practice only a finite data set is available during training.
Settling for a model merely minimizing the average loss
on this training set—the empirical risk—is insufficient, as
this often leads to over-fitting and poor generalization performance in practice. Due to this reason, empirical risk is
virtually always amended with a suitably chosen regularizer
whose role is to encode prior knowledge about the learning
task at hand, thus biasing the training algorithm towards
better performing models.
The regularization framework is quite general and perhaps
surprisingly it also allows us to consider methods for federated learning (FL)—a paradigm in which we aim at training
model for a number of clients that do not want to reveal their
data (Konečný et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz
et al., 2019). The training in FL usually happens on devices
with only a small number of model updates being shared
with a global host. To this end, Federated Averaging algorithm has emerged that performs Local SGD updates on the
clients’ devices and periodically aggregates their average.
Its analysis usually requires special techniques and deliberately constructed sequences hindering the research in this
direction. We shall see, however, that the convergence of
our FedRR follows from merely applying our algorithm for
regularized problems to a carefully chosen reformulation.
Formally, regularized ERM problems are optimization problems of the form


Pn
min P (x) := n1 i=1 fi (x) + ψ(x) ,

x∈Rd

(1)

CNRS, DI ENS, Inria 2 Princeton University 3 KAUST.
Correspondence to:
Konstantin Mishchenko <konsta.mish@gmail.com>.

where fi : Rd → R is the loss of model parameterized by
vector x ∈ Rd on the i-th training data point, and ψ : Rd →
R ∪ {+∞} is a regularizer. Let [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}. We
shall make the following assumption throughout the paper
without explicitly mentioning it:

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Assumption 1. The functions fi are Li -smooth, and the
regularizer ψ is proper, closed and convex. Let Lmax :=
maxi∈[n] Li .

1

