The CLRS Algorithmic Reasoning Benchmark

Petar Veličković 1 Adrià Puigdomènech Badia 1 David Budden 1
Razvan Pascanu 1 Andrea Banino 1 Misha Dashevskiy 1 Raia Hadsell 1 Charles Blundell 1

Abstract
Learning representations of algorithms is an
emerging area of machine learning, seeking to
bridge concepts from neural networks with classical algorithms. Several important works have
investigated whether neural networks can effectively reason like algorithms, typically by learning
to execute them. The common trend in the area,
however, is to generate targeted kinds of algorithmic data to evaluate specific hypotheses, making
results hard to transfer across publications, and
increasing the barrier of entry. To consolidate
progress and work towards unified evaluation, we
propose the CLRS Algorithmic Reasoning Benchmark, covering classical algorithms from the Introduction to Algorithms textbook. Our benchmark spans a variety of algorithmic reasoning
procedures, including sorting, searching, dynamic
programming, graph algorithms, string algorithms
and geometric algorithms. We perform extensive
experiments to demonstrate how several popular
algorithmic reasoning baselines perform on these
tasks, and consequently, highlight links to several
open challenges. Our library is readily available at
https://github.com/deepmind/clrs.

1. Introduction
Neural networks and classical algorithms are two techniques
that operate on diametrically opposite (and complementary)
sides of problem-solving: neural networks can adapt and
generalise to raw inputs, automatically extracting appropriate features and a single neural network setup is often
applicable to many separate tasks (Zamir et al., 2018). However, they are hard to interpret, notoriously unreliable when
extrapolating outside of the dataset they have been trained
on, and rely on massive quantities of training data. On
1
DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
<petarv@deepmind.com>.

Petar Veličković

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the other hand, algorithms trivially strongly generalise to
inputs of arbitrary sizes, and can be verified or proven to
be correct, with interpretable step-wise operations. Their
shortcoming is that inputs must be made to conform to a particular algorithm specification, and looking at a separate task
often requires coming up with an entirely new algorithm
(Veličković & Blundell, 2021).
Bringing the two sides closer together can therefore yield
the kinds of improvements to performance, generalisation
and interpretability that are unlikely to occur through architectural gains alone. Accordingly, algorithmic modelling
as a domain for testing neural networks has been gaining
popularity over the last few years (Zaremba & Sutskever,
2014; Kaiser & Sutskever, 2015; Trask et al., 2018; Vinyals
et al., 2015; Kool et al., 2018; Freivalds et al., 2019; Dwivedi
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2020; Veličković
et al., 2019; Yan et al., 2020; Deac et al., 2020) due to its
ability to highlight various reasoning limitations of existing
architectures.
Earlier work (Zaremba & Sutskever, 2014; Kaiser &
Sutskever, 2015) focused on the need of long-term memory capabilities when executing algorithms, which offered
a good test-bed for various recurrent and memory architectures. Recently, algorithmic tasks have been used to highlight the efficiency of graph neural networks (Dwivedi et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2020; Veličković et al., 2019; Yan et al.,
2020; Corso et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2020; Georgiev & Lió,
2020; Veličković et al., 2020) and to distinguish between
different variations of them, typically through the lens of
algorithmic alignment—architectures that align better with
the underlying algorithm can be proven to have better sample complexity (Xu et al., 2019). Unfortunately, many of
these works remain disconnected in terms of the algorithms
they target, how the data is presented to the model or through
the training and testing protocols they use, making direct
comparison somewhat difficult.
To make a first step towards a unified benchmark for algorithmic reasoning tasks, we propose a comprehensive
dataset which we will refer to as The CLRS Algorithmic
Reasoning Benchmark, in homage to the Introduction to Algorithms textbook by Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest and Stein
(Cormen et al., 2009).

