Improved StyleGAN-v2 based Inversion for Out-of-Distribution Images

Rakshith Subramanyam∗ 1 Vivek Narayanaswamy∗ 1 Mark Naufel 1 Andreas Spanias 1
Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan 2

Abstract
Inverting an image onto the latent space of
pre-trained generators, e.g., StyleGAN-v2, has
emerged as a popular strategy to leverage strong
image priors for ill-posed restoration. Several
studies have showed that this approach is effective at inverting images similar to the data used
for training. However, with out-of-distribution
(OOD) data that the generator has not been exposed to, existing inversion techniques produce
sub-optimal results. In this paper, we propose
SPHInX (StyleGAN with Projection Heads for
Inverting X), an approach for accurately embedding OOD images onto the StyleGAN latent space.
SPHInX optimizes a style projection head using
a novel training strategy that imposes a vicinal
regularization in the StyleGAN latent space. To
further enhance OOD inversion, SPHInX can additionally optimize a content projection head and
noise variables in every layer. Our empirical studies on a suite of OOD data show that, in addition
to producing higher quality reconstructions over
the state-of-the-art inversion techniques, SPHInX
is effective for ill-posed restoration tasks while
offering semantic editing capabilities.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have been shown to
produce high-quality, photo-realistic images in a variety
*
Equal contribution 1 Arizona State University 2 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories, Livermore, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Rakshith Subramanyam <rsubra17@asu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC52-07NA27344, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC.and was supported by the LLNLLDRD Program under Project No. 21-ERD-012.

of image synthesis and manipulation tasks (Karras et al.,
2019; Härkönen et al., 2020; Brock et al., 2019; Song
et al., 2021). In particular, the StyleGAN-v2 architecture and its variants (Karras et al., 2019; 2020; 2021) have
been used to synthesize very high resolution images. At
a basic level, StyleGAN-v2 learns to transform a latent
vector z ∈ Z ⊆ R512 to an intermediate latent code
w ∈ W ⊆ R512 through a mapping function (projection
head) f , which is then used to synthesize images.
The continued progress in training GANs has led to a surge
in techniques that can leverage deep generators as priors
for ill-posed image inversion problems (Bora et al., 2017;
Anirudh et al., 2019; Daras et al., 2021). In this context, the
problem of accurately embedding a given image onto the
latent space, often referred to as GAN inversion, has gained
significant research interest (Abdal et al., 2019; 2020; Daras
et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2020b; Wulff & Torralba, 2020; Kang
et al., 2021). Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that
the rich semantic information encoded in the latent space of
a pre-trained StyleGAN allows seamless editing of images
through controlled latent code manipulations (Zhu et al.,
2020b; Karras et al., 2019).
Broadly, existing approaches for StyleGAN-based inversion perform a careful selection of the latent space for optimization (Z, Z+, W and W+) and regularization techniques. Existing inversion strategies have been successful
with images that are similar to the data used for training the
generator (e.g., FFHQ faces). However, embedding out-ofdistribution images (e.g., ‘in-the wild’/domain shifted face
images) onto such latent spaces is known to be very challenging. As a result, there has been a significant emphasis
on improving StyleGAN based priors for out-of distribution
inversion. For instance, Kang et al. proposed an out-ofdomain face image inversion strategy by introducing an
encoder-based regularization on the StyleGAN-v2 feature
maps. On the other hand, Abdal et al. demonstrated that
it is possible to invert even non-face images, e.g., car images, onto the W+ space of a StyleGAN pre-trained on
face images. However, the perceptual quality of the reconstructed images in both cases are significantly poorer due
to the choice of latent space for optimization as well as the
mismatch between the latent space prior and the OOD data.

