Modeling Irregular Time Series with Continuous Recurrent Units

Mona Schirmer 1 Mazin Eltayeb 2 Stefan Lessmann 3 Maja Rudolph 4

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a popular choice for modeling sequential data. Modern
RNN architectures assume constant time-intervals
between observations. However, in many datasets
(e.g. medical records) observation times are irregular and can carry important information. To
address this challenge, we propose continuous
recurrent units (CRUs) – a neural architecture
that can naturally handle irregular intervals between observations. The CRU assumes a hidden state, which evolves according to a linear
stochastic differential equation and is integrated
into an encoder-decoder framework. The recursive computations of the CRU can be derived
using the continuous-discrete Kalman filter and
are in closed form. The resulting recurrent architecture has temporal continuity between hidden
states and a gating mechanism that can optimally
integrate noisy observations. We derive an efficient parameterization scheme for the CRU that
leads to a fast implementation f-CRU. We empirically study the CRU on a number of challenging
datasets and find that it can interpolate irregular
time series better than methods based on neural
ordinary differential equations.

1. Introduction
Recurrent architectures, such as the long short-term memory network (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997)
or gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Chung et al., 2014) have
become a principal machine learning tool for modeling time
series. Their modeling power comes from a hidden state,
which is recursively updated to integrate new observations,
1
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany. Work done
during an internship at Bosch Center for AI 2 Bosch Center for AI, Germany 3 Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany 4 Bosch Center for AI, USA. Correspondence to:
Mona Schirmer <mona.schirmer@ensae.fr>, Maja Rudolph
<maja.rudolph@us.bosch.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and a gating mechanism to balance the importance of new
information with history already encoded in the latent state.
Although continuous formulations were frequently considered in early work on recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
(Pineda, 1987; Pearlmutter, 1989; 1995), modern RNNs typically assume regular sampling rates (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Chung et al., 2014). Many real world data
sets, such as electronic health records or climate data, are
irregularly sampled. Measurements of a patient’s health
status, for example, are only available when the patient sees
a doctor. Hence, the time between observations also carries
information about the underlying time series. A lab test not
administered for many months could imply that the patient
was doing well in the meantime, while frequent visits might
indicate that the patient’s health is deteriorating. Discrete
RNNs face difficulties modeling such data as they do not
reflect the continuity of the underlying temporal processes.
Recently, the work on neural ordinary differential equations
(neural ODEs) (Chen et al., 2018) has established an elegant and practical way of modeling irregularly sampled time
series. Recurrent architectures based on neural ODEs determine the hidden state between observations by an ordinary
differential equation (ODE) and update its hidden state at
observation times using standard RNN gating mechanisms
(Rubanova et al. 2019; Brouwer et al. 2019; Lechner &
Hasani 2020). These methods typically rely on some form
of numerical ODE-solver, a network component that can
prolong training time significantly (Rubanova et al. 2019;
Shukla & Marlin 2020).
We propose continuous recurrent unit (CRU), a probabilistic recurrent architecture for modelling irregularly sampled
time series. An encoder maps observations into a latent
space, which is governed by a linear stochastic differential
equation (SDE). The analytic solution for propagating the latent state between observations and the update equations for
integrating new observations are given by the continuousdiscrete formulation of the Kalman filter. Employing the
linear SDE state space model and the Kalman filter has
three advantages. First, a probabilistic state space provides
an explicit notion of uncertainty for an uncertainty-driven
gating mechanism and for confidence evaluation of predictions. Second, as the Kalman filter is the optimal solution
for the linear filtering problem (Kalman, 1960), the gating

