Validating Causal Inference Methods

Harsh Parikh 1 Carlos Vajao 2 Louise Xu 2 Eric Tchetgen Tchetgen 3

Abstract
The fundamental challenge of drawing causal inference is that counterfactual outcomes are not
fully observed for any unit. Furthermore, in observational studies, treatment assignment is likely
to be confounded. Many statistical methods have
emerged for causal inference under unconfoundedness conditions given pre-treatment covariates,
including: propensity score-based methods, prognostic score-based methods, and doubly robust
methods. Unfortunately for applied researchers,
there is no ‘one-size-fits-all’ causal method that
can perform optimally universally.In practice,
causal methods are primarily evaluated quantitatively on handcrafted simulated data. Such datagenerative procedures can be of limited value because they are typically stylized models of reality. They are simplified for tractability and
lack the complexities of real-world data. For applied researchers, it is critical to understand how
well a method performs for data at hand. Our
work introduces a deep generative model-based
framework, Credence, to validate causal inference
methods. The framework’s novelty stems from
its ability to generate synthetic data anchored at
the empirical distribution for the observed sample, and therefore virtually indistinguishable from
the latter. The approach allows the user to specify ground truth for the form and magnitude of
causal effects and confounding bias as functions
of covariates. Thus simulated data sets are used
to evaluate the potential performance of various
causal estimation methods when applied to data
similar to the observed sample. We demonstrate
Credence’s ability to accurately assess the relative
performance of causal estimation techniques in
an extensive simulation study and two real-world
1
Duke University, Durham NC, USA 2 Amazon.com, Seattle WA, USA 3 The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA, USA. Correspondence to: Harsh Parikh
<harsh.parikh@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

data applications from Lalonde and Project STAR
studies.

1. Introduction
Causal inference problems typically focus on estimating the
effect of a point treatment (Z) on an outcome of interest (Y )
(Angrist and Pischke, 2008) - one example would be determining if a drug will aid in a patient’s recovery. In a binary
treatment setting, the average causal effect (τ ) of an intervention is defined as the contrast between the population
average potential outcome if all units were given the active
treatment (E[Y (1)]) versus the average potential outcome if
all units were given the control treatment (E[Y (0)]). In this
paper, the contrast of interest is defined on the additive scale,
that is τ = E [Y (1) − Y (0)], which hereafter is referred to
as the average treatment effect or ATE.
We will proceed under the standard consistency assumption typically made in the causal inference literature, that
for each unit with observed treatment value, say Z = z,
its observed outcome matches the potential outcome Y (z)
while the counterfactual outcome Y (1 − z) remains unobserved or missing. Hence, knowing the true causal effect of
intervention for each individual is impossible, however, it
is possible under certain conditions to learn the population
average causal effect τ . A standard approach to identify
the ATE relies on an assumption that one can account for
the possibility of confounding, on the basis of measure covariates, therefore ruling out the presence of unmeasured
confounding. Confounding factors are typically common
causes of the treatment and outcome variables, for instance,
patients that were able to avail themselves of a treatment
drug might be affluent and have better access to healthcare
facilities compared to patients in the control group. Thus,
the correlation between the treatment and the outcome might
be primarily because of better access to healthcare. In order
to evaluate the ATE, variables such as “access to healthcare”
in this case, that simultaneously affect the treatment (Z)
and the outcome (Y ) are confounders (W ) that must be
accounted for. In addition to consistency and unconfoundedness, nonparametric identification of the ATE typically
also requires a positivity assumption that for any covariate
value observed in the population, there is at least one unit
who would receive the active treatment and at least one unit

