Understanding Contrastive Learning Requires Incorporating Inductive Biases

Nikunj Saunshi 1 Jordan T. Ash 2 Surbhi Goel 2 Dipendra Misra 2 Cyril Zhang 2
Sanjeev Arora 1 Sham Kakade 3 Akshay Krishnamurthy 2

Abstract
Contrastive learning is a popular form of selfsupervised learning that encourages augmentations (views) of the same input to have more similar representations compared to augmentations
of different inputs. Recent attempts to theoretically explain the success of contrastive learning
on downstream classification tasks prove guarantees depending on properties of augmentations
and the value of contrastive loss of representations. We demonstrate that such analyses, that
ignore inductive biases of the function class and
training algorithm, cannot adequately explain the
success of contrastive learning, even provably
leading to vacuous guarantees in some settings.
Extensive experiments on image and text domains
highlight the ubiquity of this problem – different function classes and algorithms behave very
differently on downstream tasks, despite having
the same augmentations and contrastive losses.
Theoretical analysis is presented for the class of
linear representations, where incorporating inductive biases of the function class allows contrastive
learning to work with less stringent conditions
compared to prior analyses.

1. Introduction
Recently, representation functions learned via contrastive
learning have transformed machine learning. Using unlabeled data, a representation function is learnt by generating
simple augmentations of each datapoint and by enforcing,
via a suitable loss function, that (1) augmentations of a
single datapoint tend to be clustered (2) augmentations of
different datapoints tend to be far apart. Such representa1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
Microsoft Research, New York City 3 Departments of Computer
Science & Statistics, Harvard University. Correspondence to:
Nikunj Saunshi <nsaunshi@cs.princeton.edu>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tions give competitive classification performance —via even
a linear classifier— on a host of downstream tasks, bringing
us closer to the old dream of machine learners capable of
generalization across different data distributions and tasks.
We lack a conceptual framework for understanding such phenomena — which is unsurprising, since good quantitative
understanding of generalization is lacking even for single
task and single data distribution. However, deriving even
partial conceptual understanding could help push the field
forward, and researchers have begun to grapple with this
task (Arora et al., 2019; Tosh et al., 2021a; HaoChen et al.,
2021). The current paper seeks to provide guidance for further development of this nascent theory1 using simple experiments and theoretical analysis. A common thread in these
existing theories is the following components: (1) Quantifying how data augmentations implicitly encode downstream
class labels. (2) Demonstrating how representations with
small contrastive loss can uncover this implicit structure and
do well on downstream tasks.
Recent works formalize (1) via assumptions that end up implying that the augmentation distributions of inputs from the
same class have significant overlap, but there is little overlap
for inputs from different classes. For example, distributions
of augmentations of different dog images tend to be similar
to each other, but their union has little overlap with distributions of augmentations of cat images. Arora et al. (2019) —
which predates the recent wave of methods — assume that
points in the same class share the same augmentation distribution, and use this to show that the contrastive loss is a surrogate to the downstream performance. Since methods like
SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) do not appear to satisfy such
assumptions, recently HaoChen et al. (2021) gave a more refined analysis under milder assumptions, that requires only
some overlap in augmentation distributions, such that the
resultant graph of connections due to overlaps within a class
is dense. Again, it can be shown that a low-dimensional
representation that is near-optimal in the contrastive loss is
guaranteed to linearly separate the downstream classes.
1

Our title is a clear allusion to Zhang et al. (2017), which highlighted a gap between deep learning phenomena and classical ML
theory, motivating development of better theoretical understanding.

