Functional Output Regression with Infimal Convolution:
Exploring the Huber and -insensitive Losses

Alex Lambert 1 2 Dimitri Bouche 1 Zoltán Szabó 3 Florence d’Alché-Buc 1

Abstract
The focus of the paper is functional output regression (FOR) with convoluted losses. While
most existing work consider the square loss setting, we leverage extensions of the Huber and
the -insensitive loss (induced by infimal convolution) and propose a flexible framework capable
of handling various forms of outliers and sparsity
in the FOR family. We derive computationally
tractable algorithms relying on duality to tackle
the resulting tasks in the context of vector-valued
reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. The efficiency
of the approach is demonstrated and contrasted
with the classical squared loss setting on both
synthetic and real-world benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Functional data analysis (FDA, Ramsay & Silverman 1997;
Wang et al. 2016) has attracted a growing attention in the
field of machine learning and statistics, with applications
for instance in biomedical signal processing (Ullah & Finch,
2013), epidemiology monitoring and climate science (Ramsay & Silverman, 2007). The key assumption is that we
have access to densely-measured observations, in which
case functional data description becomes the most natural
and adequate. An important subfield of FDA is functional
output regression (FOR) which focuses on regression problems where the output variable is a function. There are
numerous ways to tackle the FOR problem family. The
simplest approach is to assume linear dependence between
the inputs and the outputs (Morris, 2015). However, in
order to cope with more complex dependencies, various
nonlinear approaches have been designed. In nonparametric
statistics, Ferraty et al. (2011) proposed a Banach-valued
1
LTCI, Telecom Paris, IP Paris, France 2 ESAT, KU Leuven, Belgium 3 Department of Statistics, London School of Economics, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Alex Lambert
<alex.lambert@kuleuven.be>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Nadaraya-Watson estimator. The flexibility of kernel methods (Steinwart & Christmann, 2008) and the richness of the
associated reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs; Micchelli et al. 2006) have proven to be particularly useful in
the area, with works involving tri-variate regression problem
(Reimherr et al., 2018), and approximated kernel ridge regression (KRR) using orthonormal bases (Oliva et al., 2015).
In the operator-valued kernel (Pedrick, 1957; Carmeli et al.,
2010) literature, examples include function-valued KRR
with double representer theorem (Lian, 2007), solvers based
on the discretization of the loss function (Kadri et al., 2010),
purely functional methods relying on approximate inversion
of integral operators (Kadri et al., 2016) or techniques relying on finite-dimensional coefficients of the functional
outputs in a dictionary basis (Bouche et al., 2021).
Most of these works employ the square loss which induces
an estimate of the conditional expectation of the functional
outputs given the input data. However defective sensors
or malicious attacks can lead to erroneous or contaminated
measurements (Hubert et al., 2015), resulting in local or
global functional outliers. The square loss is expected to
be badly affected in those cases and considering alternative
losses is a natural way to obtain reliable and robust prediction systems. For scalar-valued outputs, the Huber loss
(Huber, 1964) and the -insensitive loss (Lee et al., 2005)
are particularly popular and well-suited to construct outlierrobust estimators. In the FDA setting, robustness has been
investigated using Bayesian methods (Zhu et al., 2011), trading the mean for the median (Cadre, 2001), using bounded
loss functions (Maronna & Yohai, 2013), or leveraging principal component analysis (Kalogridis & Van Aelst, 2019).
In the operator-valued kernel literature, -insensitive losses
for vector-valued regression have been proposed by Sangnier et al. (2017) for finite-dimensional outputs. The use of
convex optimization tools such as the infimal convolution
operator and parametric duality leads to efficient solvers
and provides sparse estimators. This idea is exploited by
Laforgue et al. (2020) where a generalization of this approach to infinite-dimensional outputs encompassing both
the Huber and -insensitive losses is developed.
In this paper, we extend the families of losses considered
by Laforgue et al. (2020) by leveraging specific p-norms in

