Do More Negative Samples Necessarily Hurt In Contrastive Learning?

Pranjal Awasthi * 1 Nishanth Dikkala * 1 Pritish Kamath * 1

Abstract
Recent investigations in noise contrastive estimation suggest, both empirically as well as theoretically, that while having more “negative samples”
in the contrastive loss improves downstream classification performance initially, beyond a threshold, it hurts downstream performance due to a
“collision-coverage” trade-off. But is such a phenomenon inherent in contrastive learning? We
show in a simple theoretical setting, where positive pairs are generated by sampling from the underlying latent class (introduced by Saunshi et al.
(ICML 2019)), that the downstream performance
of the representation optimizing the (population)
contrastive loss in fact does not degrade with the
number of negative samples. Along the way, we
give a structural characterization of the optimal
representation in our framework, for noise contrastive estimation. We also provide empirical
support for our theoretical results on CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 datasets.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised representation learning aims to extract semantically meaningful features from complex high-dimensional
inputs without a supervised signal (Bengio et al., 2013).
These representations are then meant to be useful for a host
of downstream supervised tasks. The benefits of successfully executing such a paradigm for learning are twofold:
(1) labelled data is expensive and in contrast, unlabelled
data is abundant and easy to get, (2) rather than building a
specialized model for each downstream task we get to learn
a general-purpose representation which makes solving each
downstream task simpler which makes it possible to scalably
solve multiple downstream tasks in an efficient manner.
Noise contrastive estimation (NCE) (Gutmann & Hyvärinen,
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, USA. Correspondence
to: Nishanth Dikkala <nishanthd@google.com>, Pritish Kamath
<pritish@alum.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2010) (also known as Contrastive Learning) has emerged
as a highly effective approach for unsupervised representation learning using deep networks (Chen et al., 2020; Chen
& Li, 2020; Tian et al., 2021; Grill et al., 2020). This
approach tries to minimize the distance between representations of semantically similar inputs, while maximizing
the distance between the representations of semantically
dissimilar inputs. More concretely, a mathematical abstraction for representation learning with Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) for an input space X is: (1) a single NCE
−
example consists of k + 2 raw inputs, (x, x+ , x−
1 , . . . , xk ),
−
+
where (x, x ) are “semantically similar” and xi are sampled from the same marginal distribution as x, (2) the
representation f : X → Rd is trained to encourage
f (x)⊤ f (x+ ) ≫ f (x)⊤ f (x−
i ) for each i. This second step
can be done with standard classification objectives, such as
the cross-entropy loss, where the model is viewed as a classifier over k + 1 labels. For example, a candidate objective
to minimize (called NCE loss) is
!
Pk
−
⊤
+
⊤
ef (x) f (x ) + i=1 ef (x) f (xi )
E
log
(1)
ef (x)⊤ f (x+ )
x,x+ ,x−
1:k
To have a sense of scale it is assumed that ∥f (x)∥2 = 1
for all x. Such a normalization is also standard in practice
(Chen et al., 2020; Wang & Isola, 2020; Zimmermann et al.,
2021). Following standard terminology, we will refer to
(x, x+ ) as a positive pair and x−
i as negative examples.
Contrastive learning combined with deep neural networks
has recently shown highly promising empirical results in the
vision and NLP paradigms (Smith & Eisner, 2005; Mikolov
et al., 2013; Schroff et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2020; Oord
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021; Clark et al., 2020). Despite
this empirical success, it is not well understood why a good
representation learnt in this manner works well for downstream tasks. In particular, there are many design choices
present in the formulation which can affect the quality of
the representations learnt. Some of the salient ones are the
number of negative examples per sample k, the choice of
the architecture, the distribution of positive pairs (x, x+ ),
the hyper-parameters of the optimization algorithm among
others. In this paper, we focus primarily on the number of
negative examples k.
Prior empirical work observed that increasing k helps improve the quality of the representations (Chen et al., 2020).

