Partial Label Learning via Label Influence Function

Xiuwen Gong 1 Dong Yuan 1 Wei Bao 1

Abstract
To deal with ambiguities in partial label learning (PLL), state-of-the-art strategies implement
disambiguations by identifying the ground-truth
label directly from the candidate label set. However, these approaches usually take the label that
incurs a minimal loss as the ground-truth label
or use the weight to represent which label has a
high likelihood to be the ground-truth label. Little work has been done to investigate from the
perspective of how a candidate label changing a
predictive model. In this paper, inspired by influence function, we develop a novel PLL framework
called Partial Label Learning via Label Influence
Function (PLL-IF). Moreover, we implement the
framework with two specific representative models, an SVM model and a neural network model,
which are called PLL-IF+SVM and PLL-IF+NN
method respectively. Extensive experiments conducted on various datasets demonstrate the superiorities of the proposed methods in terms of
prediction accuracy, which in turn validates the
effectiveness of the proposed PLL-IF framework.

1. Introduction
In partial label learning (PLL) (Cour et al., 2011; Chen et al.,
2014; Yu & Zhang, 2017), each instance is associated with a
set of candidate labels, only one of which is the ground-truth
label, while the others are false positive labels. This brings
about ambiguities when training models for classification.
In recent years, many real-world applications have arisen
due to the growing demand for identifying the ground-truth
label from partially labeled data. For example, in automatic
face naming (Liu et al., 2016; Su et al., 2018), the learning
system is required to recognize the name of each face from
a candidate label set. In the image from a TV series (Fig.1
(a)) which contains ten people, each face is treated as an
1

Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney,
NSW, Australia. Correspondence to: Xiuwen Gong <xiuwen.gong@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(a) Automatic face naming (b) Automatic image annotation

Figure 1: (a) Co-occurrence picture of the main characters
in a TV series (i.e., Lost). Each face corresponds to one
name in the candidate label set extracted from the script:
Sun, Hurley, Locke, Jack, Sayid, Kate, Claire, Sawyer,
Charlie, and Boone. (b) A web image is annotated by
annotators online with different tags, such as, cat, tiger and
leopard, but only one is the ground-truth label.

instance while names extracted from scripts constitute the
candidate label set. Moreover, in automatic image annotation (Song et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020), a web image
(Fig.1 (b)) might be annotated online by different annotators
with different labels, such as cat, tiger and leopard, forming
the candidate label set, from which the ground-truth label is
desired to be identified.
Partial label learning (PLL) aims to train a classifier from
partially labelled data in order to automatically predict the
ground-truth label for an unseen instance. The main challenge is that of how to deal with the ambiguities caused by
false positive labels in candidate label set. The state-of-theart strategy (Feng & An, 2019; Lyu et al., 2018; Xu et al.,
2019) is to take the ground-truth label as a latent variable
and then identify it directly from the candidate label set. The
solution is usually obtained by employing an alternating algorithm to update the model papramter and the ground-truth
label variable through an iterative refining procedure. On
the one hand, when ground-truth label variable is fixed, the
PLL problem turns out to be a well-studied multiclass optimization problem, and can be solved by any off-the-shelf
multiclass implementations. On the other hand, when the
model parameter is fixed, how to update the ground-truth
label variable has become an intractable issue. As the binary
ground-truth variable is discrete, the optimization is often
NP-hard. Existing approaches usually take the label that

