Overcoming Oscillations in Quantization-Aware Training

Markus Nagel * 1 Marios Fournarakis * 1 Yelysei Bondarenko 1 Tijmen Blankevoort 1

Abstract
When training neural networks with simulated
quantization, we observe that quantized weights
can, rather unexpectedly, oscillate between
two grid-points. The importance of this effect
and its impact on quantization-aware training
(QAT) are not well-understood or investigated in
literature. In this paper, we delve deeper into the
phenomenon of weight oscillations and show that
it can lead to a significant accuracy degradation
due to wrongly estimated batch-normalization
statistics during inference and increased noise
during training. These effects are particularly
pronounced in low-bit (≤ 4-bits) quantization
of efficient networks with depth-wise separable
layers, such as MobileNets and EfficientNets. In
our analysis we investigate several previously
proposed QAT algorithms and show that most
of these are unable to overcome oscillations.
Finally, we propose two novel QAT algorithms
to overcome oscillations during training: oscillation dampening and iterative weight freezing.
We demonstrate that our algorithms achieve
state-of-the-art accuracy for low-bit (3 & 4
bits) weight and activation quantization of
efficient architectures, such as MobileNetV2,
MobileNetV3, and EfficentNet-lite on ImageNet.
Our source code is available at https://
github.com/qualcomm-ai-research/
oscillations-qat.

1. Introduction
Quantization is one of the most successful methods for
optimizing neural networks for efficient inference and ondevice execution while maintaining a high accuracy. By
compressing the weights and activations from the regular
*
Equal contribution 1 Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative
of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.. Correspondence to: Markus
Nagel <markusn@qti.qualcomm.com>, Marios Fournarakis
<mfournar@qti.qualcomm.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

32-bit floating-point format to more efficient low bit fixedpoint representations, such as INT8, we can reduce power
consumption and accelerate inference when deploying neural networks on edge devices (Horowitz, 2014).
Despite its clear power and latency benefits, quantization
comes at the cost of added noise due to the reduced precision.
However, researchers in recent years have shown that neural
networks are robust to this noise and can be quantized to
8-bits with a minimal drop in accuracy using post-training
quantization techniques (PTQ) (Nagel et al., 2019; Banner
et al., 2019; Nahshan et al., 2020). PTQ can be very efficient
and, generally, only requires access to a small calibration
dataset, but suffers when applied to low-bit quantization (≤
4-bits) of neural networks. Meanwhile, quantization-aware
training (QAT) has become the de-facto standard method
for achieving low-bit quantization while maintaining near
full-precision accuracy (Krishnamoorthi, 2018; Esser et al.,
2020; Nagel et al., 2021). By simulating the quantization
operation during training or fine-tuning, the network can
adapt to the quantization noise and reach better solutions
than with PTQ.
In this paper, we focus on the oscillations of quantized
weights that occur during quantization-aware training. This
is a little-known and under-investigated phenomenon in
the optimization of quantized neural networks, with significant consequences for the network during and after training.
When using the popular straight-through estimator (STE)
(Bengio et al., 2013) for QAT, weights seemingly randomly
oscillate between adjacent quantization levels leading to
detrimental noise during the optimization process. Equipped
with this insight, we investigate recent advances in QAT that
claim improved performance and assess their effectiveness
in addressing this oscillatory behavior.
An adverse symptom of weight oscillations is that they
can corrupt the estimated inference statistics of the batchnormalization layer collected during training, leading to
poor validation accuracy. We find that this effect is particularly pronounced in low-bit quantization of efficient networks with depth-wise separable layers, such as MobileNets
or EfficientNets, but can be addressed effectively by reestimating the batch-normalization statistics after training.
While batch-normalization re-estimation overcomes one significant symptom of the oscillations, it does not tackle its

