VAR S CENE: A Deep Generative Model for Realistic Scene Graph Synthesis

Tathagat Verma 1 Abir De 1 Yateesh Agrawal 1 Vishwa Vinay 2 Soumen Chakrabarti 1

Abstract
Scene graphs are powerful abstractions that capture relationships between objects in images by
modeling objects as nodes and relationships as
edges. Generation of realistic novel scene graphs
has applications like scene synthesis and data augmentation for supervised learning. Existing graph
generative models are predominantly targeted toward molecular graphs, leveraging the limited vocabulary of atoms and bonds and also the welldefined semantics of chemical compounds. In
contrast, scene graphs have much larger object
and relation vocabularies, and their semantics are
latent. To address this challenge, we propose
VAR S CENE, a variational autoencoder for scene
graphs, which is optimized for the maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) between the ground
truth scene graph distribution and distribution of
the generated scene graphs. VAR S CENE views
a scene graph as a collection of star graphs and
encodes it into a latent representation of the underlying stars. The decoder generates scene graphs
by learning to sample the component stars and
edges between them. Our experiments show that
our method is able to mimic the underlying scene
graph generative process more accurately than
several state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Scene graphs (Johnson et al., 2015; 2018; Chang et al.,
2021) have emerged as a popular data structure to represent
images. The nodes in these graphs represent objects and
their attributes, and edges capture relationships between
them. They are a succinct and human-consumable summary
of the content within the image. Their popularity is partially derived from the availability of rich datasets (Lu et al.,
2016; Krishna et al., 2016) that contain ground-truth scene
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India 2 Adobe Research,
India. Correspondence to: Abir De <abir@cse.iitb.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

graphs associated with images. Extracting scene graphs
from images continues to be a very active field of research
(Tang et al., 2020b; Yang et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2019). The
success of scene graphs can be seen in the range of visual
understanding tasks that utilize them: retrieval (Schroeder &
Tripathi, 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Maheshwari et al., 2021),
editing (Dhamo et al., 2020), question answering (Teney
et al., 2017) and captioning (Milewski et al., 2020).
While there has been progress in the field of image generation, the end goal of achieving rich, diverse and complex
scenes is far from satisfactory (Casanova et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2019). In the current paper, we propose the novel task
of scene graph generation as a stepping stone to scene synthesis. Here, our goal is to learn to synthesize scene graphs
based on a set of training examples of scene graphs. Our
work is relevant to the theme of generating new and complex
scenes, where scene graphs are often used as a means for
conditioning image synthesis (Johnson et al., 2018). We
decouple the generation of scene semantics (sets of objects
and how they relate to each other) from its visual manifestation, and focus specifically on the first part in the current
paper. Where required, we will use existing methods to
convert our synthesized scene graphs to images (Johnson
et al., 2018; Tseng et al., 2020).
Driven by the success at text and image synthesis, there
is much recent interest in deep generative models for
graphs, e.g., GraphVAE (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018),
GraphRNN (You et al., 2018), NeVAE (Samanta et al.,
2019), MolGAN (De Cao & Kipf, 2018), GRAN (Liao
et al., 2019), etc. However, most of them are tailored to
molecule discovery and cannot be effectively used to generate scene graphs, as we demonstrate in our experiments.
Very recently, Garg et al. (2021) proposed an unconditional
scene graph generator, which, however, is not optimized to
capture the underlying data distribution.
1.1. Present Work
We propose VAR S CENE, a novel variational autoencoder,
specifically designed for scene graph generation. (We use
graph ‘generation’ and ‘synthesis’ interchangeably.) In contrast to prior VAE-based graph generative models which
maximize Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) for model training, VAR S CENE is optimized to generate graphs having
minimum distribution discrepancy with the ground truth

