Discrete Probabilistic Inverse Optimal Transport

Wei-Ting Chiu * 1 Pei Wang * 1 Patrick Shafto 1 2

Abstract
Inverse Optimal Transport (IOT) studies the problem of inferring the underlying cost that gives
rise to an observation on coupling two probability measures. Couplings appear as the outcome
of matching sets (e.g. dating) and moving distributions (e.g. transportation). Compared to Optimal transport (OT), the mathematical theory of
IOT is undeveloped. We formalize and systematically analyze the properties of IOT using tools
from the study of entropy-regularized OT. Theoretical contributions include characterization of
the manifold of cross-ratio equivalent costs, the
implications of model priors, and derivation of an
MCMC sampler. Empirical contributions include
visualizations of cross-ratio equivalent effect on
basic examples, simulations validating theoretical
results and experiments on real world data.

1. Introduction
Inverse Optimal Transport (IOT) involves inferring latent
costs from stochastic couplings, a problem that arises across
many domains where matching or movement of distributions
arises (Ma et al., 2020; Stuart & Wolfram, 2020; Li et al.,
2019; Paty & Cuturi, 2020). Unlike (Entropy-regularized)
Optimal Transport (Villani, 2008; Cuturi, 2013), mathematical foundations and computational implications have not
been systematically investigated. IOT inherits interesting
geometric structure from Sinkhorn scaling (Sinkhorn, 1964),
which gives rise to natural questions about the nature of posterior distributions, the existence of samplers, and feasibility
of inferences from observed couplings to underlying costs.
IOT problems has been applied in many areas. Practical
examples include: (1) inferring the cost criterion of interna*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science, Rutgers University Newark, NJ 2 School of Mathematics,
Institute for Advanced Study (IAS), Princeton NJ. Correspondence
to: Patrick Shafto <patrick.shafto@gmail.com>, Wei-Ting Chiu
<wc570@rutgers.edu>, Pei Wang <peiwang425@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tional migration (Stuart & Wolfram, 2020); (2) estimating
the marriage matching affinity (Dupuy et al., 2019; Ma
et al., 2020); (3) learning interaction cost function from
noisy and incomplete matching matrix and make prediction
on new matching (Li et al., 2019). These works provide
methodologies to solve specific IOT problems with extra
hard constraints on latent costs. In this paper we provide a
framework to analyze discrete probabilistic inverse optimal
transport (PIOT) for general problems, and to understand
the geometric properties of the space of latent costs.
Our contributions include: (1) formulating the PIOT problem and identify the support manifold for latent costs; (2)
characterizing the geometry of the support manifold along
with the implications of prior distributions on posterior inference; (3) analyzing the support manifold for noisy and
incomplete observations. (4) developing MCMC algorithms
for posterior inference which derives directly from geometric properties of Sinkhorn scaling; (5) demonstrating PIOT
through simulations on general examples including visualizations of latent cost manifold and missing/noisy value
predictions for migration data.
Notation: R+ denotes positive reals, R∗ denotes nonnegative reals. R∗ denotes the extended non-negative reals
R∗ ∪ {+∞}. ∆k is the k-dimensional simplex. For a space
X, P(X) denotes the set of distributions over X. Matrices
are in uppercase and their elements are in the corresponding
lowercase. For a matrix Am×n , a1 , . . . , an denotes columns
of A. Column normalizing a matrix Am×n with respect to a
n-dim row vector ν is defined as Col(A, ν) = A diag( 1mν A ),
where 1m is a m-dim row vector with each element equals
to 1. ‘with respect to ν’ is omitted when ν = 1n . Row
normalization is defined in the same fashion.

2. Background and Related Work
Given two spaces X = {x1 , . . . , xm } and Y =
{y1 , . . . , yn }, let T = (tij )m×n ∈ (R∗ )m×n be a coupling that records the co-occurrence distribution between
X and Y . To avoid trivial cases, we assume m, n ≥ 2. tij
is allowed to be zero here. Each element tij represents the
probability of observing xi and yj simultaneously. The interaction between X and Y can be captured by a cost matrix
C = (cij )m×n ∈ (R∗ )m×n , where cij measures the underlying cost of coupling xi and yj . Hence, the probabilistic

