Fictitious Play and Best-Response Dynamics
in Identical Interest and Zero Sum Stochastic Games
Lucas Baudin 1 Rida Laraki 1 2

Abstract
This paper proposes an extension of a popular
decentralized discrete-time learning procedure
when repeating a static game called fictitious play
(FP) (Brown, 1951; Robinson, 1951) to a dynamic
model called discounted stochastic game (Shapley, 1953). Our family of discrete-time FP procedures is proven to converge to the set of stationary
Nash equilibria in identical interest discounted
stochastic games. This extends similar convergence results for static games (Monderer & Shapley, 1996a). We then analyze the continuous-time
counterpart of our FP procedures, which include
as a particular case the best-response dynamic introduced and studied by Leslie et al. (2020) in the
context of zero-sum stochastic games. We prove
the converge of this dynamics to stationary Nash
equilibria in identical-interest and zero-sum discounted stochastic games. Thanks to stochastic
approximations, we can infer from the continuoustime convergence some discrete time results such
as the convergence to stationary equilibria in zero
sum and team stochastic games (Holler, 2020).

1. Introduction
Learning Nash equilibria of a static game G after playing repeatedly G is a subject that has been widely studied
almost since the beginning of game theory (Fudenberg &
Levine, 1998; Hart & Mas-Colell, 2013; Young, 2004; CesaBianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Brown, 1951; Robinson, 1951).
In contrast, learning Nash equilibria of a dynamic model
such as a stochastic game has comparatively been much less
developed. Some noticeable exceptions are the two recent
papers (Leslie et al., 2020; Sayin et al., 2020) which develop
quite similar systems that converge to stationary equilibria
1

Université Paris-Dauphine - PSL, France 2 University of Liverpool, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Lucas Baudin <lucas.baudin@dauphine.eu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

in zero-sum discounted stochastic game. Our paper extends
the continuous-time dynamics of (Leslie et al., 2020) to a
large parametric class and to discrete-time. We show the
convergence of the two systems to stationary equilibria in
identical interest and also in zero-sum stochastic games.
Discounted stochastic games, introduced by Shapley (1953),
model strategic interactions between players with a state
variable. Thus, compared to non-stochastic games, actions
that players take impact their current payoff but also a state
variable that may influence their future payoff. Therefore,
this class of games offers a rich framework (Neyman &
Sorin, 2003) that is especially well suited for economic applications (see the survey by Amir (2003) and references
therein), or engineering applications. In the latter, this belongs to the more general framework of multi-agent reinforcement learning (see Busoniu et al. (2008) for a survey).
Fink (1964) proved that when there are finitely many players and actions (our framework), any discounted stochastic
game admits a stationary (mixed) Nash equilibrium (e.g. a
decentralized randomized policy that depends only on the
state variable). The proof is implied by the fact that a stationary equilibrium is the fixed point of an operator where,
given other players stationary strategies, each player strategy is an optimal stationary policy in a Markov Decision
Process. A stochastic game admits typically many other
Nash equilibria. To see why, if there is only one state, it is
a repeated game and a stationary equilibrium consists on
playing independently the same mixed strategy. Therefore,
the set of stationary Nash equilibrium payoffs of the discounted repeated game coincides with the Nash equilibria
of its stage game (which is known to be a semi-algebraic set
with several connected components (Laraki et al., 2019)).
On the other hand, the famous folk theorem of repeated
game (Aumann & Shapley, 1994; Fudenberg & Maskin,
1986; Laraki et al., 2019) shows that when the discount
factor is large enough, any feasible and individually rational
payoff of the stage game is a Nash equilibrium payoff of the
repeated game.
Stationary Nash equilibria are the simplest of all equilibria
and it is desirable to construct some natural learning procedures that are provable to converge to them. This is a
challenging problem even in identical interest or zero-sum

