Revisiting and Advancing Fast Adversarial Training
Through the Lens of Bi-Level Optimization

Yihua Zhang 1 * Guanhua Zhang 2 * Prashant Khanduri 3 Mingyi Hong 3 Shiyu Chang 2 Sijia Liu 1 4

Abstract
Adversarial training (AT) is a widely recognized
defense mechanism to gain the robustness of deep
neural networks against adversarial attacks. It is
built on min-max optimization (MMO), where the
minimizer (i.e., defender) seeks a robust model
to minimize the worst-case training loss in the
presence of adversarial examples crafted by the
maximizer (i.e., attacker). However, the conventional MMO method makes AT hard to scale.
Thus, FAST-AT (Wong et al., 2020) and other
recent algorithms attempt to simplify MMO by
replacing its maximization step with the single
gradient sign-based attack generation step. Although easy to implement, FAST-AT lacks theoretical guarantees, and its empirical performance
is unsatisfactory due to the issue of robust catastrophic overfitting when training with strong adversaries. In this paper, we advance FAST-AT
from the fresh perspective of bi-level optimization (BLO). We first show that the commonlyused FAST-AT is equivalent to using a stochastic gradient algorithm to solve a linearized BLO
problem involving a sign operation. However, the
discrete nature of the sign operation makes it difficult to understand the algorithm performance.
Inspired by BLO, we design and analyze a new
set of robust training algorithms termed Fast Bilevel AT (FAST-BAT), which effectively defends
sign-based projected gradient descent (PGD) attacks without using any gradient sign method or
explicit robust regularization. In practice, we
show our method yields substantial robustness improvements over baselines across multiple models
and datasets. Codes are available at https://
github.com/OPTML-Group/Fast-BAT.
*
Equal contribution 1 Michigan State University 2 UC
Santa Barbara 3 University of Minnesota 4 MIT-IBM Watson
AI Lab, IBM Research. Correspondence to: Yihua Zhang
<zhan1908@msu.edu>, Guanhua Zhang <guanhua@ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Given the fact that machine learning (ML) models can be
easily fooled by tiny adversarial perturbations (also known
as adversarial attacks) on the input (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Papernot et al., 2016), training
robust deep neural networks is now a major focus in research.
Nearly all existing effective defense mechanisms (Madry
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019b; Shafahi et al., 2019; Wong
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019a; Athalye et al., 2018a) are
built on the adversarial training (AT) recipe, introduced
by (Szegedy et al., 2014) and later formalized in (Madry
et al., 2018) using min-max optimization (MMO), where a
minimizer (i.e. defender) seeks to update model parameters
against a maximizer (i.e. attacker) that aims to increase the
training loss by perturbing the training data.
Despite the effectiveness of the AT-type defenses in various
application domains, the min-max nature makes them difficult to scale, because of the multiple maximization steps
required by the iterative attack generator at each training
step. The resulting prohibitive computation cost makes AT
not suitable in practical settings. For example, (Xie et al.,
2019) used 128 GPUs to run AT on ImageNet. Thereby,
how to speed up AT without losing accuracy and robustness
is now a grand challenge for adversarial defense (Wong
et al., 2020).
Recently, (Wong et al., 2020; Shafahi et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2019a; Andriushchenko & Flammarion, 2020) attempted to develop computationally-efficient alternatives
of AT, that is, the ‘fast’ versions of AT. To the best of
our knowledge, FAST-AT (Wong et al., 2020) and FASTAT with gradient alignment (GA) regularization, termed
FAST-AT-GA (Andriushchenko & Flammarion, 2020), are
the two state-of-the-art (SOTA) ‘fast’ versions of AT, since
they achieve the most significant reduction in computational
complexity and preserve accuracy and robustness to a large
extent. In particular, the inner-maximization in FAST-AT
(Wong et al., 2020) only calls for single-step attack generation. However, different from the direct application of
fast gradient sign method (Goodfellow et al., 2015), the
empirical success of FAST-AT also relies on a series of
heuristics-based strategies, e.g., using large attack step size,
cyclic learning rate schedule, and mixed-precision train-

