Distribution Regression with Sliced Wasserstein Kernels

Dimitri Meunier 1 Massimiliano Pontil 2 3 Carlo Ciliberto 3

Abstract
The problem of learning functions over spaces of
probabilities – or distribution regression – is gaining significant interest in the machine learning
community. A key challenge behind this problem
is to identify a suitable representation capturing
all relevant properties of the underlying functional
mapping. A principled approach to distribution regression is provided by kernel mean embeddings,
which lifts kernel-induced similarity on the input
domain at the probability level. This strategy effectively tackles the two-stage sampling nature
of the problem, enabling one to derive estimators
with strong statistical guarantees, such as universal consistency and excess risk bounds. However,
kernel mean embeddings implicitly hinge on the
maximum mean discrepancy (MMD), a metric
on probabilities, which may fail to capture key
geometrical relations between distributions. In
contrast, optimal transport (OT) metrics, are potentially more appealing. In this work, we propose
an OT-based estimator for distribution regression.
We build on the Sliced Wasserstein distance to
obtain an OT-based representation. We study the
theoretical properties of a kernel ridge regression
estimator based on such representation, for which
we prove universal consistency and excess risk
bounds. Preliminary experiments complement
our theoretical findings by showing the effectiveness of the proposed approach and compare it
with MMD-based estimators.

1

Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College
London, London, United Kingdom 2 Italian Institute of Technology, Genoa, Italy 3 Department of Computer Science, University
College London, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Dimitri Meunier <dimitri.meunier.21@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Distribution regression studies the problem of learning a
real-valued function defined on the space of probability distributions from a sequence of input/output observations. A
peculiar feature of this setting is that, typically, the input
distributions are not observed directly but only accessed
through finite samples, adding complexity to the problem
(Póczos et al., 2013). A typical example in the literature
(see Szabó et al., 2016; Fang et al., 2020) is the task of predicting some health indicator of patients, labeled by t, based
on their distribution Pt over results of clinical investigations,
e.g. blood measurements. The underlying distribution of
test results for each patient is observed only through repeated medical tests xt,i ∼ Pt , i = 1, . . . , nt , forming an
Pnt
approximation of Pt through P̂t,nt = n1t i=1
δxi . Given
T
labeled examples (P̂t,nt , yt )t=1 , where yt is the health indicator, we seek to learn an accurate mapping f : P̂n → y
for a new patient identified by P. Other examples of interest
for the machine learning community include the task of
predicting summary statistics of distributions such as the
entropy or the number of modes (Oliva et al., 2014) or for
conditional meta-learning (Denevi et al., 2020).
Historically, distribution regression has been tackled by
means of a two-stage procedure, that build upon the kernel
mean embedding machinery (Smola et al., 2007; Muandet
et al., 2017). A first positive definite (p.d.) kernel (Smola
& Schölkopf, 1998) defined on the underlying data space is
used to embed the distribution P̂t,nt into an Hilbert space,
and then a second kernel is used as a similarity measure between the embedded distributions to perform Kernel Ridge
Regression (KRR). This approach has been theoretically
investigated in Szabó et al. (2016) and further analyzed in
Fang et al. (2020). More recently, a SGD variant (Mücke,
2021) and a robust variant (Yu et al., 2021) have been suggested.
The two stages above allow to build a p.d. kernel on the
space of probability distributions and provide an example of distance substitution kernel, a class of kernels that
can be built from distances on metric spaces (Haasdonk
& Bahlmann, 2004). In that particular setting the chosen
distance is the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD), a metric on probability distributions (Gretton et al., 2012). A
main theme of this paper is that distance substitution kernels

