Query-Efficient and Scalable Black-Box Adversarial Attacks on
Discrete Sequential Data via Bayesian Optimization

Deokjae Lee 1 Seungyong Moon 1 Junhyeok Lee 1 Hyun Oh Song 1

Abstract
We focus on the problem of adversarial attacks
against models on discrete sequential data in the
black-box setting where the attacker aims to craft
adversarial examples with limited query access
to the victim model. Existing black-box attacks,
mostly based on greedy algorithms, find adversarial examples using pre-computed key positions
to perturb, which severely limits the search space
and might result in suboptimal solutions. To this
end, we propose a query-efficient black-box attack
using Bayesian optimization, which dynamically
computes important positions using an automatic
relevance determination (ARD) categorical kernel. We introduce block decomposition and history subsampling techniques to improve the scalability of Bayesian optimization when an input
sequence becomes long. Moreover, we develop a
post-optimization algorithm that finds adversarial
examples with smaller perturbation size. Experiments on natural language and protein classification tasks demonstrate that our method consistently achieves higher attack success rate with
significant reduction in query count and modification rate compared to the previous state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks on discrete sequential
data have achieved remarkable success in various domains
including natural language processing and protein structure
prediction, with the advent of large-scale sequence models
such as BERT and XLNet (Devlin et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019). However, these networks have exhibited vulnerability against adversarial examples that are artificially crafted
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Hyun Oh
Song <hyunoh@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

to raise network malfunction by adding perturbations imperceptible to humans (Papernot et al., 2016; Jin et al., 2020).
Recent works have focused on developing adversarial attacks in the black-box setting, where the adversary can only
observe the predicted class probabilities on inputs with a
limited number of queries to the network (Alzantot et al.,
2018; Ren et al., 2019). This is a more realistic scenario
since, for many commercial systems (Google Cloud NLP,
2022; Amazon Comprehend, 2022), the adversary can only
query input sequences and receive their prediction scores
with restricted resources such as time and cost.
While a large body of works has proposed successful blackbox attacks in the image domain with continuous attack
spaces (Ilyas et al., 2018; Andriushchenko et al., 2020),
developing a query-efficient black-box attack on discrete sequential data is quite challenging due to the discrete nature
of their attack spaces. Some prior works employ evolutionary algorithms for the attack, but these methods require a
large number of queries in practice (Alzantot et al., 2018;
Zang et al., 2020). Most of the recent works are based on
greedy algorithms which first rank the elements in an input
sequence by their importance score and then greedily perturb the elements according to the pre-computed ranking
for query efficiency (Ren et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2020; Maheshwary et al., 2021). However, these algorithms have an
inherent limitation in that each location is modified at most
once and the search space is severely restricted (Yoo et al.,
2020).
To this end, we propose a Blockwise Bayesian Attack (BBA)
framework, a query-efficient black-box attack based on
Bayesian Optimization. We first introduce a categorical kernel with automatic relevance determination (ARD), suited
for dynamically learning the importance score for each categorical variable in an input sequence based on the query history. To make our algorithm scalable to a high-dimensional
search space, which occurs when an input sequence is long,
we devise block decomposition and history subsampling
techniques that successfully improve the query and computation efficiency without compromising the attack success
rate. Moreover, we propose a post-optimization algorithm
that reduces the perturbation size.
We validate the effectiveness of BBA in a variety of datasets

