Reverse Engineering ℓp attacks: A block-sparse optimization approach with
recovery guarantees

Darshan Thaker * 1 Paris Giampouras * 1 René Vidal 1

Abstract
Deep neural network-based classifiers have been
shown to be vulnerable to imperceptible perturbations to their input, such as ℓp -bounded norm
adversarial attacks. This has motivated the development of many defense methods, which are
then broken by new attacks, and so on. This paper focuses on a different but related problem of
reverse engineering adversarial attacks. Specifically, given an attacked signal, we study conditions under which one can determine the type of
attack (ℓ1 , ℓ2 or ℓ∞ ) and recover the clean signal.
We pose this problem as a block-sparse recovery
problem, where both the signal and the attack are
assumed to lie in a union of subspaces that includes one subspace per class and one subspace
per attack type. We derive geometric conditions
on the subspaces under which any attacked signal can be decomposed as the sum of a clean
signal plus an attack. In addition, by determining the subspaces that contain the signal and the
attack, we can also classify the signal and determine the attack type. Experiments on digit and
face classification demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network based classifiers have been shown to
be vulnerable to imperceptible perturbations to their inputs,
which can cause the classifier to incorrectly classify a datapoint. (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2014). Examples
of such adversarial attacks include the Fast Gradient Sign
Method (FGSM) (Goodfellow et al., 2015) and the Projected
Gradient Method (PGD) (Madry et al., 2018a), where small
*
Equal contribution 1 Mathematical Institute for Data Science,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD USA. Correspondence
to: Darshan Thaker <dbthaker@jhu.edu>, Paris Giampouras
<parisg@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

additive perturbations are made to the input that are bounded
in ℓp norm and designed to maximize the loss of the classifier. In response to these attacks, many defense methods
have been developed, including Randomized Smoothing
(Cohen et al., 2019). However, such defenses have been
broken by new attacks, and so on, leading to a cat and mouse
game between new attacks (Athalye et al., 2018a;b; Carlini
& Wagner, 2017a; Uesato et al., 2018; Athalye & Carlini,
2018) and new defenses (Madry et al., 2018b; Samangouei
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Papernot et al., 2016; Kurakin et al., 2016; Miyato et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2016).
This paper focuses on the less well studied problem of reverse engineering adversarial attacks. Specifically, given a
corrupted signal x′ = x + δ, where x is a “clean” signal and
δ is an ℓp -norm bounded attack, the goal is to determine the
attack type (ℓ1 , ℓ2 or ℓ∞ ) as well as the original signal x.
Challenges. In principle, this problem might seem impossible to solve since there could be many pairs (x, δ) that yield
the same x′ . A key challenge is hence to derive conditions
under which this problem is well posed. We propose to
address this challenge by leveraging results from the sparse
recovery literature, which show that one can perfectly recover a signal x from a corrupted version x′ = x + δ 0 when
both x and δ 0 are sparse in a meaningful basis. Specifically,
it is shown in (Wright & Ma, 2010) that if x is sparse with
respect to some signal dictionary Ds , i.e., if x = Ds cs for
a sparse vector cs , and δ 0 is also sufficiently sparse, then
the solution (c∗ , δ ∗ ) to the convex problem
min ∥c∥1 + ∥δ∥1
c

s.t.

x′ = D s c + δ

(1)

is such that c∗ = cs and δ ∗ = δ 0 . In other words, one can
perfectly recover the clean signal as x = Ds c∗ = Ds cs
and the corruption δ 0 by solving the convex problem in (1).
Unfortunately, these classical results from sparse recovery
are not directly applicable to the problem of reverse engineering adversarial attacks due to several challenges:
1. An attack δ may not be sparse. Indeed, δ is usually
assumed to be bounded in ℓp norm, where p = 1, 2, ∞.
While results from sparse recovery can be extended to
bounded ℓ2 errors, e.g. (Candès et al., 2006) considers the case where δ is ℓ2 -bounded, such results only

