When AUC meets DRO: Optimizing Partial AUC
for Deep Learning with Non-Convex Convergence Guarantee

Dixian Zhu * 1 Gang Li * 1 Bokun Wang 1 Xiaodong Wu 2 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose systematic and efficient gradient-based methods for both one-way
and two-way partial AUC (pAUC) maximization
that are applicable to deep learning. We propose new formulations of pAUC surrogate objectives by using the distributionally robust optimization (DRO) to define the loss for each individual positive data. We consider two formulations
of DRO, one of which is based on conditionalvalue-at-risk (CVaR) that yields a non-smooth
but exact estimator for pAUC, and another one
is based on a KL divergence regularized DRO
that yields an inexact but smooth (soft) estimator
for pAUC. For both one-way and two-way pAUC
maximization, we propose two algorithms and
prove their convergence for optimizing their two
formulations, respectively. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms
for pAUC maximization for deep learning on various datasets. The proposed methods are implemented with tutorials in our open-sourced library
LibAUC (www.libauc.org).

1. Introduction
AUC, short for the area under the ROC curve, is a performance measure of a model, where the ROC curve is a curve
of true positive rate (TPR) vs false positive rate (FPR) for all
possible thresholds. AUC maximization in machine learning has a long history dating back to early 2000s (Herbrich
et al., 1999). It has four ages in the twenty-years history,
full-batch based methods in the first age, online methods
in the second age, stochastic methods in the third age, and
deep learning methods in the recent age. The first three
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA 2 Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
Correspondence to: Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ages focus on learning linear models or kernelized models. In each age, there have been seminal works in rigorous
optimization algorithms that play important roles in the evolution of AUC maximization methods. Recent advances in
non-convex optimization (in particular non-convex min-max
optimization) (Liu et al., 2020) has driven large-scale deep
AUC maximization to succeed in real-world tasks, e.g., medical image classification (Yuan et al., 2020) and molecular
properties prediction (Wang et al., 2021).
Nevertheless, the research on efficient optimization algorithms for partial AUC (pAUC) lag behind. In many applications, there are large monetary costs due to high false
positive rates (FPR) and low true positive rates (TPR), e.g.,
in medical diagnosis. Hence, a measure of primary interest
is the region of the curve corresponding to low FPR and/or
high TPR, i.e., pAUC. There are two commonly used versions of pAUC, namely one-way pAUC (OPAUC) (Dodd
& Pepe, 2003) and two-way pAUC (TPAUC) (Yang et al.,
2019), where OPAUC puts a restriction on the range of FPR,
i.e., FPR∈ [α, β] (Figure 1 middle) and TPAUC puts a restriction on the lower bound of TPR and the upper bound
of FPR, i.e., TPR≥ α, FPR≤ β (Figure 1 right). Compared
with standard AUC maximization, pAUC maximization is
more challenging since its estimator based on training examples involves selection of examples whose prediction scores
are in certain ranks.
To the best of our knowledge, there are few rigorous and
efficient algorithms developed for pAUC maximization for
deep learning. Some earlier works have focused on pAUC
maximization for learning linear models. For example,
Narasimhan & Agarwal (2017) have proposed a structured
SVM approach for one-way pAUC maximization, which
is guaranteed to converge for optimizing the surrogate objective of pAUC. However, their approach is not efficient
for big data and is not applicable to deep learning, which
needs to evaluate the prediction scores of all examples and
sort them at each iteration. There are some heuristic approaches, e.g., updating the model parameters according
to the gradient of surrogate pAUC computed based on a
mini-batch data (Kar et al., 2014) or using an ad-hoc weighting function for each example for computing the stochastic
gradient (Yang et al., 2021). However, such approaches are

