A Framework for Learning to
Request Rich and Contextually Useful Information from Humans

Khanh Nguyen 1 Yonatan Bisk 2 Hal Daumé III 1 3

Abstract
When deployed, AI agents will encounter
problems that are beyond their autonomous
problem-solving capabilities. Leveraging human
assistance can help agents overcome their inherent limitations and robustly cope with unfamiliar
situations. We present a general interactive
framework that enables an agent to request and
interpret rich, contextually useful information
from an assistant that has knowledge about the
task and the environment. We demonstrate the
practicality of our framework on a simulated
human-assisted navigation problem. Aided with
an assistance-requesting policy learned by our
method, a navigation agent achieves up to a 7×
improvement in success rate on tasks that take
place in previously unseen environments, compared to fully autonomous behavior. We show that
the agent can take advantage of different types
of information depending on the context, and
analyze the benefits and challenges of learning the
assistance-requesting policy when the assistant
can recursively decompose tasks into subtasks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning has largely focused on creating agents that
can solve problems on their own. Despite much progress,
these autonomous agents struggle to operate in unfamiliar environments and fulfill new requirements from users
(Goodfellow et al., 2015; Jia & Liang, 2017; Eykholt et al.,
2018; Qi et al., 2020; Shridhar et al., 2020). As autonomous
agents are built to perform tasks by themselves, they are typically endowed with limited capabilities of communicating
with humans during task execution. This design significantly constrains the performance of these agents, as human
1

University of Maryland, College Park 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Khanh Nguyen
<kxnguyen@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

bystanders or supervisors can provide useful information
that improves the agents’ decisions. Uncommunicative autonomous agents are also highly unsafe. They do not consult
humans on difficult decisions and can potentially commit
catastrophic mistakes without warnings.
The reliability of autonomous agents can be dramatically
enhanced if they are equipped with communication skills for
leveraging knowledge of humans in the same environment
(Rosenthal et al., 2010; Tellex et al., 2014; Nguyen et al.,
2019; Nguyen & Daumé III, 2019; Thomason et al., 2020).
In many cases, a task that is initially out of reach of an
agent can be elaborated or re-formulated into a task that the
agent is familiar with. Through effective communication,
the agent can help a human revise the task specification into
a form that it can easily interpret and accomplish. As a motivating example, consider a home-assistant robot assigned
a task of finding a newly bought rice cooker in a house,
which it has never heard of and therefore does not know
how to proceed. The robot, however, knows how to navigate
to familiar landmarks in the house. In this case, the robot
can ask a human it encounters a question like “where is the
rice cooker?”, expecting an instruction like “find it in the
kitchen, near the sink”, which it may know how to execute.
By communicating with the human, the robot can convert
the initially impossible task into a more feasible one. On
the other hand, by giving the right information to the agent,
a human can lift its task performance without needing to
collect extra data and acquire expertise to upgrade its model.
We present H ARI: Human-Assisted Reinforced Interaction,
a general, POMDP-based framework that allows agents to
effectively request and interpret information from humans.
We identify and provide solutions to two fundamental problems: the speaker problem and the listener problem. The
speaker problem concerns teaching an agent to elicit information from humans that can improve its decision making.
Inspired the intention-based theory of human communication (Sperber & Wilson, 1986; Tomasello et al., 2005;
Scott-Phillips, 2014), we equip a learning agent with a set
of general information-seeking intentions that are helpful in
solving any POMDP problem. At every time step, the agent
can express to a human an intention of requesting additional
information about (i) its current state, (ii) the goal state

