Matching Normalizing Flows and Probability Paths on Manifolds

Heli Ben-Hamu * 1 Samuel Cohen * 2 3 Joey Bose 2 Brandon Amos 2 Aditya Grover 2
Maximilian Nickel 2 Ricky T. Q. Chen 2 Yaron Lipman 1 2

Abstract
Continuous Normalizing Flows (CNFs) are a class
of generative models that transform a prior distribution to a model distribution by solving an
ordinary differential equation (ODE). We propose
to train CNFs on manifolds by minimizing probability path divergence (PPD), a novel family of
divergences between the probability density path
generated by the CNF and a target probability
density path. PPD is formulated using a logarithmic mass conservation formula which is a linear
first order partial differential equation relating the
log target probabilities and the CNF’s defining
vector field. PPD has several key benefits over
existing methods: it sidesteps the need to solve
an ODE per iteration, readily applies to manifold
data, scales to high dimensions, and is compatible
with a large family of target paths interpolating
pure noise and data in finite time. Theoretically,
PPD is shown to bound classical probability divergences. Empirically, we show that CNFs learned
by minimizing PPD achieve state-of-the-art results in likelihoods and sample quality on existing
low-dimensional manifold benchmarks, and is the
first example of a generative model to scale to
moderately high dimensional manifolds.

1. Introduction
One of the core domains of machine learning research are
density estimation and generative modeling, which view
data from a probabilistic perspective. The deep-learning
revolution fostered a significant advancement in the field,
leading to the emergence of powerful generative models for
images, language, audio, and other data types represented in
Euclidean spaces. While early literature primarily focused
*
Equal contribution 1 Weizmann Institute of Science 2 Meta
AI Research 3 Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University
College London.
Correspondence to: Heli Ben-Hamu
<heli.benhamu@weizmann.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

on Euclidean data, the need to model data in non-Euclidean
spaces arises in many scientific fields. For instance, occurrences of natural phenomena on earth can be modeled as a
distribution on a sphere (Mathieu & Nickel, 2020), protein
structure prediction requires angle predictions (Mardia et al.,
2008) and motion and position of robots can be modeled
with a product of Euclidean spaces and spheres. Therefore, constructing generative models over manifolds is an
important problem with many potential applications.
A generative model can be described as a function φ that
transforms a simple probability distribution (the prior or
base) to a more complicated one (the model) so to best represent some empirical set of data observations. Among the
large toolkit of deep generative models, innate candidates for
designing generative models on manifolds are Normalizing
Flows (NFs) (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) and Continuous
Normalizing Flows (CNFs) (Chen et al., 2018). In these
approaches φ is a diffeomorphism, i.e., a smooth bijection
with a smooth inverse. Therefore, the model density can be
expressed in terms of the prior density and the determinant
of the Jacobian of φ, also known as the change of variable
formula, which can be naturally adapted to the manifold
case. Recently, (Rezende et al., 2020; Bose et al., 2020)
devised NF models for sphere, tori and hyperbolic spaces.
In a parallel line of works, (Mathieu & Nickel, 2020; Lou
et al., 2020; Falorsi & Forré, 2020) developed CNFs over
Riemannian manifolds.
Like Euclidean NF models, manifold NFs suffer from limited expressive power due to the representation of φ as a
composition of a restricted set of invertible transformations.
On the other hand, CNFs model diffeomorphisms as flows
along parametric tangent vector fields, v, represented as neural networks, lifting the architectural restriction and allowing maximal expressive power. Nonetheless, training a CNF
by minimizing negative log-likelihoods, or equivalently, the
KL-divergence of the data and model densities, requires
log model densities evaluated at observation points. Computing the log model densities entails solving an ordinary
differential equation (ODE) during training, which results
in a substantial time and memory burden, as well as introduces an extra challenge when the data lies on a manifold.
Rozen et al. (2021) suggested a different parametrization
of CNFs via the divergence of unrestricted vector fields,

