Distributional Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman Equations for Continuous-Time
Reinforcement Learning

Harley Wiltzer 1 2 David Meger 1 Marc G. Bellemare 2 3 4

Abstract
Continuous-time reinforcement learning offers an
appealing formalism for describing control problems in which the passage of time is not naturally divided into discrete increments. Here we
consider the problem of predicting the distribution of returns obtained by an agent interacting in
a continuous-time, stochastic environment. Accurate return predictions have proven useful for
determining optimal policies for risk-sensitive
control, learning state representations, multiagent
coordination, and more. We begin by establishing the distributional analogue of the HamiltonJacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation for Itô diffusions
and the broader class of Feller-Dynkin processes.
We then specialize this equation to the setting
in which the return distribution is approximated
by N uniformly-weighted particles, a common
design choice in distributional algorithms. Our
derivation highlights additional terms due to statistical diffusivity which arise from the proper
handling of distributions in the continuous-time
setting. Based on this, we propose a tractable
algorithm for approximately solving the distributional HJB based on a JKO scheme, which can
be implemented in an online control algorithm.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of such an algorithm in a synthetic control problem.

1. Introduction
In continuous-time reinforcement learning (Munos, 1997;
Munos & Bourgine, 1997), the expected return or value
function is characterized by a partial differential equation
(PDE) known as the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation (Krylov, 1980; Fleming & Soner, 2006). This equation
1

McGill University, Montreal, Canada 2 Mila – Quebec AI
Institute 3 Google Brain, Montreal, Canada 4 CIFAR Fellow. Correspondence to: Harley Wiltzer <harley.wiltzer@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

can be solved using numerical methods (Munos, 2004), producing a policy that is optimal in the sense it maximises
the expected return and avoids the error and computational
costs associated with discretizing time.
This paper presents an analysis of the behavior of the distribution over returns in the continuous-time limit, as opposed
to solely its expectation. Existing literature in distributional
reinforcement learning (DRL) has demonstrated that modeling return distributions aids the policy learning process,
even when decisions are based only on the expectations
of the return distributions (Bellemare et al., 2017; Hessel
et al., 2018; Rowland et al., 2019). Beyond that, statistics
of the return distributions may provide useful signals for
exploration (Mavrin et al., 2019) and risk-sensitive behavior
(Prashanth & Ghavamzadeh, 2013; Chow & Ghavamzadeh,
2014; Tamar et al., 2015; Dabney et al., 2018a; Yang et al.,
2019; Halperin, 2021; Prashanth & Fu, 2021).
A distributional HJB equation. We first establish the distributional analogue to the HJB equation for a broad class
of continuous-time environments, when the policy is fixed
(the policy evaluation setting). Because return distribution
functions are infinite-dimensional objects (both in state and
return), they are in general quite complex. However, we obtain a concise form of the distributional HJB by appealing to
the notion of an infinitesimal generator (Rogers & Williams,
1994), specifically applied to the cumulative distribution
function of the return distribution. This basic result extends
to the expected-return control setting by obtaining an optimal policy from the usual HJB equation and subsequently
solving the distributional HJB equation with this policy.
Specialization to finitely-supported distributions. In distributional RL, it is common to represent return distributions
parametrically, for example with a finite collection of Dirac
deltas. With care, this makes it possible to derive practical algorithms that find finite-memory approximations to
the return distribution function. Our second contribution is
to specialize the distributional HJB equation to finite collections of statistical functionals and subsequently to what
Bellemare et al. (2022) call the quantile probability representation. The result is effectively a set of HJB equations
and associated distributional constraints, one per parameter.

