On Well-posedness and Minimax Optimal Rates of Nonparametric Q-function
Estimation in Off-policy Evaluation

Xiaohong Chen 1 Zhengling Qi 2

Abstract
We study the off-policy evaluation (OPE) problem in an infinite-horizon Markov decision process with continuous states and actions. We recast
the Q-function estimation into a special form of
the nonparametric instrumental variables (NPIV)
estimation problem. We first show that under
one mild condition the NPIV formulation of Qfunction estimation is well-posed in the sense of
L2 -measure of ill-posedness with respect to the
data generating distribution, bypassing a strong assumption on the discount factor γ imposed in the
recent literature for obtaining the L2 convergence
rates of various Q-function estimators. Thanks
to this new well-posed property, we derive the
first minimax lower bounds for the convergence
rates of nonparametric estimation of Q-function
and its derivatives in both sup-norm and L2 -norm,
which are shown to be the same as those for the
classical nonparametric regression (Stone, 1982).
We then propose a sieve two-stage least squares
estimator and establish its rate-optimality in both
norms under some mild conditions. Our general
results on the well-posedness and the minimax
lower bounds are of independent interest to study
not only other nonparametric estimators for Qfunction but also efficient estimation on the value
of any target policy in off-policy settings.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there is a surging interest in studying batch
reinforcement learning (RL), which utilizes previously collected data to perform sequential decision making (Sutton &
Author names are sorted alphabetically. 1 Cowles Foundation
for Research in Economics, Yale University 2 Department of Decision Sciences, George Washington University. Correspondence
to: Xiaohong Chen <xiaohong.chen@yale.edu>, Zhengling Qi
<qizhengling@gwu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Barto, 2018) and does not require interacting with task environment or accessing a simulator. The batch RL techniques
are especially attractive in many high-stake real-world application domains where it is too costly or infeasible to access a
simulator, such as mobile health (Liao et al., 2018), robotics
(Pinto & Gupta, 2016), digital marketing (Thomas et al.,
2017) and precision medicine (Kosorok & Laber, 2019),
and others. Nevertheless, the batch setting still posits several theoretical challenges that tamper the generalizability of
many RL algorithms in practice. Among them, one central
challenge is the distributional mismatch between the data
collecting process and the target distribution for evaluation
(Levine et al., 2020).
Motivated by these, we study the off-policy evaluation
(OPE) problem, which is considered one of fundamental
problems in batch RL. The goal of OPE is to leverage precollected data generated by a so-called behavior policy to
evaluate the performance (e.g., value) of a new/target policy. In particular, we investigate theoretical property of
nonparametric estimation of Q-function in the setting of
infinite-horizon Markov decision processes (MDPs) (with
discounted rewards, continuous states and actions).
We make several important contributions to the existing
literature. Motivated by Bellman equation, we formulate
Q-function estimation under the framework of a nonparametric instrumental variable (NPIV) model. We first show
that, under mild regularity conditions, the NPIV formulation of Q-function estimation is well-posed in the sense of
L2 -measure of ill-posedness with respect to the data generating distribution. This essentially justifies the valid use
of the L2 -norm of Bellman error/residual to measure the
accuracy of Q-function estimation in the batch setting. Next,
we derive the minimax lower bounds for the convergence
rates in sup-norm and in L2 -norm for the estimation of
Q-function and its derivatives. Thanks to the general wellposedness result, the lower bounds are shown to be the same
as those for the nonparametric regression estimation in the
i.i.d. setting (Stone, 1982; Tsybakov, 2009). Thus the nonparametric Q-function estimation could be as easy as the
nonparametric regression in terms of the worst case rate.
Using the NPIV formulation, we also propose sieve 2SLS
estimators to estimate the Q-function (and its derivatives)

