Making Linear MDPs Practical via Contrastive Representation Learning

Tianjun Zhang * 1 Tongzheng Ren * 2 3 Mengjiao Yang 1 3 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1 Dale Schuurmans 3 4 Bo Dai 3

Abstract
It is common to address the curse of dimensionality in Markov decision processes (MDPs) by
exploiting low-rank representations. This motivates much of the recent theoretical study on linear MDPs. However, most approaches require
a given representation under unrealistic assumptions about the normalization of the decomposition or introduce unresolved computational challenges in practice. Instead, we consider an alternative definition of linear MDPs that automatically
ensures normalization while allowing efficient
representation learning via contrastive estimation.
The framework also admits confidence-adjusted
index algorithms, enabling an efficient and principled approach to incorporating optimism or pessimism in the face of uncertainty. To the best of
our knowledge, this provides the first practical representation learning method for linear MDPs that
achieves both strong theoretical guarantees and
empirical performance. Theoretically, we prove
that the proposed algorithm is sample efficient in
both the online and offline settings. Empirically,
we demonstrate superior performance over existing state-of-the-art model-based and model-free
algorithms on several benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), the goal of an agent is to
learn a policy that maximizes the expected reward accumulated during sequential interaction with an unknown environment. Most RL algorithms are developed under the
framework of Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014), where performance can be evaluated by “regret”, i.e., the difference in accumulated reward between
the best policy and the policies produced by the algorithm.
*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 UT Austin 3 Google Brain
University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Tianjun Zhang <tianjunz@berkeley.edu>, Tongzheng Ren <tongzheng@utexas.edu>,
Bo Dai <bodai@google.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

It is known that in the tabular case where the number
of states |S| and actions |A| are finite, there exist algorithms
achieve
p that can√
 the asymptotic regret lower bound
Ω
|S| |A| · T (Jaksch et al., 2010; Dann & Brunskill,
2015; Osband & Van Roy, 2016; Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al.,
2018) after T iterations, which is unimprovable in the worst
case. Unfortunately, the polynomial dependence on |S| and
|A| impedes the application of the regret bounded RL algorithms in practice, where the number of states and actions
can be very large or even infinite. This difficulty is known as
the “curse of dimensionality” in control and RL (Bellman,
1966).
To tackle the curse of dimensionality, low-rank representations via function approximation have been used to exploit
additional structures in an MDP. One prominent direction is
the linear MDP framework (Yang & Wang, 2020; Jin et al.,
2020), which leverages additional assumptions to reduce
the algorithmic and theoretical challenge of coping with
the dimensionality issue in RL. In particular, assuming a
known low-rank feature that can represent the transition
operator and reward function in a linear MDP, then simple
optimistic algorithms can achieve regret that is independent
of the cardinality of the state and action sets. Therefore, the
linear MDP framework partially breaks the curse of dimensionality, provides a deeper understanding of the empirical
success of deep RL (Mnih et al., 2015; Levine et al., 2016),
and can deliver performance improvements. However, the
requirement that the low-rank features be known beforehand is difficult to achieve in practice, which has limited the
practical impact of linear MDPs in real applications.
Recently, there have been important new progress in making
linear MDPs more practical by introducing representation
learning techniques that satisfy provable guarantees. Agarwal et al. (2020) proposed the first theoretically-grounded
representation learning algorithm for linear MDPs, which
achieves polynomial sample complexity given a maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) oracle for stochastic transition dynamics. Later, Uehara et al. (2021) improved their
algorithm by exploiting upper confidence bounds (UCB)
to reduce sample complexity under the same MLE oracle.
These efforts have revealed the possibility of achieving statistically efficient representation learning in linear MDPs.
However, these algorithms have not addressed the underly-

