Fast Rates for Noisy Interpolation Require Rethinking the Effects of Inductive
Bias
Konstantin Donhauser 1 2 Nicolò Ruggeri 1 3 Stefan Stojanovic 4 Fanny Yang 1

Abstract
Good generalization performance on highdimensional data crucially hinges on a simple
structure of the ground truth and a corresponding strong inductive bias of the estimator. Even
though this intuition is valid for regularized models, in this paper we caution against a strong inductive bias for interpolation in the presence of
noise: While a stronger inductive bias encourages a simpler structure that is more aligned with
the ground truth, it also increases the detrimental
effect of noise. Specifically, for both linear regression and classification with a sparse ground truth,
we prove that minimum ℓp -norm and maximum
ℓp -margin interpolators achieve fast polynomial
rates close to order 1/n for p > 1 compared to a
logarithmic rate for p = 1. Finally, we provide
preliminary experimental evidence that this tradeoff may also play a crucial role in understanding
non-linear interpolating models used in practice.

1. Introduction
Despite being extremely overparameterized, large complex
models such as deep convolutional neural networks generalize surprisingly well, even when interpolating noisy training
data. If the noise in the training data is low, a natural explanation could be that these models are biased towards having
a certain structural simplicity. For example, in deep learning
theory, a long line of work studies the implicit bias of standard optimization algorithms towards solutions with a small
structured norm, see e.g. (Ji & Telgarsky, 2019; Lyu & Li,
2020; Soudry et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2020; Arora et al.,
2019a; Jacot et al., 2018). If the optimal prediction model
also has a small corresponding norm, then, intuitively, the
1
ETH Zurich, Department of Computer Science 2 ETH AI Center 3 Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 4 ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Konstantin Donhauser
<konstantin.donhauser@ai.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

implicit bias effectively reduces the search space to a ”good”
subset that includes a good model.
Even though this intuition is valid in the low-noise regime,
it is unclear why the generalization error might stay low
when the (structured) models are forced to interpolate nonnegligible noise in the data. Further, it is hard to mathematically characterize structural simplicity for complex
prediction models, and theoretical analysis is difficult.
Interestingly, some of the fundamental phenomena revolving around the generalization behavior of interpolating
complex overparameterized models even occur for highdimensional linear models (see e.g., (Hastie et al., 2019;
Muthukumar et al., 2020; Bartlett et al., 2020; Deng et al.,
2021) and references therein). Although the latter are significantly simpler to analyze, the literature has yet to provide a
comprehensive theoretical understanding for interpolating
models as it exists for example for regularized estimators.
This paper aims to take an important step in that direction.
As mentioned above, high-dimensional parametric models
with structural simplicity may correspond to parameter vectors with a small particular norm. For linear models, the
common structural simplicity assumption is sparsity, induced by the ℓ0 /ℓ1 -norms – the concrete example we focus
on in this paper. We say that estimators with small ℓ0 /ℓ1 norm have a strong inductive bias towards “simple”, in
this case sparse, solutions. In contrast, the more frequently
studied rotationally invariant ℓ2 -norm uniformly shrinks the
estimator in all directions, thereby inducing only weak to
no inductive bias towards sparse solutions.
For noiseless interpolation, it is well-known that the min-ℓ1 norm interpolator (aka basis pursuit) yields exact recovery
for sparse ground truths (Chen et al., 1998). Moreover,
when the measurements are noisy, its regularized variant, the
LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996), achieves minimax optimal rates
of order s log(d)
(Van de Geer, 2008) (where s is the ℓ0 -norm
n
of the ground truth). However, when forcing structured
models to interpolate the noisy samples, it is unclear why the
generalization error might stay low. In fact, the min-ℓ1 -norm
1
interpolator achieves rates of order log(d/n)
(Wang et al.,
2022; Muthukumar et al., 2020), suggesting that models
with strong inductive biases suffer heavily from noise.

