Intriguing Properties of Input-Dependent Randomized Smoothing

Peter Súkenı́k 1 Aleksei Kuvshinov 2 Stephan Günnemann 2 3

Abstract
Randomized smoothing is currently considered
the state-of-the-art method to obtain certifiably
robust classifiers. Despite its remarkable performance, the method is associated with various serious problems such as “certified accuracy waterfalls”, certification vs. accuracy trade-off, or
even fairness issues. Input-dependent smoothing approaches have been proposed with intention of overcoming these flaws. However, we
demonstrate that these methods lack formal guarantees and so the resulting certificates are not justified. We show that in general, the input-dependent
smoothing suffers from the curse of dimensionality, forcing the variance function to have low
semi-elasticity. On the other hand, we provide a
theoretical and practical framework that enables
the usage of input-dependent smoothing even in
the presence of the curse of dimensionality, under
strict restrictions. We present one concrete design
of the smoothing variance function and test it on
CIFAR10 and MNIST. Our design mitigates some
of the problems of classical smoothing and is formally underlined, yet further improvement of the
design is still necessary.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are one of the dominating recently
used machine learning methods. They achieve state-of-theart performance in a variety of applications like computer
vision, natural language processing, and many others. The
key property that makes neural networks so powerful is
their expressivity (Gühring et al., 2020). However, as a
price, they possess a weakness - a vulnerability against
adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2013; Biggio et al.,
1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg,
Austria 2 Technical University of Munich, School of Computation,
Information and Technology, Munich, Germany 3 Munich Data
Science Institute, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Peter
Súkenı́k <peter.sukenik@ista.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2013). The adversarial attack on a sample x0 is a point x1
such that the distance d(x0 , x1 ) is small, yet the predictions
of model f on x0 and x1 differ. Such examples are often
easy to construct, for example by optimizing for a change
in prediction f (x) (Biggio et al., 2013). Even worse, these
attacks are present even if the model’s prediction on x is
unequivocal.
This property is highly undesirable because in several sensitive applications, misclassifying a sample just because it
does not follow the natural distribution might lead to serious and harmful consequences. A well-known example is
a sticker placed on a traffic sign, which could confuse the
self-driving car and cause an accident (Eykholt et al., 2018).
As a result, the robustness of classifiers against adversarial examples has begun to be a strongly discussed topic.
Though many methods claim to provide robust classifiers,
just some of them are certifiably robust, i.e. the robustness
is mathematically guaranteed. The certifiability turns out
to be essential since more sophisticated attacks can break
empirical defenses (Carlini & Wagner, 2017).
Currently, the dominant method to achieve the certifiable
robustness is randomized smoothing (RS). This clever idea
to get rid of adversarial examples using randomization of
input was introduced by Lecuyer et al. (2019) and Li et al.
(2019) and fully formalized and improved by Cohen et al.
(2019). Let f be a classifier assigning inputs x ∈ RN
to one of the classes C ∈ C. Given a random deviation
ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 I), the smoothed classifier g, made of f , is
defined as: g(x) = arg maxC P(f (x + ϵ) = C), for C ∈ C.
In other words, the smoothed classifier classifies a class that
has the highest probability under the sampling of f (x + ϵ).
Consequently, an adversarial attack x′ on f is less dangerous for g, because g does not look directly at x′ , but rather
at its whole neighborhood, in a weighted manner. This way
we can get rid of local artifacts that f possesses – thus the
name “smoothing”. It turns out, that g enjoys strong robustness properties against attacks bounded by a specifically
computed l2 -norm threshold, especially if f is trained under
a Gaussian noise augmentation (Cohen et al., 2019).
Unfortunately, since the introduction of the RS, several serious problems were reported to be connected to the technique.
Cohen et al. (2019) mention two of them. First is the usage
of lower confidence bounds to estimate the leading class’s

