Born-Infeld (BI) for AI: Energy-Conserving Descent (ECD) for Optimization

G. Bruno De Luca * 1 Eva Silverstein * 1

Abstract
We introduce a novel framework for optimization based on energy-conserving Hamiltonian dynamics in a strongly mixing (chaotic) regime and
establish its key properties analytically and numerically. The prototype is a discretization of
Born-Infeld dynamics, with a squared relativistic speed limit depending on the objective function. This class of frictionless, energy-conserving
optimizers proceeds unobstructed until slowing
naturally near the minimal loss, which dominates
the phase space volume of the system. Building
from studies of chaotic systems such as dynamical billiards, we formulate a specific algorithm
with good performance on machine learning and
PDE-solving tasks, including generalization. It
cannot stop at a high local minimum, an advantage in non-convex loss functions, and proceeds
faster than GD+momentum in shallow valleys.

1. Introduction and Summary
Many scientific and technological problems, including machine learning (ML), require optimization, the process of
evolving to or near to the minimum of a nontrivial loss function F (Θ) depending on a high dimensional space of parameters Θ. The loss function may be highly non-convex and/or
contain shallow long valleys. It traditionally works – quite
well in many cases – via a form of gradient descent (GD),
with many improvements derived over the years involving
momentum and adaptive features1 . A standard example
is (stochastic) GD with momentum (Polyak, 1964) which
we will denote (S)GDM. In physics terms, these standard
algorithms involve a noisy and discretized form of frictional
evolution of a particle on a complicated potential energy
*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford Institute for Theoretical Physics,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94306, USA. Correspondence
to: G. Bruno De Luca <gbdeluca@stanford.edu>, Eva Silverstein
<evas@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
See e.g. (Bottou et al., 2018) for a review and (Kingma & Ba,
2015; Reddi et al., 2018) for examples of adaptive optimization.

landscape, without conservation of total kinetic and potential energy E. More precisely, given an objective function
F (Θ), one can define a potential energy:
V (Θ) ≡ F (Θ) − ∆V ,

(1)

where ∆V is a (possibly zero) constant shift whose adaptive
tuning we will address below. Through this map, optimization can be formulated as (discretized) physical evolution
from an initial point Θ0 , with the goal of reaching sufficiently low values of V . Standard methods correspond
to friction-dominated evolution, relying on some form of
dissipation of energy to achieve this.
In this work, we show that friction is not necessary: energyconserving dynamics (ECD) provides a distinctive class
of optimization algorithms with some favorable properties,
including increased calculability of its behavior, resulting
from the E conservation summarized in Table 1. The minimal version contains zero friction, and conserves energy,
yet essentially stops moving near vanishing loss. This may
sound paradoxical on first glance, but it is straightforward.
One example which we focus on in this work is based on
relativistic Born-Infeld (BI) dynamics, with the (squared)
speed limit2 crel depending on V (Θ) as:
c2rel = V (Θ).

(2)

As a consequence of this, the evolution essentially stops
when V (Θ) → 0. As defined in (1), ∆V represents a constant hyper-parameter sometimes needed to shift the objective to V = 0; although adaptively tunable, we note that
∆V = 0 in practice for a number of standard problems including ML tasks with achievable vanishing loss objectives
and partial differential equation (PDE) solving with F given
by the summed squares of the equations. When V vanishes,
so does the speed of motion in parameter space. Another example is to take mass = 1/V for ordinary (non-relativistic)
particle motion; again even without friction slowing it down,
the system ultimately slows as V → 0, mass → ∞.
2

Relativistic dynamics for optimization was considered previously in the interesting work (França et al., 2020), but there the
speed of light was taken to be a constant and friction was introduced to enable the evolution to converge; see also related work in
(Lu et al., 2017a). Our approach was motivated by the mechanism
(Alishahiha et al., 2004) for early-universe inflationary cosmology,
a subject which also involves evolution on a potential landscape.

