Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

Jack Parker-Holder * 1 2 Minqi Jiang * 1 3 Michael Dennis 4 Mikayel Samvelyan 1 3 Jakob Foerster 2
Edward Grefenstette 1 3 Tim Rocktäschel 1 3

Abstract
Training generally-capable agents with reinforcement learning (RL) remains a significant challenge. A promising avenue for improving the
robustness of RL agents is through the use of
curricula. One such class of methods frames environment design as a game between a student and
a teacher, using regret-based objectives to produce environment instantiations (or levels) at the
frontier of the student agent’s capabilities. These
methods benefit from theoretical robustness guarantees at equilibrium, yet they often struggle to
find effective levels in challenging design spaces
in practice. By contrast, evolutionary approaches
incrementally alter environment complexity, resulting in potentially open-ended learning, but
often rely on domain-specific heuristics and vast
amounts of computational resources. This work
proposes harnessing the power of evolution in
a principled, regret-based curriculum. Our approach, which we call Adversarially Compounding Complexity by Editing Levels (ACCEL), seeks
to constantly produce levels at the frontier of an
agent’s capabilities, resulting in curricula that start
simple but become increasingly complex. ACCEL maintains the theoretical benefits of prior
regret-based methods, while providing significant
empirical gains in a diverse set of environments.
An interactive version of this paper is available at
https://accelagent.github.io.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton and Barto (1998)) considers the problem of an agent learning through experience
to maximize reward in a given environment. The past decade
has seen a surge of interest in RL, with high profile successes
*

Equal contribution 1 Meta AI 2 University of Oxford 3 UCL
UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Jack Parker-Holder
<jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Minqi Jiang <msj@fb.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

in games (Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019; Silver
et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2013; Hu and Foerster, 2020) and
robotics (OpenAI et al., 2019; Andrychowicz et al., 2020),
with some believing RL may be sufficient for producing
generally capable agents (Silver et al., 2021). Despite the
promise of RL, it is often a challenge to train agents capable
of systematic generalization (Kirk et al., 2021).
This work focuses on the use of adaptive curricula for training more generally-capable agents. By adapting the training
distribution over the parameters of an environment, adaptive
curricula have been shown to produce more robust policies
in fewer training steps (Portelas et al., 2019; Jiang et al.,
2021b). For example, these parameters may correspond to
friction coefficients in a robotics simulator or maze layouts
for a navigation task. Each concrete setting of parameters
results in an environment instance called a level. Indeed
in many prominent RL successes, adaptive curricula have
played a key role, acting over opponents (Vinyals et al.,
2019), game levels (Team et al., 2021), or parameters of a
simulator (OpenAI et al., 2019; Andrychowicz et al., 2020).
Unsupervised Environment Design (UED, Dennis et al.
(2020)) formalizes the problem of finding adaptive curricula,
whereby a teacher agent designs levels using feedback from
a student, which seeks to solve them. When using regret
as feedback, Dennis et al. (2020) showed that if the system
reaches equilibrium, then the student must follow a minimax
regret strategy, i.e. the student would be capable of solving
all solvable environments. This approach produces student
policies exhibiting impressive zero-shot transfer to challenging human designed environments (Dennis et al., 2020;
Jiang et al., 2021a; Gur et al., 2021). However, training such
an adversarial teacher remains a challenge, and so far, the
strongest empirical results come from curating randomly
sampled levels for high-regret, rather than learning to directly design such levels (Jiang et al., 2021a). This approach
is unable to take advantage of any previously discovered
level structures, and its performance can be expected to
degrade as the size of the design space grows.
An important benefit of adaptive curricula is the possibility
of open-ended learning (Soros and Stanley, 2014), given the
curriculum can be steered toward constantly designing novel
tasks for the agent to solve. While generating truly open-

