XAI for Transformers: Better Explanations through Conservative Propagation

Ameen Ali 1 Thomas Schnake 2 3 Oliver Eberle 2 3 Grégoire Montavon 2 3 Klaus-Robert Müller 2 3 4 5 Lior Wolf 1

Abstract
Transformers have become an important
workhorse of machine learning, with numerous
applications. This necessitates the development of
reliable methods for increasing their transparency.
Multiple interpretability methods, often based
on gradient information, have been proposed.
We show that the gradient in a Transformer
reflects the function only locally, and thus fails
to reliably identify the contribution of input
features to the prediction. We identify Attention
Heads and LayerNorm as the main reasons for
such unreliable explanations and propose a more
stable way for propagation through these layers.
Our proposal, which can be seen as a proper
extension of the well-established LRP method
to Transformers, is shown both theoretically
and empirically to overcome the deficiency of a
simple gradient-based approach, and achieves
state-of-the-art explanation performance on a
broad range of Transformer models and datasets.

1. Introduction
Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have attracted
increasing interest and shown excellent performance in domains such as natural language processing (NLP) (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019), vision
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) or graphs (Ying et al., 2021; Yun
et al., 2019). Yet, their typically very high complexity (up
to billions of parameters (Narayanan et al., 2021)) makes
these models notoriously intransparent and their predictions
inaccessible to the user. Since Transformer models have
1

The School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv University, Israel 2 Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin,
Berlin, Germany 3 BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations
of Learning and Data, Berlin, Germany 4 Department of Artificial
Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea 5 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to:
Ameen Ali <ameenali@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

heavy application in potentially sensitive domains, e.g. as
support in recruiting processes (Aleisa et al., 2021), the
development of methods that explain their decisions is essential since they allow one to verify whether the model
makes fair decisions and does not discriminate protected
classes (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Gonen & Goldberg, 2019).
In this work, we ask how to bring Explainable AI to Transformers in a theoretically sound manner, focusing in particular on the axiom of conservation, which underlies a number
of popular explanation techniques (Bach et al., 2015; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017). We embed
our analysis in the Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP)
framework (Bach et al., 2015), which allows us to analyze
conservation at the level of individual modules and layers
of the Transformer model. Our analysis reveals that the
conservation properties of existing XAI techniques can be
severely impaired when extended to Transformer models.
We propose a theoretically grounded, and easy to implement
countermeasure, consisting of strategically ‘detaching’ part
of the Transformer model’s forward computation before
computing explanations.
We provide qualitative and quantitative experiments on different data domains, such as natural language understanding, computer vision and graph analysis. Comparison is
performed with state-of-the-art baseline explanation methods for Transformers. For the quantitative analysis, we
perform different input perturbation schemes, in which we
track the behavior of the model when relevant or irrelevant
features are added to or removed from the input data sample.
The proposed explanation method for Transformers presents
excellent performance on the qualitative and quantitative
experiments and outperforms all existing baseline methods
in most of the tasks. Hence, our fairly intuitive explanation
method provides both theoretical soundness in its formal
derivation and leading performance on many important data
domains. Our code is publicly available.1
1
https://github.com/AmeenAli/XAI_
Transformers

