Provable Domain Generalization via Invariant-Feature Subspace Recovery

Haoxiang Wang 1 Haozhe Si 1 Bo Li 1 Han Zhao 1

Abstract
Domain generalization asks for models trained
over a set of training environments to perform
well in unseen test environments. Recently, a
series of algorithms such as Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) has been proposed for domain
generalization. However, Rosenfeld et al. (2021)
shows that in a simple linear data model, even
if non-convexity issues are ignored, IRM and
its extensions cannot generalize to unseen environments with less than ds `1 training environments, where ds is the dimension of the spuriousfeature subspace. In this paper, we propose to
achieve domain generalization with Invariantfeature Subspace Recovery (ISR). Our first algorithm, ISR-Mean, can identify the subspace
spanned by invariant features from the first-order
moments of the class-conditional distributions,
and achieve provable domain generalization with
ds `1 training environments under the data model
of Rosenfeld et al. (2021). Our second algorithm,
ISR-Cov, further reduces the required number of
training environments to Op1q using the information of second-order moments. Notably, unlike IRM, our algorithms bypass non-convexity
issues and enjoy global convergence guarantees.
Empirically, our ISRs can obtain superior performance compared with IRM on synthetic benchmarks. In addition, on three real-world image
and text datasets, we show that both ISRs can
be used as simple yet effective post-processing
methods to improve the worst-case accuracy of
(pre-)trained models against spurious correlations
and group shifts. The code is released at https:
//github.com/Haoxiang-Wang/ISR.

1

Introduction

Domain generalization, i.e., out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization, aims to obtain models that can generalize to
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.
Correspondence to: Haoxiang Wang <hwang264@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

unseen (OOD) test domains after being trained on a limited
number of training domains (Blanchard et al., 2011; Wang
et al., 2021b; Zhou et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021). A series
of works try to tackle this challenge by learning the so-called
domain-invariant features (i.e., features whose distributions
do not change across domains) (Long et al., 2015; Ganin
et al., 2016; Hoffman et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018; 2019).
On the other hand, Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) (Arjovsky et al., 2019), represents another approach that aims to
learn features that induce invariant optimal predictors over
training environments. Throughout this work, we shall use
the term invariant features to denote such features. There
is a stream of follow-up works of IRM (Javed et al., 2020;
Krueger et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2020; Ahuja et al., 2020;
Khezeli et al., 2021), which propose alternative objectives
or extends IRM to different settings.
Recently, some theoretical works demonstrate that IRM and
its variants fail to generalize to unseen environments, or
cannot outperform empirical risk minimization (ERM), in
various simple data models (Rosenfeld et al., 2021; Kamath
et al., 2021; Ahuja et al., 2021b). For instance, Rosenfeld et al. (2021) considers a simple Gaussian linear data
model such that the class-conditional distribution of invariant features remains the same across domains, while that
of spurious features changes across domains. Intuitively,
a successful domain generalization algorithm is expected
to learn an optimal invariant predictor, which relies on
only the invariant features and is optimal over the invariant
features. To remove the noise introduced by finite samples, these theoretical works generally assume that infinite
samples are available per training environment to disregard
finite-sample effects, and the main evaluation metric for
domain generalization algorithms is the number of training
environments needed to learn an optimal invariant predictor
– this metric is also referred to as environment complexity
in the literature (Chen et al., 2021). In the case of linear
predictors, Rosenfeld et al. (2021) shows that IRM and REx
(an alternative objective of IRM proposed in (Krueger et al.,
2021)) need E ą ds to learn optimal invariant predictors,
where E is the number of training environments, and ds is
the dimension of spurious features. In the case of non-linear
predictors, they both fail to learn invariant predictors. Notice that the E ą ds condition of IRM can be interpreted
as a linear environment complexity (i.e., Opds q complexity),

