FOCUS: Familiar Objects in Common and Uncommon Settings

Priyatham Kattakinda 1 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract
Standard training datasets for deep learning often do not contain objects in uncommon and
rare settings (e.g., “a plane on water”, “a car
in snowy weather”). This can cause models
trained on these datasets to incorrectly predict objects that are typical for the context in the image,
rather than identifying the objects that are actually present. In this paper, we introduce FOCUS
(Familiar Objects in Common and Uncommon
Settings), a dataset for stress-testing the generalization power of deep image classifiers. By
leveraging the power of modern search engines,
we deliberately gather data containing objects in
common and uncommon settings; in a wide range
of locations, weather conditions, and time of day.
We present a detailed analysis of the performance
of various popular image classifiers on our dataset
and demonstrate a clear drop in accuracy when
classifying images in uncommon settings. We
also show that finetuning a model on our dataset
drastically improves its ability to focus on the
object of interest leading to better generalization.
Lastly, we leverage FOCUS to machine annotate
additional visual attributes for the entirety of ImageNet. We believe that our dataset will aid researchers in understanding the inability of deep
models to generalize well to uncommon settings
and drive future work on improving their distributional robustness.

1. Introduction
Since the remarkable success of AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) in the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) (Russakovsky et al., 2015), deep learning
models have been used in a variety of applications ranging
from robotics and self-driving cars to stock trading and com1
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Priyatham Kattakinda <pkattaki@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

putational biology. Undoubtedly, large scale datasets such
as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) deserve much of the credit
for the success of deep learning. These datasets typically
consist of natural images of objects in some environment.
For our purposes, the environment in an image includes
all the contextual information surrounding the object in the
image. Evidently, objects do not occur independently of
their environments. In other words, objects are more likely
to be found in some environments than in others (we call
these common settings). For example, ships are often on
water; cars are usually on streets; birds are usually on trees,
etc. Search engines are more likely to return images with
objects in their common settings when queried for an object
alone, i.e., without any additional qualifiers (e.g., just “deer”
or “frog”). As a result, objects in uncommon settings are
often missing in many of the popular datasets in use today.
Therefore, a classifier’s performance on these datasets is not
indicative of how well it does in novel environments.
To address this issue, we introduce a new dataset containing images both in common and uncommon settings called
FOCUS (Familiar Objects in Common and Uncommon
Settings). Our key idea is that modern search engines often
return many relevant results even for qualified queries of
objects in uncommon settings. For example, searching “bird
indoors” still returns a few relevant images even though this
is an uncommon setting. Building on this idea, we collect
images of objects in various common and uncommon environments explicitly. FOCUS has around 21K images of ten
objects along with annotations for different aspects of the
environment in the images including a wide range of locations, weather conditions, and time of day. Depending on
the class, we further annotate these environmental settings
as common or uncommon.
Using FOCUS, we assess the performance of some popular deep learning models with high accuracy on ImageNet,
on uncommon settings. We observe that all of these popular models show significant drop in accuracy when tested
on objects in uncommon settings. Next, we finetune these
models on FOCUS and show clear evidence for substantial
improvement in generalization. We also use FOCUS to train
classifiers that can detect various visual attributes we consider in FOCUS and use these classifiers to add additional
annotations to ImageNet. To the best of our knowledge,
FOCUS is the first large-scale dataset of natural images

