Neural Language Models are not Born Equal to Fit Brain Data, but Training
Helps

Alexandre Pasquiou * 1 2 Yair Lakretz * 1 John Hale 3 Bertrand Thirion 2 Christophe Pallier 1

Abstract
Neural Language Models (NLMs) have made
tremendous advances during the last years, achieving impressive performance on various linguistic tasks. Capitalizing on this, studies in neuroscience have started to use NLMs to study neural
activity in the human brain during language processing. However, many questions remain unanswered regarding which factors determine the ability of a neural language model to capture brain
activity (aka its ’brain score’). Here, we make first
steps in this direction and examine the impact of
test loss, training corpus and model architecture
(comparing GloVe, LSTM, GPT-2 and BERT), on
the prediction of functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging timecourses of participants listening to
an audiobook. We find that (1) untrained versions
of each model already explain significant amount
of signal in the brain by capturing similarity in
brain responses across identical words, with the
untrained LSTM outperforming the transformerbased models, being less impacted by the effect
of context; (2) that training NLP models improves
brain scores in the same brain regions irrespective
of the model’s architecture; (3) that Perplexity
(test loss) is not a good predictor of brain score;
(4) that training data have a strong influence on the
outcome and, notably, that off-the-shelf models
may lack statistical power to detect brain activations. Overall, we outline the impact of modeltraining choices, and suggest good practices for
future studies aiming at explaining the human language system using neural language models.

1. Introduction
In the last few years, Transformer-based language models
have revolutionized the field of natural language processing
in virtually all areas. Although these models were developed
for applications in language technology, their impressive
success has raised interest in whether these models could
also shed light on language processing in the human brain.
Promising results in this direction suggest that brain activations and transformer-based models converge to similar
linguistic representations (Caucheteux et al., 2021b) showing that brain activity can be significantly predicted from
linear combinations of model activations, as was shown
for fMRI (Toneva et al., 2020; Caucheteux et al., 2021b;a),
MEG (Caucheteux & King, 2021), and intracranial data
(Goldstein et al., 2021).

Equal contribution 1 Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, INSERM,
CEA, Neurospin, Gif-sur-Yvette, France 2 Parietal, INRIA, CEA,
Neurospin, Gif-sur-Yvette, France 3 Dept. of Linguistics, U.
of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Alexandre
Pasquiou <alexandre.pasquiou@inria.fr>.

However, several differences between Transformer-based
models and the human brain raise questions about how far
we can advance our understanding of brain function using these models. First, the architecture of Transformers
is based on multi-head self-attention modules, which does
not clearly map on neural computations in biological networks (e.g., Dayan & Abbott, 2005). Does this architecture
contribute to or hinder the ability of the model to predict
brain activity compared to other, possibly more brain-like,
architectures (e.g., recurrent neural networks)? Second, the
data used to train Transformer-based models is often different from that available for children, both in type and
size. Training a Transformer-based model requires massive
corpora, on the order of billions of words, whereas children require orders of magnitudes less words to achieve
comparable or better linguistic performance. How does the
training corpus (type and size) affect the model’s ability to
fit brain activity? Finally, the learning and evaluation objective commonly used with these models, such as masked or
next-word prediction, is at most a rough approximation of
the computational problem the human brain solves during
language acquisition and processing. Can one consider that
a well-trained model (according to perplexity loss) is a good
model for brain activity in language tasks?

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We investigate these questions by contrasting several types
of language models in their ability to fit functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) timecourses of participants lis-

*

