Decentralized Online Convex Optimization in Networked Systems

Yiheng Lin * 1 Judy Gan * 2 Guannan Qu 3 Yash kanoria 2 Adam Wierman 1

Abstract
We study the problem of networked online convex optimization, where each agent individually
decides on an action at every time step and agents
cooperatively seek to minimize the total global
cost over a finite horizon. The global cost is made
up of three types of local costs: convex node costs,
temporal interaction costs, and spatial interaction
costs. In deciding their individual action at each
time, an agent has access to predictions of local
cost functions for the next k time steps in an rhop neighborhood. Our work proposes a novel
online algorithm, Localized Predictive Control
(LPC), which generalizes predictive control to
multi-agent systems. We show that LPC achieves
a competitive ratio of 1 + Õ(ρkT ) + Õ(ρrS ) in an
adversarial setting, where ρT and ρS are constants
in (0, 1) that increase with the relative strength
of temporal and spatial interaction costs, respectively. This is the first competitive ratio bound on
decentralized predictive control for networked online convex optimization. Further, we show that
the dependence on k and r in our results is near
optimal by lower bounding the competitive ratio
of any decentralized online algorithm.

1. Introduction
A wide variety of multi-agent systems can be modeled as
optimization tasks in which individual agents must select
actions based on local information with the goal of cooperatively learning to minimize a global objective in an uncertain,
time varying environment. This general setting emerges in
applications such as formation control (Chen & Wang, 2005;
Oh et al., 2015), power systems control (Molzahn et al.,
2017; Shi et al., 2021), and multiproduct price optimization
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology 2 Decision, Risk,
and Operations division, Columbia Business School 3 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Yiheng Lin <yihengl@caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Caro & Gallien, 2012; Candogan et al., 2012). In all these
cases, it is key that the algorithms used by agents use only
local information due to the computational burden created
by the size of the systems, the information constraints in the
systems, and the need for fast and/or interpretable decisions.
At this point, there is a mature literature focused on decentralized optimization, e.g. Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis (1989);
Boyd et al. (2011); Shi et al. (2015); Nedić et al. (2018),
see Xin et al. (2020) for a survey; however, the design of
learning policies for uncertain, time-varying environments
requires decentralized online optimization. The literature
studying decentralized online optimization is still nascent
(see the related work section for a discussion of recent papers, e.g. Li et al. (2021b); Yuan et al. (2021); Yi et al.
(2020)) and many challenging open questions remain.
Three issues of particular importance for real-world applications are the following.
First, temporal coupling in actions is often of first-order importance to applications. For example, startup costs, ramping costs, and switching costs are prominent in settings such
as power systems and cloud computing, and lead to penalties
for changing actions dramatically over time. The design of
online algorithms to address such temporal interaction costs
has received significant attention in the single-agent case recently, e.g, smoothed online optimization (Goel et al., 2019;
Lin et al., 2020), convex body chasing (Argue et al., 2020b;
Sellke, 2020), online optimization with memory (Agarwal
et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2020), and dynamic pricing (Besbes
& Lobel, 2015; Chen & Farias, 2018).
Second, spatial interaction costs are of broad importance in
practical applications. Such costs arise because of the need
for actions of nearby agents to be aligned with one another,
and are prominent in settings such as economic team theory
(Marschak, 1955; Marschak & Radner, 1972), combinatorial optimization over graphs (Hochba, 1997; Gamarnik &
Goldberg, 2010), and statistical inference (Wainwright &
Jordan, 2008). An example is (dynamic) multiproduct pricing, where the price of a product can impact the demand of
other related products (Song & Chintagunta, 2006).
Third, leveraging predictions of future costs has long been
recognized as a promising way to improve the performance
of online agents (Morari & Lee, 1999; Lin et al., 2012;

