On the Hidden Biases of Policy Mirror Ascent in Continuous Action Spaces

Amrit Singh Bedi 1 Souradip Chakraborty 2 Anjaly Parayil 3 Brian Sadler 4 Pratap Tokekar 2 Alec Koppel 5

Abstract
We focus on parameterized policy search for reinforcement learning over continuous action spaces.
Typically, one assumes the score function associated with a policy is bounded, which fails to hold
even for Gaussian policies. To properly address
this issue, one must introduce an exploration tolerance parameter to quantify the region in which
it is bounded. Doing so incurs a persistent bias
that appears in the attenuation rate of the expected
policy gradient norm, which is inversely proportional to the radius of the action space. To mitigate
this hidden bias, heavy-tailed policy parameterizations may be used, which exhibit a bounded score
function, but doing so can cause instability in algorithmic updates. To address these issues, in this
work, we study the convergence of policy gradient
algorithms under heavy-tailed parameterizations,
which we propose to stabilize with a combination of mirror ascent-type updates and gradient
tracking. Our main theoretical contribution is the
establishment that this scheme converges with
constant batch sizes, whereas prior works require
these parameters to respectively shrink to null or
grow to infinity. Experimentally, this scheme under a heavy-tailed policy parameterization yields
improved reward accumulation across a variety of
settings as compared with standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an autonomous agent sequentially interacts with its environment and observes rewards incrementally across time (Sutton et al., 2017). This
1

Institute of Systems Research, University of Maryland, College Park, USA. 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA. 3 Microsoft Research, India 4 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA
5
JP Morgan Chase AI Research, USA. . Correspondence to:
Amrit Singh Bedi <amritbd@umd.edu>, Alec Koppel <aekoppel314@gmail.com >.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

framework has been successfully applied in continuous control (Schulman et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016), web
services (Zou et al., 2019), personalized medicine (Kosorok
& Moodie, 2015), among other contexts. Mathematically,
RL may be defined by a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
(Puterman, 2014), where an agent seeks to select actions to
maximize the long-term accumulation of rewards, known as
the value. The key distinguishing point of RL with classical
optimal control is its ability to discern policies without a
system dynamics model.
Algorithms for RL may be categorized as those which operate by approximately solving Bellman’s equations (Bellman,
1957; Watkins & Dayan, 1992) and policy gradient (PG)
methods (Williams, 1992). While the former may be lower
variance and converge faster (Even-Dar et al., 2003; Devraj & Meyn, 2017), typically they require representing a
Q-function for every state-action pair, which is intractable
for large spaces, the focus of this work. For this reason, we
focus on PG methods.
Policy search hinges upon the Policy Gradient (PG) Theorem (Sutton et al., 2000), which expresses the gradient
of the value function with respect to policy parameters as
the expected value of the product of the score function of
the policy and its associated Q function. Policy search has
been classically studied from the perspective of dynamical
systems (Kushner & Yin, 2003; Borkar, 2008), leading to
an understanding of its asymptotic performance (Konda &
Borkar, 1999; Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2000; Bhatnagar et al.,
2009)). More recently, its non-asymptotic performance has
come to the fore. Recent results (Bhandari & Russo, 2019;
Zhang et al., 2020a; Agarwal et al., 2020) have established
the global convergence of PG methods but require either
softmax or direct policy parametrization. One may further
refine the convergence constants via proximal regularization
(Schulman et al., 2017; Tomar et al., 2020; Lan, 2021; Khodadadian et al., 2021). These results hold for finite state and
action spaces. However, for continuous spaces the focus
of this work) or general parameterizations, these results do
not apply. Instead, stochastic gradient iteration for general
non-convex objectives defines its performance in terms of
convergence to stationarity
(Bhatt et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
√
2020b), i.e., O(1/ K) (or O(ϵ−2 )) rate of decrease of the

