PAC-Bayesian Bounds on Rate-Efficient Classifiers

Alhabib Abbas 1 2 Yiannis Andreopoulos 2

Abstract
We derive analytic bounds on the noise invariance of majority vote classifiers operating on compressed inputs. Specifically, starting from recent
bounds on the true risk of majority vote classifiers,
we extend the applicability of PAC-Bayesian theory to quantify the resilience of majority votes to
input noise stemming from compression. The derived bounds are intuitive in binary classification
settings, where they can be measured as expressions of voter differentials and voter pair agreement. By combining measures of input distortion
with analytic guarantees on noise invariance, we
prescribe rate-efficient machines to compress inputs without affecting subsequent classification.
Our validation shows how bounding noise invariance can inform the compression stage for any
majority vote classifier such that worst-case implications of bad input reconstructions are known,
and inputs can be compressed to the minimum
amount of information needed prior to inference.

1. Introduction
To learn concepts inherently contained in data, recent
breakthroughs in deep learning, adversarial robustness, and
bounded bayesian inference (Germain et al., 2015; Letarte
et al., 2019; Vidot et al., 2021) typically assume models that
can observe whole uncompressed volumes of d-dimensional
inputs x ∈ X ⊆ Rd in order to map x to target concepts
y ∈ Y. However, in practice, systems with distributed computing assets (Pradhan et al., 2002; Xiao et al., 2006) employ
lossy compression techniques to reduce the load of communication between inference machines and sensors that
collect data at test time. In such contexts, whole volumes
of x are inaccessible to machines tasked with inference,
and only noisy reconstructions of x are available to infer
concepts y.

Adapting recent proposals to data scarcity at test time entails
the design of models that infer concepts from compressed
samples of input xc = C(x), where C : X → E → X
encodes and decodes x with information loss, E ⊆ Rdc is
the set describing compressed codes of x, and dc ≤ d. From
a rate-distortion theory perspective (Gray & Neuhoff, 1998),
code lengths dc quantify the rate of bitstreams ingested by
arbitrary models M : X → Y, and since d−1
c ∝ |xc − x|,
rate-efficient classifiers define the family of models that
satisfy M(x) = M(xc ) for lower values of dc . Generally,
models that return outputs sensitive to small perturbations on
x can be deemed as greedy models, due to their requirement
of long code lengths dc to reduce |xc −x|. On the other hand,
models that are resilient to input distortion are rate-efficient,
since they require shorter code lengths dc to correctly infer
concepts y. Thus, rate-efficiency defines a sub-class of
models that are resilient to noise afflicted on x, and this
sets the context of our approach to solve for rate-efficient
machines.
We hereon define noise invariance as the probability of output change with respect to noisy input perturbations, and
in the case of binary classifiers where y ∈ {−1, 1}, noise
invariance specifically refers to the percentile of outputs
flipped due to input compression noise. Bounding the noise
invariance of classifiers M can allow for more aggressive
compression, since it gives guarantees on the implications
of reconstruction loss |xc − x| on predicted outputs. Hence,
wherever noise invariance bounds are defined over probabilistic measures on input noise, empirical measures of
|xc − x| can be inspected to compress inputs up to allowable limits on code lengths dc without distorting predictions
M(xc ). The latter motivates our proposal, and we summarise our contributions below:
1. We introduce the notion of rate-efficient classifiers to
PAC-Bayesian theory, and derive relevant expressions
of noise-invariance to define such classifiers.

1
Meme Research Ltd., London, UK 2 Dept. of Electronic and
Electrical Eng., University College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: A. Abbas <alhabib.abbas.13@ucl.ac.uk>, Y. Andreopoulos <i.andreopoulos@ucl.ac.uk>.

2. We derive unsupervised general bounds on noiseinvariance, and specialize them to binary majority vote
classifiers comprising linear kernels.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

3. We combine noise-invariance bounds with measures
of reconstruction loss to realize rate-efficient machines
that bound errors resulting from lossy compression.

