Large Batch Experience Replay

Thibault Lahire 1 Matthieu Geist 2 Emmanuel Rachelson 1

Abstract
Several algorithms have been proposed to sample non-uniformly the replay buffer of deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents to speed-up learning, but very few theoretical foundations of these
sampling schemes have been provided. Among
others, Prioritized Experience Replay appears as
a hyperparameter sensitive heuristic, even though
it can provide good performance. In this work,
we cast the replay buffer sampling problem as
an importance sampling one for estimating the
gradient. This allows deriving the theoretically
optimal sampling distribution, yielding the best
theoretical convergence speed. Elaborating on
the knowledge of the ideal sampling scheme, we
exhibit new theoretical foundations of Prioritized
Experience Replay. The optimal sampling distribution being intractable, we make several approximations providing good results in practice and
introduce, among others, LaBER (Large Batch
Experience Replay), an easy-to-code and efficient
method for sampling the replay buffer. LaBER,
which can be combined with Deep Q-Networks,
distributional RL agents or actor-critic methods,
yields improved performance over a diverse range
of Atari games and PyBullet environments, compared to the base agent it is implemented on and
to other prioritization schemes.

1. Introduction
In deep Reinforcement Learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018,
RL), neural network policies and value functions can be
learnt thanks to stochastic gradient descent algorithms (Robbins & Monro, 1951, SGD) sampling an experience replay memory (Lin, 1992). This replay memory, or replay
buffer, stores the transitions encountered along the interaction with the environment. SGD-based algorithms ex1

ISAE-SUPAERO, Université de Toulouse, France 2 Google
Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to: Thibault Lahire
<thibaultlahire.research@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ploit such buffers to learn relevant functions, such as the Qfunction in the case of Deep Q-Networks (Mnih et al., 2015,
DQN), the return distribution for distributional approaches
(Bellemare et al., 2017), or an actor and a critic (Lillicrap
et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018) in the case of continuous
state-action space problems. Most Deep RL algorithms boil
down to a sequence of SGD-based, supervised learning problems. Ideally, one would like to minimize the corresponding
loss functions with as few gradient steps as possible.
Prioritized Experience Replay (Schaul et al., 2016, PER)
has been introduced for the DQN algorithm as a heuristic accelerating the learning process, drawing inspiration
from Prioritized Sweeping (Moore & Atkeson, 1993). Each
transition in the replay buffer is assigned a priority that is
proportional to the temporal difference (TD) error, and gradients are estimated by sampling according to these priorities.
Later, PER was combined with other DQN improvements,
including distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2017; Hessel et al., 2018), as well as applied to actor-critic methods
(Wang & Ross, 2019). However the reason why prioritizing
on TD errors can provide better performance remains theoretically unexplained. For distributional value functions,
using the loss value as a priority, as suggested by Hessel
et al. (2018), also lacks foundations. Lastly, in actor-critic
methods, when two critics are used (Fujimoto et al., 2018;
Haarnoja et al., 2018), two TD errors are available and the
appropriate way to draw mini-batches has, again, not been
established clearly. In this work, we provide theoretical
foundations for the concept of prioritization used in RL, and
derive the associated algorithms, shedding light on existing
approaches on the way.
SGD relies on the fact that the loss minimized when learning a neural network is an integral quantity over a certain
distribution. Hence, the gradient of this loss is also such
an integral, which can be approximated via Monte Carlo
estimation with a finite number of samples. The variance
of this Monte Carlo estimate can be reduced using importance sampling (Rubinstein & Kroese, 2016), yielding better
convergence speed. Consequently, non-uniform sampling
of mini-batches for gradient estimation can be cast as an
importance sampling problem over the replay buffer, such as
in the work of Needell et al. (2014). The Supervised Learning literature provides links between sampling, variance of
the stochastic gradient estimate, and convergence speed of

