P LATINUM: Semi-Supervised Model Agnostic Meta-Learning using
Submodular Mutual Information
Changbin Li * 1 Suraj Kothawade * 1 Feng Chen 1 Rishabh Iyer 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have proven to be successful in a variety of domains. However, they require large
amounts of data, which might not be available for all desired
tasks. In such low data regimes, they struggle to perform
well. A well known approach to mitigate this problem is
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Texas at Dallas. Correspondence to: Suraj Kothawade <suraj.kothawade@utdallas.edu>,
Changbin Li <changbin.li@utdallas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Query Set

Unlabeled Set

Meta-Test

Meta-Training

Support Set

Few-shot classification (FSC) requires training
models using a few (typically one to five) data
points per class. Meta-learning has proven to
be able to learn a parametrized model for FSC
by training on various other classification tasks.
In this work, we propose P LATINUM (semisuPervised modeL Agnostic meTa learnIng
usiNg sUbmodular Mutual information ), a novel
semi-supervised model agnostic meta learning
framework that uses the submodular mutual information (SMI) functions to boost the performance of FSC. P LATINUM leverages unlabeled
data in the inner and outer loop using SMI functions during meta-training and obtains richer metalearned parameterizations. We study the performance of P LATINUM in two scenarios - 1)
where the unlabeled data points belong to the
same set of classes as the labeled set of a certain episode, and 2) where there exist out-ofdistribution classes that do not belong to the labeled set. We evaluate our method on various
settings on the miniImageNet, tieredImageNet
and CIFAR-FS datasets. Our experiments show
that P LATINUM outperforms MAML and semisupervised approaches like pseduo-labeling for
semi-supervised FSC, especially for small ratio
of labeled to unlabeled samples.

Labeled

In- distribution
Unlabeled

Out-of-distribution
Unlabeled

Figure 1: Semi-supervised few-shot learning setup. During metatraining, the goal is to iterate overs tasks T1 · · · TN and meta-learn
a parametrization using the support set S, query set Q, and the
unlabeled set U. During meta-testing, the learned parametrization
is used as an initialization and a model is trained using the S and
U to perform well on Q. In any task, U may contain data points
that are out-of-distribution, i.e.not pertinent to the classes of data
points in S.

meta-learning, which aims to learn from multiple smaller
tasks that are related to the target task. The most promising
meta-learning techniques that improve the performance of
DNNs are gradient based meta-learning methods (Finn et al.,
2017; Rusu et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2019). Typically, these
methods are designed to operate for few-shot learning. A
natural way to improve the performance of meta-learning is
by using additional unlabeled data. Semi-supervised techniques are known to use unlabeled data to improve the performance on tasks with relatively small number of labeled
data (Oliver et al., 2018; Chapelle et al., 2009).
In this paper, we focus on few-shot classification using
Model Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) and improve it via
semi-supervised learning (see Fig. 1). In many realistic classification tasks, although the labeled data is scarce, there is
plenty of unlabeled data available for training a classifier. Towards this goal, we propose P LATINUM, a novel framework
that embeds semi-supervision in the MAML framework by
using submodular mutual information (SMI) (Iyer et al.,
2021) functions as per-class acquisition functions. We observe that embedding semi-supervision in the MAML framework is non-trivial, since simply using a pseudo-labeling approach in the inner loop does not improve the performance.
This lack of improvement occurs due to either noisy pseudolabels or class imbalance caused due to pseudo-labels being

