Locally Sparse Neural Networks for Tabular Biomedical Data

Junchen Yang * 1 Ofir Lindenbaum * 2 Yuval Kluger 1 3 4

Abstract
Tabular datasets with low-sample-size or many
variables are prevalent in biomedicine. Practitioners in this domain prefer linear or tree-based
models over neural networks since the latter are
harder to interpret and tend to overfit when applied to tabular datasets. To address these neural
networks’ shortcomings, we propose an intrinsically interpretable network for heterogeneous
biomedical data. We design a locally sparse neural network where the local sparsity is learned
to identify the subset of most relevant features
for each sample. This sample-specific sparsity is
predicted via a gating network, which is trained
in tandem with the prediction network. By forcing the model to select a subset of the most informative features for each sample, we reduce
model overfitting in low-sample-size data and obtain an interpretable model. We demonstrate that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art models
when applied to synthetic or real-world biomedical datasets using extensive experiments. Furthermore, the proposed framework dramatically
outperforms existing schemes when evaluating its
interpretability capabilities. Finally, we demonstrate the applicability of our model to two important biomedical tasks: survival analysis and
marker gene identification.

1. Introduction
Machine learning has revolutionized the way we do scientific research. In recent years, deep neural networks (NN)
have closed the performance gap between humans and ma*

Equal contribution 1 Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, USA 2 Faculty of Engineering, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan,
Israel 3 Applied Math Program, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA 4 Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. Correspondence to: Yuval Kluger
<yuval.kluger@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

chines in disciplines such as vision, image processing, audio
processing, and natural language processing. The tremendous success of these complex models may be explained
by an increase in data size, computational resources that
enable training deeper networks (Tishby & Zaslavsky, 2015;
Arora et al., 2016), or by implicit properties of the optimization tools (Yaguchi et al., 2018; Soudry et al., 2018).
State-of-the-art frameworks, such as convolutional neural
networks, recurrent neural networks, and transformers exploit structures or invariants in the data to inform the design
of the NN. Unfortunately, these models are not suitable for
biomedical applications when the associated datasets are
tabular, lack spatial or temporal structure, or are heterogeneous. Therefore, biomedical data pose a challenge for deep
nets and require deviating from tried and true methodologies
(Borisov et al., 2021; Marais, 2019; Shavitt & Segal, 2018;
Shwartz-Ziv & Armon, 2021).
In medicine or biology, practitioners seek for ML models
that are accurate and interpretable. Accuracy is important
for improving personalized prognosis and diagnosis. At
the same time, interpretability can lead to the identification of driving factors in complex high-dimensional systems and is imperative to help practitioners trust the model.
When trained on tabular biomedical data, deep nets are
hard to interpret and may lead to low accuracy. This is because biomedical datasets are often low-sample-size (LSS)
(Liu et al., 2017; Aoshima et al., 2018), high dimensional,
or contain nuisance features. These challenges often lead
practitioners to abandon NNs and switch to linear models
in biomedicine. Linear feature selection models such as
(Tibshirani, 1996; Fan & Li, 2001; Lindenbaum & Steinerberger, 2021a;b) are interpretable and able to cope with
high-dimensional low sample size (HDLSS) data but come
with the cost of limited expressivity.
In contrast, deep over-parametrized nets are highly expressive but tend to overfit on LSS tabular data; one reason is
that in this regime, the vast amount of parameters leads to
a large variance of the gradient estimates (Liu et al., 2017).
To prevent model overfitting, several authors (Li et al., 2016;
Scardapane et al., 2017; Feng & Simon, 2017; Yamada
et al., 2020) have proposed to apply different regularization schemes to sparsify the input features. Since these
models select one global set of informative features, they
are not suited for the heterogeneity of tabular biomedical

