Neural Network Pruning Denoises the Features and Makes Local Connectivity
Emerge in Visual Tasks

Franco Pellegrini 1 Giulio Biroli 1

Abstract
Pruning methods can considerably reduce the size
of artificial neural networks without harming their
performance and in some cases they can even uncover sub-networks that, when trained in isolation,
match or surpass the test accuracy of their dense
counterparts. Here, we characterize the inductive
bias that pruning imprints in such “winning lottery tickets”: focusing on visual tasks, we analyze
the architecture resulting from iterative magnitude pruning of a simple fully connected network.
We show that the surviving node connectivity is
local in input space, and organized in patterns
reminiscent of the ones found in convolutional
networks. We investigate the role played by data
and tasks in shaping the architecture of the pruned
sub-network. We find that pruning performances,
and the ability to sift out the noise and make local features emerge improve by increasing the
size of the training set, and the semantic value of
the data. We also study different pruning procedures, and find that iterative magnitude pruning
is particularly effective in distilling meaningful
connectivity out of features present in the original
task. Our results suggest the possibility to automatically discover new and efficient architectural
inductive biases in other datasets and tasks.

1. Introduction
In the last decade deep and over-parametrized neural
networks achieved breakthroughs in a variety of contexts (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Vaswani
et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020; Silver et al., 2017). To keep
pushing the boundaries of their capacity, these networks
1
Laboratoire de Physique de l’École normale supérieure, ENS,
Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris
— F-75005 Paris, France. Correspondence to: Franco Pellegrini
<franco.pellegrini@phys.ens.fr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

have grown in size to over billions of parameters (Tan & Le,
2020). Network pruning approaches have recently received
renewed attention as effective procedures to counterbalance
this growth by reducing networks size without harming their
performance. Several pruning methods have been introduced (Hoefler et al., 2021): they are mostly based on the
idea of cutting weights from a trained, or partially trained,
network in order to obtain a sparse sub-network with similar
accuracy to the original one. For applications, pruning is
very efficient in improving storage and computational cost;
on the theoretical side, it led to the discovery that within
a randomly-initialized network one can find sub-networks,
winning lottery tickets, that even when trained in isolation
can match the test accuracy of the original network (Frankle
& Carbin, 2019).
Advanced network architectures, with geometries suited to
specific tasks, resulting in faster training and overall better generalizing properties, can also be seen from a similar perspective. For instance, Convolutional Neural Networks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; LeCun et al.,
1989; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Szegedy et al., 2015)
(CNN), which are very efficient for visual tasks, can be
embedded in the Fully Connected Network (FCN) class.
CNNs can therefore be interpreted as sparse FCNs trained
from very specific initial conditions well adapted to the
task (d’Ascoli et al., 2019). Also in this case the size is
drastically reduced (with respect to the FCN counterpart).
The difference with pruning is that the main characteristics
of CNNs—local connectivity and weight sharing—do not
come from an automatic procedure but are “hand-designed”
features introduced starting from analogies with the visual
cortex (Hubel & Wiesel, 1962; Fukushima, 1980), studies
of the invariant properties of natural images (Ruderman,
1994), and engineering improvements (LeCun et al., 1989).
Pruning instead proceeds in an agnostic way in order to
find smaller and efficient architectures; it takes advantage
of properties which are imprinted in the network through
training and which result from the interplay of data, task
and optimization algorithm. Pruning induces an inductive
bias customized to the learning task at hand, which leads
to a network with better training and generalization properties compared to one of similar size trained from scratch.
Surprisingly, it has been shown that the same winning lot-

