Fair and Fast k-Center Clustering for Data Summarization

Haris Angelidakis * 1 Adam Kurpisz * 2 Leon Sering * 2 Rico Zenklusen * 2

Abstract
We consider two key issues faced by many clustering methods when used for data summarization,
namely (a) an unfair representation of “demographic groups” and (b) distorted summarizations,
where data points in the summary represent subsets of the original data of vastly different sizes.
Previous work made important steps towards handling separately each of these two issues in the
context of the fundamental k-Center clustering
objective through the study of fast algorithms for
natural models that address them.
We show that it is possible to effectively address
both (a) and (b) simultaneously by presenting a
clustering procedure that works for a canonical
combined model and
(i) is fast, both in theory and practice,
(ii) exhibits a worst-case constant-factor guarantee, and
(iii) gives promising computational results showing that there can be significant benefits in
addressing both issues together instead of
sequentially.

1. Introduction
The size of the digital universe in 2020 was estimated to
be dozens of zettabytes of data, the vast majority of which
were generated within the last few years (see Statista and
Forbes estimates (Holst, 2021; Marr, 2018) for additional
information). Moreover, the International Data Corporation
(IDC) (2019) report predicts that by the end of 2025 nearly
80 zettabytes will be generated every year by IoT devices,
with an average of more than 4 devices per human being.
This massive amount of data generated goes hand in hand
with the need for algorithmic techniques to process and analyze them. One particularly useful application of machine
*

Equal contribution 1 CoW Protocol 2 Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Adam
Kurpisz <adam.kurpisz@ifor.math.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

learning algorithms for analyzing massive data sets is data
summarization. Given a large data set, the goal of data
summarization is to extract a small subset of samples that
represents well the whole data set. Performing further analysis on a smaller data set is much easier and in that sense
data summarization algorithms act as an interface between
the digital universe and human users, e.g., in search engines.
A crucial challenge faced when representing a large data
set by a smaller subset is the proper handling of fairness
considerations. We focus on two central aspects of obtaining
a fair representation of the underlying data, namely
(a) that sensitive attributes are properly reflected in the
summary (think about a fair representation of races or
other demographics in the summary), and
(b) different data points in the summary should not represent subsets of the original data of vastly different
sizes, thus leading to a distorted summary.
There are numerous applications where both aspects are
relevant, including fair voting system design (Celis, Huang,
and Vishnoi, 2018) and single-cell RNA sequencing (Do,
Elbassioni, and Canzar, 2020).
Regarding (a), it has been repeatedly observed that even
though data summarization procedures are generally not
biased by design, the fact that many of them are oblivious to
sensitive attributes can quickly lead to a strong bias by coincidence. Significant measures have been taken to counteract
the bias in society, e.g., the concept of disparate impact introduced in 1971 in the U.S. Supreme Court: Griggs v. Duke
Power Co. (see for example (Feldman, Friedler, Moeller,
Scheidegger, and Venkatasubramanian, 2015)). Nevertheless, the rapidly developing field of learning algorithms still
faces many challenges in this regard. As an example, it
was observed that in 2019, 85% of supermarket cashier job
advertisements on Facebook were targeted to women, while
taxi driver positions were proposed to black men to an extent of 74% (Ali, Sapiezynski, Bogen, Korolova, Mislove,
and Rieke, 2019). More emphatic examples include bias in
the crime-related search results when keywords more likely
associated with black people are used (Sweeney, 2013). Various examples showing bias using gender, age, and race have
been studied (see, e.g., (Tambe, Cappelli, and Yakubovich,
2019)). Finally, news feed personalization often amplifies
existing beliefs of users due to a severe underrepresentation

