Stochastic Reweighted Gradient Descent

Ayoub El Hanchi 1 David A. Stephens 2 Chris J. Maddison 1

Abstract
Importance sampling is a promising strategy for
improving the convergence rate of stochastic gradient methods. It is typically used to precondition the optimization problem, but it can also be
used to reduce the variance of the gradient estimator. Unfortunately, this latter point of view
has yet to lead to practical methods that provably
improve the asymptotic error of stochastic gradient methods. In this work, we propose stochastic
reweighted gradient descent (SRG), a stochastic
gradient method based solely on importance sampling that can reduce the variance of the gradient estimator and improve on the asymptotic error of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in the
strongly convex and smooth case. We show that
SRG can be extended to combine the benefits of
both importance-sampling-based preconditioning
and variance reduction. When compared to SGD,
the resulting algorithm can simultaneously reduce
the condition number and the asymptotic error,
both by up to a factor equal to the number of
component functions. We demonstrate improved
convergence in practice on regularized logistic
regression problems.

1. Introduction
Unconstrained optimization of finite-sum objectives is a
core algorithmic problem in machine learning. The prototypical way of solving such problems is by viewing them
through the lens of stochastic optimization, where the source
of stochasticity resides in the choice of the index in the
sum. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro,
1951) remains the standard algorithm for this class of problems.
A natural way to improve on SGD is by considering importance sampling schemes. This idea is not new and dates
1
University of Toronto and Vector Institute 2 McGill University.
Correspondence to: Ayoub El Hanchi <aelhan@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

back to (Needell et al., 2014) who uses importance sampling
as a preconditioning technique. They propose sampling the
indices with probabilities proportional to the smoothness
constants of the corresponding component functions, and
show that this sampling scheme provably reduces the condition number of the problem.
In another line of work, variance-reduced methods were
found to achieve linear convergence in the strongly convex
and smooth case (Roux et al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2017).
Many of these methods rely on control variates to reduce the
variance of the gradient estimator used by SGD (Johnson &
Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al., 2014). While very successful,
the applicability of these methods is limited by the large
memory overhead that they introduce, or the periodic fullgradient recomputation that they require (Defazio & Bottou,
2019). Despite strong progress in this research area, an
importance-sampling-based analogue to these algorithms,
which is potentially free from these drawbacks, has yet to
emerge.
In this work, we propose such an analogue. We introduce stochastic reweighted gradient (SRG), an importancesampling-based stochastic optimization algorithm that reduces the variance of the gradient estimator. Similar to SGD,
SRG requires a single gradient oracle call per iteration, and
only requires O(n) additional memory, and O(log n) additional floating point operations per iteration. We analyze the
convergence rate of SRG in the strongly-convex and smooth
case, and show that it can provably improve the asymptotic error of SGD. Finally, we show how our importance
sampling strategy can be combined with smoothness-based
importance sampling, and prove that the resulting algorithm
simultaneously performs variance reduction and preconditioning. We demonstrate improved convergence in practice
on `2 -regularized logistic regression problems.

2. Preliminaries
We consider the finite-sum optimization problem:
(
)
n
1X
min F (x) :=
fi (x)
n i=1
x∈Rd

(1)

where F is µ-strongly convex for µ > 0, and for all i ∈
[n], fi is convex and Li -smooth for Li > 0. Note that

