Mirror Learning: A Unifying Framework of Policy Optimisation

Jakub Grudzien Kuba 1 Christian Schroeder de Witt 1 Jakob Foerster 1

Abstract
Modern deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are motivated by either the generalised policy iteration (GPI) or trust-region learning (TRL) frameworks. However, algorithms
that strictly respect these theoretical frameworks
have proven unscalable. Surprisingly, the only
known scalable algorithms violate the GPI/TRL
assumptions, e.g. due to required regularisation or other heuristics. The current explanation of their empirical success is essentially “by
analogy”: they are deemed approximate adaptations of theoretically sound methods. Unfortunately, studies have shown that in practice these
algorithms differ greatly from their conceptual
ancestors. In contrast, in this paper we introduce a novel theoretical framework, named Mirror Learning, which provides theoretical guarantees to a large class of algorithms, including
TRPO and PPO. While the latter two exploit the
flexibility of our framework, GPI and TRL fit in
merely as pathologically restrictive corner cases
thereof. This suggests that the empirical performance of state-of-the-art methods is a direct consequence of their theoretical properties, rather
than of aforementioned approximate analogies.
Mirror learning sets us free to boldly explore
novel, theoretically sound RL algorithms, a thus
far uncharted wonderland.

1. Introduction
The generalised policy iteration (Sutton & Barto, 2018,
GPI) and trust-region learning (Schulman et al., 2015,
TRL) frameworks lay the foundations for the design of
the most commonly used reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. At each GPI iteration, an RL agent first evaluates its policy by computing a scalar value function, and
then updates its policy so as to maximise the value function
1
University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Jakub Grudzien
Kuba <jakub.grudzien@new.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

at every environment state. This procedure serves well for
Markov Decision Problems (Bellman, 1957, MDPs) with
small state spaces, as it is guaranteed to produce a new policy whose value at every state improves monotonically over
the old one. However, the sizes of state spaces that many
practical problem settings constitute are intractable to exact implementations of GPI. Instead, large scale settings
employ function approximation and sample based learning.
Unfortunately, such an adoption of GPI has proven unstable (Mnih et al., 2015), which has necessitated a number of
adjustments, such as replay buffers, target networks, etc., to
stabilise learning (Van Hasselt et al., 2016). In their days,
these heuristics have been empirically sucessful but were
not backed up by any theory and required extensive hyperparameter tuning (Mnih et al., 2016).

Figure 1. Known RL frameworks and algorithms as points in the
infinite space of theoretically sound mirror learning algorithms.

Instead, TRL improves the robustness of deep RL methods by optimising a surrogate objective, which restricts the
policy update size at each learning iteration while preserving monotonic improvement guarantees (Schulman et al.,
2015). To this end it introduces a notion of distance between policies, e.g. through evaluating the maximal KLdivergence. Unfortunately, these types of measures do not
scale to large MDPs that TRL was meant to tackle in the
first place (since small problems can be solved by GPI).
Nevertheless, TRL’s theoretical promises and intuitive accessibility inspired a number of algorithms based on heuristic approximations thereof. This paradigm shift led to substantial empirical success: First, in Trust-Region Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2015, TRPO), a hard constraint
mechanism on the policy update size was introduced. Second, Proximal Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2017,
PPO) replaced the hard constraint with the clipping objec-

