Constrained Gradient Descent:
A Powerful and Principled Evasion Attack Against Neural Networks

Weiran Lin 1 2 Keane Lucas 1 2 Lujo Bauer 1 2 3 Michael K. Reiter 4 Mahmood Sharif 5

Abstract
We propose new, more efficient targeted whitebox attacks against deep neural networks. Our
attacks better align with the attacker’s goal: (1)
tricking a model to assign higher probability to
the target class than to any other class, while (2)
staying within an -distance of the attacked input. First, we demonstrate a loss function that
explicitly encodes (1) and show that Auto-PGD
finds more attacks with it. Second, we propose
a new attack method, Constrained Gradient Descent (CGD), using a refinement of our loss function that captures both (1) and (2). CGD seeks to
satisfy both attacker objectives—misclassification
and bounded `p -norm—in a principled manner, as
part of the optimization, instead of via ad hoc postprocessing techniques (e.g., projection or clipping). We show that CGD is more successful on
CIFAR10 (0.9–4.2%) and ImageNet (8.6–13.6%)
than state-of-the-art attacks while consuming less
time (11.4–18.8%). Statistical tests confirm that
our attack outperforms others against leading defenses on different datasets and values of .

1. Introduction
With the prevalence of machine learning (ML), adversarial ML techniques that slightly manipulate the inputs of
an ML model to influence its functionality have also been
1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, US 2 Cylab, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, US 3 Institute for Software Research,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, US 4 Departments
of Computer Science and Electrical & Computer Engineering,
Duke University, Durham, NC, US 5 School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence
to: Weiran Lin <weiranl@andrew.cmu.edu>, Keane Lucas
<kjlucas@andrew.cmu.edu>, Lujo Bauer <lbauer@cmu.edu>,
Michael K. Reiter <michael.reiter@duke.edu>, Mahmood Sharif
<mahmoods@cs.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

developed (Croce & Hein, 2020b). One type of attack on
classification models is the evasion attack, which applies a
small perturbation, within a distance limit, to a classifier’s
input to induce misclassification during inference. The `∞
distance is commonly used for specifying distance limits
via  boundaries, which define the maximum change acceptable in each element of the input. In previous work it
is also common for attackers to have access to all weights
of the model, known as the white-box scenario, and the attackers aim to force a specific misclassification, performing
targeted attacks. Previous work proposes an attack method
that iteratively perturbs an input in the direction of the gradients of a loss function, which is not necessarily the same
loss function used by the model, and automatically truncates
the attack in each iteration to stay within the distance limits. Researchers have shown that such attacks are effective
against state-of-the-art neural networks (Moosavi-Dezfooli
et al., 2016; Szegedy et al., 2014).
Croce et al. show that well-tuned parameters and carefully
designed loss functions can boost the performance of attacks (Croce & Hein, 2020b). For example, varying the loss
function of Auto Projected Gradient Descent (Auto-PGD),
a state-of-the-art attack, between the cross-entropy, Carlini
and Wagner (CW), and Difference of Logits Ratio (DLR)
losses has a substantial impact on the attack’s performance.
Guided by this observation, we define a new loss function,
the Minimal Difference loss (MD loss), that better aligns
with the goal of a targeted attack: MD loss aims to (mis)lead
the model to assign higher confidence to the target class than
to any other class, even if by just a tiny amount. We empirically show that Auto-PGD with the MD loss finds on
average 0.5–12.3% more adversarial examples, depending
on the dataset and model, than Auto-PGD with other loss
functions.
Although MD loss substantially improves Auto-PGD’s performance, we still notice limitations that hinder the attack’s
effectiveness. In particular, like other attacks in the PGD
family, Auto-PGD uses projection at the end of each iteration to satisfy the norm constraints, eliminating changes
that fall outside a predefined `p ball. However, projecting
adversarial examples back into the `p ball may work against
the attacker’s misclassification objective, thus harming the

