Time Is MattEr: Temporal Self-supervision for Video Transformers

Sukmin Yun 1 Jaehyung Kim 1 Dongyoon Han 2 Hwanjun Song 2 Jung-Woo Ha 2 Jinwoo Shin 1 3

Abstract
Understanding temporal dynamics of video is an
essential aspect of learning better video representations. Recently, transformer-based architectural
designs have been extensively explored for video
tasks due to their capability to capture long-term
dependency of input sequences. However, we
found that these Video Transformers are still biased to learn spatial dynamics rather than temporal ones, and debiasing the spurious correlation
is critical for their performance. Based on the
observations, we design simple yet effective selfsupervised tasks for video models to learn temporal dynamics better. Specifically, for debiasing the
spatial bias, our method learns the temporal order of video frames as extra self-supervision and
enforces the randomly shuffled frames to have
low-confidence outputs. Also, our method learns
the temporal flow direction of video tokens among
consecutive frames for enhancing the correlation
toward temporal dynamics. Under various video
action recognition tasks, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and its compatibility
with state-of-the-art Video Transformers.

1. Introduction
Understanding videos for action or event recognition is a
challenging yet crucial task that has gotten significant attention in computer vision communities (Lin et al., 2019;
Cheng et al., 2021). Compared to image data, temporal
dynamics between video frames provide additional information that is essential for recognition, as the actions and
events generally occur over multiple consecutive frames.
Hence, designing video-specific architectures for capturing
such temporal dynamics has been a common theme in learning better video representations (Simonyan & Zisserman,
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea 2 NAVER AI Lab, South Korea 3 Graduate School of AI,
KAIST, South Korea. Correspondence to: Sukmin Yun <sukmin.yun@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2014; Tran et al., 2015; 2018; Feichtenhofer et al., 2019).
Recently, Transformer-based (Vaswani et al., 2017) video
models, so-called Video Transformers, have been extensively explored due to their capability to capture long-term
dependency among the input sequence; for example, Bertasius et al. (2021) and Patrick et al. (2021) introduce divided
space-time and trajectory attentions, respectively.
However, it is still questionable whether these architectural
advances are enough to fully capture the temporal dynamics
in a video. For example, Fan et al. (2021) shows that a
well-designed image classifier with a flattened video along
time dimension could outperform the several state-of-the-art
video models on the representative action recognition tasks.
As additional clues, we observed that Video Transformers
often predict a video action correctly with high confidence
even when input video frames are randomly shuffled, i.e.,
the shuffled video does not contain correct temporal dynamics (see Figure 1(a) and 1(c)). Furthermore, as shown in
Figure 1(b), Video Transformers also fail to capture the temporal order of video frames as their layers go deeper. These
observations reveal that the recent Video Transformers are
likely to be biased to learn spatial dynamics, despite their
efforts of designing a better architecture for learning the
temporal one. Hence, this limitation inspires us to investigate an independent and complementary direction other
than architectural advance, to improve the quality of learned
video representations via better temporal modeling.
Contribution. In this paper, we design simple yet effective frame- and token-level self-supervised tasks, coined
TIME (Time Is MattEr), for video models which learn temporal dynamics better. First, we train the models to learn
two frame-level tasks for debiasing the spurious correlation
learned from spatial dynamics. Specifically, (a) we keep the
temporal information within the video frame-by-frame by
assigning the correct frame order as a self-supervised label
to predict the temporal order of video frames (to avoid losing
the temporal information), and (b) we simultaneously train
the video models to be not able to output high-confident
predictions when the input video does not contain the correct temporal order, i.e., randomly shuffled video frames.
Moreover, we train the models with a token-level task for
enhancing the correlation toward temporal dynamics by predicting the temporal flow direction of video tokens among
consecutive frames. To be specific, we adapt an attention-

