Informed Learning by Wide Neural Networks:
Convergence, Generalization and Sampling Complexity

Jianyi Yang 1 Shaolei Ren 1

Abstract
By integrating domain knowledge with labeled
samples, informed machine learning has been
emerging to improve the learning performance
for a wide range of applications. Nonetheless, rigorous understanding of the role of injected domain
knowledge has been under-explored. In this paper, we consider an informed deep neural network
(DNN) with over-parameterization and domain
knowledge integrated into its training objective
function, and study how and why domain knowledge benefits the performance. Concretely, we
quantitatively demonstrate the two benefits of domain knowledge in informed learning — regularizing the label-based supervision and supplementing the labeled samples — and reveal the
trade-off between label and knowledge imperfectness in the bound of the population risk. Based on
the theoretical analysis, we propose a generalized
informed training objective to better exploit the
benefits of knowledge and balance the label and
knowledge imperfectness, which is validated by
the population risk bound. Our analysis on sampling complexity sheds lights on how to choose
the hyper-parameters for informed learning, and
further justifies the advantages of knowledge informed learning.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of deep neural networks (DNNs),
or more generally machine learning, largely relies on the
proliferation of data samples with ground-truth labels for
supervised learning. Nonetheless, labeled data of high quality can often be very limited and/or extremely expensive
to collect in real application domains, including medical
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, United States. Correspondence to: Shaolei Ren <sren@ece.ucr.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

sciences, security-related fields, and specialized engineering
areas (von Rueden et al., 2021).
In parallel with the data-driven learning paradigm, domain
knowledge (which we simply refer to as knowledge) has
been utilized to assist with decision making and system designs, with a long history of success. As its name would
suggest, domain knowledge is naturally domain-specific and
can come from various sources in multiple forms, such as
subjective experiences (e.g., medical prognosis), external
sources, and scientific laws. For example, partial differential equations are used to govern many flow dynamics in
physics, and the Shannon channel capacity is the fundamental principle to guide the design of modern communications
systems (Goldsmith, 2005; Willard et al., 2020).
Importantly, domain knowledge has already been, sometimes implicitly, integrated into every stage of the machine
learning pipeline, including training data augmentation, hypothesis set selection, model training and hypothesis finalization (more details in Appendix E). For example, differential equations and logic rules from physical sciences and/or
common knowledge provide additional constraints or new
functional regularization terms for model training (Battaglia
et al., 2016; Borghesi et al., 2020; Silvestri et al., 2021;
Muralidhar et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018).
Despite the numerous successful examples (von Rueden
et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2020), there still lacks a rigorous
understanding of the role of domain knowledge in informed
learning. In this paper, we focus on informed DNNs —
DNNs with domain knowledge explicitly integrated into the
training risk/loss function. Concretely, we consider an overparameterized DNN with a sufficiently large network width
(Neyshabur et al., 2018), and study how domain knowledge affects the DNN from three complementary aspects:
convergence, generalization, and sampling complexity.
Convergence (Theorem 4.1): We show the convergence
of training an informed risk function under milder technical assumptions than the prior works (Section 4.1). More
specifically, we show that for inputs within a smooth set
(Definition 1), the network outputs converge to the optimal
solution jointly determined by all the samples in the set.
Generalization (Theorems 4.2 and 5.1): We show in Theo-

