From data to functa: Your data point is a function
and you can treat it like one

Emilien Dupont * 1 Hyunjik Kim * 2 S. M. Ali Eslami 2 Danilo Rezende 2 Dan Rosenbaum 3 2

Abstract
It is common practice in deep learning to represent a measurement of the world on a discrete grid,
e.g. a 2D grid of pixels. However, the underlying
signal represented by these measurements is often
continuous, e.g. the scene depicted in an image.
A powerful continuous alternative is then to represent these measurements using an implicit neural
representation, a neural function trained to output
the appropriate measurement value for any input
spatial location. In this paper, we take this idea to
its next level: what would it take to perform deep
learning on these functions instead, treating them
as data? In this context we refer to the data as
functa, and propose a framework for deep learning on functa. This view presents a number of
challenges around efficient conversion from data
to functa, compact representation of functa, and
effectively solving downstream tasks on functa.
We outline a recipe to overcome these challenges
and apply it to a wide range of data modalities including images, 3D shapes, neural radiance fields
(NeRF) and data on manifolds. We demonstrate
that this approach has various compelling properties across data modalities, in particular on the
canonical tasks of generative modeling, data imputation, novel view synthesis and classification.

1. Introduction
In deep learning, data is traditionally represented by arrays. For example, images are represented by their pixel
intensities, and 3D shapes by voxel occupancies, both at a
discrete set of grid coordinates tied to a particular resolution. However, the underlying signal represented by these
*
Equal contribution: author order determined by coin flip.
University of Oxford 2 DeepMind 3 University of Haifa.
Correspondence to: Emilien Dupont <dupont@stats.ox.ac.uk>,
Hyunjik Kim <hyunjikk@google.com>.

1

th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Generative modeling

Inference

Classification

Figure 1. We convert array data into functional data parameterized
by neural networks, termed functa, and treat these as data points
for various downstream machine learning tasks.

arrays is often continuous. It is therefore natural to consider
representing such data with continuous quantities.
Recently, the idea of modelling data with continuous functions has gained popularity. An image, for example, can
be represented by a continuous function mapping 2D pixel
coordinates to RGB values. When such a function is parameterized by a neural network, it is typically referred to as
an implicit neural representation (INR). INRs are generally
applicable to a wide range of modalities – indeed, various
works have demonstrated that INRs can be used to represent
images (Stanley, 2007; Ha, 2016), 3D shapes (Mescheder
et al., 2019; Chen & Zhang, 2019), signed distance functions (Park et al., 2019), videos (Li et al., 2021), 3D scenes
(Mildenhall et al., 2020), audio (Sitzmann et al., 2020b) and
data on manifolds (Dupont et al., 2021b). This functional
representation offers a number of advantages over array
representations. It allows for dealing with data at arbitrary
resolutions, as well as data that is difficult to discretize such
as neural radiance fields (NeRF) for 3D scene representation (Mildenhall et al., 2020). Parameterizing such functions
as neural networks offers additional advantages, in terms
of memory-efficiency and as a single architecture that can
represent different data modalities.
In light of these advantages, we propose a new framework
that 1. converts array data to functional data parameterized
by neural networks, and 2. performs deep learning tasks
directly on these functions. The first step involves taking

