Bounding the Width of Neural Networks via Coupled Initialization
– A Worst Case Analysis –

Alexander Munteanu 1 Simon Omlor 2 Zhao Song 3 David P. Woodruff 4

Abstract
A common method in training neural networks
is to initialize all the weights to be independent
Gaussian vectors. We observe that by instead
initializing the weights into independent pairs,
where each pair consists of two identical Gaussian vectors, we can significantly improve the
convergence analysis. While a similar technique
has been studied for random inputs [Daniely,
NeurIPS 2020], it has not been analyzed with
arbitrary inputs. Using this technique, we show
how to significantly reduce the number of neurons required for two-layer ReLU networks, both
in the under-parameterized setting with logistic
loss, from roughly γ −8 [Ji and Telgarsky, ICLR
2020] to γ −2 , where γ denotes the separation
margin with a Neural Tangent Kernel, as well as
in the over-parameterized setting with squared
loss, from roughly n4 [Song and Yang, 2019] to
n2 , implicitly also improving the recent running
time bound of [Brand, Peng, Song and Weinstein,
ITCS 2021]. For the under-parameterized setting
we also prove new lower bounds that improve
upon prior work, and that under certain assumptions, are best possible.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved state-of-the-art performance
in many areas, e.g., computer vision (LeCun et al., 1998;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al.,
*

1
Equal contribution
Dortmund Data Science Center,
Faculties of Statistics and Computer Science, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany 2 Faculty of Statistics, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany 3 Adobe
Research 4 Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Alexander Munteanu <alexander.munteanu@tu-dortmund.de>, Simon Omlor <simon.omlor@tu-dortmund.de>, David Woodruff
<dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>, Zhao Song <zsong@adobe.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2016), natural language processing (Collobert et al., 2011;
Devlin et al., 2018), self-driving cars, games (Silver et al.,
2016; 2017), and so on. A beautiful work connected the
convergence of training algorithms for over-parameterized
neural networks to kernel ridge regression, where the kernel
is the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018).
The convergence results motivated by NTK mainly require
two assumptions: (1) the kernel matrix K formed by the input data points has a sufficiently large minimum eigenvalue
λmin (K) ≥ λ > 0, which is implied by the separability of
the input point set (Oymak & Soltanolkotabi, 2020), and (2)
the neural network is over-parameterized. Mathematically,
the latter means that the width of the neural network is a sufficiently large polynomial in the other parameters of the network, such as the number of input points, the data dimension,
etc. The major weakness of such convergence results is that
the neural network has to be sufficiently over-parameterized.
In other words, the over-parameterization is a rather large
polynomial, which is not consistent with architectures for
neural networks used in practice, cf. (Kawaguchi & Huang,
2019).
Suppose m is the width of the neural network, which is the
number of neurons in a hidden layer, and n is the number
of input data points. In an attempt to reduce the number
of neurons for binary classification, a recent work (Ji &
Telgarsky, 2020) has shown that a polylogarithmic dependence on n suffices to achieve arbitrarily small training
error. Their width, however, depends on the separation margin γ in the RKHS (Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space)
induced by the NTK. More specifically they show an upper bound of m = O(γ −8 log n) and a lower bound of
m = Ω(γ −1/2 ) relying on the NTK technique. Our new
analysis in this regime significantly improves the upper
bound to m = O(γ −2 log n).
We complement this result with a series of lower bounds.
Without relying on any assumptions we show m = Ω(γ −1 )
is necessary. Assuming we need to rely on the NTK technique as in (Ji & Telgarsky, 2020), we can improve their
lower bound to m = Ω(γ −1 log n). Finally, assuming we
need to rely on a special but natural choice for estimating
an expectation by its empirical mean in the analysis of Ji
& Telgarsky (2020), which we have adopted in our general

