Deep Hierarchy in Bandits

Joey Hong 1 Branislav Kveton 2 Sumeet Katariya 2 Manzil Zaheer 3 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 4

Abstract
Mean rewards of actions are often correlated. The
form of these correlations may be complex and
unknown a priori, such as the preferences of users
for recommended products and their categories.
To maximize statistical efficiency, it is important
to leverage these correlations when learning. We
formulate a bandit variant of this problem where
the correlations of mean action rewards are represented by a hierarchical Bayesian model with
latent variables. Since the hierarchy can have multiple layers, we call it deep. We propose a hierarchical Thompson sampling algorithm (HierTS)
for this problem and show how to implement it
efficiently for Gaussian hierarchies. The efficient
implementation is possible due to a novel exact
hierarchical representation of the posterior, which
itself is of independent interest. We use this exact
posterior to analyze the Bayes regret of HierTS.
Our regret bounds reflect the structure of the problem, that the regret decreases with more informative priors, and can be recast to highlight reduced
dependence on the number of actions. We confirm these theoretical findings empirically, in both
synthetic and real-world experiments.

1. Introduction
A contextual bandit (Li et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011) is a
sequential decision-making problem where a learning agent
sequentially interacts with an environment over n rounds.
In each round, the agent observes a context, chooses one of
K possible actions, and then receives a reward for the taken
action. The agent aims to maximize its expected cumulative
reward over n rounds. It does not know the mean rewards
of the actions a priori and learns them by taking the actions.
This forces the agent to choose between exploring actions to
learn about them and exploiting the action with the highest
1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Amazon 3 DeepMind
Google Research.
Correspondence to:
Joey Hong
<joey hong@berkeley.edu>.

4

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

estimated reward. As an example, in online shopping, the
context can be a user’s query, the actions are recommended
products, and the reward is the indicator of a purchase (Yue
& Guestrin, 2011; Kveton et al., 2015; Combes et al., 2015;
Zong et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016).
In many practical problems, the action space is large and
cannot be explored naively. However, the mean rewards
of actions are correlated due to some underlying structure.
As a result, exploration of one action can teach the agent
about other actions, depending on how correlated they are,
and this increases statistical efficiency of exploration. As
an example, in online shopping, many products are semantically similar, and their relationships can be captured by
a graphical model: both a keyboard and monitor are computer accessories; and both computer accessories and home
theatre systems are electronic devices. Another example is
classification with a bandit feedback, where the labels are
clustered. For instance, the car and truck are vehicles, while
the monkey and tiger are animals. We experiment with this
kind of problems in Section 6.2.
Unfortunately, the aforementioned structure is not easy to
represent in traditional bandit algorithms (Auer et al., 2002;
Chapelle & Li, 2012; Kawale et al., 2015; Sen et al., 2017).
As an example, Thompson sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933;
Chapelle & Li, 2012; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012; Russo & Van
Roy, 2014) is a natural and elegant strategy for exploration
in bandit problems. However, in structured action spaces,
TS would need to model correlations between all actions
using their joint posterior. This could be computationally
costly in practice, as observing the reward of a single action
may require recomputing the joint posterior of all actions.
Therefore, it is not immediately obvious how to design an
efficient TS algorithm when the mean rewards of actions
are correlated.
In this work, we study a structured bandit problem where
the action space has a hierarchical structure. This structure
is represented using a hierarchical Bayesian model (Lindley
& Smith, 1972; Zhang & Yang, 2017), where each action is
a leaf node in a tree. Each node is associated with a node
parameter, which is drawn i.i.d. from a distribution parameterized by its parent’s parameter. This hierarchical structure
not only models many practical bandit tasks, such as online
shopping, but admits an efficient exploration because the

