Fat–Tailed Variational Inference with Anisotropic Tail Adaptive Flows

Feynman Liang 1 2 Liam Hodgkinson 1 3 Michael W. Mahoney 1 3

Abstract
While fat-tailed densities commonly arise as posterior and marginal distributions in robust models
and scale mixtures, they present challenges when
Gaussian-based variational inference fails to capture tail decay accurately. We first improve previous theory on tails of Lipschitz flows by quantifying how the tails affect the rate of tail decay and
by expanding the theory to non-Lipschitz polynomial flows. We then develop an alternative theory
for multivariate tail parameters which is sensitive
to tail-anisotropy. In doing so, we unveil a fundamental problem which plagues many existing
flow-based methods: they can only model tailisotropic distributions (i.e., distributions having
the same tail parameter in every direction). To mitigate this and enable modeling of tail-anisotropic
targets, we propose anisotropic tail-adaptive flows
(ATAF). Experimental results on both synthetic
and real-world targets confirm that ATAF is competitive with prior work while also exhibiting appropriate tail-anisotropy.

1. Introduction
Flow-based methods (Papamakarios et al., 2021) have
proven to be effective techniques to model complex probability densities. They compete with the state of the art
on density estimation (Huang et al., 2018; Durkan et al.,
2019; Jaini et al., 2020), generative modeling (Chen et al.,
2019; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), and variational inference
(Kingma et al., 2016; Agrawal et al., 2020) tasks. These
methods start with a random variable X having a simple and
tractable distribution µ, and then apply a learnable transport
map fθ to build another random variable Y = fθ (X) with
a more expressive pushforward probability measure (fθ )∗ µ
(Papamakarios et al., 2021). In contrast to the implicit distri1
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 2 Meta, Menlo Park, CA 3 International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA. Correspondence to: Feynman Liang <feynman@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

butions (Huszár, 2017) produced by generative adversarial
networks (GANs), flow-based methods restrict the transport
map fθ to be invertible and to have efficiently-computable
Jacobian determinants. As a result, probability density functions can be tractably computed through direct application
of a change of variables
pY (y) = pX (fθ−1 (y)) det

dfθ−1 (z)
.
dz
z=y

(1)

While recent developments (Chen et al., 2019; Huang et al.,
2018; Durkan et al., 2019) have focused primarily on the
transport map fθ , the base distribution µ has received comparatively less investigation. The most common choice for
the base distribution is standard Gaussian µ = N (0, I).
However, in Theorem 3.2, we show this choice results in
significant restrictions on the expressivity of the model,
limiting its utility for data that exhibits fat-tailed (or heavytailed) structure. Prior work addressing heavy-tailed flows
(Jaini et al., 2020) are limited to tail-isotropic base distributions. In Proposition 3.6, we prove flows built on these base
distributions are unable to model accurately multivariate
anisotropic fat-tailed structure.
Our work here aims to identify and address these deficiencies. To understand the impact of the base distribution µ
in flow-based models, we develop and apply theory for
fat-tailed random variables and their transformations under Lipschitz-continuous functions. Our approach leverages the theory of concentration functions (Ledoux, 2001,
Chapter 1.2) to sharpen significantly and extend prior results (Jaini et al., 2019, Theorem 4) by describing precisely
the tail parameters of the pushforward distribution (fθ )∗ µ
under both Lipschitz-continuous (Theorem 3.2) and polynomial (Corollary 3.4) transport maps. In the multivariate
setting, we develop a theory of direction-dependent tail parameters (Definition 3.5), and we show that tail-isotropic
base distributions yield tail-isotropic pushforward measures
(Proposition 3.6). As a consequence of Proposition 3.6,
prior methods (Jaini et al., 2020) are limited in that they
are unable to capture tail-anisotropy. This motivates the
construction of anisotropic tail adaptive flows (ATAF, Definition 3.7) as a means to alleviate this issue (Remark 3.8)
and to improve modeling of tail-anisotropic distributions.
Our experiments show that ATAF exhibits correct tail behaviour in synthetic target distributions exhibiting fat-tails

