Fourier Learning with Cyclical Data

Yingxiang Yang∗ 1 Zhihan Xiong∗ 2 Tianyi Liu∗ 1 Taiqing Wang 1 Chong Wang 1

1. Introduction
Cyclical data are an important component in a wide range of
machine learning applications. In large-scale recommender
systems such as YouTube and TikTok, users usually log into
the platform during a relatively fixed time window each day
(e.g. before bed or after work), resulting in a strong cyclical pattern in the system’s revenue. In federated learning
*
Equal contribution 1 ByteDance Inc 2 Paul G. Allen School
of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, WA. Correspondence to: Yingxiang Yang, Chong Wang
<{yingxiang.yang, chong.wang}@bytedance.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Normalized Revenue

Many machine learning models for online applications, such as recommender systems, are often
trained on data with cyclical properties. These
data sequentially arrive from a time-varying distribution that is periodic in time. Existing algorithms either use streaming learning to track a
time-varying set of optimal model parameters,
yielding a dynamic regret that scales linearly in
time; or partition the data of each cycle into multiple segments and train a separate model for each—
a pluralistic approach that is computationally and
storage-wise expensive. In this paper, we have
designed a novel approach to overcome the aforementioned shortcomings. Our method, named
“Fourier learning”, encodes the periodicity into
the model representation using a partial Fourier
sequence, and trains the coefficient functions modeled by neural networks. Particularly, we design a
Fourier multi-layer perceptron (F-MLP) that can
be trained on streaming data with stochastic gradient descent (streaming-SGD), and we derive its
convergence guarantees. We demonstrate Fourier
learning’s better performance with extensive experiments on synthetic and public datasets, as
well as on a large-scale recommender system that
is updated in real-time, and trained with tens of
millions of samples per day.

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00

10

20

30

Hour

40

50

Midnight
60
70

100

Midnight
120
140

Popularity

Abstract

20

40

60

Hour

80

Figure 1. Top: Normalized revenue of a recommender system over
3 days. Bottom: Normalized trend of the word “dinner” over 6
days (data collected from https://trends.google.com).

(Kairouz et al., 2019), the training data are cyclical in nature
as the availability of each device is usually fixed throughout
the day (Eichner et al., 2019). In financial markets, asset
prices rise and fall periodically on a yearly basis, a phenomenon commonly known to the investors as “seasonality”
(Gultekin & Gultekin, 1983). In search engines, the number of hits for certain keywords can also display periodic
patterns (Tracà et al., 2021). Figure 1 depicts a few of these
applications. How to exploit the periodicity within the training data to learn a better prediction model is an important
issue for these applications.
Problem setup. Given samples denoted by (x, y, t), with
x ∈ X ⊂ Rd being the feature, y ∈ Y ⊆ R being the label,
and t ∈ R being the time at which the sample is generated,
we wish to maintain a model f that can consistently and
accurately predict y with x at any given t. In this paper, we
focus on the scenario where the model is updated under an
online learning (Hazan, 2019) or continual learning (LopezPaz & Ranzato, 2017) framework, while the data arrive in a
streaming and cyclical fashion. More specifically, between
two consecutive updates of the model at t and t + δ, only
samples arrived within the interval [t, t + δ) is available
for training. In addition, if (x, y) is generated from a timedependent distribution Dt , then there exists a T such that
Dt = Dt−T for all t. Assuming that T is given, and that, for

