Scaling-up Diverse Orthogonal Convolutional Networks
by a Paraunitary Framework

Jiahao Su 1 Wonmin Byeon 2 Furong Huang 1

Abstract
Enforcing orthogonality in convolutional neural networks is a remedy for gradient vanishing/exploding problems and sensitivity to perturbation. Many previous approaches for orthogonal convolutions enforce orthogonality on its
flattened kernel, which, however, do not lead to
the orthogonality of the operation. Some recent
approaches consider orthogonality for standard
convolutional layers and propose specific classes
of their realizations. In this work, we propose a
theoretical framework that establishes the equivalence between diverse orthogonal convolutional
layers in the spatial domain and the paraunitary
systems in the spectral domain. Since 1D paraunitary systems admit a complete factorization, we
can parameterize any separable orthogonal convolution as a composition of spatial filters. As
a result, our framework endows high expressive
power to various convolutional layers while maintaining their exact orthogonality. Furthermore,
our layers are memory and computationally efficient for deep networks compared to previous
designs. Our versatile framework, for the first
time, enables the study of architectural designs
for deep orthogonal networks, such as choices
of skip connection, initialization, stride, and dilation. Consequently, we scale up orthogonal networks to deep architectures, including ResNet
and ShuffleNet, substantially outperforming their
shallower counterparts. Finally, we show how
to construct residual flows, a flow-based generative model that requires strict Lipschitzness, using our orthogonal networks. Our code will be
publicly available at https://github.com/
umd-huang-lab/ortho-conv.
* 1 University of Maryland, College Park, MD USA 2 NVIDIA
Research, NVIDIA Corporation, Santa Clara, CA USA . Correspondence to: Jiahao Su <jiahaosu@umd.edu>, Furong Huang
<furongh@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks, whose deployment has witnessed extensive empirical success, still exhibit limitations
that are not thoroughly studied. Firstly, deep convolutional
networks are in general difficult to learn, and their high
performance heavily relies on techniques that are not fully
understood, such as skip-connections (He et al., 2016a),
batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), specialized
initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010). Secondly, they are
sensitive to imperceptible perturbations, including adversarial attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and geometric transformations (Azulay & Weiss, 2019). Finally, a precise characterization of their generalizability is still under active
investigation (Neyshabur et al., 2018; Jia et al., 2019).
Orthogonal networks, which have a “flat” spectrum with
all singular values of each linear layer being 1 (thus the
output norm kyk equals the input norm kxk, ∀x), alleviate
all problems above. As shown in recent works, by enforcing orthogonality in neural networks, we obtain (1) easier
optimization (Zhang et al., 2018a; Qi et al., 2020): since
each orthogonal layer preserves the gradient norm during
backpropagation, an orthogonal network is free from gradient vanishing/ exploding problems; (2) robustness against
adversarial perturbation (Anil et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019b;
Trockman & Kolter, 2021): since each orthogonal layer is
1-Lipschitz, an orthogonal network can not amplify any perturbation to the input to flip the output prediction; (3) better
generalizability (Jia et al., 2019): a network’s generalization
error is positively related to the standard deviation of each
linear layer’s singular values, thus encouraging orthogonality in the network lowers its generalization error.
Despite the benefits, enforcing orthogonality in convolutional networks is challenging. To avoid strict constraint,
orthogonal initialization (dynamical isometry) (Pennington
et al., 2017; 2018; Xiao et al., 2018) and orthogonal regularization (Wang et al., 2019; Qi et al., 2020) are opted for
the gradient vanishing/exploding problems. However, as
they do not enforce strict orthogonality (and Lipschitzness),
these methods are unsuitable for applications that require
strict Lipschitzness, such as adversarial robustness (Anil
et al., 2019) and residual flows (Chen et al., 2019).

