Prototype Based Classification from Hierarchy to Fairness

Mycal Tucker 1 Julie Shah 1

Abstract
Artificial neural nets can represent and classify
many types of data but are often tailored to particular applications – e.g., for “fair” or “hierarchical”
classification. Once an architecture has been selected, it is often difficult for humans to adjust
models for a new task; for example, a hierarchical
classifier cannot be easily transformed into a fair
classifier that shields a protected field. Our contribution in this work is a new neural network architecture, the concept subspace network (CSN),
which generalizes existing specialized classifiers
to produce a unified model capable of learning
a spectrum of multi-concept relationships. We
demonstrate that CSNs reproduce state-of-the-art
results in fair classification when enforcing concept independence, may be transformed into hierarchical classifiers, or even reconcile fairness
and hierarchy within a single classifier. The CSN
is inspired by existing prototype-based classifiers
that promote interpretability.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are able to learn rich representations of
data that support highly accurate classification; however,
understanding or controlling what neural nets learn remains
challenging. Some techniques offer insight into pre-trained
models by exposing patterns in latent spaces (Goetschalckx
et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2018), while approaches focused
on interpretability provide techniques that are more comprehensible to humans (Li et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019).
While these methods provide insight, they fail to offer control: humans observe learned patterns but are unable to
guide models such that learned relationships are useful for
a particular setting or task.
Another line of work has advanced the design of models
for particular types of classification tasks (such as fair or
1

CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts,
USA. Correspondence to: Mycal Tucker <mycal@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

hierarchical classification) but these techniques are often
developed with only one problem in mind (Louizos et al.,
2016; Xie et al., 2017; Hase et al., 2019). For example,
models built for fair classification (predicting an outcome
regardless of information about a protected field) are only
used to enforce independence of concepts rather than hierarchy. Thus, humans may exert control over learned representations by selecting an appropriate technique rather than
tuning training parameters within the same technique.
We have designed a new neural network architecture, the
concept subspace network (CSN), which generalizes existing specialized classifiers to produce a unified model capable of learning a spectrum of multi-concept relationships.
CSNs use prototype-based representations, a technique employed in interpretable neural networks in prior art (Li et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2019; Garnot & Landrieu, 2020). A single
CSN uses sets of prototypes in order to simultaneously learn
multiple concepts; classification within a single concept
(e.g., “type of animal”) is performed by projecting encodings into a concept subspace defined by the prototypes for
that concept (e.g., “bird,” “dog,” etc.). Lastly, CSNs use a
measure of concept subspace alignment to guide concept
relationships such as independence or hierarchy.
In our experiments, CSNs performed comparably to stateof-the art in fair classification, despite prior methods only
being designed for this type of problem. In applying CSNs
to hierarchical classification tasks, networks automatically
deduced interpretable representations of the hierarchical
problem structure, allowing them to outperform state-ofthe-art, for a given neural network backbone, in terms of
both accuracy and average cost of errors on the CIFAR100
dataset. Lastly, in a human-motion prediction task, we
demonstrated how a single CSN could enforce both fairness
(to preserve participant privacy) and hierarchy (to exploit
a known taxonomy of tasks). Our findings suggest that
CSNs may be applied to a wide range of problems that had
previously only been addressed individually, or not at all.

2. Related Work
2.1. Interpretability and Prototype Networks
Numerous post-hoc explanation techniques fit models to
pre-trained neural nets; if humans understand these auxil-

