Burst-Dependent Plasticity and Dendritic Amplification Support Target-Based
Learning and Hierarchical Imitation Learning

Cristiano Capone * 1 Cosimo Lupo * 1 Paolo Muratore 2 Pier Stanislao Paolucci 1

Abstract
The brain can learn to solve a wide range of
tasks with high temporal and energetic efficiency. However, most biological models are
composed of simple single-compartment neurons
and cannot achieve the state-of-the-art performances of artificial intelligence. We propose a
multi-compartment model of pyramidal neuron,
in which bursts and dendritic input segregation
give the possibility to plausibly support a biological target-based learning. In target-based learning, the internal solution of a problem (a spatiotemporal pattern of bursts in our case) is suggested
to the network, bypassing the problems of error
backpropagation and credit assignment. Finally,
we show that this neuronal architecture naturally
supports the orchestration of “hierarchical imitation learning”, enabling the decomposition of
challenging long-horizon decision-making tasks
into simpler subtasks.

1. Introduction
The brain can learn a wide range of tasks very efficiently
in terms of energy consumption and required evidences,
motivating the search for biologically inspired learning rules
for improving the efficiency of artificial intelligence. Most
biologically plausible neural networks are composed so far
of point neurons. Despite recent outstanding advances in
this field (Nicola & Clopath, 2017; Bellec et al., 2020),
biologically plausible neural networks cannot achieve the
state-of-the-art performances of artificial intelligence (e.g.,
they struggle to solve the credit assignment problem (Payeur
et al., 2021)).
Recent findings on dendritic computational properties
*
Equal contribution 1 INFN, Sezione di Roma, Rome,
Italy 2 SISSA, International School for Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy. Correspondence to: Cristiano Capone <cristiano0capone@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Poirazi & Papoutsi, 2020) and on the complexity of pyramidal neurons dynamics (Larkum, 2013) motivated the study
of multicompartment neuron models in the development
of new biologically plausible learning rules (Urbanczik &
Senn, 2014; Guerguiev et al., 2017; Sacramento et al., 2018;
Payeur et al., 2021).
In addition, it has been proposed that segregation of dendritic input (i.e. neurons receive sensory information and
higher-order feedback in segregated compartments) (Guerguiev et al., 2017) and generation of high-frequency bursts
of spikes (Payeur et al., 2021) would support backpropagation in biological neurons. However, these approaches
require propagating errors with a fine spatio-temporal structure to all the neurons. It is not clear whether this is possible
in biological networks. For this reason, in the last few years,
target-based approaches (Lee et al., 2015; DePasquale et al.,
2018; Manchev & Spratling, 2020; Meulemans et al., 2020;
Muratore et al., 2021) started to gain more and more interest.
In a target-based learning framework, the targets, rather than
the errors, are propagated through the network (Lee et al.,
2015; Manchev & Spratling, 2020). In this framework, it is
possible to directly suggest to the network the internal solution to a task (DePasquale et al., 2018; Muratore et al., 2021;
Capone et al., 2022). However, target-based approaches require evaluating at the same time the spontaneous activity
and the target activity of the network (DePasquale et al.,
2018; Muratore et al., 2021). This is usually solved by evaluating the two activities in two different networks, which is
not natural in terms of biological plausibility.
In the present work, we show that bursts and dendritic input
segregation offer a natural solution to this dilemma. In our
model, pyramidal neurons rely on two different apical dendritic compartments to simultaneously evaluate the target
and the spontaneous activity. A coincidence mechanism between basal and apical inputs generating the burst (Larkum,
2013) eventually defines the (target or spontaneous) spatiotemporal bursting dynamics of the network.
We exploit dendritic computation in our model, to let arbitrary signals act as teaching signals which drive the learning
procedure in a biologically plausible fashion. This allows to
flexibly store and recall arbitrary trajectories.

