Congested Bandits: Optimal Routing via Short-term Resets

Pranjal Awasthi 1 Kush Bhatia 2 Sreenivas Gollapudi 1 Kostas Kollias 1

Abstract
For traffic routing platforms, the choice of which
route to recommend to a user depends on the congestion on these routes – indeed, an individual’s
utility depends on the number of people using the
recommended route at that instance. Motivated
by this, we introduce the problem of Congested
Bandits where each arm’s reward is allowed to
depend on the number of times it was played in
the past ∆ timesteps. This dependence on past
history of actions leads to a dynamical system
where an algorithm’s present choices also affect
its future pay-offs, and requires an algorithm to
plan for this. We study the congestion aware formulation in the multi-armed bandit (MAB) setup
and in the contextual bandit setup with linear rewards. For the multi-armed setup, we propose
a UCB style algorithm
√ and show that its policy
regret scales as Õ( K∆T ). For the linear contextual bandit setup, our algorithm, based on an
iterative√least squares planner, achieves policy regret Õ( dT + ∆). From an experimental standpoint, we corroborate the no-regret properties of
our algorithms via a simulation study.

1. Introduction
The online multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem and its extensions have been widely studied and used to model many
real world scenarios (Robbins, 1952; Auer et al., 2002;
2001). In the basic MAB setup there are K arms with either
stochastic or adversarially chosen reward profiles. The goal
is to design an algorithm that achieves a cumulative reward
that is as good as that of the best arm in hindsight. This is
quantified in terms of the regret achieved by the algorithm
over T time steps (see Section 2 for formal definitions).
In many real world scenarios the MAB setup as described
above is not suitable as the reward obtained by playing an
arm/action at a given time step may depend on the algo1
Google Research 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Kush
Bhatia <kushbhatia@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

rithm’s choices in the previous time steps. In particular, we
are motivated by online routing problems where the reward
of suggesting a particular edge to traverse along a path from
source to destination often depends on the congestion on
that edge. This congestion is a function of the number of
times the particular edge has been recommended earlier (potentially in a time window). In such scenarios, one would
desire algorithms that can compete with the best policy, i.e.,
the best sequence of actions, in hindsight as compared to a
fixed best action.
Classical multi-armed bandit formulation and associated
no-regret algorithms (Slivkins, 2019), or their extensions
to routing problems (Kalai & Vempala, 2005; Awerbuch &
Kleinberg, 2008) do not suffice for the above scenario as
they only guarantee competitiveness with respect to the best
fixed arm in hindsight. To overcome these limitations, we
propose a new model, viz., congested bandits which captures
the above scenario. In our proposed model the reward of a
given arm at each time step depends on how many times the
arm has been played within a given time window of size ∆.
Hence over time, an arm’s expected reward may decay and
reset dynamically. While our model is motivated by online
routing problems, our proposed formulation is very general.
As another example, consider a digital music platform that
recommends artists to its end users. In order to maximize
profit the recommendation algorithm may prefer to recommend popular artists, and at the same time the platform may
want to promote equity and diversity by highlighting new
and emerging artists as well. This scenario can be model via
congested bandits where each artist is an arm and the reward
for suggesting an artist is a function of how many times the
artist has been recommended in the past time window of
length ∆. In both the scenarios above, the ability to reset
the congestion cost (by simply not playing an arm for ∆
time steps) is a crucial part of the problem formulation.
Our contributions. We propose and study the congested
bandits model with short term resets under a variety of
settings and design no-regret algorithms. In the most basic setup we consider a K-armed stochastic bandit problem where each arm a has a mean reward µa , and the
mean reward obtained by playing arm a at time t equals
fcong (a, ht )µa . Here ht denotes the history of the algorithm’s choices within the last ∆ time steps and fcong is a
non-increasing congestion function. Recall that the algo-

