Self-Organized Polynomial-Time Coordination Graphs

Qianlan Yang * 1 Weijun Dong * 1 Zhizhou Ren * 2 Jianhao Wang 1 Tonghan Wang 3 Chongjie Zhang 1

Abstract
Coordination graph is a promising approach to
model agent collaboration in multi-agent reinforcement learning. It conducts a graph-based
value factorization and induces explicit coordination among agents to complete complicated
tasks. However, one critical challenge in this
paradigm is the complexity of greedy action selection with respect to the factorized values. It
refers to the decentralized constraint optimization
problem (DCOP), which and whose constant-ratio
approximation are NP-hard problems. To bypass
this systematic hardness, this paper proposes a
novel method, named Self-Organized Polynomialtime Coordination Graphs (SOP-CG), which uses
structured graph classes to guarantee the accuracy and the computational efficiency of collaborated action selection. SOP-CG employs dynamic
graph topology to ensure sufficient value function
expressiveness. The graph selection is unified into
an end-to-end learning paradigm. In experiments,
we show that our approach learns succinct and
well-adapted graph topologies, induces effective
coordination, and improves performance across a
variety of cooperative multi-agent tasks.

1. Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is
a promising approach to a variety of real-world applications,
such as sensor networks (Zhang & Lesser, 2011; Ye et al.,
2015), traffic light control (Van der Pol & Oliehoek, 2016),
and multi-robot formation (Alonso-Mora et al., 2017). One
of the long-lasting challenges of cooperative MARL is how
to organize coordination for a large multi-agent system. In
recent years, the popular MARL algorithms achieve scala*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences (IIIS), Tsinghua University 2 Department of
Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
3
Harvard University. Correspondence to: Chongjie Zhang
<chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

bility by deploying fully decentralized control policies, i.e.,
the behavior of each agent only depends on its local observation history. Due to the lack of explicit coordination,
these methods may suffer from a game-theoretic pathology
called relative overgeneralization (Panait et al., 2006; Wei
& Luke, 2016; Böhmer et al., 2020): if the values of coordinated and uncoordinated actions are not distinguished
during exploration, the learning agents can jointly converge
to suboptimal behaviors. Coordination graph (Guestrin et al.,
2001) provides a promising class of algorithms to address
this issue. It conducts a graph-based value factorization
to explicitly represent coordination relations among agents.
Each vertex in the graph corresponds to an agent, and each
(hyper-) edge defines a local utility function over the joint
action space of the connected agents. With such a higherorder value factorization, agents communicate to jointly
optimize their actions, which helps to prevent relative overgeneralization. Despite this advantage, coordination graph
would require more complex greedy action selection and
extra communication cost than using fully decentralized
policies. This paper mainly focuses on the challenges in
greedy action selection of coordination graph.
One fundamental problem for coordination graphs is the
trade-off between the representational capacity of value
functions and the computational complexity of policy execution, where the latter would hinder the scalability of these
algorithms. To obtain value functions with high expressiveness, an advanced approach, deep coordination graphs
(DCG; Böhmer et al., 2020), considers a static complete
graph connecting all pairs of agents. This graph structure
has high representational capacity in terms of function expressiveness but raises a challenge for computation in the
execution phase. The greedy action selection over a coordination graph can be formalized to a decentralized constraint
optimization problem (DCOP), finding the maximum-value
joint actions (Guestrin et al., 2001; Zhang & Lesser, 2013;
Böhmer et al., 2020). Note that the DCOP and its approximation are NP-hard problems, especially for the complete
graphs used in DCG (Dagum & Luby, 1993; Park & Darwiche, 2004). From the perspective of theoretical computer
science, any scalable heuristic algorithm (e.g., max-sum
algorithm (Pearl, 1988)) for DCOP may have an uncontrollable gap with the optimal solution.
To visualize this issue, we generate a suite of complete-

