Improving Policy Optimization with Generalist-Specialist Learning

Zhiwei Jia 1 Xuanlin Li 1 Zhan Ling 1 Shuang Liu 1 Yiran Wu 1 Hao Su 1

Abstract
Generalization in deep reinforcement learning
over unseen environment variations usually requires policy learning over a large set of diverse
training variations. We empirically observe that
an agent trained on many variations (a generalist) tends to learn faster at the beginning, yet its
performance plateaus at a less optimal level for a
long time. In contrast, an agent trained only on
a few variations (a specialist) can often achieve
high returns under a limited computational budget. To have the best of both worlds, we propose
a novel generalist-specialist training framework.
Specifically, we first train a generalist on all environment variations; when it fails to improve,
we launch a large population of specialists with
weights cloned from the generalist, each trained
to master a selected small subset of variations.
We finally resume the training of the generalist
with auxiliary rewards induced by demonstrations
of all specialists. In particular, we investigate
the timing to start specialist training and compare strategies to learn generalists with assistance
from specialists. We show that this framework
pushes the envelope of policy learning on several
challenging and popular benchmarks including
Procgen, Meta-World and ManiSkill.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) holds the promise in
a wide range of applications such as autonomous vehicles
(Filos et al., 2020), gaming (Silver et al., 2017), robotics
(Kalashnikov et al., 2018) and healthcare (Yu et al., 2021).
To fulfill the potential of RL, we need algorithms and models capable of adapting and generalizing to unseen (but
similar) environment variations during their deployment.
Recently, several benchmarks (Gupta et al., 2018; Cobbe
1
University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Zhiwei Jia <zjia@eng.ucsd.edu>, Hao Su <haosu@eng.ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2020a; Mu et al., 2021; Szot et al., 2021; Gan et al.,
2020; Zhao et al., 2021) were proposed to this end, featuring
a very high diversity of variations in training environments,
accomplished through procedural generation and layout randomization, to encourage policy generalization.
However, due to the sheer number of variations, many existing DRL algorithms struggle to efficiently achieve high
performance during training, let alone generalization. For
instance, in Procgen Benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2020a), a
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017b) agent trained on a thousand
levels can have poor performance even with hundreds of
millions of samples. Training PPO on visual navigation
tasks involving ∼100 scenes might require billions of samples to achieve good performance (Wijmans et al., 2019).
Several lines of work have been proposed to alleviate this
issue, by accelerating training with automatic curriculum
(Jiang et al., 2021), improving learned representations with
the help of extra constraints (Igl et al., 2019; Raileanu et al.,
2020), or decoupling the learning of the policy and value
networks (Cobbe et al., 2021; Raileanu & Fergus, 2021).
Orthogonal to these approaches, we tackle the challenge
from a perspective inspired by how human organizations
solve difficult problems. We first define a generalist agent to
be a single policy that can solve all environment variations.
We also define a specialist agent to be a policy that masters
a subset, but not all, of environment variations. Our goal is
to utilize experiences from the specialists to aid the policy
optimization of the generalist.
We observe that trajectories belonging to different environment variations often consist of shared early stages and
context-specific later stages. It is often more efficient for a
single generalist to learn the shared early stages for all contexts than first training different specialists and then merging
them to a generalist. For instance, learning to push a chair
towards a goal, regardless of variations in chair geometry,
topology, or dynamics, requires an agent to first recognize
the chair and approach it. During these early stages, jointly
training an agent on all chairs, starting and goal states results
in faster learning. However, as the visited states get more
and more diverse, it becomes increasingly hard for the policy
and value network to maintain the predictive power without forgetting (i.e., “catastrophic forgetting”), or be vigilant
to input dimensions that were not useful at the beginning

