For Learning in Symmetric Teams,
Local Optima are Global Nash Equilibria

Scott Emmons 1 Caspar Oesterheld 2 Andrew Critch 1 Vincent Conitzer 3 Stuart Russell 1

Abstract
Although it has been known since the 1970s that
a globally optimal strategy profile in a commonpayoff game is a Nash equilibrium, global optimality is a strict requirement that limits the result’s applicability. In this work, we show that
any locally optimal symmetric strategy profile is
also a (global) Nash equilibrium. Furthermore,
we show that this result is robust to perturbations
to the common payoff and to the local optimum.
Applied to machine learning, our result provides
a global guarantee for any gradient method that
finds a local optimum in symmetric strategy space.
While this result indicates stability to unilateral
deviation, we nevertheless identify broad classes
of games where mixed local optima are unstable
under joint, asymmetric deviations. We analyze
the prevalence of instability by running learning
algorithms in a suite of symmetric games, and we
conclude by discussing the applicability of our
results to multi-agent RL, cooperative inverse RL,
and decentralized POMDPs.

1. Introduction
We consider common-payoff games (also known as identical
interest games (Ui, 2009)), in which the payoff to all players
is always the same. Such games model a wide range of situations involving cooperative action towards a common goal.
Under the heading of team theory, they form an important
branch of economics (Marschak, 1955; Marschak & Radner,
1972). In cooperative AI (Dafoe et al., 2021), the commonpayoff assumption holds in Dec-POMDPs (Oliehoek et al.,
2016), where multiple agents operate independently according to policies designed centrally to achieve a common
objective. Many applications of multiagent reinforcement
1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Duke University, University of Oxford. Correspondence to:
Scott Emmons <emmons@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

learning also assume a common payoff (Foerster et al., 2016;
2018; Gupta et al., 2017). Finally, in assistance games (Russell, 2019) (also known as cooperative inverse reinforcement
learning or CIRL games (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017)),
which include at least one human and one or more “robots,”
it is assumed that the robots’ payoffs are exactly the human’s
payoff, even if the robots must learn it.
Our focus is on symmetric strategy profiles in commonpayoff games. Loosely speaking, a symmetric strategy profile is one in which some subset of players share the same
strategy; Section 3 defines this in a precise sense. For example, in Dec-POMDPs, an offline solution search may
consider only symmetric strategies as a way of reducing
the search space. (Notice that this does not lead to identical behavior, because strategies are state-dependent.) In
common-payoff multiagent reinforcement learning, each
agent may collect percepts and rewards independently, but
the reinforcement learning updates can be pooled to learn a
single parameterized policy that all agents share; prior work
has found experimentally that “parameter sharing is crucial
for reaching the optimal protocol” (Foerster et al., 2016).
In team theory, it is common to develop a strategy that can
be implemented by every employee in a given category and
leads to high payoff for the company. In civic contexts,
symmetry commonly arises through notions of fairness and
justice. In treaty negotiations and legislation that mandates
how parties behave, for example, there is often a constraint
that all parties be treated equally.
For the purposes of this paper, we consider Nash equilibria—
strategy profiles for all players from which no individual
player has an incentive to deviate—as a reasonable solution
concept. Marschak & Radner (1972) make the obvious
point that a globally optimal (possibly asymmetric) strategy
profile—one that achieves the highest common payoff—is
necessarily a Nash equilibrium. Moreover, it can be found
in time linear in the size of the payoff matrix.
In any sufficiently complex game, however, we should not
expect to be able to find a globally optimal strategy profile.
For example, matrix games have size exponential in the
number of players, and the matrix representation of a game
tree has size exponential in the depth of the tree. Therefore,
global search over all possible contingency plans is infea-

