QSFL: A Two-Level Uplink Communication Optimization Framework for
Federated Learning

Liping Yi 1 Gang Wang 1 Xiaoguang Liu 1
FedAvg
C_nat

Abstract

1. Introduction
In traditional FL, participating clients upload local fullprecision models to the server for aggregating without local
data sharing. When thousands of clients collaboratively
train one GB-level model, uplink transmission can reach
TB-level (Sattler et al., 2019b). However, expensive and unreliable wireless connections between edge devices and the
server often have a lower rate than the Ethernet connection
in a data center (Yao et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020). And
large-scale deep networks often have lots of redundant parameters (Kairouz et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2018b; Yi et al.,
1
Nankai-Orange D.T. Joint Lab, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. Correspondence to:
Gang Wang <wgzwp@nbjl.nankai.edu.cn>, Xiaoguang Liu <liuxg@nbjl.nankai.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

② Model-level:

upload one
segment per
client

①Client-level: remove redundant clients

890

843

800

659

600
400

349

200
0

AFL
QSFL

1061

1000
Compression Ratio

In cross-device Federated Learning (FL), the communication cost of transmitting full-precision
models between edge devices and a central server
is a significant bottleneck, due to expensive, unreliable, and low-bandwidth wireless connections.
As a solution, we propose a novel FL framework named QSFL, towards optimizing FL uplink
(client-to-server) communication at both client
and model levels. At the client level, we design a
Qualification Judgment (QJ) algorithm to sample
high-qualification clients to upload models. At
the model level, we explore a Sparse Cyclic Sliding Segment (SCSS) algorithm to further compress
transmitted models. We prove that QSFL can converge over wall-to-wall time, and develop an optimal hyperparameter searching algorithm based
on theoretical analysis to enable QSFL to make
the best trade-off between model accuracy and
communication cost. Experimental results show
that QSFL achieves state-of-the-art compression
ratios with marginal model accuracy degradation.

top-p
top-p &
signSGD

34

82

180 180

155
19

50%

60

60%
mAP

97

6

87

22

68

127

70%

Figure 1: Left: insights of QSFL. Right: QSFL outperforms
alternatives in the compression ratio under 50%, 60% and
70% target mAP on the FEMINIST dataset, respectively.

2020), transmitting all local full-precision models leads to
communication overhead being a major bottleneck. Besides,
the uploading and downloading speed of internet connection
are highly asymmetrical: the former is slower at least five
times than the latter (Konečný et al., 2016), so compressing
client-to-server transmission traffic yields greater benefits.
Existing communication-effective FL schemes mainly involve: delaying communication, sampling clients, encoding
models, sparsification, quantization. Since these methods
either have no theoretical convergence guarantee or have limited compression ratios, more advanced schemes should be
designed to balance communication cost and convergence.
In this work, we propose a novel communication-efficient
framework named QSFL, which optimizes FL’s uplink communication cost by: a) first sampling high-qualification
clients to upload model updates (QJ algorithm), and b) further compressing each uploaded model to one segment in
each round (SCSS algorithm). We prove its convergence and
explore how to search its optimal hyperparameters based
on theoretical analysis. As shown in Fig. 1, QSFL fulfills the state-of-the-art compression ratio than advanced
communication-efficient methods when achieving the same
target accuracy, promoting a better trade-off between communication cost and model accuracy.
Contributions. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel FL framework named QSFL to
reduce FL uplink communication overhead at both
client-level and model-level.

