Fast-Rate PAC-Bayesian Generalization Bounds for Meta-Learning

Jiechao Guan 1 2 Zhiwu Lu 3 2

Abstract
PAC-Bayesian error bounds provide a theoretical
guarantee on the generalization abilities of metalearning from training tasks to unseen tasks. However, it is still unclear how tight PAC-Bayesian
bounds we can achieve for meta-learning. In this
work, we propose a general PAC-Bayesian framework to cope with single-task learning and metalearning uniformly. With this framework, we
generalize the two tightest PAC-Bayesian bounds
(i.e., kl-bound and Catoni-bound) from singletask learning to standard meta-learning, resulting in fast convergence rates for PAC-Bayesian
meta-learners. By minimizing the derived two
bounds, we develop two meta-learning algorithms
for classification problems with deep neural networks. For regression problems, by setting Gibbs
optimal posterior for each training task, we obtain the closed-form formula of the minimizer of
our Catoni-bound, leading to an efficient Gibbs
meta-learning algorithm. Although minimizing
our kl-bound can not yield a closed-form solution,
we show that it can be extended for analyzing
the more challenging meta-learning setting where
samples from different training tasks exhibit interdependencies. Experiments empirically show that
our proposed meta-learning algorithms achieve
competitive results with respect to latest works.

1. Introduction
Inspired by human beings’ ability of utilizing past experience to efficiently learn a novel task, meta-learning, also
referred to as learning to learn (Thrun & Pratt, 1998), has
received much attention from the machine learning commu1
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing,
China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and
Analysis Methods, Beijing, China 3 Gaoling School of Artificial
Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Zhiwu Lu <luzhiwu@ruc.edu.cn>, Jiechao Guan
<2014200990@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

nity in the last decade. The goal of meta-learning is thus
to transfer the knowledge extracted from training tasks to
unseen tasks for fast adaptation. Successful applications of
such learning paradigm have been witnessed in computer
vision (Snell et al., 2017; Ye et al., 2020), natural language
processing (Wu et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021), reinforcement learning (Li et al., 2021) and other related fields.
Apart from practical applications, the theoretical analysis
of meta-learning has also been developed in the last decade.
The pioneering work was provided by (Baxter, 2000), which
first assumed that all learning tasks are independently and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) from a task environment. Under this assumption, the following works investigated metalearning from the standpoint of VC-theory (Maurer, 2009;
Maurer et al., 2016) or algorithmic stability (Maurer, 2005;
Chen et al., 2020). In recent years, there has also emerged
an interest in studying meta-learning via PAC-Bayesian
analysis (Pentina & Lampert, 2014; 2015; Amit & Meir,
2018). However, it is still unclear how tight PAC-Bayesian
generalization bounds we can achieve for meta-learning.
This paper intends to tackle this issue and provides fast-rate
PAC-Bayesian bounds for meta-learning. Our motivation
is to generalize the two tightest PAC-Bayesian bounds, klbound and Catoni-bound, from the i.i.d. single-task learning
setting (Maurer, 2004; Catoni, 2007), to the standard metalearning setting where observations from different tasks are
independent but not identically distributed. The main tool
to achieve this goal is a useful lemma in (Berend & Tassa,
2010) that bounds the sum of independent bounded random variables with the sum of i.i.d. Bernoulli random variables. We can then apply the demonstration techniques in
single-task learning to meta-learning, obtaining two fast-rate
PAC-Bayesian bounds, which are still called kl-bound and
Catoni-bound for convenience (Theorems 3-4). As a result,
we unify the demonstration framework of PAC-Bayesian theory for single-task learning and meta-learning, and provide
two up-to-date tightest bounds for meta-learners (see comparisons between different bounds in Table 1). By setting
the derived two bounds as minimization objective, we also
develop two bound-minimizing meta-learning algorithms
for classification problems with deep neural networks.
Next, we give more theoretical results and applications of
our derived two bounds. For the Catoni-bound, we show

