No-Regret Learning in Partially-Informed Auctions

Wenshuo Guo 1 Michael I. Jordan 1 2 Ellen Vitercik 3

Abstract
Auctions with partially-revealed information
about items are broadly employed in real-world
applications, but the underlying mechanisms have
limited theoretical support. In this work, we study
a machine learning formulation of these types
of mechanisms, presenting algorithms that are
no-regret from the buyer’s perspective. Specifically, a buyer who wishes to maximize his utility
interacts repeatedly with a platform over a series of T rounds. In each round, a new item is
drawn from an unknown distribution and the platform publishes a price together with incomplete,
“masked” information about the item. The buyer
then decides whether to purchase the item. We
formalize this problem as an online learning task
where the goal is to have low regret with respect
to a myopic oracle that has perfect knowledge of
the distribution over items and the seller’s masking function. When the distribution over items is
known to the buyer and the mask is a SimHash
function mapping Rd to {0, 1}` , our algorithm
has regret Õ((T d`)1/2 ). In a fully agnostic setting
when the mask is an arbitrary function mapping
to a set of size n and the prices are stochastic, our
algorithm has regret Õ((T n)1/2 ).

1. Introduction
Selling mechanisms play a crucial role in economic theory
and have a wide range of applications across many industries (Post et al., 1995; Milgrom, 2004; Edelman et al., 2007;
Milgrom, 2010; Arnosti et al., 2016). Under the canonical
mechanism design model, buyers choose whether or not to
buy items for sale based on their true values for those items.
1
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Department of Statistics,
University of California, Berkeley, USA 3 Department of Management Science & Engineering and Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to: Wenshuo
Guo <wguo@cs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

This fundamental model, however, assumes that the buyers
know exactly how much they value the items for sale, which
is often not the case.
One of the overriding reasons that a buyer may not know
their true values is information asymmetry: the seller may
purposefully obfuscate information about an item for sale.
For example, the seller may hide information about the item
in the hopes of better revenue (Gershkov, 2009). Alternatively, information about the item may be private, and thus
the seller may wish to protect this sensitive information by
only revealing partial information about the item. For instance, in online advertising auctions, bids represent how
much advertisers are willing to pay to display their ad to
a particular user. Historically, advertisers have bid based
on uniquely identifying information about users, but there
has been a growing effort to protect users’ privacy by obfuscating this sensitive information (Juels, 2001; Guha et al.,
2011; Epasto et al., 2021).
In these scenarios, the buyer only has partial information
about the item for sale but still must decide whether to make
a purchase. This raises the question: how should a buyer
determine their purchase strategy with only incomplete
item information?
We study posted-price auctions—a fundamental mechanism
family that is appealingly interpretable—with incomplete
item information. In particular, the seller reveals obfuscated
(“masked”) information about the item using a fixed, unknown masking function. We study an online setting where,
at each round, a fresh item is drawn from an unknown distribution (for example, a distribution over users visiting a
webpage). The seller sets a price and the buyer chooses
whether to buy the item based on the incomplete information that the seller provides. We propose no-regret learning
algorithms for the buyer that achieve sub-linear regret compared to an oracle buyer who has perfect knowledge of the
item distribution as well as the seller’s masking function.
1.1. Our results
We study no-regret learning with incomplete item information in two settings:
1. First, we propose an algorithm for a setting where the
item distribution is known to the buyer and the mask

