Optimizing Tensor Network Contraction Using Reinforcement Learning

Eli Merom 1 Haggai Maron 1 Shie Mannor 1 Gal Chechick 1

Abstract
Quantum Computing (QC) stands to revolutionize computing, but is currently still limited. To
develop and test quantum algorithms today, quantum circuits are often simulated on classical computers. Simulating a complex quantum circuit
requires computing the contraction of a large network of tensors. The order (path) of contraction
can have a drastic effect on the computing cost,
but finding an efficient order is a challenging combinatorial optimization problem. We propose a
Reinforcement Learning (RL) approach combined
with Graph Neural Networks (GNN) to address
the contraction ordering problem. The problem
is extremely challenging due to the huge search
space, the heavy-tailed reward distribution, and
the challenging credit assignment. We show how
a carefully implemented RL-agent that uses a
GNN as the basic policy construct can address
these challenges and obtain significant improvements over state-of-the-art techniques in three
varieties of circuits, including the largest scale
networks used in contemporary QC.

1. Introduction
Quantum computing has the potential to revolutionize the
computer industry (Gill et al., 2022), but quantum computers
are still notoriously difficult to build (Franklin and Chong,
2004; Ladd et al., 2010; Cho, 2020). To devise and test
quantum algorithms, researchers use classical computers to
simulate the corresponding quantum circuits that implement
them (Huang et al., 2021; Gray, 2018; Fishman et al., 2020;
Patti et al., 2021b). In most cases, simulating a complex
quantum circuit involves computing a contraction of a huge
network of tensors.
1
Nvidia research, Israel.
Code:
https://
nv-research-tlv.netlify.app/publication/
tensor_contraction/. Correspondence to: Eli Merom
<emeirom@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Importantly, computing the contraction can be executed in
a variety of ways, all yielding the same final result, but
possibly at a very different computational cost. Section 3
explains this in more detail, but for now, a good analogy
is the problem of computing the product of a sequence of
matrices ABC. Both (AB)C and A(BC) yield the same
result, but the computational cost may be very different
depending on the matrix dimensions.
Similarly, the cost of computing the contraction depends
heavily on the order by which the tensors are contracted.
Formally, the combinatorial optimization problem Tensor
Network Contraction Ordering (TNCO) attempts to determine the optimal order of contracting a network of tensors
by iteratively contracting pair by pair (Pfeifer et al., 2014;
Xu et al., 2019; Schindler and Jermyn, 2020). TNCO can be
naturally formulated using graphs, where nodes represent
tensors and edges correspond to shared indices. Each edge
is assigned a cost, which represents the computational cost
of calculating the contraction along that edge. The objective is to find an ordering1 over the pairwise contraction
operations, or edges, that has the minimal total cost.
Going beyond simulations of quantum computers, tensor
network contractions play a key role in other areas of science, including many-body physics (Ran et al., 2020), statistical mechanics (Liu et al., 2021), and machine learning
(Stoudenmire and Schwab, 2016).
In the general case, TNCO is computationally hard (ChiChung et al., 1997), so designing efficient contraction algorithms remains a challenge. Some specific instances are
computationally tractable, for instance, finding an optimal
order for matrix multiplication, when each tensor is a matrix (Cormen et al., 2009). For more complex networks,
like those relevant for quantum circuits, there are multiple
approaches (Pfeifer et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2019; Schindler
and Jermyn, 2020; Daniel et al., 2018), employing a variety of tools from combinatorial optimization with different
quality-complexity trade-offs. The current state-of-the-art is
a graph-partitioning based solver (Gray and Kourtis, 2021)
that can produce high-quality solutions to networks with
up to hundreds of tensors. For larger networks, the greedy
approach (e.g. (Daniel et al., 2018)), which often results in
1
we use path, sequence and ordering interchangeably throughout the paper.

