Learning from a Learning User for Optimal Recommendations

Fan Yao 1 Chuanhao Li 1 Denis Nekipelov 2 Hongning Wang 1 Haifeng Xu 1

Abstract
In real-world recommendation problems, especially those with a formidably large item space,
users have to gradually learn to estimate the utility
of any fresh recommendations from their experience about previously consumed items. This in
turn affects their interaction dynamics with the
system and can invalidate previous algorithms
built on the omniscient user assumption. In this
paper, we formalize a model to capture such
“learning users” and design an efficient systemside learning solution, coined Noise-Robust Active Ellipsoid Search (RAES), to confront the challenges brought by the non-stationary feedback
from such a learning user. Interestingly, we prove
that the regret of RAES deteriorates gracefully
as the convergence rate of user learning becomes
worse, until reaching linear regret when the user’s
learning fails to converge. Experiments on synthetic datasets demonstrate the strength of RAES
for such a contemporaneous system-user learning
problem. Our study provides a novel perspective
on modeling the feedback loop in recommendation problems.

1. Introduction
A recommender system (hereinafter referred to as system)
is designed to predict users’ preferences over items so as
to maximize the utility of the recommended items (Sarwar
et al., 2001; Koren et al., 2009). Driven by this principle,
there has been a tremendous amount of research efforts and
industry practices on developing various recommendation
algorithms that predict item utility for each user based on
the observed user-item interactions, including collaborative
filtering (Sarwar et al., 2001; Konstan et al., 1997; Linden
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, USA 2 Department of Economics, University of Virginia, USA. Correspondence to: Fan Yao
<fy4bc@virginia.edu>, Hongning Wang <hw5x@virginia.edu>,
Haifeng Xu <hx4ad@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2003), latent factor models (Koren et al., 2009; Rendle,
2010; Rendle & Schmidt-Thieme, 2010), neural recommendation models (He et al., 2017; Ebesu et al., 2018; Liang
et al., 2018), and sequential recommendation models (Kang
& McAuley, 2018; Tang & Wang, 2018; Wu et al., 2020).
Nevertheless, this paradigm is built on an overly simplified
user model: users are omniscient about the (millions of)
items and thus allow the system to directly query their preferences. This assumption ceases to be true in real-world
recommendation applications where the size of the item
space could be formidably large. As a result, instead of
being a static “classifier” (Das et al., 2007; Li et al., 2010;
Linden et al., 2003), an ordinary user typically is also learning the item utility from her interactions with the system.
For instance, a user might be new to a category of items;
thus, her responses to such items can only be accurate after consuming the recommended items, possibly even after
multiple times.
This “inaccuracy” in users’ feedback cannot be simply modeled as random noise, since it naturally depend on the interaction history and thus could be biased by her previous
choices. More specifically, any small bias (e.g., towards a
particular item category) in the system’s past recommendations will bias the user’s learning, which consequently leads
to biased user feedback, which then further bias the system’s subsequent recommendations. This forms a vicious
circle – even if an optimal item is recommended to the user,
she might not take it due to her currently inaccurate utility
estimation; but failing to consume the optimal item will
stop the user from exploring that direction, and thus leading
to repeated future rejections of the same optimal recommendations. This is similar to the explore-exploit dilemma
in bandit problems, but is much worse because in bandit
problems the noise of user feedback is independent from the
interaction history, whereas here the bias will accumulate.
Our problem setting also differs from reinforcement learning where the reward function is fixed by the environment
and independent from the agent’s actions.
To address the limitation caused by the previous omniscient
user assumption, we propose to model a user as an autonomous agent who is learning to evaluate the utility of
system’s recommendations from her interaction history. We
formulate the system-user interaction in a dueling bandit

