Extracting Latent State Representations
with Linear Dynamics from Rich Observations

Abraham Frandsen 1 Rong Ge 1 Holden Lee 2

Abstract
Recently, many reinforcement learning techniques have been shown to have provable guarantees in the simple case of linear dynamics, especially in problems like linear quadratic regulators.
However, in practice many tasks require learning
a policy from rich, high-dimensional features such
as images, which are unlikely to be linear. We
consider a setting where there is a hidden linear
subspace of the high-dimensional feature space in
which the dynamics are linear. We design natural
objectives based on forward and inverse dynamics models. We prove that these objectives can
be efficiently optimized and their local optimizers
extract the hidden linear subspace. We empirically verify our theoretical results with synthetic
data and explore the effectiveness of our approach
(generalized to nonlinear settings) in simple control tasks with rich observations.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning has made tremendous progress recently, achieving strong performance in difficult problems
like go (Silver et al., 2017) and Starcraft (Vinyals et al.,
2019). A common theme in the recent progress is the use
of neural networks to handle the cases when the system
dynamics and policy are both highly nonlinear. However,
theoretical understanding for reinforcement learning is most
thoroughly developed in the tabular setting (where the number of state/actions is small) or when the underlying dynamics of the system is linear (see Section 1.1).
Requiring the dynamics to be linear is especially limiting
for problems with rich, high dimensional output, e.g. ma1

Department of Computer Science, Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina, USA 2 Department of Mathematics,
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. Correspondence to: Abraham Frandsen <abef@cs.duke.edu>, Rong Ge
<rongge@cs.duke.edu>, Holden Lee <holden.lee@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

nipulating a robot from video frames or playing a game by
observing pixel representations. Consider a simple system
where we control an object by applying forces to it. The
state of the object (position and velocity) can evolve linearly
according to physical laws. However, if the observation
is a visual rendering of this object in a 3-d environment,
the observation contains a lot of redundant information and
doesn’t have linear dynamics. Such problems can potentially be solved by learning a state representation mapping ϕ
that maps the complicated observations to states that satisfy
simpler dynamics. State representation learning is popular
in practice, but theoretical understanding is still nascent; see
the survey by Lesort et al. (2018) and more references in
Section 1.1. Many approaches either try to learn a forward
model, which predicts the next state or an inverse model,
which predicts the action taken given the states. In this paper we show both approaches can provably extract a state
representation that encodes linear dynamics.
We first consider a simple theoretical model where the full
observation x does not have linear dynamics, but there exists
an unknown subspace V where the projection y = ΠV x has
linear dynamics. This corresponds to the case when the state
representation mapping is a linear projection. We give two
provably correct algorithms for identifying V, one based on
learning a linear forward model, and one based on learning
a linear inverse model.
In more complicated settings one might need a nonlinear
mapping in order to extract a latent space representation
that has linear dynamics. We extend our algorithms to the
nonlinear setting, and show that if we can find solutions to
similar nonconvex optimization problems with 0 loss, then
the representations have nontrivial linear dynamics.
We discuss related works in Section 1.1. We next introduce
our model and discuss how one can formalize learning a
state representation mapping as optimization problems in
Section 2. In Sections 3 and 4 we give algorithms based
on forward and inverse models, respectively, and prove that
these recover the underlying state representation. We then
extend these to nonlinear state representations in Section 5.
Finally in Section 6, we empirically validate our approach
on synthetic data and simple RL environments. All detailed
proofs are found in the appendix.

