An Initial Alignment between Neural Network and Target
is Needed for Gradient Descent to Learn
Emmanuel Abbe 1 Elisabetta Cornacchia 1 Jan H ˛
azła 1 2 Christopher Marquis 1

Abstract
This paper introduces the notion of “Initial Alignment” (INAL) between a neural network at initialization and a target function. It is proved that if a
network and a Boolean target function do not have
a noticeable INAL, then noisy gradient descent on
a fully connected network with normalized i.i.d.
initialization will not learn in polynomial time.
Thus a certain amount of knowledge about the
target (measured by the INAL) is needed in the
architecture design. This also provides an answer
to an open problem posed in (Abbe & Sandon,
2020a). The results are based on deriving lowerbounds for descent algorithms on symmetric neural networks without explicit knowledge of the
target function beyond its INAL.

1. Introduction
Does one need an educated guess on the type of architecture
needed in order for gradient descent to learn certain target
functions? Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have an
architecture that is natural for learning functions having to
do with image features: at initialization, a CNN is already
well posed to pick up correlations with the image content
due to its convolutional and pooling layers, and gradient
descent (GD) allows to locate and amplify such correlations.
However, a CNN may not be the right architecture for nonimage based target functions, or even certain image-based
functions that are non-classical (Liu et al., 2018). More
generally, we raise the following question:
Is a certain amount of ‘initial alignment’ needed
between a neural network at initialization and
a target function in order for GD to learn on a
*
Equal contribution 1 Institute of Mathematics, EPFL, Lausanne,
Switzerland 2 African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS),
Kigali, Rwanda. Correspondence to: Elisabetta Cornacchia <elisabetta.cornacchia@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

reasonable horizon? Or could a neural net that is
not properly designed but large enough find its
own path to correlate with the target?
In order to formalize the above question, one needs to define the notion of ‘alignment’ as well as to quantify the
‘certain amount’ and ‘reasonable horizon’ notions. This
paper focuses on the ‘polynomial-scaling’ regime and on
fully connected architectures, but we conjecture that a more
general quantitative picture can be derived. Before defining
the question formally, we stress a few connections to related
problems.
A different type of ‘gradual’ question has recently been
investigated for neural networks, namely, the ‘depth gradual correlation’ hypothesis. This postulates that if a neural network of low depth (e.g., depth 2) cannot learn to a
non-trivial accuracy after GD has converged, then an augmentation of the depth to a larger constant will not help in
learning (Malach & Shalev-Shwartz, 2019; Allen-Zhu & Li,
2020). In contrast, the question studied here is more of a
‘time gradual correlation’ hypothesis, saying that if at time
zero GD cannot correlate non-trivially with a target function
(i.e., if the neural net at time zero does not have an initial
alignment), then a polynomial number of GD steps will not
help.
From a lower-bound point of view, the question we ask
is also slightly different than the traditional lower-bound
questions posed in the learning literature that have to do with
the difficulties of learning a class of functions irrespective of
a specific architecture. For instance, it is known from (Blum
et al., 1994; Kearns, 1998) that the larger the statistical
dimension of a function class is, the more challenging it is
for a statistical query (SQ) algorithm to learn, and similarly
for GD-like algorithms (Abbe et al., 2021); these bounds
hold irrespective of the type of neural network architectures
used.
A more architecture-dependent lower-bound is derived
in (Abbe & Sandon, 2020b), where the junk-flow is essentially used as replacement of the number of queries, and
which depends on the type of architecture and initialization
albeit being implicit. In (Shalev-Shwartz & Malach, 2021),
a separation between fully connected and CNN architec-

