On the Robustness of CountSketch to Adaptive Inputs

Edith Cohen 1 2 Xin Lyu 3 Jelani Nelson 3 1 Tamás Sarlós 1 Moshe Shechner 2 Uri Stemmer 2 1

Abstract
The last decade saw impressive progress towards
understanding the performance of algorithms in
adaptive settings, where subsequent inputs may
depend on the output from prior inputs. Adaptive
settings arise in processes with feedback or with
adversarial attacks. Existing designs of robust
algorithms are generic wrappers of non-robust
counterparts and leave open the possibility of better tailored designs. The lowers bounds (attacks)
are similarly worst-case and their significance
to practical setting is unclear. Aiming to understand these questions, we study the robustness of
CountSketch, a popular dimensionality reduction technique that maps vectors to a lower dimension using randomized linear measurements.
The sketch supports recovering `2 -heavy hitters
of a vector (entries with v[i]2 ≥ k1 kvk22 ). We
show that the classic estimator is not robust, and
can be attacked with a number of queries of the
order of the sketch size. We propose a robust
estimator (for a slightly modified sketch) that allows for quadratic number of queries in the
√ sketch
size, which is an improvement factor of k (for k
heavy hitters) over prior "blackbox" approaches.

1. Introduction
Algorithms are often analyzed under the assumption that
their internal randomness is independent of their inputs.
This assumption, however, is not always reasonable. For
example, consider a large system where there is a feedback
loop between inputs and outputs or an explicit adversarial
attack aimed at constructing inputs on which the system
fails. In such a case, it is no longer true that the inputs are
generated independently of the algorithm’s randomness (as
1

Google Research 2 Tel Aviv University 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: <edith@cohenwang.com,
lyuxin1999@gmail.com, minilek@alum.mit.edu,
stamas@google.com, moshe.shechner@gmail.com,
u@uri.co.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the inputs depend on previous outputs which depend on the
internal randomness) and hence the algorithms might fail to
provide utility.
This motivated a growing interest in understanding the
performance of algorithms when the inputs are chosen
adaptively, possibly as a function of their previous outputs, and in designing robust algorithms which provide
utility guarantees even when their inputs are chosen adaptively. Works in this vein span multiple areas, including machine learning (48; 24; 5; 43), adaptive data analysis (22; 31; 37; 28; 19), dynamic graph algorithms (46;
3; 23; 27; 49; 9), and sketching and streaming algorithms (39; 29; 12; 30; 51; 6; 11). However, the resulting
(robust) algorithms tend to be significantly less efficient
then their classical counterparts. This naturally raises the
question of quantifying more precisely the robustness of algorithms. We continue the study of this question for sketching algorithms (though our techniques are applicable more
broadly).
The study of sketching in adversarial environments was initiated by (39), in a setting different from ours in which the
adversary fully knows the public randomness when designing adversarial inputs in a multi-party setting. Robustness of
sketching algorithms to adaptive inputs (in a setting similar
to ours) was then considered implicitly by (3), who showed
an impossibility result for robust L0 sampling in sublinear
memory. Adaptive robustness in sketching was then formalized and put forward explicitly by (29), who showed
general impossibility results for linear sketches. A recent
line of work showed positive results (i.e., robust algorithms)
for many problems of interest, starting with (12), and continuing with (30; 51; 6; 11). However, the resulting robust
algorithms are generally significantly less efficient then their
classical counterparts. Furthermore, while the analyses of
classical algorithms do not seem to carry over to the robust
setting, so far we do not have any example showing that
they are not robust (i.e,. for all we know it might only be
the analysis that breaks).1 In fact, so far we do not have any
1

As we mentioned, (29) showed negative results for linear
sketches in the adaptive setting; however, the negative results are
very far from respective upper bounds. It is also worth mentioning
that (12) showed an attack on a simplified version of the classical
AMS sketch (4) (with a weaker estimator). However, their attack
does not apply with the classic estimator.

