Molecular Representation Learning via Heterogeneous Motif Graph Neural
Networks
Zhaoning Yu 1 Hongyang Gao 1

Abstract
We consider feature representation learning problem of molecular graphs. Graph Neural Networks
have been widely used in feature representation
learning of molecular graphs. However, most
existing methods deal with molecular graphs individually while neglecting their connections, such
as motif-level relationships. We propose a novel
molecular graph representation learning method
by constructing a heterogeneous motif graph to
address this issue. In particular, we build a heterogeneous motif graph that contains motif nodes and
molecular nodes. Each motif node corresponds
to a motif extracted from molecules. Then, we
propose a Heterogeneous Motif Graph Neural Network (HM-GNN) to learn feature representations
for each node in the heterogeneous motif graph.
Our heterogeneous motif graph also enables effective multi-task learning, especially for small
molecular datasets. To address the potential efficiency issue, we propose to use an edge sampler,
which can significantly reduce computational resources usage. The experimental results show
that our model consistently outperforms previous
state-of-the-art models. Under multi-task settings,
the promising performances of our methods on
combined datasets shed light on a new learning
paradigm for small molecular datasets. Finally,
we show that our model achieves similar performances with significantly less computational resources by using our edge sampler.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been proved to effectively solve various challenging tasks in graph embed1

Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University,
Ames, the United State of America. Correspondence to: Zhaoning
Yu <znyu@iastate.edu>, Hongyang Gao <hygao@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ding fields, such as node classification (Kipf & Welling,
2016), graph classification (Xu et al., 2018), and link prediction (Schlichtkrull et al., 2018), which have been extensively
applied in social networks, molecular properties prediction,
natural language processing, and other fields. Compared
with hand-crafted features in the molecular properties prediction field, GNNs map a molecular graph into a dimensional Euclidean space using the topological information
among the nodes in the graph (Scarselli et al., 2008). Most
existing GNNs use the basic molecular graphs topology to
obtain structural information through neighborhood feature
aggregation and pooling methods (Kipf & Welling, 2016;
Ying et al., 2018; Gao & Ji, 2019; Liu et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022). However, these methods fail to consider connections among molecular graphs, specifically the sharing
of motif patterns in the molecular graph.
One of the critical differences between molecular graphs
and other graph structures such as social network graphs and
citation graphs is that motifs, which can be seen as common
sub-graphs in molecular graphs have special meanings. For
example, an edge in a molecule represents a bond, and a
cycle represents a ring. One ground truth that has been
widely used in explanation of GNNs is that carbon rings and
NO2 groups tend to be mutagenic (Debnath et al., 1991).
Thus, motifs deserve more attention when designing GNNs
for motif-level feature representation learning.
In this work, we propose a novel method to learn motif-level
feature embedding for molecular graphs. Given molecular
graphs, we first extract motifs from them and build a motif
vocabulary containing all these motifs. Then we construct a
heterogeneous motif graph containing all motif nodes and
molecular nodes. We can apply GNNs to learn motif-level
representations for each molecular graph based on the heterogeneous motif graph. The message passing scheme in
a heterogeneous motif graph enables interaction between
motifs and molecules, which helps exchange information
between molecular graphs. The experimental results show
that the learned motif-level embedding can dramatically improve the representation of a molecule, and our model can
significantly outperform other state-of-the-art GNN models
on a variety of graph classification datasets. Also, our methods can serve as an new multi-task learning paradigm for
graph learning problems.

