Global Optimization of K-Center Clustering

Mingfei Shi * 1 Kaixun Hua * 1 Jiayang Ren 1 Yankai Cao 1

Abstract
k-center problem is a well-known clustering
method and can be formulated as a mixed-integer
nonlinear programming problem. This work provides a practical global optimization algorithm for
this task based on a reduced-space spatial branch
and bound scheme. This algorithm can guarantee convergence to the global optimum by only
branching on the centers of clusters, which is independent of the dataset’s cardinality. In addition,
a set of feasibility-based bounds tightening techniques are proposed to narrow down the domain
of centers and significantly accelerate the convergence. To demonstrate the capacity of this
algorithm, we present computational results on 32
datasets. Notably, for the dataset with 14 million
samples and 3 features, the serial implementation
of the algorithm can converge to an optimality
gap of 0.1% within 2 hours. Compared with a
heuristic method, the global optimum obtained by
our algorithm can reduce the objective function
on average by 30.4%.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental unsupervised machine learning
task that plays a vital role in various fields of applications,
such as customer grouping (Aggarwal et al., 2004), data
summarization (Kleindessner et al., 2019; Hesabi et al.,
2015), and facility location determination (Hansen et al.,
2009). Clustering aims to aggregate similar data into one
cluster and separate those in diverse into different clusters
(Pan et al., 2013). Cluster analysis can be formulated as
an optimization problem. Various objective functions are
designed and lead to different algorithms to find clusters
(Madhulatha, 2012).
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. Correspondence to: Yankai Cao
<yankai.cao@ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

This paper focuses on one of the most fundamental centroidbased clustering problems called the k-center problem. It
picks a subset of k samples as centers to represent k clusters,
and each sample is assigned to its closest center to form the
cluster. The distance from a sample to its closest center is
called the within-cluster distance. The objective of the kcenter problem is to minimize the maximum within-cluster
distance of the dataset (Kaufman & Rousseeuw, 2009). As
an NP-hard problem (Gonzalez, 1985), there is no way to
achieve an optimal solution in a polynomial-time unless
P = N P (Garey & Johnson, 1979). Therefore, many
heuristic approximation algorithms are developed to obtain
a near-optimal solution quickly.
The 2-approximation greedy algorithm is one of the most
effective heuristic ways to solve the k-center problem (Gonzalez, 1985). It starts from a randomly selected center, and
then the new centers are chosen as the farthest points to the
previously selected centers. Alpert & Kahng (1997) applied
a complete-linkage-based algorithm that can outperform
traditional algorithms with proper ordering heuristics for
sample. However, the experiments in (Aloise & Contardo,
2018) showed that it seldom finds optimal solutions. Parametric pruning (Hochbaum & Shmoys, 1985) transferred the
k-center problem as finding a minimum dominating set in a
pruned graph. It developed corresponding heuristics to solve
the dominating set problems. An experimental comparison
of these heuristic algorithms indicated the 2-approximation
greedy algorithm as the fastest in practical (Mihelič & Robic, 2005). Nevertheless, none of the above algorithms can
guarantee a global optimal solution for the k-center problem.
The exact algorithms that attempt to solve the k-center problem to global optimum lie in many directions. Early seminal
works focus on reducing searching space for the optimal
solution. For example, Daskin (2000) proposed an iterative
algorithm that solves the k-center problem by performing
a binary search over possible solution values. In each iteration, a set-covering problem is solved. Elloumi et al. (2004)
leveraged the binary search scheme, designed a new integer
linear programming formulation of the k-center problem,
and generated tighter lower bounds than pure LP relaxations.
It was the first algorithm that could solve a dataset of size
up to 1817 samples. Another direction to attain global optimum includes adopting a constraint programming frame-

