Generalization Guarantee of Training Graph Convolutional Networks with
Graph Topology Sampling

Hongkang Li 1 Meng Wang 1 Sijia Liu 2 3 Pin-Yu Chen 4 Jinjun Xiong 5

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have recently achieved great empirical success in learning graph-structured data. To address its scalability issue due to the recursive embedding of
neighboring features, graph topology sampling
has been proposed to reduce the memory and
computational cost of training GCNs, and it has
achieved comparable test performance to those
without topology sampling in many empirical
studies. To the best of our knowledge, this paper provides the first theoretical justification of
graph topology sampling in training (up to) threelayer GCNs for semi-supervised node classification. We formally characterize some sufficient
conditions on graph topology sampling such that
GCN training leads to a diminishing generalization error. Moreover, our method tackles the nonconvex interaction of weights across layers, which
is under-explored in the existing theoretical analyses of GCNs. This paper characterizes the impact
of graph structures and topology sampling on the
generalization performance and sample complexity explicitly, and the theoretical findings are also
justified through numerical experiments.

1. Introduction
Graph convolutional neural networks (GCNs) aggregate the
embedding of each node with the embedding of its neighbor1
Department of Electrical, Computer, and System Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University,
MI, USA 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, MA, USA
4
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY,
USA 5 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Hongkang Li
<lih35@rpi.edu>, Meng Wang <wangm7@rpi.edu>, Sijia Liu
<liusiji5@msu.edu>, Pin-yu Chen <Pin-Yu.Chen@ibm.com>,
Jinjun Xiong <jinjun@buffalo.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ing nodes in each layer. GCNs can model graph-structured
data more accurately and compactly than conventional neural networks and have demonstrated great empirical advantage in text analysis (Hamilton et al., 2017; Kipf & Welling,
2017; Veličković et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2017), computer
vision (Satorras & Estrach, 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Hu
et al., 2018), recommendation systems (Ying et al., 2018;
Van den Berg et al., 2018), physical reasoning (Battaglia
et al., 2016; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018), and biological
science (Duvenaud et al., 2015). Such empirical success is
often achieved at a cost of higher computational and memory
costs, especially for large graphs, because the embedding of
one node depends recursively on the neighbors. To alleviate
the exponential increase of computational cost in training
deep GCNs, various graph topology sampling methods have
been proposed to only aggregate the embeddings of a selected subset of neighbors in training GCNs. Node-wise
neighbor-sampling methods such as GraphSAGE (Hamilton
et al., 2017), VRGCN (Chen et al., 2018b), and ClusterGCN (Chiang et al., 2019) sample a subset of neighbors for
each node. Layer-wise importance sampling methods such
as FastGCN (Chen et al., 2018a) and LADIES (Zou et al.,
2019) sample a fixed number of nodes for each layer based
on the estimate of node importance. Another line of works
such as (Zheng et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2021) employ graph sparsification or pruning to reduce the
computational and memory cost. Surprisingly, these sampling methods often have comparable or even better testing
performance compared to training with the original graph
in many empirical studies (Chen et al., 2018a; 2021).
In contrast to the empirical success, the theoretical foundation of training GCNs with graph sampling is much less
investigated. Only Cong et al. (2021) analyzes the convergence rate of graph sampling, but no generalization analysis
is provided. One fundamental question about training GCNs
is still vastly open, which is:
Under what conditions does a GCN learned with graph
topology sampling achieve satisfactory generalization?
Our contributions: To the best of our knowledge, this
paper provides the first generalization analysis of training
GCNs with graph topology sampling. We focus on semi-

