A Data-Driven Approach for Learning to Control Computers

Peter Humphreys 1 David Raposo 1 Toby Pohlen 1 Gregory Thornton 1 Rachita Chhaparia 1 Alistair Muldal 1
Josh Abramson 1 Petko Georgiev 1 Adam Santoro 1 Timothy Lillicrap 1

Abstract
It would be useful for machines to use computers
as humans do so that they can aid us in everyday
tasks. This is a setting in which there is also the
potential to leverage large-scale expert demonstrations and human judgements of interactive
behaviour, which are two ingredients that have
driven much recent success in AI. Here we investigate the setting of computer control using keyboard and mouse, with goals specified via natural
language. Instead of focusing on hand-designed
curricula and specialized action spaces, we focus
on developing a scalable method centered on reinforcement learning combined with behavioural
priors informed by actual human-computer interactions. We achieve state-of-the-art and humanlevel mean performance across all tasks within
the MiniWob++ benchmark, a challenging suite
of computer control problems, and find strong evidence of cross-task transfer. These results demonstrate the usefulness of a unified human-agent
interface when training machines to use computers. Altogether our results suggest a formula for
achieving competency beyond MiniWob++ and
towards controlling computers, in general, as a
human would.

1. Introduction
Recent work on natural language (Brown et al., 2020; Rae
et al., 2021), code production (Chen et al., 2021), and multimodal interactive behaviour in 3D simulated worlds (DeepMind Interactive Agents Team, 2021) has produced models
with remarkable expressivity, context awareness, and general knowledge. This research is a striking demonstration
of the power of two ingredients: a rich, compositional output space that is congruent between machines and humans,
1

DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Peter Humphreys <peterhumphreys@deepmind.com>, Timothy
Lillicrap <countzero@deepmind.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and large amounts of human data and judgements to inform
machine behaviour.
One domain that has these two ingredients but has received
relatively less attention is digital device control (Shi et al.,
2017; Liu et al., 2018; Nakano et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2021; Shvo et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020; Toyama et al., 2021;
Gur et al., 2021), which comprises the use of digital devices
to accomplish a myriad of inherently useful tasks. Because
of its near exclusive use of digital information, this domain
scales well in regards to data acquisition and parallelization
of control (compared to, say, robotics or fusion reactors). It
also combines diverse, multimodal inputs with expressive,
composable, and human-compatible affordances. In this
work we focus on computer control using keyboard and
mouse, with pixel and Document Object Model (DOM)
observations.
A useful benchmark for initial investigations of computer
control is the MiniWob++ task suite (Shi et al., 2017; Liu
et al., 2018), which comprises a set of instruction following
tasks that require clicking, typing, form-filling, and other
such basic computer interactions (Fig. 1b). MiniWob++
further provides programmatically defined rewards. These
tasks are a first step towards more open-ended human-agent
interactions in which a human specifies a task using natural language and provides subsequent judgement about
performance (Li et al., 2016; Ammanabrolu et al., 2020;
DeepMind Interactive Agents Team, 2021).
We focus on training agents to solve these tasks using methods that can in principle apply to any task one hopes to perform on a digital device, and that have desirable data- and
compute-scaling properties. We therefore turn to a straightforward combination of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton
and Barto, 2018) and behavioural cloning (BC) (Pomerleau,
1989), the latter of which is aided by an alignment between
human and agent action spaces (i.e. keyboard and mouse).
This is a combination that was proposed at MiniWob’s conception (Shi et al., 2017), but was not found at the time
to produce high-scoring agents. Subsequent work consequently attempted to improve performance by giving agents
access to DOM-specific actions (Liu et al., 2018; Gur et al.,
2018; Jia et al., 2019), curricula (Gur et al., 2018), and
through constrained exploration techniques that reduce the

