Exploring and Exploiting Hubness Priors for High-Quality GAN
Latent Sampling

Yuanbang Liang 1 Jing Wu 1 Yu-Kun Lai 1 Yipeng Qin 1

Abstract
Despite the extensive studies on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), how to reliably sample high-quality images from their latent spaces
remains an under-explored topic. In this paper,
we propose a novel GAN latent sampling method
by exploring and exploiting the hubness priors of
GAN latent distributions. Our key insight is that
the high dimensionality of the GAN latent space
will inevitably lead to the emergence of hub latents that usually have much larger sampling densities than other latents in the latent space. As a
result, these hub latents are better trained and thus
contribute more to the synthesis of high-quality
images. Unlike the a posteriori “cherry-picking”,
our method is highly efficient as it is an a priori
method that identifies high-quality latents before
the synthesis of images. Furthermore, we show
that the well-known but purely empirical truncation trick is a naive approximation of the central
clustering effect of hub latents, which not only
uncovers the rationale of the truncation trick, but
also indicates the superiority and fundamentality
of our method. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method. Our code is available at: https://github.
com/Byronliang8/HubnessGANSampling.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a type of deep
generative models that have revolutionized a variety of applications in computer vision and computer graphics, e.g.
image synthesis (Karras et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019; Zhu
et al., 2020), image editing (Abdal et al., 2019; 2020; Tov
et al., 2021), image-to-image translation (Isola et al., 2017;
1

School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, CF24 4AG, UK. Correspondence to: Yipeng Qin
<qiny16@cardiff.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(c) Hub Latents
(a) Randomly Sampled
Latents

-NN

Latents
Mean
(b) Truncated Latents

Figure 1. Our method vs. random latent sampling and the truncation trick (Marchesi, 2017; Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al.,
2019). All images are generated using StyleGAN2 (Karras et al.,
2020). (a) Random latent sampling yields both high-quality (green
box) and low-quality (red box) images; (b) The truncation trick
improves the quality of synthesized images by empirically truncating randomly sampled latents according to a scaling parameter
ψ (e.g. ψ = 0.7), which is a naive approximation of the “central
clustering effect” of our hub latents; (c) Our method identifies
high-quality latents as the hub latents that are more likely to be
among the k-nearest neighbors of other latents (Radovanovic et al.,
2010). The blue and orange rings illustrate the high-dimensional
Gaussian (latent) distribution (Menon et al., 2020) and their truncated version respectively.

Zhu et al., 2017; Richardson et al., 2021). Among them,
novel image synthesis via random latent sampling is the
most fundamental. It not only generates novel instances
from the data distribution, but also measures how close the
learned distribution is to the data distribution. Through
the lens of the quality of synthesized images, we have witnessed significant progress in GANs over the past several
years. Specifically, starting from the groundbreaking vanilla
GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014), DCGAN (Radford et al.,
2015) laid the foundation for GAN architectures as deep convolutional neural networks; ProGAN (Karras et al., 2018)
showed that GANs can generate high-quality images at
high resolutions; BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019) addressed
the problem of class-conditional image synthesis; the StyleGAN series (Karras et al., 2019; 2020; 2021) further boosted

