Cascaded Gaps: Towards Logarithmic Regret for
Risk-Sensitive Reinforcement Learning

Yingjie Fei 1 Ruitu Xu 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study gap-dependent regret
guarantees for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning based on the entropic risk measure. We propose a novel definition of sub-optimality gaps,
which we call cascaded gaps, and we discuss
their key components that adapt to the underlying
structures of the problem. Based on the cascaded
gaps, we derive non-asymptotic and logarithmic
regret bounds for two model-free algorithms under episodic Markov decision processes. We
show that, in appropriate settings, these bounds
feature exponential improvement over existing
ones that are independent of gaps. We also prove
gap-dependent lower bounds, which certify the
near optimality of the upper bounds.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of risk-sensitive reinforcement learning (RL) based on the entropic risk measure, in which we
aim to identify a decision making rule (or policy) π
b that
solves the following optimization problem:
o
n
1
(1.1)
max V π = log(Eπ eβR ) ,
π
β
where R denotes the cumulative reward and β 6= 0 is
the risk parameter that induces risk-seeking learning when
β > 0 and risk-averse learning when β < 0. The (standard) risk-neutral objective function used in RL, which is
simply Eπ [R], can be recovered from Eq. (1.1) by setting
β → 0. Moreover, the objective of (1.1) in the form of
entropic risk measure admits a Taylor expansion V π =
Eπ [R] + β2 Varπ (R) + O(β 2 ), which represents a tradeoff between the expectation and the variance (and possibly higher-order statistics) of the reward. Several lines of
*

Alphabetical order 1 Bloomberg, New York, USA
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University,
USA. Correspondence to: Yingjie Fei <yf275@cornell.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

research on related problems have witnessed fruitful applications in a wide range of domains, including neuroscience
(Niv et al., 2012; Shen et al., 2014), robotics (Nass et al.,
2019; Williams et al., 2016; 2017), economics (Hansen and
Sargent, 2011), etc. The formulation (1.1) has been related
to notions of robustness (Osogami, 2012; Hansen and Sargent, 2011; Föllmer and Knispel, 2011) and bounded rationality (Simon, 1955; Ortega and Stocker, 2016) in decision
making and behavioral studies. A thermodynamic view on
such formulation has also been proposed for understanding sequential decision making systems (Ortega and Braun,
2013).
For problem (1.1), much recent work has been devoted to
designing algorithms that attain finite-sample regret bounds
under Markov decision processes (MDPs). Although the
existing bounds are nearly optimal in the minimax sense,
they are overly pessimistic as they generally fail to exploit particular structures of the underlying MDPs, such
as sub-optimality gaps, which quantify the easiness of
learning optimal policies under the MDPs. On the other
hand, while previous work has explored and provided gapdependent results for risk-neutral RL, it is unclear how
the sub-optimality gaps should be constructed in the risksensitive setting. In particular, the definition of existing
sub-optimality gaps, as we will elaborate in Section 4, crucially hinges on the linear structures of the risk-neutral
setting, which no longer hold in the risk-sensitive setting
characterized by the non-linear objective (1.1). It therefore begs the following natural questions: 1) how suboptimality gaps should be characterized in risk-sensitive
RL, and 2) whether we can obtain refined bounds on regret and sample complexity by taking advantage of the gap
structures.
To answer the above questions, we study gap-dependent regret bounds for risk-sensitive RL based on the entropic risk
measure. We begin by identifying two key conditions for
a proper definition of sub-optimality gaps for risk-sensitive
RL: Bellman difference condition and risk consistency condition. The Bellman difference condition states that the
gaps induce a Bellman equation in which they play the role
of reward functions; the risk consistency condition stipulates that the gaps stay on the same order of magnitude for

