How to Fill the Optimum Set?
Population Gradient Descent with Harmless Diversity

Chengyue Gong * 1 Lemeng Wu * 1 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract
Although traditional optimization methods focus
on finding a single optimal solution, most objective functions in modern machine learning problems, especially those in deep learning, often
have multiple or infinite number of optimal points.
Therefore, it is useful to consider the problem of
finding a set of diverse points in the optimum set
of an objective function. In this work, we frame
this problem as a bi-level optimization problem
of maximizing a diversity score inside the optimum set of the main loss function, and solve it
with a simple population gradient descent framework that iteratively updates the points to maximize the diversity score in a fashion that does
not hurt the optimization of the main loss. We
demonstrate that our method can efficiently generate diverse solutions on multiple applications, e.g.
text-to-image generation, text-to-mesh generation,
molecular conformation generation and ensemble
neural network training.

1. Introduction
Most traditional optimization methods in machine learning
aim to find a single optimal solution for a given objective
function. However, in many practical applications, the objective functions tend to have multiple or even infinite number
of (local or global) optimum points, for which it is of great
interest to find a set of diverse points that are representative
of the whole optimum set. This is tremendously useful in a
variety of machine learning tasks, including, for example,
ensemble learning (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2016; Pang
et al., 2019), robotics (Cully et al., 2015; Osa, 2020), generative models (Lee et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2021), latent space
exploration of generation models (Liu et al., 2021; Fontaine
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Chengyue Gong <cygong@cs.utexas.edu>, Lemeng Wu <lmwu@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

& Nikolaidis, 2021) robotics and reinforcement learning
(Vannoy & Xiao, 2008; Conti et al., 2017; Parker-Holder
et al., 2020).
Finding diverse solutions is particularly relevant in modern
deep learning applications, in which it is common to use
very large, overparameterized neural networks whose number of parameters is larger than the size of training data (e.g.
Radford et al., 2021; Fedus et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2020).
In these cases, the set of models that perfectly fit the training
data (and hence optimal w.r.t. the training loss) consist of
low dimensional manifolds of an infinite number of points.
It is hence useful to explore and profile the whole solution
manifold by finding diverse representative points.
A straightforward approach to obtaining multiple optimal
solutions is to run multiple trials of optimization with random initialization (e.g. Wu et al., 2017; Toscano-Palmerin &
Frazier, 2018). However, this does not explicitly enforce the
diversity preference. Another approach is to jointly optimize
a set of solutions with a diversity promoting regularization
term (e.g., Pang et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2015; Croce & Hein,
2020; Xie et al., 2016). However, the regularization term
can hurt the optimization of the main objective function
without a careful tuning of the regularization coefficient.
Evolutionary algorithms (e.g. Cully et al., 2015; Flageat &
Cully, 2020; Mouret & Clune, 2015) and genetic algorithms
(e.g. Lehman & Stanley, 2011b; Gomes et al., 2013; Lehman
& Stanley, 2011a) are also useful for finding diverse solutions. However, these black-box algorithms do not leverage
gradient information and tend to require a large number of
query points for large-scale optimization problems.
In this work, we consider this problem with a bi-level optimization perspective: we want to maximize a diversity
score of a set of points within the minimum set of a given
objective function (i.e., diversity within the optimum set).
We solve the problem with a simple gradient descent like
approach that iteratively updates a set of points to maximize the diversity score while minimizing the main loss in a
guaranteed fashion. The key feature of our method is that it
ensures to optimize the main loss as a typical optimization
method while adding diversity score as a secondary loss that
is minimized to the degree that does not hurt the main loss.

