Scaling Structured Inference with Randomization

Yao Fu 1 John P. Cunningham 2 3 Mirella Lapata 1

Abstract
Deep discrete structured models have seen considerable progress recently, but traditional inference using dynamic programming (DP) typically
works with a small number of states (less than
hundreds), which severely limits model capacity.
At the same time, across machine learning, there
is a recent trend of using randomized truncation
techniques to accelerate computations involving
large sums. Here, we propose a family of randomized dynamic programming (RDP) algorithms for
scaling structured models to tens of thousands of
latent states. Our method is widely applicable to
classical DP-based inference (partition function,
marginal, reparameterization, entropy) and different graph structures (chains, trees, and more
general hypergraphs). It is also compatible with
automatic differentiation: it can be integrated
with neural networks seamlessly and learned with
gradient-based optimizers. Our core technique
approximates the sum-product by restricting and
reweighting DP on a small subset of nodes, which
reduces computation by orders of magnitude. We
further achieve low bias and variance via RaoBlackwellization and importance sampling. Experiments over different graphs demonstrate the
accuracy and efficiency of our approach. RDP can
also be used to learn a structured variational autoencoder with a scaled inference network which
outperforms baselines in terms of test likelihood
and successfully prevents collapse.

1. Introduction
Deep discrete structured models (Martins et al., 2019; Rush,
2020) have enjoyed great progress recently, improving per1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh 2 Statistics
Department, Columbia University 3 Zuckerman Institute, Columbia
University. Correspondence to: Yao Fu <yao.fu@ed.ac.uk>,
John P. Cunningham <jpc2181@columbia.edu>, Mirella Lapata
<mlap@inf.ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

formance and interpretability in a range of tasks including
sequence tagging (Ma & Hovy, 2016), parsing (Zhang et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2021), and text generation (Wiseman
et al., 2018). However, their capacity is limited by issues of
scaling (Sun et al., 2019; Chiu & Rush, 2020; Yang et al.,
2021; Chiu et al., 2021). Traditional dynamic programming
based inference for exponential families has limited scalability with large combinatorial spaces. When integrating
exponential families with neural networks (e.g., a VAE with
a CRF inference network, detailed later), the small latent
combinatorial space severely restricts model capacity. Existing work has already observed improved performance
by scaling certain types of structures (Yang et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2020; Chiu & Rush, 2020), and researchers are eager
to know if there are general techniques for scaling classical
structured models.
Challenges in scaling structured models primarily come
from memory complexity. For example, consider linearchain CRFs (Sutton & McCallum, 2006), the classical sequence model that uses the Forward algorithm, a dynamic
programming algorithm, for computing the partition function exactly. This algorithm requires O(T N 2 ) computation where N is the number of latent states and T is the
length of the sequence. It is precisely the N 2 term that is
problematic in terms of memory and computation. This
limitation is more severe under automatic differentiation
(AD) frameworks as all intermediate DP computations are
stored for gradient construction. Generally, DP-based inference algorithms are not optimized for modern computational
hardware like GPUs and typically work under small-data
regimes, with N in the range [10, 100] (Ma & Hovy, 2016;
Wiseman et al., 2018). With larger N , inference becomes
intractable since the computation graph does not easily fit
into GPU memory (Sun et al., 2019).
Aligning with a recent trend of exploiting randomization
techniques for machine learning problems (Oktay et al.,
2020; Potapczynski et al., 2021; Beatson & Adams, 2019),
this work proposes a randomization framework for scaling
structured models, which encompasses a family of randomized dynamic programming algorithms with a wide coverage
of different structures and inference (Table 1). Within our
randomization framework, instead of summing over all possible combinations of latent states, we only sum over paths
with the most probable states and sample a subset of less

