Imitation Learning by Estimating Expertise of Demonstrators

Mark Beliaev * 1 Andy Shih * 2 Stefano Ermon 2 Dorsa Sadigh 2 Ramtin Pedarsani 1

Abstract
Many existing imitation learning datasets are collected from multiple demonstrators, each with
different expertise at different parts of the environment. Yet, standard imitation learning algorithms
typically treat all demonstrators as homogeneous,
regardless of their expertise, absorbing the weaknesses of any suboptimal demonstrators. In this
work, we show that unsupervised learning over
demonstrator expertise can lead to a consistent
boost in the performance of imitation learning algorithms. We develop and optimize a joint model
over a learned policy and expertise levels of the
demonstrators. This enables our model to learn
from the optimal behavior and filter out the suboptimal behavior of each demonstrator. Our model
learns a single policy that can outperform even
the best demonstrator, and can be used to estimate
the expertise of any demonstrator at any state.
We illustrate our findings on real-robotic continuous control tasks from Robomimic and discrete
environments such as MiniGrid and chess, outperforming competing methods in 21 out of 23
settings, with an average of 7% and up to 60%
improvement in terms of the final reward.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning provides a powerful and general
framework for tasks such as autonomous vehicles, assistive
robots, or conversation agents, by optimizing behavior with
respect to user-specified reward functions. However, online
interaction with the environment can be costly or even unsafe (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Mihatsch & Neuneier, 2002;
Hans et al., 2008; Garcıa & Fernández, 2015), and specify*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara
2
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Mark Beliaev <mbeliaev@ucsb.edu>, Andy Shih
<andyshih@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ing reward functions can be difficult in practice (HadfieldMenell et al., 2017). Instead, one can mitigate these issues
by viewing the problem through the lens of offline learning, where the learner either has access to demonstrations
of the task along with the corresponding reward values as
in offline reinforcement learning (Levine et al., 2020), or
only has access to expert demonstrations without any reward information as in imitation learning (Pomerleau, 1991;
Argall et al., 2009). In this work, we focus on the imitation
learning setting—only assuming access to demonstrations.
The success of offline methods crucially depends on the
availability of a large and diverse dataset (Pinto & Gupta,
2016; Fu et al., 2020) and as such, there has been a flurry
of work in collecting vast amounts of expert demonstrations in various domains (Sharma et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2018; Mandlekar et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2020; Mandlekar
et al., 2021). A common finding from these works is the
need for crowd-sourced data collection, both for scale and
for diversity (Sharma et al., 2018). For example, Roboturk (Mandlekar et al., 2019) reports data-collection from
54 different humans, and Robomimic (Mandlekar et al.,
2021) organizes its data into 6 different types of demonstrators with varying levels of expertise. Other works such as
CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017) use a mix of human and
autonomous agents for collecting demonstrations.
These crowd-sourced data collection pipelines inevitably
generate a diverse dataset of behavior from users with varying levels of expertise. Yet, current imitation learning algorithms typically treat these datasets as homogeneous. By
assuming all demonstrations are equally optimal, these algorithms may be blindly learning from the weaknesses of
suboptimal demonstrators. Instead, our work asks the question: can we make use of the knowledge that the trajectories
come from different demonstrators with various levels of
suboptimality? More specifically, can we use the information of which demonstrator provided which demonstration
to improve learning?
Our key insight is that imitation learning frameworks should
account for the varying levels of suboptimality in large offline datasets by leveraging information about demonstrator
identities. For example, say we learn to play chess by imitating from a large dataset of games. We do not know the
expertise levels of the players, but we do know which player

