Going Deeper into Permutation-Sensitive Graph Neural Networks

Zhongyu Huang 1 2 Yingheng Wang 3 4 Chaozhuo Li 5 Huiguang He 1 2 6

Abstract
The invariance to permutations of the adjacency
matrix, i.e., graph isomorphism, is an overarching requirement for Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs). Conventionally, this prerequisite can
be satisfied by the invariant operations over node
permutations when aggregating messages. However, such an invariant manner may ignore the
relationships among neighboring nodes, thereby
hindering the expressivity of GNNs. In this work,
we devise an efficient permutation-sensitive aggregation mechanism via permutation groups, capturing pairwise correlations between neighboring
nodes. We prove that our approach is strictly
more powerful than the 2-dimensional WeisfeilerLehman (2-WL) graph isomorphism test and not
less powerful than the 3-WL test. Moreover, we
prove that our approach achieves the linear sampling complexity. Comprehensive experiments on
multiple synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of our model.

1. Introduction
The invariance to permutations of the adjacency matrix, i.e.,
graph isomorphism, is a key inductive bias for graph representation learning (Murphy et al., 2019a). Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) invariant to graph isomorphism are more
amenable to generalization as different orderings of the
nodes result in the same representations of the underlying
graph. Therefore, many previous studies (Duvenaud et al.,
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 School
of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 4 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
5
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China 6 Center for Excellence
in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Zhongyu Huang
<huangzhongyu2020@ia.ac.cn>, Huiguang He (primary contact)
<huiguang.he@ia.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2015; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; Maron et al., 2019b) devote
much effort to designing permutation-invariant aggregators
to make the overall GNNs permutation-invariant (permutation of the nodes of the input graph does not affect the
output) or permutation-equivariant (permutation of the input permutes the output) to node orderings.
Despite their great success, Kondor et al. (2018) and de Haan
et al. (2020) expound that such a permutation-invariant manner may hinder the expressivity of GNNs. Specifically, the
strong symmetry of these permutation-invariant aggregators
presumes equal statuses of all neighboring nodes, ignoring
the relationships among neighboring nodes. Consequently,
the central nodes cannot distinguish whether two neighboring nodes are adjacent, failing to recognize and reconstruct
the fine-grained substructures within the graph topology. As
shown in Figure 1(a), the general Message Passing Neural
Networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017) can only explicitly
reconstruct a star graph from the 1-hop neighborhood, but
are powerless to model any connections between neighbors
(Chen et al., 2020). To address this problem, some latest
advances (Thiede et al., 2021; Zhang & Li, 2021; Zhao et al.,
2022; Bevilacqua et al., 2022) propose to use subgraphs or
ego-nets to improve the expressive power while preserving
the property of permutation-invariance. Unfortunately, they
usually suffer from high time or memory complexity when
operating on multiple subgraphs (Bevilacqua et al., 2022).
In contrast, the permutation-sensitive (as opposed to
permutation-invariant) function can be regarded as a
“symmetry-breaking” mechanism, which breaks the equal
statuses of neighboring nodes. The relationships among
neighboring nodes, e.g., the pairwise correlation between
each pair of neighboring nodes, are explicitly modeled in
the permutation-sensitive paradigm. These pairwise correlations help capture whether two neighboring nodes are
connected, thereby exploiting the local graph substructures
to improve the expressive power. We illustrate a concrete
example in Appendix D.
Different permutation-sensitive aggregation functions behave variously when modeling pairwise correlations. GraphSAGE with an LSTM aggregator (Hamilton et al., 2017)
in Figure 1(b) is capable of modeling some pairwise correlations among the sampled subset of neighboring nodes.

