Low-Precision Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics

Ruqi Zhang 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 2 Christopher De Sa 3

Abstract
While low-precision optimization has been widely
used to accelerate deep learning, low-precision
sampling remains largely unexplored. As a consequence, sampling is simply infeasible in many
large-scale scenarios, despite providing remarkable benefits to generalization and uncertainty estimation for neural networks. In this paper, we
provide the first study of low-precision Stochastic
Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD), showing
that its costs can be significantly reduced without sacrificing performance, due to its intrinsic
ability to handle system noise. We prove that
the convergence of low-precision SGLD with fullprecision gradient accumulators is less affected
by the quantization error than its SGD counterpart in the strongly convex setting. To further enable low-precision gradient accumulators, we develop a new quantization function for SGLD that
preserves the variance in each update step. We
demonstrate that low-precision SGLD achieves
comparable performance to full-precision SGLD
with only 8 bits on a variety of deep learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Low-precision optimization has become increasingly popular in reducing computation and memory costs of training
deep neural networks (DNNs). It uses fewer bits to represent
numbers in model parameters, activations, and gradients,
and thus can drastically lower resource demands (Gupta
et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2016; De Sa et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2017). Prior work has shown that using 8-bit numbers in
training DNNs achieves about 4× latency speed ups and
memory reduction compared to 32-bit numbers on a wide
variety of deep learning tasks (Sun et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2018b; Banner et al., 2018). As datasets
and architectures grow rapidly, performing low-precision
1

The University of Texas at Austin 2 New York University 3 Cornell University. Correspondence to: Ruqi Zhang
<ruqiz@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

optimization enables training large-scale DNNs efficiently
and enables many applications on different hardware and
platforms.
Despite the impressive progress in low-precision optimization, low-precision sampling remains largely unexplored.
However, we believe stochastic gradient Markov chain
Monte Carlo (SGMCMC) methods (Welling & Teh, 2011;
Chen et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2015) are particularly suited
for low-precision arithmetic because of their intrinsic robustness to system noise. In particular: (1) SGMCMC explores weight space instead of converging to a single point,
thus it should not require precise weights or gradients; (2)
SGMCMC even adds noise to the system to encourage exploration and so is naturally more tolerant to quantization
noise; (3) SGMCMC performs Bayesian model averaging
during testing using an ensemble of models, which allows
coarse representations of individual models to be compensated by the overall model average (Zhu et al., 2019).
SGMCMC is particularly compelling in Bayesian deep
learning due to its ability to characterize complex and multimodal DNN posteriors, providing state-of-the-art generalization accuracy and calibration (Zhang et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2016; Gan et al., 2017; Heek & Kalchbrenner, 2019). Moreover, low-precision approaches are especially appealing in
this setting, where at test time we must store samples from a
posterior over millions of parameters, and perform multiple
forward passes through the corresponding models, which
incurs significant memory and computational expenses.
In this paper, we give the first comprehensive study of
low-precision Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics
(SGLD) (Welling & Teh, 2011), providing both theoretical convergence bounds and promising empirical results
in deep learning. On strongly log-concave distributions
(i.e. strongly convex functions for SGD), we prove that
the convergence of SGLD with full-precision gradient accumulators is more robust to the quantization error than its
counterpart in SGD. Surprisingly, we find that SGLD with
low-precision gradient accumulators can diverge arbitrarily
far away from the target distribution with small stepsizes.
We identify the source of the issue and develop a new quantization function to correct the bias with minimal overhead.
Empirically, we demonstrate low-precision SGLD across
different tasks, showing that it is able to provide superior

