DNNR: Differential Nearest Neighbors Regression

Youssef Nader * 1 Leon Sixt * 1 Tim Landgraf 1

Abstract
K-nearest neighbors (KNN) is one of the earliest and most established algorithms in machine
learning. For regression tasks, KNN averages the
targets within a neighborhood which poses a number of challenges: the neighborhood definition is
crucial for the predictive performance as neighbors might be selected based on uninformative
features, and averaging does not account for how
the function changes locally. We propose a novel
method called Differential Nearest Neighbors Regression (DNNR) that addresses both issues simultaneously: during training, DNNR estimates local
gradients to scale the features; during inference,
it performs an n-th order Taylor approximation
using estimated gradients. In a large-scale evaluation on over 250 datasets, we find that DNNR
performs comparably to state-of-the-art gradient
boosting methods and MLPs while maintaining
the simplicity and transparency of KNN. This
allows us to derive theoretical error bounds and
inspect failures. In times that call for transparency
of ML models, DNNR provides a good balance
between performance and interpretability.2

1. Introduction
K-nearest neighbors (KNN) is an early machine learning
algorithm (Cover & Hart, 1967) and a prototypical example
for a transparent algorithm. Transparency means that a
model’s decision can be explained by inspecting of its parts.
KNN’s transparency follows from its simplicity: it can be
expressed in simple terms as ”the system averages the targets
of the most similar points to the query”. At the same time,
the algorithm’s simplicity makes it amenable for theoretical
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Freie
Universität Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Youssef
Nader <youssef.nader@fu-berlin.de>, Leon Sixt <leon.sixt@fuberlin.de>, Tim Landgraf <tim.landgraf@fu-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
2
For code, see https://github.com/younader/
DNNR paper code

analysis, such as obtaining bounds on KNN’s prediction
error (Chaudhuri & Dasgupta, 2014).
However, KNN’s predictive performance is limited. Most
works aiming to improve KNN primarily focused on the
selection of the neighbors, the distance metric, and the
number of nearest neighbors k (Wettschereck & Dietterich,
1993; Weinberger & Tesauro, 2007; Cleary & Trigg, 1995).
KNN’s averaging scheme assumes that the target variable’s
changes are independent of those in the input features.
Here, we introduce Differential Nearest Neighbor Regression (DNNR) to make use of that very gradient information.
For each neighbor of a query point, we estimate the gradient
of the function, and then – instead of averaging the targets –
we average a Taylor approximation. KNN can then be seen
as a zero-order Taylor approximation, while DNNR uses
higher orders of the Taylor’s theorem. A visual summary of
the differences between KNN regression and DNNR can be
found in Figure 1.
In a theoretical analysis, we derived a bound on the pointwise error of DNNR in relation to parameters such as the
number of training points and the neighborhood size and
found that the error bound favors DNNR over KNN. In
an empirical evaluation on over 250 different datasets, we
confirmed that DNNR outperforms KNN regression and performs on par with gradient boosting methods. An ablation
study then confirmed that both the gradient-based prediction
and the feature scaling contribute to the performance gains.
Using a synthetic dataset generated with known underlying
ground truth, we simulated the error bound and found that
DNNR requires fewer training points than KNN. Furthermore, we present an investigation on a DNNR failure and
showcase how the model’s transparency can be used in such
an analysis.
The regulation of Machine Learning algorithms in high-risk
applications is being discussed globally or already under
preparation (European Commission, 2021). We contribute
to the overall goal of transparent and safer ML models in
the following ways:
• We propose a new regression method (DNNR) that
performs on par with state-of-the-art algorithms;
• DNNR is theoretically grounded: we provide a proof
to bound DNNR’s point-wise error (Theorem 1) and
validate its usefulness empirically;

