Functional Generalized Empirical Likelihood Estimation for
Conditional Moment Restrictions
Heiner Kremer 1 Jia-Jie Zhu 2 Krikamol Muandet 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract
Important problems in causal inference, economics, and, more generally, robust machine
learning can be expressed as conditional moment
restrictions, but estimation becomes challenging
as it requires solving a continuum of unconditional moment restrictions. Previous works addressed this problem by extending the generalized method of moments (GMM) to continuum
moment restrictions. In contrast, generalized empirical likelihood (GEL) provides a more general
framework and has been shown to enjoy favorable small-sample properties compared to GMMbased estimators. To benefit from recent developments in machine learning, we provide a functional reformulation of GEL in which arbitrary
models can be leveraged. Motivated by a dual formulation of the resulting infinite dimensional optimization problem, we devise a practical method
and explore its asymptotic properties. Finally, we
provide kernel- and neural network-based implementations of the estimator, which achieve stateof-the-art empirical performance on two conditional moment restriction problems.

1. Introduction
Moment restrictions identify a parameter of interest by restricting the expectation value of so-called moment functions, which depend on the parameter and random variables
representing the underlying noisy data generating process.
Important problems in causal inference, economics, and
generally robust machine learning can be cast in this form
(Newey, 1993; Ai and Chen, 2003; Bennett and Kallus,
2020b; Dikkala et al., 2020). Particularly challenging are
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics,
Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Heiner Kremer <hkremer@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

problems formulated as conditional moment restrictions
(CMR), which constrain the conditional expectation of the
moment function. Such problems appear, e.g., in instrumental variable (IV) regression (Newey and Powell, 2003;
Angrist and Pischke, 2008), where the expectation of the
residual of the prediction conditioned on so-called instruments is restricted to be zero. Other applications are policy
learning (Bennett and Kallus, 2020a) and off-policy evaluation in reinforcement learning (Kallus and Uehara, 2020;
Bennett et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021) and double/debiased
machine learning (Chernozhukov et al., 2016; 2017; 2018).
As conditional moment restrictions are difficult to handle
directly, a common approach is to transform them into an
infinite number of corresponding unconditional moment
restrictions (Bierens, 1982). Generalizing the corresponding estimation methods from the finite dimensional case
to the infinite case is an active area of research (Carrasco
and Florens, 2000; Carrasco et al., 2007; Chaussé, 2012;
Carrasco and Kotchoni, 2017; Muandet et al., 2020; Bennett
and Kallus, 2020b; Zhang et al., 2021).
One of the most popular approaches to learning with moment restrictions is Hansen’s celebrated generalized method
of moments (GMM) (Hansen, 1982). In order to improve
the small sample properties of GMM estimators, alternative
methods have been proposed and are generally known as
generalized empirical likelihood (GEL) estimators (Smith,
1997; 2005; Newey and Smith, 2004). GEL generalizes
the original empirical likelihood framework developed by
Owen (1988; 1990); Qin and Lawless (1994) to different
divergence functions and contains many related estimators
as special cases. While closely related to GMM, the estimators from the GEL family have been shown theoretically
to exhibit smaller higher-order-biases than those of GMM
(Newey and Smith, 2004) and therefore promise to have
favorable small sample properties. With increasing number
of overidentifying restrictions, i.e., when the number of restrictions exceeds the number of parameters, this advantage
has been shown theoretically to become more significant
(Newey and Smith, 2002; Donald et al., 2003). Therefore,
we expect the framework to be particularly suited for the
case of infinitely many restrictions. We leverage this potential for conditional moment restrictions by developing the
theoretical foundation for a GEL framework with continua

