Measuring the Effect of Training Data on Deep Learning Predictions via
Randomized Experiments

Jinkun Lin * 1 Anqi Zhang * 1 Mathias Lécuyer 2 Jinyang Li 1 Aurojit Panda 1 Siddhartha Sen 3

Abstract
We develop a new, principled algorithm for estimating the contribution of training data points
to the behavior of a deep learning model, such
as a specific prediction it makes. Our algorithm
estimates the AME, a quantity that measures the
expected (average) marginal effect of adding a
data point to a subset of the training data, sampled from a given distribution. When subsets are
sampled from the uniform distribution, the AME
reduces to the well-known Shapley value. Our approach is inspired by causal inference and randomized experiments: we sample different subsets of
the training data to train multiple submodels, and
evaluate each submodel’s behavior. We then use
a LASSO regression to jointly estimate the AME
of each data point, based on the subset compositions. Under sparsity assumptions (k  N datapoints have large AME), our estimator requires
only O(k log N ) randomized submodel trainings,
improving upon the best prior Shapley value estimators.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) is now ubiquitous, with black-box
models such as deep neural networks (DNNs) powering an
ever increasing number of applications, yielding social and
economic benefits. However, these complex models are
the result of long, iterative training procedures over large
amounts of data, which make them hard to understand, debug, and protect. As an important first step towards addressing these challenges, we must be able to solve the problem
of data attribution, which aims to pinpoint training data
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, New
York University, New York, NY 2 University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada 3 Microsoft Research, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Jinkun Lin <jinkun.lin@nyu.edu>, Mathias
Lécuyer <mathias.lecuyer@ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

points with significant contributions to specific model behavior. There are many use cases for data attribution: it can
be used to assign value to different training data based on
the accuracy improvements they bring (Koh et al., 2019; Jia
et al., 2019), explain the source of (mis)predictions (Koh &
Liang, 2017; Basu et al., 2020), or find faulty data points resulting from data bugs (Chakarov et al., 2016) or malicious
poisoning (Shafahi et al., 2018).
Existing principled approaches to explain how training data
points influence DNN behavior either measure Influence
functions (Koh & Liang, 2017) or Shapley values (Ghorbani
& Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019). Influence provides a local explanation that misses complex dependencies between
data points as well as contributions that build up over time
during training (Basu et al., 2020). While Shapley values
account for complex dependencies, they are prohibitively
expensive to calculate: exact computation requires O(2N )
model evaluations, and the best known approximation requires O(N log log N ) model evaluations, where N is the
number of data points in the training set (Jia et al., 2019).
In this paper, we propose a new, principled metric for data
attribution. Our metric, called AME, measures the contribution of each training data point to a given behavior of
the trained model (e.g., a specific prediction, or test set accuracy). AME is defined as the expected marginal effect
contributed by a data point to the model behavior over randomly selected subsets of the data. Intuitively, a data point
has a large AME when adding it to the training data affects
the behavior under study, regardless of which other data
points are present. We show that the AME can be efficiently
estimated using a carefully designed LASSO regression under the sparsity assumption (i.e., there are k  N data
points with large AME values). In particular, our estimator
requires only O(k log N ) evaluations, which makes it practical to use with large training sets. When using AME to
detect data poisoning/corruption, we also extend our estimator to provide control over the false positive rate using the
Knockoffs method (Candes et al., 2016).
When the size of subsets used by our algorithm is drawn
uniformly, the AME reduces to the Shapley value (SV). As
a result, our AME estimator provides a new method for
estimating the SVs of all training data points; under the

