On Learning Mixture of Linear Regressions in the Non-Realizable Setting

Avishek Ghosh 1 Arya Mazumdar 1 Soumyabrata Pal 2 Rajat Sen 3

Abstract
While mixture of linear regressions (MLR) is a
well-studied topic, prior works usually do not analyze such models for prediction error. In fact, prediction and loss are not well-defined in the context
of mixtures. In this paper, first we show that MLR
can be used for prediction where instead of predicting a label, the model predicts a list of values
(also known as list-decoding). The list size is equal
to the number of components in the mixture, and
the loss function is defined to be minimum among
the losses resulted by all the component models.
We show that with this definition, a solution of the
empirical risk minimization (ERM) achieves small
probability of prediction error. This begs for an
algorithm to minimize the empirical risk for MLR,
which is known to be computationally hard. Prior
algorithmic works in MLR focus on the realizable setting, i.e., recovery of parameters when data
is probabilistically generated by a mixed linear
(noisy) model. In this paper we show that a version
of the popular alternating minimization (AM) algorithm finds the best fit lines in a dataset even when
a realizable model is not assumed, under some
regularity conditions on the dataset and the initial points, and thereby provides a solution for the
ERM. We further provide an algorithm that runs in
polynomial time in the number of datapoints, and
recovers a good approximation of the best fit lines.
The two algorithms are experimentally compared.

1. Introduction
For unsupervised learning, a standard way to represent the
presence of sub-populations within an overall population
is the use of mixture models. In many important applications
ranging from financial models to genetics, a mixture model
is used to fit the heterogeneous data. Mixture models, in
1

Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute (HDSI), UC San Diego, USA
Google Research, India 3 Google Research, Palo Alto, USA. Correspondence to: Soumyabrata Pal <soumyabrata@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright
2022 by the author(s).

particular mixture of Gaussian distributions, have been
extensively studied from both the perspective of statistical
inference and algorithmic approaches (Dasgupta, 1999;
Achlioptas & McSherry, 2005; Kalai et al., 2010; Belkin &
Sinha, 2010; Arora & Kannan, 2001; Moitra & Valiant, 2010;
Feldman et al., 2008; Chan et al., 2014; Acharya et al., 2017;
Hopkins & Li, 2018; Diakonikolas et al., 2018; Kothari et al.,
2018; Hardt & Price, 2015).
A relatively recent use of mixtures is to model functional relationships (as in supervised learning). Most prominent among
these is the mixed linear regression problem (De Veaux,
1989). In this setting, each sample is a tuple of (covariates,
label). The label is stochastically generated by picking a
linear relation uniformly from a set of two or more linear
functions, evaluating this function on the covariates and
possibly adding noise. The goal is to learn the set of
unknown linear functions. The problem has some recent
attention (Chaganty & Liang, 2013; Faria & Soromenho,
2010; Städler et al., 2010; Li & Liang, 2018; Kwon &
Caramanis, 2018; Viele & Tong, 2002; Yi et al., 2014; 2016;
Balakrishnan et al., 2017; Klusowski et al., 2019), with an
emphasis on the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm
and other alternating minimization (AM) techniques.
However, it is to be noted, all of these previous works on
mixed-linear regression and their algorithmic guarantees,
assumes a generative model for the data, and then provides
sample-complexity guarantees for parameter-estimation. On
the other hand, in the non-realizable setting, where one is just
provided with a set of (covariates, label) pairs, algorithmic
methods to find two or more optimal lines were never
explored. This is in sharp contrast with high-dimensional
Gaussian mixtures, where in the non-realizable setting, the
k-means, k-median, and similar objective functions are
incredibly popular, and the algorithmic guarantees focus on
approximating the objective of cost function (lack of generative modeling implies no parameter estimation to be done).
For example, the famous k-means++ algorithm provides an
approximate answer with a cost within log k-factor of the
optimal value (Vassilvitskii & Arthur, 2006).
This begs the question, in the non-realizable data-dependent
setting what is a loss/risk function that one should aim to
minimize to find the best-fitting lines? Given a set of lines,
our objective should be to assign a data-sample to the line that

