Accurate Quantization of Measures via Interacting Particle-based Optimization

Lantian Xu 1 Anna Korba 2 Dejan Slepčev 1

Abstract
Approximating a target probability distribution
can be cast as an optimization problem where the
objective functional measures the dissimilarity to
the target. This optimization can be addressed by
approximating Wasserstein and related gradient
flows. In practice, these are simulated by interacting particle systems, whose stationary states
define an empirical measure approximating the
target distribution. This approach has been popularized recently to design sampling algorithms,
e.g. Stein Variational Gradient Descent, or by
minimizing the Maximum Mean or Kernel Stein
Discrepancy. However, little is known about quantization properties of these approaches, i.e. how
well is the target approximated by a finite number
particles. We investigate this question theoretically and numerically. In particular, we prove
general upper bounds on the quantization error
of MMD and KSD at rates which significantly
outperform quantization by i.i.d. samples. We
conduct experiments which show that the particle systems at study achieve fast rates in practice, and notably outperform greedy algorithms,
such as kernel herding. We compare different
gradient flows and highlight their quantization
rates. Furthermore we introduce a Normalized
Stein Variational Gradient Descent and argue in
favor of adaptive kernels, which exhibit faster convergence. Finally we compare the Gaussian and
Laplace kernels and argue that the Laplace kernel
provides a more robust quantization.

1. Introduction
Approximating a probability distribution π only known up to
a normalization
R constant by a finite set of points, to compute
functionals f (x)dπ(x) (e.g. expectations, quantiles) is a
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris. Correspondence to: Lantian Xu <lxu2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

central task in machine learning and computational statistics,
often referred to as sampling. The error made when approximating the integral of interest by an average over n support
points is typically called the integral approximation error.
A large number of methods have been developed to tackle
this problem. For instance, Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods generate a Markov chain whose law converges to π under mild assumptions (Roberts & Rosenthal,
2004). However, iterates of these chains might bunch up and
cover the target distribution in an irregular, thus inefficient
way with respect to the number of points. More precisely,
the integral approximation error of MCMC methods is of
1
order O(n− 2 ) when using n particles (Łatuszyński et al.,
2013). Hence, a large body of work has been focused on
designing post-processing methods on MCMC algorithms
output to reduce the finite-sample error (Riabiz et al., 2020;
Hodgkinson et al., 2020; Teymur et al., 2021; Chopin &
Ducrocq, 2021). In contrast, Quasi-Monte Carlo methods
(Sobol, 1998; Dick & Pillichshammer, 2010) create more
regularly-spaced sample sets to achieve faster convergence.
Recently, several algorithms for sampling relying on deterministic particle systems have been proposed in the literature, as alternatives to MCMC algorithms. In a nutshell, one
casts the sampling problem as minimizing a discrepancy
(between probability distributions) to the target measure
π, and discretize Wasserstein, or other, gradient flows of
this discrepancy. The best known example is Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) algorithm (Liu & Wang,
2016), that proposes a deterministic gradient descent of the
Kullback-Leibler divergence in Stein geometry that can be
seen as a kernel smoothed relative of the Wasserstein metric.
In particular the velocities of SVGD are smoother than for
the Wasserstein gradient flow of the same energy. The simplicity of the algorithm and its relative success on machine
learning tasks, such as sampling e.g. for Bayesian inference
(Liu & Wang, 2016; Liu & Zhu, 2018), learning deep probabilistic models (Pu et al., 2017), and more recently Bayesian
deep learning (D’Angelo et al., 2021; D’Angelo & Fortuin,
2021) has raised a lot of interest in the sampling literature
and popularized the method. More recently, the minimization of other discrepancies have been investigated, such as
the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (Arbel et al., 2019) or
the Kernel Stein Discrepancy (Korba et al., 2021). While
the first one is closely related to optimizing shallow neural

