Unraveling Attention via Convex Duality:
Analysis and Interpretations of Vision Transformers

Arda Sahiner 1 Tolga Ergen 1 Batu Ozturkler 1 John Pauly 1 Morteza Mardani 2 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract
Vision transformers using self-attention or its proposed alternatives have demonstrated promising
results in many image related tasks. However,
the underpinning inductive bias of attention is
not well understood. To address this issue, this
paper analyzes attention through the lens of convex duality. For the non-linear dot-product selfattention, and alternative mechanisms such as
MLP-mixer and Fourier Neural Operator (FNO),
we derive equivalent finite-dimensional convex
problems that are interpretable and solvable to
global optimality. The convex programs lead to
block nuclear-norm regularization that promotes
low rank in the latent feature and token dimensions. In particular, we show how self-attention
networks implicitly clusters the tokens, based on
their latent similarity. We conduct experiments
for transferring a pre-trained transformer backbone for CIFAR-100 classification by fine-tuning
a variety of convex attention heads. The results indicate the merits of the bias induced by attention
compared with the existing MLP or linear heads.

1. Introduction
Transformers have recently delivered tremendous success
for representation learning in language and vision. This is
primarily due to the attention mechanism that effectively
mixes the tokens’ representation over the layers to learn
the semantics present in the input1 . After the inception of
dot-product self-attention (Vaswani et al., 2017), there have
been several efficient alternatives that scale nicely with the
sequence size for large pretraining tasks; see e.g., (Wang
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA 2 NVIDIA Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Arda Sahiner <sahiner@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
We use the terms “attention”, “token mixing”, and “mixing”
interchangeably throughout this paper.

et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2021; Kitaev et al., 2020; Panahi
et al., 2021; Xiong et al., 2021). However, the learnable
inductive bias of attention is not explored well. A strong
theoretical understanding of attention’s inductive bias can
motivate designing more efficient architectures, and can
explain the generalization ability of these networks.
Self-attention was the fundamental building block in the
first proposed vision transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020). It consists of an outer product of two linear functions,
followed by a non-linearity and a product with another linear
function, which makes it non-convex and non-interpretable.
One approach to understand attention has been to design
new alternatives to self-attention which perform similarly
well, which may help explain its underlying mechanisms.
One set of work pertains to Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
based architectures, (Tolstikhin et al., 2021; Tatsunami &
Taki, 2021; Touvron et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Yu et al.,
2021), while another line of work proposes Fourier based
models (Lee-Thorp et al., 2021; Rao et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2020; Guibas et al., 2021). Others have proposed replacing self-attention with matrix decomposition (Geng et al.,
2021). While all of these works have appealing applications
that leverage general concepts about the structure of attention, they lack any fine-tuned theoretical analysis on these
architectures from an optimization perspective.
To address this shortcoming, we leverage convex duality to
analyze a single block of self-attention with ReLU activation. Since self-attention incurs quadratic complexity in the
sequence, we alternatively analyze more efficient modules.
As representatives for more efficient modules, we focus on
MLP Mixers (Tolstikhin et al., 2021) and Fourier Neural
Operators (FNO) (Li et al., 2020). MLP-mixer mixes tokens (purely) using MLP projections in both the token and
feature dimensions. In contrast, FNO mixes tokens using
circular convolution that is efficiently implemented based
on 2D Fourier transforms.
We find that all three of these analyzed modules are equivalent to finite-dimensional convex optimization problems,
indicating that there are guarantees to provably optimize
them to their global optima. Furthermore, we make novel
observations about the bias induced by the convex models.
In particular, convexified equivalents of both self-attention

