Datamodels: Predicting Predictions from Training Data

Andrew Ilyas * 1 Sung Min Park * 1 Logan Engstrom * 1 Guillaume Leclerc 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract
We present a conceptual framework, datamodeling, for analyzing the behavior of a model class
in terms of the training data. For any fixed “target” example x, training set S, and learning algorithm, a datamodel is a parameterized function 2S → R that for any subset of S 0 ⊂ S—
using only information about which examples of
S are contained in S 0 —predicts the outcome of
training a model on S 0 and evaluating on x. Despite the complexity of the underlying process
that is being approximated (e.g. end-to-end training and evaluation of deep neural networks), we
show that even simple linear datamodels successfully predict model outputs. We then demonstrate that datamodels give rise to a variety of applications, such as: accurately predicting the effect of dataset counterfactuals; identifying brittle
predictions; finding semantically similar examples; quantifying train-test leakage; and embedding data into a well-behaved and feature-rich
representation space.

1. Introduction and Setup
What kinds of biases does my (machine learning) system
exhibit? On what subpopulations does it perform well (or
poorly)? A recent body of work suggests that the answers
to these questions lie within both the learning algorithm and
the training data used. However, it is often difficult to understand how these two factors combine to yield model predictions. In this work, we present datamodeling—a framework for tackling this issue by forming an explicit model
for predictions in terms of the training data.

puts a trained model. This learning algorithm need not be
deterministic—for example, A might encode the process of
training a neural network from random initialization.
Now, consider a fixed target example x and define
fA (x; S) := the outcome of training a model on S
using A, and evaluating it on the input x,

(1)

where we leave “outcome” intentionally broad to capture a
variety of settings that one might care about. For example,
fA (x; S) may be the cross-entropy loss of a classifier on
x, or the error of a regression model on x. The potential
stochasticity of A means fA (x; S) is a random variable.
Goal. Broadly, we aim to understand how the training examples in S combine through the learning algorithm A to
yield fA (x; S) (again, for the specific example x that we
are examining). Towards this goal, we will leverage a classic technique for studying complex black-box functions:
surrogate modeling (Sacks et al., 1989). In surrogate modeling, one replaces complex functions with inexact but significantly easier-to-analyze approximations, then uses the
latter to shed light on the behavior of the original functions.
In our setting, the complex black-box function is fA (x; ·).
We thus aim to find a simple surrogate function g(S 0 )
whose output roughly matches fA (x; S 0 ) for a variety of
training sets S 0 (but again, for a fixed example x). Achieving this goal would reduce the challenge of scrutinizing
fA (x; ·)—and more generally, the map from training data
to predictions as mediated by learning algorithm A—to the
(hopefully easier) task of analyzing g.

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT. Correspondence to: Andrew Ilyas
<ailyas@mit.edu>.

Datamodeling. By parameterizing the surrogate function
g (as gθ , for a parameter vector θ), we transform the challenge of constructing a surrogate into a supervised learning
problem. In this problem, the “training examples” are subsets S 0 ⊂ S of the original task’s training set S, and the
corresponding “labels” are given by fA (x; S 0 ) (which we
can compute by training a new model on S 0 with algorithm
A, and evaluating on x). Our goal is then to fit a parametric
function gθ mapping the former to the latter.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We now formalize this as datamodeling—the framework
that forms the basis of our work. In this framework, we first
fix a distribution over subsets that we will use to collect the

Setting. Consider a typical machine learning setup, starting with a training set S comprising d input-label pairs.
The focal point of this setup is a learning algorithm A that
takes in such a training set of input-label pairs, and out-

