Risk-Averse No-Regret Learning in Online Convex Games

Zifan Wang 1 Yi Shen 2 Michael M. Zavlanos 2

Abstract
We consider an online stochastic game with riskaverse agents whose goal is to learn optimal decisions that minimize the risk of incurring significantly high costs. Specifically, we use the Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) as a risk measure
that the agents can estimate using bandit feedback
in the form of the cost values of only their selected actions. Since the distributions of the cost
functions depend on the actions of all agents that
are generally unobservable, they are themselves
unknown and, therefore, the CVaR values of the
costs are difficult to compute. To address this
challenge, we propose a new online risk-averse
learning algorithm that relies on one-point zerothorder estimation of the CVaR gradients computed
using CVaR values that are estimated by appropriately sampling the cost functions. We show that
this algorithm achieves sub-linear regret with high
probability. We also propose two variants of this
algorithm that improve performance. The first
variant relies on a new sampling strategy that uses
samples from the previous iteration to improve the
estimation accuracy of the CVaR values. The second variant employs residual feedback that uses
CVaR values from the previous iteration to reduce
the variance of the CVaR gradient estimates. We
theoretically analyze the convergence properties
of these variants and illustrate their performance
on an online market problem that we model as a
Cournot game.

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) aims at solving optimization problems with unknown cost functions using only
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. 2 Department
of Mechanical Engineering & Material Science, Duke University,
Durham, NC 27708, USA. Correspondence to: Zifan Wang <zifanwang199710@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

samples of the cost function values. Many practical applications can be modeled as OCO problems. Examples include
spam filtering (Hazan, 2019) and portfolio management
(Hazan, 2006), among many others (Shalev-Shwartz et al.,
2011). Oftentimes, OCO problems involve multiple agents
interacting with each other in the same environment; for
instance, in traffic routing (Sessa et al., 2019) and economic
market optimization (Shi & Zhang, 2019), agents cooperate
or compete, respectively, by sequentially selecting the best
decisions that minimize their expected accumulated costs.
These problems can be formulated as online convex games
(Shalev-Shwartz & Singer, 2006; Gordon et al., 2008), and
constitute the focus of this paper.
Typically, the performance of online optimization algorithms is measured using different notions of regret (Hazan,
2019), that capture the difference between the agents’ online
decisions and the optimal decisions in hindsight. An online
algorithm is said to be no-regret (no-external-regret) if its
regret is sub-linear in time (Gordon et al., 2008), i.e., if the
agents are able to eventually learn the optimal decisions.
Many no-regret algorithms have been proposed and analyzed for online convex games including (Shalev-Shwartz
& Singer, 2006; Gordon et al., 2008; Hazan, 2019; ShalevShwartz et al., 2011). Common in these problems is the
objective of the agents to minimize their expected cost functions. However, in high-stakes applications, minimizing the
expected cost alone is not sufficient; avoiding the worst case
is equally important. For example, in portfolio management,
investing in the assets that yield the highest expected return
rate is not necessarily the best decision since these assets
may also be highly volatile and result in severe losses. To
control for such catastrophic events, appropriate risk-averse
criteria need to be considered during optimization, such as
the Sharpe Ratio (Sharpe, 1994) or Conditional Value at
Risk (CVaR) (Artzner et al., 1999).
In this paper, we consider online convex games with riskaverse agents, whose goal is to minimize the CVaR values
of their cost functions. Moreover, we assume that only bandit feedback in the form of the costs of selected actions is
available to the agents to estimate their CVaR values. To
the best of our knowledge, risk-averse learning in convex
games has not been explored in the literature. Most closely
related to the problem considered here is work on deterministic online convex games with bandit feedback, including

