The Combinatorial Brain Surgeon:
Pruning Weights That Cancel One Another in Neural Networks

Xin Yu * 1 Thiago Serra * 2 Srikumar Ramalingam 3 Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract
Neural networks tend to achieve better accuracy
with training if they are larger — even if the resulting models are overparameterized. Nevertheless, carefully removing such excess of parameters before, during, or after training may also
produce models with similar or even improved
accuracy. In many cases, that can be curiously
achieved by heuristics as simple as removing a
percentage of the weights with the smallest absolute value — even though absolute value is not
a perfect proxy for weight relevance. With the
premise that obtaining significantly better performance from pruning depends on accounting for
the combined effect of removing multiple weights,
we revisit one of the classic approaches for impactbased pruning: the Optimal Brain Surgeon (OBS).
We propose a tractable heuristic for solving the
combinatorial extension of OBS, in which we select weights for simultaneous removal, and we
combine it with a single-pass systematic update
of unpruned weights. Our selection method outperforms other methods for high sparsity, and the
single-pass weight update is also advantageous
if applied after those methods. Source code:
github.com/yuxwind/CBS.

1. Introduction
In a world where large and overparameterized neural networks keep GPUs burning hot because machine learning
researchers rethought generalization (Zhang et al., 2017;
Belkin et al., 2019) and started tuning neural architectures
with a hope for globally convergent loss landscapes (Li et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT,
United States 2 Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA, United States
3
Google Research, New York, NY, United States. Correspondence to: Shandian Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>, Thiago Serra <thiago.serra@bucknell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2018; Sun et al., 2020), network pruning can perhaps save
us from parameter redundancy (Denil et al., 2013).
Network pruning can lead to more parameter-efficient networks, with which we can save on model deploying and
storage costs, and even to models with better accuracy. Although the extent to which we can prune depends on the
task (Liebenwein et al., 2021) and pruning may have an
uneven impact across classes if not done properly (Hooker
et al., 2019; Paganini, 2020; Hooker et al., 2020; Good et al.,
2022), pruning can also make neural networks more robust
to adversarial manipulation (Wu & Wang, 2021).
From a perspective of model expressiveness using linear
regions, we may see network pruning as a means to close
the gap between the highly complex models that can be theoretically learned with an architecture (Pascanu et al., 2014;
Montúfar et al., 2014; Telgarsky, 2015; Montúfar, 2017;
Arora et al., 2018a; Serra et al., 2018; Serra & Ramalingam,
2020; Xiong et al., 2020; Montúfar et al., 2021) and the
relatively less complex models obtained in practice (Hanin
& Rolnick, 2019a;b; Tseran & Montúfar, 2021).
Curiously, however, the long-standing magnitude-based
pruning approach (Hanson & Pratt, 1988; Mozer & Smolensky, 1989; Janowsky, 1989) remains remarkably competitive (Blalock et al., 2020) despite having equally longstanding evidence that it does not offer a good proxy for
parameter relevance (Hassibi & Stork, 1992). But why?
We conjecture that focusing on the impact of removing each
parameter alone prevents impact-based methods from being
more effective. In other words, we believe that the decision
about pruning each parameter should be based on which
other parameters are also removed. Ideally, we want the
effect of such removals to cancel one another to the largest
extent possible while achieving the aimed sparsity.
In this work, we revisit the functional Taylor expansion of
the loss function L on a choice of weights w ∈ RN around
the learned weights w̄ ∈ RN of the neural network as
L(w) − L(w̄) =(w − w̄)T ∇L(w̄)
1
+ (w − w̄)T ∇2 L(w̄)(w − w̄)
2
+ O(kw − w̄k3 ),

