Improved Certified Defenses against Data Poisoning with
(Deterministic) Finite Aggregation

Wenxiao Wang 1 Alexander Levine 1 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract
Data poisoning attacks aim at manipulating model
behaviors through distorting training data. Previously, an aggregation-based certified defense,
Deep Partition Aggregation (DPA), was proposed
to mitigate this threat. DPA predicts through an
aggregation of base classifiers trained on disjoint
subsets of data, thus restricting its sensitivity to
dataset distortions. In this work, we propose an
improved certified defense against general poisoning attacks, namely Finite Aggregation. In
contrast to DPA, which directly splits the training
set into disjoint subsets, our method first splits the
training set into smaller disjoint subsets and then
combines duplicates of them to build larger (but
not disjoint) subsets for training base classifiers.
This reduces the worst-case impacts of poison
samples and thus improves certified robustness
bounds. In addition, we offer an alternative view
of our method, bridging the designs of deterministic and stochastic aggregation-based certified
defenses. Empirically, our proposed Finite Aggregation consistently improves certificates on
MNIST, CIFAR-10, and GTSRB, boosting certified fractions by up to 3.05%, 3.87% and 4.77%,
respectively, while keeping the same clean accuracies as DPA’s, effectively establishing a new
state of the art in (pointwise) certified robustness
against data poisoning.

1. Introduction
Over the past years, we have witnessed the increasing popularity of deep learning in a variety of domains including
computer vision (He et al., 2016), natural language process1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, Maryland, USA. Correspondence to: Wenxiao Wang
<wwx@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ing (Devlin et al., 2019), and speech recognition (Xiong
et al., 2016). In many cases, such rapid developments depend heavily on the increased availability of data collected
from diverse sources, which can be different users or simply websites from all over the Internet. While the richness
of data sources greatly facilitates the advancement of deep
learning techniques and their applications, it also raises concerns about their reliability. This makes the data poisoning
threat model, which concerns the reliability of models under
adversarially corrupted training samples, more important
than ever (Goldblum et al., 2020).
In this work, we use a general formulation of data poisoning
attacks as follows: The adversary is given the ability to
insert/remove a bounded number of training samples in
order to manipulate the predictions (on some target samples)
of the model trained from the corresponding training set.
Here, the number of samples that the adversary is allowed
to insert/remove is referred to as the attack size.
Many variants of empirical poisoning attacks targeting deep
neural networks have been proposed, including Feature Collision (Shafahi et al., 2018), Convex Polytope (Zhu et al.,
2019), Bullseye Polytope (Aghakhani et al., 2021) and
Witches’ Brew (Geiping et al., 2021). These attacks are
also referred to as triggerless attacks since no modification
to the targets is required. Unlike triggerless attacks, backdoor attacks are poisoning attacks that allow modifications
of the target samples, for which a variety of approaches have
been developed including backdoor poisoning (Chen et al.,
2017), label-consistent backdooring (Turner et al., 2019)
and hidden-trigger backdooring (Saha et al., 2020). While it
is shown in (Schwarzschild et al., 2021) that the evaluation
settings can greatly affect the success rate of many data
poisoning attacks to deep models, the vulnerability issues
against poisoning attacks remain because (i) the current attacks can still succeed in many scenarios, and (ii) stronger
adaptive poisoning attacks can potentially be developed in
the future, posing practical threats.
In this work, we focus on developing provably robust defenses against general poisoning attacks. In particular,
aggregation-based techniques, including a deterministic one
(Levine & Feizi, 2021) and stochastic ones (Jia et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2020), have been adopted to offer (pointwise)

