Deletion Robust Submodular Maximization over Matroids
Paul Dütting * 1 Federico Fusco * 2 Silvio Lattanzi * 1 Ashkan Norouzi-Fard * 1 Morteza Zadimoghaddam * 1

Abstract
Maximizing a monotone submodular function is a
fundamental task in machine learning. In this
paper we study the deletion robust version of
the problem under the classic matroids constraint.
Here the goal is to extract a small size summary
of the dataset that contains a high value independent set even after an adversary deleted some elements. We present constant-factor approximation algorithms, whose space complexity depends
on the rank k of the matroid and the number d
of deleted elements. In the centralized setting
we present a (3.582 + O(ε))-approximation algorithm with summary size O(k + εd2 log kε ). In the
streaming setting we provide a (5.582 + O(ε))approximation algorithm with summary size and
memory O(k + εd2 log kε ). We complement our
theoretical results with an in-depth experimental
analysis showing the effectiveness of our algorithms on real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Submodular maximization is a fundamental problem in machine learning that encompasses a broad range of applications, including active learning (Golovin & Krause, 2011)
sparse reconstruction (Bach, 2010; Das & Kempe, 2011;
Das et al., 2012), video analysis (Zheng et al., 2014), and
data summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011; Bairi et al., 2015).
Given a submodular function f , a universe of elements V ,
and a family F ⊆ 2V of feasible subsets of V , the optimization problem consists in finding a set S ∈ F that maximizes f (S). A natural choice for F are capacity constraints
(a.k.a. k-uniform matroid constraints) where any subset S of
V of size at most k is feasible. Another standard restriction,
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Zürich, Switzerland
Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering
“Antonio Ruberti”, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. Part
of this work was done while Federico was an intern at Google
Research, hosted by Paul Dütting. Correspondence to: Federico
Fusco <fuscof@diag.uniroma1.it>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

which generalizes capacity constraints and naturally comes
up in a variety of settings, are matroid constraints. As an
example where such more general constraints are needed,
consider a movie recommendation application, where, given
a large corpus of movies from various genres, we want to
come up with a set of recommended videos that contains at
most one movie from each genre.
Exact submodular maximization is a NP-hard problem, but
efficient algorithms exist that obtain small constant-factor
approximation guarantees in both centralized and streaming
setting (e.g., Fisher et al., 1978; Călinescu et al., 2011;
Chakrabarti & Kale, 2015).
In this work we design algorithms for submodular optimization over matroids that are robust to deletions. A main
motivation for considering deletions are privacy and user
preferences. For example, users may exert their “right to be
forgotten” or may update their preferences and thus exclude
some of the data points. For instance, in the earlier movie
recommendation example, a user may mark some of the
recommended videos as “seen” or “inappropriate,” and we
may wish to quickly update the list of recommendations.
1.1. The Deletion Robust Approach
Following Mitrovic et al. (2017), we model robustness to
deletion as a two phases game against an adversary. In
the first phase, the algorithm receives a robustness parameter d and chooses a subset W ⊆ V as summary of the
whole dataset V . Concurrently, an adversary selects a subset D ⊆ V with |D| ≤ d. The adversary may know the
algorithm but has no access to its random bits. In the second
phase, the adversary reveals D and the algorithm determines
a feasible solution from W \ D. The goal of the algorithm is
to be competitive with the optimal solution on V \ D. Natural performance metrics in this model are the algorithm’s
approximation guarantee and its space complexity as measured by the size of the set W . We consider this problem
in both the centralized and in the streaming setting. The
adversary studied is called oblivious, as its choice of the
deleted elements D does not depend on the realized W , but
possibly on the structure of the algorithm (not on its random bits). This is a natural assumption in the applications.
Consider the movie recommendation example: the fact that
a movie has already been watched by the user or that it is

