Revisiting Contrastive Learning through the Lens of
Neighborhood Component Analysis: an Integrated Framework

Ching-Yun Ko 1 Jeet Mohapatra 1 Sijia Liu 2 Pin-Yu Chen 3 Luca Daniel 1 Tsui-Wei Weng 4

Abstract
As a seminal tool in self-supervised representation
learning, contrastive learning has gained unprecedented attention in recent years. In essence, contrastive learning aims to leverage pairs of positive
and negative samples for representation learning,
which relates to exploiting neighborhood information in a feature space. By investigating the connection between contrastive learning and neighborhood component analysis (NCA), we provide
a novel stochastic nearest neighbor viewpoint of
contrastive learning and subsequently propose a
series of contrastive losses that outperform the existing ones. Under our proposed framework, we
show a new methodology to design integrated contrastive losses that could simultaneously achieve
good accuracy and robustness on downstream
tasks. With the integrated framework, we achieve
up to 6% improvement on the standard accuracy
and 17% improvement on the robust accuracy.

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning has drawn much attention and has
become one of the most effective representation learning techniques recently. The contrastive paradigm (Oord
et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020a; Chuang et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020) constructs
an objective for embeddings based on an assumed semantic similarity between positive pairs and dissimlarity between negative pairs, which stems from instance-level classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2015; Bojanowski & Joulin,
2017; Wu et al., 2018). Specifically, the contrastive loss
LCL (Oord 
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020a) is defined
as E x∼D, − log
+
x+ ∼Dx
,
−
x−
∼D
x
i

T f (x+ )

ef (x)

ef (x)T f (x+ ) +

N
P

ef (x)

T f (x− )
i

 where, for

an input data sample x, (x, x+ ) denotes a positive pair and
(x, x− ) denotes a negative pair. The function f is an encoder parameterized by a neural network and the number
of negative pairs N is typically treated as a hyperparameter. Note that the contrastive loss can encode the inputs
and keys by different encoders if one considers the use of
memory bank or momentum contrast (Wu et al., 2018; He
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b). In this work, we will focus
on the paradigm proposed in (Wang & Gupta, 2015; Ye
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020a) which has demonstrated
competitive results in representation learning.
When constructing loss LCL , ideally, one draws x+ from
the data distribution Dx+ that characterizes the semanticallysimilar (i.e., positive) samples to x; similarly, one wants
to draw x− from Dx− that characterizes the semanticallydissimilar (negative) samples. However, the definition of
semantically-similar and semantically-dissimilar is heavily contingent on downstream tasks: an image of a cat
can be considered semantically similar to that of a dog
if the downstream task is to distinguish between animal and
non-animal classes. Without the knowledge of downstream
tasks, Dx+ and Dx− are hard to define. To provide a surrogate of measuring similarity, current mainstream contrastive
learning algorithms (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a;b;
Grill et al., 2020) typically build up Dx+ by considering
data augmentation Dxaug of a data sample x. In the meantime, Dx− is approximated by the joint distribution D or
aug
D\x
:= ∪x′ ∈D\{x} Dxaug
′ , and the resulting contrastive loss
is known as LSimCLR which was proposed in (Chen et al.,
2020a):
(SimCLR loss LSimCLR )



T

E

x∼D,
aug
x ∼Dx
,
aug
−
xi ∼D\x
+


− log


+


ef (x) f (x )
.

N
P
−
T
T
+
ef (x) f (x ) +
ef (x) f (xi )

(1)

i=1

i=1

1

MIT 2 MSU 3 IBM Research AI 4 UCSD. Correspondence to:
Ching-Yun Ko <cyko@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Although this formulation seems to put no assumptions on
the downstream task classes, we find that there are in fact
implicit assumptions on the class probability prior of the
downstream tasks. Specifically, we formally establish the
connection between the Neighborhood Component Analysis (NCA) and the unsupervised contrastive learning in this

