Tight and Robust Private Mean Estimation with Few Users

Hossein Esfandiari 1 Vahab Mirrokni 1 Shyam Narayanan 2

Abstract
In this work, we study high-dimensional mean estimation under user-level differential privacy, and
design an (ε, δ)-differentially private mechanism
using as few users as possible. In particular, we
provide a nearly optimal trade-off between the
number of users and the number of samples per
user required for private mean estimation, even
when the number of users is as low as O( 1ε log 1δ ).
Interestingly, this bound on the number of users is
independent of the dimension (though the number
of samples per user is allowed to depend polynomially on the dimension), unlike the previous
work that requires the number of users to depend
polynomially on the dimension. This resolves
a problem first proposed by Amin et al. (2019).
Moreover, our mechanism is robust against corruptions in up to 49% of the users. Finally, our results also apply to optimal algorithms for privately
learning discrete distributions with few users, answering a question of Liu et al. (2020), and a
broader range of problems such as stochastic convex optimization and a variant of stochastic gradient descent via a reduction to differentially private
mean estimation.

1. Introduction
Without any doubt, user privacy is one of the greatest matters of the modern era. Differential privacy is one of the
most popular concepts to measure and enforce privacy. In a
nutshell, differential privacy statistically protects the privacy
of every single unit of the data, regardless of how much
information about the rest of the data is revealed. Depending on how a single unit of data is defined, we have two
general notions of differential privacy: user-level privacy
Authors listed in alphabetical order. 1 Google Research,
New York, NY, USA 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Shyam Narayanan
<shyamsn@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and item-level 1 privacy.
Let us differentiate these two notions with a simple example.
Consider a dataset that consists of the daily blood pressures
of the patients in a hospital. For the privacy purpose, we
may define a unit of data to be one single value of a blood
pressure, or the whole collection of the blood pressures of
a patient. The former leads to item-level differential privacy, while the latter leads to user-level differential privacy.
Roughly speaking, item-level differential privacy in this example protects one single value of a patient’s blood pressure;
however, an estimate of the average blood pressure of an
individual might be released under item-level differential
privacy, which is concerning in this example. Conversely,
user-level differential privacy protects any information about
the blood pressure of every single patient, while it allows
statistical analysis of a population of the patients. In general user-level differential privacy provides a higher level of
privacy. User-level privacy is certainly necessary in some
cases such as our previous example because an individual’s
average blood pressure is clearly a private information that
should be kept protected. Hence, in this work, we mainly
focus on user-level differential privacy.
Ignoring the computational constraints, it is folklore that providing differential privacy gets easier as the number of users
in the dataset grows and for many tasks we can have simple differentially private mechanisms using a large enough
number of users in the dataset. However, the question has
always been “how large should the dataset be?”. Providing
differential privacy using only a few users is of particular
importance when we want to analyse local information, for
example analysing the information of each hospital separately, or analysing the information of each neighborhood of
a city separately (e.g. for advertising an anti-drug campaign
or suicide prevention lifeline). Another example where we
face few users is when we are analysing a rare situation such
as the patients of a rare or novel disease (e.g. the Covid-19
pandemic at its early days (Corsello et al., 2020)).
Motivated by this, we consider the problem of mean estimation with user-level differential privacy and attempt to
understand the limits of the number of users one needs to
provide a differentially private mechanism for this problem.
1
Also known as record-level or sample-level differential privacy.

