Why the Rich Get Richer?
On the Balancedness of Random Partition Models
Changwoo J. Lee 1 Huiyan Sang 1

Abstract
Random partition models are widely used in
Bayesian methods for various clustering tasks,
such as mixture models, topic models, and community detection problems. While the number
of clusters induced by random partition models
has been studied extensively, another important
model property regarding the balancedness of partition has been largely neglected. We formulate
a framework to define and theoretically study the
balancedness of exchangeable random partition
models, by analyzing how a model assigns probabilities to partitions with different levels of balancedness. We demonstrate that the “rich-getricher” characteristic of many existing popular
random partition models is an inevitable consequence of two common assumptions: productform exchangeability and projectivity. We propose a principled way to compare the balancedness of random partition models, which gives a
better understanding of what model works better
and what doesn’t for different applications. We
also introduce the “rich-get-poorer” random partition models and illustrate their application to
entity resolution tasks.

1. Introduction
Bayesian formulation of clustering problems has gained considerable attention, especially when the number of clusters is
unknown. By assigning a prior distribution on the partition
space, Bayesian clustering methods give not only flexibility
in the number of clusters but also an uncertainty quantification of latent clustering structure. Popular examples include random partition models induced by discrete random
probability measures, such as Dirichlet process (DP; Ferguson, 1973), Pitman-Yor process (PYP; Perman et al., 1992;
1
Department of Statistics, Texas A&M University, Texas, USA.
Correspondence to: Changwoo J. Lee <c.lee@stat.tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Pitman & Yor, 1997), and the mixture of finite mixtures
(MFM; Miller & Harrison, 2018), to name a few. These
random partition models reflect the prior belief on the clusters’ characteristics, such as how the number of clusters Kn+
grows as the number of datapoints n increases, and how
datapoints are distributed among clusters. For example, it is
well known that Kn+ ≍ log n under the Chinese restaurant
process (CRP), the distribution of partition induced by DP.
While the behavior of the number of clusters Kn+ under various random partition models has been studied extensively
(Gnedin & Pitman, 2005; Lijoi et al., 2007; Favaro et al.,
2009; De Blasi et al., 2015; Camerlenghi et al., 2018; Lijoi
et al., 2020; Frühwirth-Schnatter et al., 2021), the balancedness of random partition (i.e. probabilities of partitions with
different levels of balancedness) has been largely uninvestigated. Nevertheless, there has been awareness of the crucial
effect of the balancedness of random partitions on cluster
inference. The most prominent example is the CRP prior
that is known to yield the posterior estimate with few big
and many small extra clusters (Petrone & Raftery, 1997),
intuitively due to the prediction rule of CRP that assumes a
new datapoint falls into an existing cluster with probability
proportional to its size. This “rich-get-richer” characteristic
of preferring unbalanced partitions is shared across many
other random partition models, such as those induced by
PYP, MFM, and Dirichlet-multinomial allocation (Green &
Richardson, 2001), yet there is a less theoretical understanding of when and why this property arises.
There are many important questions surrounding the balancedness of random partition models that are not well
studied in the literature. First, how to define a rigorous
theoretical framework that is applicable to systematically
studying the balancedness properties for a broad class of random partition models? The answer to this question would be
crucial to understand the root causes of the “rich-get-richer”
property: the product-form exchangeability and projectivity
assumptions which we shall demonstrate later. Also, it provides deeper insight into the suitable application scenario of
each model. The success of latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA;
Blei et al., 2003) in topic modeling is partially attributed to
the fact that per-document topic proportions are inherently
unbalanced, and hence unbalanced random partition models
are naturally suitable for topic modeling.

