Multiclass Learning with Margin:
Exponential Rates with No Bias-Variance Trade-Off

Stefano Vigogna 1 Giacomo Meanti 2 Ernesto De Vito 3 Lorenzo Rosasco 2 4 5

Abstract
We study the behavior of error bounds for multiclass classification under suitable margin conditions. For a wide variety of methods we prove that
the classification error under a hard-margin condition decreases exponentially fast without any
bias-variance trade-off. Different convergence
rates can be obtained in correspondence of different margin assumptions. With a self-contained
and instructive analysis we are able to generalize
known results from the binary to the multiclass
setting.

1. Introduction
It was recently remarked that the learning curves observed
in practice can be quite different from those predicted in
theory (Zhang et al., 2021). In particular, while one might
expect performance to degrade as models get larger or less
constrained (Hastie et al., 2009), this is in fact not the case.
By the no free lunch theorem (Wolpert, 1996), theoretical
results critically depend on the set of assumptions made on
the problem. Such assumptions can be hard to verify in
practice, hence a possible way to tackle the seeming contradictions in learning theory vs. practice is to consider a wider
range of assumptions, and check whether the corresponding
results can explain empirical observations.
In the context of classification, it is interesting to consider assumptions describing the difficulty of the problem in terms
of margin (Mammen & Tsybakov, 1999; Tsybakov, 2004).
It is well known that very different learning curves can
be obtained depending on the considered margin condition
(Bartlett et al., 2006). Further, the behavior of the test error
in terms of misclassification can be considerably different
1

RoMaDS, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy
MaLGa - DIBRIS, University of Genova, Italy 3 MaLGa - DIMA,
University of Genova, Italy 4 Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy 5 CBMM - MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Stefano Vigogna <vigogna@mat.uniroma2.it>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

from that induced by the surrogate loss function used for
empirical risk minimization (Zhang, 2004a; Bartlett et al.,
2006). An extreme case is when there is a hard margin
among the classes. Indeed, in this case the misclassification
error can decrease exponentially fast as the number of points
increases, while the surrogate loss error displays a polynomial decay. This behavior was first noted in (Koltchinskii &
Beznosova, 2005; Audibert & Tsybakov, 2007) for a wide
class of estimators (see also (Yao et al., 2007)), and reprised
more recently in (Pillaud-Vivien et al., 2018; Nitanda &
Suzuki, 2019) for stochastic gradient descent. The effect
of margin conditions has also been considered for multiclass learning (Zhang, 2004b; Chen & Sun, 2006; Mroueh
et al., 2012), but not in the hard-margin case. Interestingly,
hard-margin and exponential rates have been studied by (Cabannes et al., 2021) in the context of structured prediction
(Nowak et al., 2019), a general framework which includes
traditional classification. However, these latter results are
restricted to least-squares-based estimators.
The purpose of our paper is twofold. On the one hand, we
analyze the effect of margin conditions, and in particular
hard-margin conditions, for a wide class of multiclass estimators derived from different surrogate losses. On the other
hand, we build on ideas in (Mroueh et al., 2012; PillaudVivien et al., 2018; Nitanda & Suzuki, 2019) to provide
a simplified and self-contained treatment that naturally recovers results for binary classification as a special case. In
particular, we note that, in the presence of a hard margin,
the misclassification error curve does not exhibit any biasvariance trade-off, thus providing a possible explanation to
the empirical observations that motivate our study.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We conclude
the introduction by setting up some basic notation. In Section 2 we describe the multiclass classification problem, the
surrogate approach and the simplex encoding. In Section 3
we analyze the bias-variance decomposition for the misclassification risk, discuss soft and hard-margin conditions,
and prove our main results of exponential convergence under assumptions of hard margin. In Section 4 we validate
the theory with experiments on synthetic data. Some final
remarks are provided in Section 5.

