Delayed Reinforcement Learning by Imitation

Pierre Liotet * 1 Davide Maran * 1 Lorenzo Bisi 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
When the agent’s observations or interactions are
delayed, classic reinforcement learning tools usually fail. In this paper, we propose a simple yet
new and efficient solution to this problem. We
assume that, in the undelayed environment, an
efficient policy is known or can be easily learned,
but the task may suffer from delays in practice
and we thus want to take them into account. We
present a novel algorithm, Delayed Imitation with
Dataset Aggregation (DIDA), which builds upon
imitation learning methods to learn how to act in
a delayed environment from undelayed demonstrations. We provide a theoretical analysis of the
approach that will guide the practical design of
DIDA. These results are also of general interest
in the delayed reinforcement learning literature
by providing bounds on the performance between
delayed and undelayed tasks, under smoothness
conditions. We show empirically that DIDA obtains high performances with a remarkable sample
efficiency on a variety of tasks, including robotic
locomotion, classic control, and trading.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), it is generally assumed that
the effect of an action over the environment is known instantaneously to the agent. However, in the presence of delays,
this classic setting is challenged. The effect of a delayed
action execution or state observation, if not accounted for,
can have perilous effects in practice (Dulac-Arnold et al.,
2019). It can induce a performance loss in trading (Wilcox,
1993), create instability in dynamic systems (Dugard & Verriest, 1998; Gu & Niculescu, 2003), be detrimental to the
training of real-world robots (Mahmood et al., 2018). To
further grasp the importance of delay, one may notice that
most traffic laws around the world base safety distances on
*
Equal contribution 1 Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Pierre Liotet <pierre.liotet@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

drivers’ “reaction time”, which is partly due to the perception of the event and partly to the implementation of the
action (Droździel et al., 2020). These two types of delay
have an exact correspondence in RL, where they are dubbed
as state observation and action execution delays. There are
many ways in which delays can further vary. They may
be anonymous (i.e., not known to the agent), constant or
stochastic, integer or non-integer. In this work, as in most of
the literature, we focus on constant non-anonymous delays
in the action execution or, equivalently (Katsikopoulos &
Engelbrecht, 2003), in the state observation.
Previous research can be divided into three main directions.
In memoryless approaches the agent’s policy depends on
the last observed state (Schuitema et al., 2010). Augmented
approaches try to cast the problem into a Markov decision
process (MDP) by building policies based on an augmented
state, composed of the last observed state and on the actions
that the agent knows it has taken since then (Bouteiller
et al., 2020). A last line of research, which we refer to as
model-based approach, considers using as a policy input
any statistics about the current unknown state that can be
computed from the augmented state (Walsh et al., 2009;
Firoiu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021; Agarwal & Aggarwal,
2021; Derman et al., 2021; Liotet et al., 2021). The goal of
this approach is to avoid the curse of dimensionality posed
by the augmented state (Walsh et al., 2009; Bouteiller et al.,
2020). We formalize the problem of delays in Section 3
and give a more in-depth description of the literature in
Section 4.
We adopt the simple yet practically effective idea of learning a policy in a delayed environment by applying imitation
learning to a policy learned in the undelayed environment,
as described in Section 5. We propose to use DAGGER (Ross
et al., 2011) as the imitation learning algorithm. It is particularly well suited to the task since, being one of the few
algorithms to compute the loss under the learner’s own distribution (Osa et al., 2018), it is able to account for the shift
in distribution induced by the delay We provide a theoretical
analysis (Section 6) which, under smoothness conditions
over the MDP, bounds the performance lost by introducing delays. Finally, we provide an extensive experimental
analysis (Section 7) where our algorithm is compared with
state-of-the-art approaches on a variety of delayed problems
and demonstrates great performances and sample efficiency.

