Generalised Policy Improvement with Geometric Policy Composition

Shantanu Thakoor * 1 Mark Rowland * 1 Diana Borsa 1 Will Dabney 1 Rémi Munos 1 André Barreto 1

Abstract
We introduce a method for policy improvement
that interpolates between the greedy approach of
value-based reinforcement learning (RL) and the
full planning approach typical of model-based
RL. The new method builds on the concept of a
geometric horizon model (GHM, also known as
a γ-model), which models the discounted statevisitation distribution of a given policy. We show
that we can evaluate any non-Markov policy that
switches between a set of base Markov policies
with fixed probability by a careful composition
of the base policy GHMs, without any additional
learning. We can then apply generalised policy
improvement (GPI) to collections of such nonMarkov policies to obtain a new Markov policy
that will in general outperform its precursors. We
provide a thorough theoretical analysis of this
approach, develop applications to transfer and
standard RL, and empirically demonstrate its effectiveness over standard GPI on a challenging
deep RL continuous control task. We also provide
an analysis of GHM training methods, proving
a novel convergence result regarding previously
proposed methods and showing how to train these
models stably in deep RL settings.

1. Introduction
Policy improvement is at the heart of reinforcement learning
(RL). The prototypical approach to policy improvement in
value-based RL is to take the Q-function of a policy and
act greedily with respect to it. In contrast, in model-based
RL, planning with a model in principle aims to derive a
(near-)optimal policy directly. Choosing between these two
extremes involves some trade-offs. While greedy improvement requires estimating only a Q-function, from which it is
*
Equal contribution.
Order determined by coin flip.
DeepMind, London. Correspondence to: Shantanu Thakoor
<thakoor@deepmind.com>, Mark Rowland <markrowland@deepmind.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A spectrum of trade-offs in policy improvement. Barreto
et al. (2017) propose generalised policy improvement (GPI) as a
means of simultaneously improving over several policies (illustrated with blue and red trajectories), a step from greedy improvement of a single policy towards planning. The central contribution
of this paper, GPI with geometric switching policies, moves a
step further in this direction, allowing for improvement over nonMarkov GSPs (illustrated as trajectories that switch between blue
and red base policies).

computationally trivial to derive the greedy policy, this may
result in only a weak improvement over the existing policy.
Planning, on the other hand, is a computationally intensive
process, yet can yield extremely high-quality policies. In
this paper, we introduce an approach to policy improvement
that interpolates between these two extremes.
Barreto et al. (2017) propose generalised policy improvement (GPI), a method that allows for improvement over a
collection of policies {π1 , . . . , πk } simultaneously, generalising the notion of greedy improvement of an individual
policy. We show that GPI can be extended to a much wider
class of non-Markov policies. These policies, which we call
geometric switching policies (GSPs), switch between executing a base set of Markov policies {π1 , . . . , πk } with fixed
probability. In general, these policies do not ever need to be
executed, and can instead be evaluated using information
learnt about the base policies, without any further learning
required, leading to a stronger improvement guarantee in
GPI. This approach to policy improvement makes statistical and computational trade-offs that interpolate between
greedy improvement and full model-based planning, potentially providing benefits of both worlds; Figure 1 shows
where the proposed approach lies along the spectrum of
methods between the conventional model-free and modelbased extremes.

