LSB: Local Self-Balancing MCMC in Discrete Spaces

Emanuele Sansone 1

Abstract
We present the Local Self-Balancing sampler
(LSB), a local Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method for sampling in purely discrete
domains, which is able to autonomously adapt to
the target distribution and to reduce the number
of target evaluations required to converge. LSB is
based on (i) a parametrization of locally balanced
proposals, (ii) a newly proposed objective function based on mutual information and (iii) a selfbalancing learning procedure, which minimises
the proposed objective to update the proposal parameters. Experiments on energy-based models
and Markov networks show that LSB converges
using a smaller number of queries to the oracle
distribution compared to recent local MCMC samplers.

1. Introduction
Sampling from complex and intractable probability distributions is of fundamental importance for learning and inference (MacKay, 2003). In this regard, MCMC methods are
promising solutions to tackle the intractability of sampling
in high dimensions. They have been successfully applied in
several domains, including Bayesian statistics and statistical
physics (Neal, 1993; Robert & Casella, 2013), bioinformatics and computational biology (Altekar et al., 2004; Alexeev
et al., 2020) as well as machine learning (Andrieu et al.,
2003; Koller & Friedman, 2009; Nijkamp et al., 2020).
While MCMC is a general method, which can be used to
sample from any target distribution, its efficiency strongly
depends on the choice of the proposal. Indeed, the proposal must be adapted to the distribution we want to sample from (Andrieu & Thoms, 2008; Hoffman & Gelman,
2014) and machine learning can help to automate this process (Zhang et al., 2012; Pakman & Paninski, 2013; Af-

shar et al., 2015; Dinh et al., 2017; Nishimura et al., 2020).
However, less effort has been devoted to devise strategies
for adapting the proposal distribution to a discrete target.
Most common solutions embed the discrete problem into
a continuous one, thus allowing to reuse sampling strategies designed for the continuous domain. However, these
strategies are not always optimal, as they either require specific analytic forms for the target (Zhang et al., 2012), or
simply because the embeddings do not capture the topological properties of the original domain (Pakman & Paninski,
2013; Afshar et al., 2015; Dinh et al., 2017; Nishimura et al.,
2020). We can avoid these issues by sampling directly in the
discrete domain and using local MCMC strategies (Zanella,
2020).
In this work, we propose an adaptation strategy for local
MCMC. Specifically, we introduce (i) a new parametrization
for locally balanced proposals, (ii) a new objective function
based on mutual information to compute the statistical dependence between consecutive samples, and (iii) a learning
procedure to adapt the parameters of the proposal to the target distribution using our proposed objective. The resulting
procedure, called the Local Self-Balancing sampler (LSB),
automatically discovers a locally balanced proposal with
the advantage of reducing the number of target evaluations
required to converge. Furthermore, we show that our framework generalizes over two recent works (Zanella, 2020)
and (Grathwohl et al., 2021). We conduct experiments on
energy-based models and Markov network, and show that
LSB queries the oracle distribution in a more efficient way
compared to recent local MCMC samplers.
In summary, the key contributions of the work are:
• A parametrization of locally balanced proposals, which
enable to convert the problem of proposal selection into
a learning problem.
• The use of mutual information as a criterion to learn
the proposal distribution and accelerate MCMC.

Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven,
Belgium.
Correspondence to:
Emanuele Sansone
<emanuele.sansone@kuleuven.be>.

• An estimator to efficiently compute the mutual information objective and to enable efficient learning.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We start by providing some background on locally balanced
proposal distributions (Section 2), we introduce LSB by describing the parametrizations, the objective and the learning

1

