Robust Task Representations for Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning
via Contrastive Learning

Haoqi Yuan 1 Zongqing Lu 1

Abstract
We study offline meta-reinforcement learning, a
practical reinforcement learning paradigm that
learns from offline data to adapt to new tasks. The
distribution of offline data is determined jointly by
the behavior policy and the task. Existing offline
meta-reinforcement learning algorithms cannot
distinguish these factors, making task representations unstable to the change of behavior policies.
To address this problem, we propose a contrastive
learning framework for task representations that
are robust to the distribution mismatch of behavior
policies in training and test. We design a bi-level
encoder structure, use mutual information maximization to formalize task representation learning, derive a contrastive learning objective, and
introduce several approaches to approximate the
true distribution of negative pairs. Experiments
on a variety of offline meta-reinforcement learning benchmarks demonstrate the advantages of
our method over prior methods, especially on the
generalization to out-of-distribution behavior policies.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great successes in playing video games (Mnih et al., 2013; Lample &
Chaplot, 2017), robotics (Nguyen & La, 2019), recommendation systems (Zheng et al., 2018) and multi-agent systems
(OroojlooyJadid & Hajinezhad, 2019). However, deep RL
still faces two challenging problems: data efficiency and
generalization. To play Atari games, model-free RL takes
millions of steps of environment interactions, while modelbased RL takes 100k environment steps (Łukasz Kaiser
et al., 2020). The tremendous interactions along with safety
issues prevent its applications in many real-world scenar1
School of Computer Science, Peking University. Correspondence to: Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ios. Offline reinforcement learning (Levine et al., 2020)
tackles the sample efficiency problem by learning from precollected offline datasets, without any online interaction. On
the other hand, as deep RL is supposed to be tested in the
same environment to the training environment, when the
transition dynamics or the reward function changes, the performance degenerates. To tackle the generalization problem,
meta-reinforcement learning (Finn et al., 2017; Duan et al.,
2016) introduces learning over task distribution to adapt to
new tasks.
Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning (OMRL), an understudied problem, lies in the intersection of offline RL and
meta-RL. Usually, the offline dataset is collected from multiple tasks by different behavior policies. The training agent
aims at learning a meta-policy, which is able to efficiently
adapt to unseen tasks. Recent studies (Li et al., 2020; Dorfman et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021a;b) extend context-based
meta-RL to OMRL. They propose to use a context encoder
to learn task representations from the collected trajectories,
then use the latent codes as the policy’s input.
However, context-based methods are vulnerable to the distribution mismatch of behavior policies in training and test
phases. The distribution of collected trajectories depends
both on the behavior policy and the task. When behavior policies are highly correlated with tasks in the training
dataset, the context encoder is likely to memorize the feature
of behavior policies. Thus, in the test phase, the context
encoder produces biased task inference due to the change of
the behavior policy. Although Li et al. (2021b;a) employed
contrastive learning to improve task representations, their
learning objectives are simply based on discriminating trajectories from different tasks, and thus cannot eliminate the
influence of behavior policies.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel framework of COntrastive Robust task Representation learning
for OMRL (CORRO). We design a bi-level structured task
encoder, where the first level extracts task representations
from one-step transition tuples instead of trajectories and the
second level aggregates the representations. We formalize
the learning objective as mutual information maximization
between the representation and task, to maximally eliminate
the influence of behavior policies from task representations.

