Quantifying and Learning Linear Symmetry-Based Disentanglement

Loek Tonnaer * 1 2 Luis A. Pérez Rey * 1 2 3 Vlado Menkovski 1 2 Mike Holenderski 1 2 Jacobus W. Portegies 1 2

Abstract
The definition of Linear Symmetry-Based Disentanglement (LSBD) formalizes the notion of
linearly disentangled representations, but there
is currently no metric to quantify LSBD. Such a
metric is crucial to evaluate LSBD methods and to
compare to previous understandings of disentanglement. We propose DLSBD , a mathematically
sound metric to quantify LSBD, and provide a
practical implementation for SO(2) groups. Furthermore, from this metric we derive LSBD-VAE,
a semi-supervised method to learn LSBD representations. We demonstrate1 the utility of our
metric by showing that (1) common VAE-based
disentanglement methods don’t learn LSBD representations, (2) LSBD-VAE, as well as other recent
methods, can learn LSBD representations needing
only limited supervision on transformations, and
(3) various desirable properties expressed by existing disentanglement metrics are also achieved
by LSBD representations.

1. Introduction
Learning low-dimensional representations that disentangle
the underlying factors of variation in data is considered
an important step towards interpretable machine learning
with good generalization. To address the fact that there is
no consensus on what disentanglement entails and how to
formalize it, Higgins et al. (2018) propose a formal definition for Linear Symmetry-Based Disentanglement, or
LSBD, arguing that underlying real-world symmetries give
exploitable structure to data (see Sect. 3).
*
Equal contribution 1 Eindhoven University of Technology
(TU/e), Eindhoven, The Netherlands 2 Eindhoven Artificial Intelligence Systems Institute (EAISI), Eindhoven, the Netherlands 3 Prosus, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Correspondence
to: Loek Tonnaer <l.m.a.tonnaer@tue.nl>, Luis A. Pérez Rey
<l.a.perez.rey@tue.nl>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Code
available
at
https://github.com/
luis-armando-perez-rey/lsbd-vae

LSBD emphasizes that the variability in data observations
is often due to some transformations, and that good data representations should reflect these transformations. A typical
setting is that of an agent interacting with its environment.
An action of the agent will transform some aspect of the
environment and its observation thereof, but keeps all other
aspects invariant. It is often easy and cheap to register the
actions that an agent performs and how they transform the
observed environment, which can provide useful information for learning disentangled representations.
However, there is currently no general metric to quantify
LSBD. Such a metric is crucial to properly evaluate methods
aiming to learn LSBD representations and to relate LSBD to
previous definitions of disentanglement. Although previous
works have evaluated LSBD by measuring performance on
downstream tasks (Caselles-Dupré et al., 2019) or by measuring specific traits related to LSBD (Painter et al., 2020;
Quessard et al., 2020), none of these evaluation methods
directly quantify LSBD according to its formal definition.
We propose DLSBD , a well-formalized and generally applicable metric that quantifies the level of LSBD in learned data
representations (Sect. 4). We show an intuitive justification
of this metric, as well as its theoretical derivation. We also
provide a practical implementation to compute DLSBD for
common SO(2) symmetry groups. Furthermore, we show
that our metric formulation can be used to derive a semisupervised method to learn LSBD representations, which
we call LSBD-VAE (Sect. 5). To make LSBD-VAE more
widely applicable, we also demonstrate how to disentangle
symmetric properties from other non-symmetric properties,
and how to quantify this disentanglement with DLSBD .
We show the utility of DLSBD by quantifying LSBD in a
number of settings, for a variety of datasets with underlying SO(2) symmetries and other non-symmetric properties
(Sect. 6 & 7). First, we evaluate common VAE-based disentanglement methods and show that most don’t learn LSBD
representations. Second, we evaluate LSBD-VAE and other
recent methods that specifically target LSBD, showing that
they can obtain much better DLSBD scores while needing
only limited supervision on transformations. Third, we compare DLSBD with existing disentanglement metrics, showing that various desirable properties expressed with these
metrics are also achieved by LSBD representations.

