Set Based Stochastic Subsampling

Bruno Andreis 1 Seanie Lee 1 A. Tuan Nguyen 2 Juho Lee 1 3 Eunho Yang 1 3 Sung Ju Hwang 1 3

Abstract
Deep models are designed to operate on huge
volumes of high dimensional data such as images. In order to reduce the volume of data these
models must process, we propose a set-based twostage end-to-end neural subsampling model that
is jointly optimized with an arbitrary downstream
task network (e.g. classifier). In the first stage,
we efficiently subsample candidate elements using conditionally independent Bernoulli random
variables by capturing coarse grained global information using set encoding functions, followed by
conditionally dependent autoregressive subsampling of the candidate elements using Categorical
random variables by modeling pair-wise interactions using set attention networks in the second
stage. We apply our method to feature and instance selection and show that it outperforms the
relevant baselines under low subsampling rates
on a variety of tasks including image classification, image reconstruction, function reconstruction and few-shot classification. Additionally, for
nonparametric models such as Neural Processes
that require to leverage the whole training data
at inference time, we show that our method enhances the scalability of these models.

1. Introduction
Deep models operate on large volumes of high-dimensional
dense inputs such as the pixels of an image (Deng et al.,
2009; Krizhevsky et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2015). Training or evaluating models with such data is computationally
expensive and several works (Balın et al., 2019; Huijben
et al., 2019; Yoon et al., 2019) have proposed subsampling
techniques to subsample such dense inputs. Subsampling
1

Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), Seoul, South Korea 2 University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 3 AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Bruno Andreis <andries@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung
Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

methods have the potential to drastically reduce the data acquisition effort and reduce the inference time of algorithms
that operate on dense inputs. Additionally, subsampling
techniques have found applications in medical research for
the purpose of interpretation (Ribeiro et al., 2016).
However, these methods have a major drawback in that they
require a fixed input structure. For instance, some of these
methods are only applicable when each feature (e.g. a pixel)
of the input is 1-dimensional. This restriction is imposed by
the way the subsampling methods are designed: the input
(e.g. an image) is flattened to a single vector and a model
predicts a binary mask for each feature (e.g. pixels). This
becomes problematic when we consider a 3-channel image.
Flattening out the image results in ambiguities as to which
pixels to select since channels are treated independently. For
instance, in order to perform subsampling on CIFAR10 images, INVASE (Yoon et al., 2019) and DPS (Huijben et al.,
2019) convert the images into single channel images (e.g.
grey-scaled images) before subsampling pixels. In more
extreme cases such as subsampling of training instances
(different from instance-wise feature selection), each feature
is itself an image (each possibly multi-channel) and hence
those subsampling techniques are inapplicable. Finally, we
show in our experiments that most of these methods fail under extremely low subsampling rates and their performance
is similar to random sampling in this setting.
In order to tackle these limitation, we propose to consider
each feature or instance as an element of a set. We formulate
the subsampling problem as selecting a subset of features or
instances that minimizes the performance degradation of an
arbitrary model on an arbitrary task such as image classification, regression or instance subsampling for target tasks
such as few-shot classification. As a result, there are several
advantages compared to the previous works. First, we can
handle arbitrary input structure using set functions (Zaheer
et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019) parameterized with expressive
neural networks. Second, a subsampling model with set
functions can process arbitrary number of elements. As a
result, the model is robust to a wide range of subsampling
rates at test time even when trained with a fixed sampling
rate. Lastly, the set-based formulation unifies the feature
and instance subsampling tasks under a single framework.
However, it is prohibitively expensive to process all the

