Bounding Training Data Reconstruction in Private (Deep) Learning

Chuan Guo 1 Brian Karrer 2 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1 Laurens van der Maaten 1

Abstract
Differential privacy is widely accepted as the de
facto method for preventing data leakage in ML,
and conventional wisdom suggests that it offers
strong protection against privacy attacks. However, existing semantic guarantees for DP focus on
membership inference, which may overestimate
the adversary’s capabilities and is not applicable
when membership status itself is non-sensitive. In
this paper, we derive semantic guarantees for DP
mechanisms against training data reconstruction
attacks under a formal threat model. We show
that two distinct privacy accounting methods—
Rényi differential privacy and Fisher information
leakage—both offer strong semantic protection
against data reconstruction attacks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are known to memorize their training data. This vulnerability can be exploited by an adversary
to compromise the privacy of participants in the training
dataset when given access to the trained model and/or its
prediction interface (Fredrikson et al., 2014; 2015; Shokri
et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2019). By far the most accepted
mitigation measure against such privacy leakage is differential privacy (DP; Dwork et al. (2014)), which upper bounds
the information contained in the learner’s output about its
training data via statistical divergences. However, such a
differential guarantee is often hard to interpret, and it is
unclear how much privacy leakage can be tolerated for a
particular application (Jayaraman & Evans, 2019).
Recent studies have derived semantic guarantees for differential privacy, that is, how does the private mechanism limit
an attacker’s ability to extract private information from the
trained model? For example, Yeom et al. (2018) showed that
a differentially private learner can reduce the success rate of
a membership inference attack to close to that of a random
1
Meta AI 2 Meta. Correspondence to: Chuan Guo <chuanguo@fb.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

coin flip. Semantic guarantees serve as more interpretable
translations of the DP guarantee and provide reassurance
of protection against privacy attacks. However, existing semantic guarantees focus on protection of membership status,
which has several limitations: 1. There are many scenarios
where membership status itself is not sensitive but the actual
data value is, e.g., census data and location data. 2. It only
bounds the leakage of the binary value of membership status
as opposed to how much information can be extracted. 3.
Membership inference is empirically much easier than powerful attacks such as training data reconstruction (Carlini
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Balle et al., 2022), and hence
it may be possible to provide a strong semantic guarantee
against data reconstruction attacks even when membership
status cannot be protected.
In this work, we focus on deriving semantic guarantees
against data reconstruction attacks (DRA), where the adversary’s goal is to reconstruct instances from the training
dataset. Under mild assumptions, we show that if the learning algorithm is (2, ϵ)-Rényi differentially private, then the
expected mean squared error (MSE) of an adversary’s estimate for the private training data can be lower bounded
by Θ(1/(eϵ − 1)). When ϵ is small, this bound suggests
that the adversary’s estimate incurs a high MSE and is thus
unreliable, in turn guaranteeing protection against DRAs.
Furthermore, we show that a recently proposed privacy
framework called Fisher information leakage (FIL; Hannun
et al. (2021)) can be used to give tighter semantic guarantees
for common private learning algorithms such as output perturbation (Chaudhuri et al., 2011) and private SGD (Song
et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016). Importantly, FIL gives a
per-sample estimate of privacy leakage for every individual in the training set, and we empirically show that this
per-sample estimate is highly correlated with the sample’s
vulnerability to data reconstruction attacks. Finally, FIL
accounting gives theoretical support for the observation that
existing private learning algorithms do not leak much information about the vast majority of its training samples
despite having a high privacy parameter.

2. Background
Data reconstruction attacks. Machine learning algorithms often require the model to memorize parts of its

