Feature Selection using e-values

Subhabrata Majumdar 1 2 Snigdhansu Chatterjee 1

Abstract
In the context of supervised parametric models,
we introduce the concept of e-values. An e-value
is a scalar quantity that represents the proximity of
the sampling distribution of parameter estimates
in a model trained on a subset of features to that
of the model trained on all features (i.e. the full
model). Under general conditions, a rank ordering of e-values separates models that contain all
essential features from those that do not.
The e-values are applicable to a wide range of
parametric models. We use data depths and a fast
resampling-based algorithm to implement a feature selection procedure using e-values, providing
consistency results. For a p-dimensional feature
space, this procedure requires fitting only the full
model and evaluating p + 1 models, as opposed
to the traditional requirement of fitting and evaluating 2p models. Through experiments across several model settings and synthetic and real datasets,
we establish that the e-values method as a promising general alternative to existing model-specific
methods of feature selection.

1. Introduction
In the era of big data, feature selection in supervised statistical and machine learning (ML) models helps cut through
the noise of superfluous features, provides storage and computational benefits, and gives model intepretability. Modelbased feature selection can be divided into two categories
(Guyon & Elisseeff, 2003): wrapper methods that evaluate models trained on multiple feature sets (Schwarz, 1978;
Shao, 1996), and embedded methods that combine feature
selection and training, often through sparse regularization
(Tibshirani, 1996; Zou, 2006; Zou & Hastie, 2005). Both
categories are extremely well-studied for independent data
1

School of Statistics, University of Minnesota Twin Cities,
Minneapolis, MN, USA 2 Currently at Splunk. Correspondence to:
Subhabrata Majumdar <smajumdar@splunk.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

models, but have their own challenges. Navigating an exponentially growing feature space using wrapper methods is
NP-hard (Natarajan, 1995), and case-specific search strategies like k-greedy, branch-and-bound, simulated annealing
are needed. Sparse penalized embedded methods can tackle
high-dimensional data, but have inferential and algorithmic
issues, such as biased Lasso estimates (Zhang & Zhang,
2014) and the use of convex relaxations to compute approximate local solutions (Wang et al., 2013; Zou & Li, 2008).
Feature selection in dependent data models has received
comparatively lesser attention. Existing implementations of
wrapper and embedded methods have been adapted for dependent data scenarios, such as mixed effect models (Meza
& Lahiri, 2005; Nguyen & Jiang, 2014; Peng & Lu, 2012)
and spatial models (Huang et al., 2010; Lee & Ghosh, 2009).
However these suffer from the same issues as their independent data counterparts. If anything, the higher computational overhead for model training makes implementation
of wrapper methods even harder in this situation!
In this paper, we propose the framework of e-values as a
common principle to perform best subset feature selection in
a range of parametric models covering independent and dependent data settings. In essence ours is a wrapper method,
although it is able to determine important features affecting
the response by training a single model: the one with all
features, or the full model. We achieve this by utilizing the
information encoded in the distribution of model parameter estimates. Notwithstanding recent efforts (Lai et al.,
2015; Singh et al., 2007), parameter distributions that are
fully data-driven have generally been underutilized in data
science. In our work, e-values score a candidate model to
quantify the similarity between sampling distributions of
parameters in that model and the full model. Sampling distribution is the distribution of a parameter estimate, based
on the random data samples the estimate is calculated from.
We access sampling distributions using the efficient Generalized Bootstrap technique (Chatterjee & Bose, 2005), and
utilize them using data depths, which are essentially pointto-distribution inverse distance functions (Tukey, 1975; Zuo,
2003; Zuo & Serfling, 2000), to compute e-values.
How e-values perform feature selection Data depth functions quantify the inlyingness of a point in multivariate space
with respect to a probability distribution or a multivariate

