Off-Policy Evaluation for Large Action Spaces via Embeddings

Yuta Saito 1 Thorsten Joachims 1

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) in contextual bandits
has seen rapid adoption in real-world systems,
since it enables offline evaluation of new policies
using only historic log data. Unfortunately, when
the number of actions is large, existing OPE estimators – most of which are based on inverse
propensity score weighting – degrade severely
and can suffer from extreme bias and variance.
This foils the use of OPE in many applications
from recommender systems to language models.
To overcome this issue, we propose a new OPE
estimator that leverages marginalized importance
weights when action embeddings provide structure in the action space. We characterize the bias,
variance, and mean squared error of the proposed
estimator and analyze the conditions under which
the action embedding provides statistical benefits
over conventional estimators. In addition to the
theoretical analysis, we find that the empirical
performance improvement can be substantial, enabling reliable OPE even when existing estimators
collapse due to a large number of actions.

1. Introduction
Many intelligent systems (e.g., recommender systems, voice
assistants, search engines) interact with the environment
through a contextual bandit process where a policy observes
a context, takes an action, and obtains a reward. Logs of
these interactions provide valuable data for off-policy evaluation (OPE), which aims to accurately evaluate the performance of new policies without ever deploying them in the
field. OPE is of great practical relevance, as it helps avoid
costly online A/B tests and can also act as subroutines for
batch policy learning (Dudı́k et al., 2014; Su et al., 2020a).
However, OPE is challenging, since the logs contain only
partial-information feedback – specifically the reward of the
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, USA. Correspondence to: Yuta Saito <ys552@cornell.edu>,
Thorsten Joachims <tj@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

chosen action, but not the counterfactual rewards of all the
other actions a different policy might choose.
When the action space is small, recent advances in the design
of OPE estimators have led to a number of reliable methods
with good theoretical guarantees (Dudı́k et al., 2014; Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015a; Wang et al., 2017; Farajtabar
et al., 2018; Su et al., 2019; 2020a; Metelli et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, these estimators can degrade severely when
the number of available actions is large. Large action spaces
are prevalent in many potential applications of OPE, such as
recommender systems where policies have to handle thousands or millions of items (e.g., movies, songs, products).
In such a situation, the existing estimators based on inverse
propensity score (IPS) weighting (Horvitz & Thompson,
1952) can incur high bias and variance, and as a result, be
impractical for OPE. First, a large action space makes it
challenging for the logging policy to have common support
with the target policies, and IPS is biased under support
deficiency (Sachdeva et al., 2020). Second, a large number of actions typically leads to high variance of IPS due
to large importance weights. To illustrate, we find in our
experiments that the variance and mean squared error of IPS
inflate by a factor of over 300 when the number of actions
increases from 10 to 5000 given a fixed sample size. While
doubly robust (DR) estimators can somewhat reduce the
variance by introducing a reward estimator as a control variate (Dudı́k et al., 2014), they do not address the fundamental
issues that come with large action spaces.
To overcome the limitations of the existing estimators when
the action space is large, we leverage additional information about the actions in the form of action embeddings.
There are many cases where we have access to such prior
information. For example, movies are characterized by auxiliary information such as genres (e.g., adventure, science
fiction, documentary), director, or actors. We should then
be able to utilize these supplemental data to infer the value
of actions under-explored by the logging policy, potentially
achieving much more accurate policy evaluation than the
existing estimators. We first provide the conditions under
which action embeddings provide another path for unbiased
OPE, even with support deficient actions. We then propose
the Marginalized IPS (MIPS) estimator, which uses the
marginal distribution of action embeddings, rather than actual actions, to define a new type of importance weights. We

