Learning to Separate Voices by Spatial Regions

Zhongweiyang Xu 1 Romit Roy Choudhury 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of audio voice separation for binaural applications, such as earphones
and hearing aids. While today’s neural networks
perform remarkably well (separating 4+ sources
with 2 microphones) they assume a known or
fixed maximum number of sources, K. Moreover,
today’s models are trained in a supervised manner, using training data synthesized from generic
sources, environments, and human head shapes.
This paper intends to relax both these constraints
at the expense of a slight alteration in the problem
definition. We observe that, when a received mixture contains too many sources, it is still helpful to
separate them by region, i.e., isolating signal mixtures from each conical sector around the user’s
head. This requires learning the fine-grained spatial properties of each region, including the signal
distortions imposed by a person’s head. We propose a two-stage self-supervised framework in
which overheard voices from earphones are preprocessed to extract relatively clean personalized
signals, which are then used to train a regionwise separation model. Results show promising
performance, underscoring the importance of personalization over a generic supervised approach.
(audio samples available at our project website1 ).
We believe this result could help real-world applications in selective hearing, noise cancellation,
and audio augmented reality.

a table-top teleconference system, robots, cars, etc.). When
these microphones are on “earable” devices, such as hearing
aids and earphones, new opportunities emerge. In particular,
the human face/ears/head alter the arriving audio signals
in sophisticated ways, ultimately helping the brain infer
important spatial attributes of the signal (Blauert, 1996).
Importantly, this head-related transfer function (HRTF) is
different across users, and harnessing this personalized filter
remains a rich area of exploration in various fields of science
(Zhang et al., 2021; Yang & Roy Choudhury, 2021).
This paper aims to explore the potential benefits of personal
HRTFs in binaural source separation, such as for hearing
aids, earphones, or glasses. Our hypothesis is that the personal HRTF encodes considerable spatial diversity and this
diversity can aid source separation compared to a baseline
with generic HRTFs. Of course, the spatial diversity may
not be enough to separate two sources arriving from nearby
angles; in fact even typical humans cannot achieve more
than 20◦ angular resolution (Yang & Roy Choudhury, 2021).
However, if the diversity can separate sources by broad angular regions (e.g., isolate one mixture per region shown
in Figure 1), various applications may benefit from it. A
user’s hearing aid, for example, could help isolate a target
voice in front of him from all other voices in other regions.
Even if two voices arrive from the front, separating that
two-voice mixture from all other mixtures could still be beneficial to noise cancellation, augmented reality, and other
applications.

1. Introduction
Audio source separation research (Luo et al., 2019; Gu et al.,
2019; 2020; Jenrungrot et al., 2020) has focused extensively
on separating sources from a generic microphone array (e.g.,
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, US. Correspondence
to: Zhongweiyang Xu <zx21@illinois.edu>, Romit Roy Choudhury <croy@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
https://uiuc-earable-computing.github.
io/binaural/

Figure 1. K=4 sources in R=3 spatial regions (or cones). The front
and back cones identified as the same region due to spatial aliasing
(i.e., signals arriving from the front and back cones can produce
the same time difference at the ears).

