Goal Misgeneralization in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Lauro Langosco * 1 Jack Koch * Lee Sharkey * 2 Jacob Pfau 3 David Krueger 1

Abstract
We study goal misgeneralization, a type of out-ofdistribution robustness failure in reinforcement
learning (RL). Goal misgeneralization occurs
when an RL agent retains its capabilities out-ofdistribution yet pursues the wrong goal. For instance, an agent might continue to competently
avoid obstacles, but navigate to the wrong place.
In contrast, previous works have typically focused
on capability generalization failures, where an
agent fails to do anything sensible at test time.
We formalize this distinction between capability
and goal generalization, provide the first empirical demonstrations of goal misgeneralization, and
present a partial characterization of its causes.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness, performing well on
test data that is not distributed identically to the training set,
is a fundamental problem in machine learning (Arjovsky,
2021). OOD robustness is crucial since in many applications
it is not feasible to collect data distributed identically to that
which the model will encounter in deployment.
In this work, we focus on a particularly concerning type of
OOD robustness that can occur in RL. When an RL agent
is deployed out of distribution, it may simply fail to take
useful actions. However, there exists an alternative failure mode in which the agent pursues a goal other than the
training reward while retaining the capabilities it had on
the training distribution. For example, an agent trained to
pursue a fixed coin might not recognize the coin when it is
positioned elsewhere, and instead competently navigate to
the wrong position (Figure 1). We call this kind of failure
goal misgeneralization1 and distinguish it from capabil*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge 2 University of
Tübingen 3 University of Edinburgh. Correspondence to: Lauro
Langosco <langosco.lauro@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Here, ‘goal’ does not refer only to goal-states in MDPs, but to
goal-directed (optimizing) behavior more broadly.

(a) Goal position ﬁxed

(b) Goal position randomized

Figure 1. (a) At training time, the agent learns to reliably reach the
coin which is always located at the end of the level. (b) However,
when the coin position is randomized at test time, the agent still
goes towards the end of the level and often skips the coin. The
agent’s capability for solving the levels generalizes, but its goal of
collecting coins does not.

ity generalization failures. We provide the first empirical
demonstrations of goal misgeneralization to highlight and
illustrate this phenomenon.
While it is well-known that the true reward function can
be unidentifiable in inverse reinforcement learning (Amin
& Singh, 2016), our work shows that a similar problem
can also occur in reinforcement learning when features of
the environment are correlated and predictive of the reward
on the training distribution but not OOD. In this way, goal
misgeneralization can also resemble problems that arise in
supervised learning when models use unreliable features:
both problems are a form of competent misgeneralization
that works in-distribution but fails OOD. Disentangling capability and goal generalization failures is difficult in supervised learning; for instance, are adversarial examples
bugs or features (Ilyas et al., 2019)? In contrast, studying
RL allows us to formally distinguish capabilities and goals,
which roughly correspond to understanding the environment
dynamics and the reward function, respectively.
Goal misgeneralization might be more dangerous than capability generalization failures, since an agent that capably
pursues an incorrect goal can leverage its capabilities to visit
arbitrarily bad states (Zhuang & Hadfield-Menell, 2021). In
contrast, the only risks from capability generalization failures are those of accidents due to incompetence.
An important implication of goal misgeneralization is that
training a model by optimizing an objective R is not enough

