Communication-efficient Distributed Learning for Large Batch Optimization

Rui Liu 1 Barzan Mozafari 1

Abstract
Many communication-efficient methods have
been proposed for distributed learning, whereby
gradient compression is used to reduce the communication cost. However, given recent advances
in large batch optimization (e.g., large batch SGD
and its variant L ARS with layerwise adaptive
learning rates), the compute power of each machine is being fully utilized. This means, in modern distributed learning, the per-machine computation cost is no longer negligible compared to
the communication cost. In this paper, we propose new gradient compression methods for large
batch optimization, J OINT S PAR and its variant
J OINT S PAR -L ARS with layerwise adaptive learning rates, that jointly reduce both the computation
and the communication cost. To achieve this, we
take advantage of the redundancy in the gradient
computation, unlike the existing methods compute all coordinates of the gradient vector, even
if some coordinates are later dropped for communication efficiency. J OINT S PAR and its variant further reduce the training time by avoiding
the wasted computation on dropped coordinates.
While computationally more efficient, we prove
that J OINT S PAR and its variant also maintain the
same convergence rates as their respective baseline methods. Extensive experiments show that,
by reducing the time per iteration, our methods
converge faster than state-of-the-art compression
methods in terms of wall-clock time.

1. Introduction
Distributed machine learning has drawn much attention as
an important approach to scale up machine learning models.
Since machine learning model training is notoriously time
consuming, most distributed machine learning methods are
1

Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor. Correspondence to: Rui Liu <ruixliu@umich.edu>,
Barzan Mozafari <mozafari@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

focused on parallelizing stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
algorithms (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013; Schmidt et al.,
2017; Johnson & Zhang, 2013). This is because SGD (and
its variants) are commonly used to train machine learning
models, including deep learning models (Sutskever et al.,
2013; Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma & Ba, 2014). In SGD, let
f (x) be the loss function that we hope to minimize, where
x ∈ RD is the parameter vector of a machine learning model.
At each iteration t, we have access to the unbiased gradient
vector gt = g(xt ) such that E[g(xt )] = ∇f (xt ), where
xt is the parameter vector at current iteration. A standard
SGD uses the following update rule to get xt+1 for the next
iteraiton: xt+1 = xt − αt gt , where αt is a scalar for step
size.
A common method to parallelize SGD is to use several
machines to collectively minimize f . Each machine has
one partition of the whole training dataset, and maintains
a local copy of the parameter vector xt . At each iteration,
it obtains a new gradient vector gt according to its local
parameter copy and data partition. After each iteration, all
machines broadcast their local gradient vectors to their peers,
so that gradient vectors can be aggregated to compute the
new parameter vector xt+1 . This synchronization step of
aggregating gradients can also be relaxed with asynchronous
update methods (Leblond et al., 2018; Recht et al., 2011;
Nguyen et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2015). It has been observed
that gradient communication in each iteration is a significant
performance bottleneck in practical applications (Chilimbi
et al., 2014; Seide et al., 2014; Strom, 2015).
Existing Approaches. The main mechanism for alleviating
the communication overhead is to compress the gradients
before synchronously1 broadcasting them to peer machines.
There are two popular approaches to compressing the gradients: one is to quantize gradients (into lower precision
representation) (De Sa et al., 2015; Alistarh et al., 2017;
Zhou et al., 2016; Wen et al., 2017; De Sa et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2017; Rastegari et al., 2016; De Sa et al., 2018;
Bernstein et al., 2018), and the other is to sparsify gradients
by dropping some of their coordinates (Mania et al., 2015;
Leblond et al., 2016; Aji & Heafield, 2017; Lin et al., 2017;
Chen et al., 2018a; Renggli et al., 2018; Tsuzuku et al., 2018;
1
State-of-the-art gradient compression often uses synchronous
updates. We will also discuss asynchronous updates in Section 2.

