Expression might be enough: representing pressure and demand for
reinforcement learning based traffic signal control

Liang Zhang 1 Qiang Wu 2 Jun Shen 3 Linyuan Lü 2 Bo Du 4 Jianqing Wu 5

Abstract
Many studies confirmed that a proper traffic state
representation is more important than complex
algorithms for the classical traffic signal control
(TSC) problem. In this paper, we (1) present a
novel, flexible and efficient method, namely advanced max pressure (Advanced-MP), taking both
running and queuing vehicles into consideration
to decide whether to change current signal phase;
(2) inventively design the traffic movement representation with the efficient pressure and effective running vehicles from Advanced-MP, namely
advanced traffic state (ATS); and (3) develop a
reinforcement learning (RL) based algorithm template, called Advanced-XLight1 , by combining
ATS with the latest RL approaches, and generate
two RL algorithms, namely ”Advanced-MPLight”
and ”Advanced-CoLight” from Advanced-XLight.
Comprehensive experiments on multiple realworld datasets show that: (1) the AdvancedMP outperforms baseline methods, and it is also
efficient and reliable for deployment; and (2)
Advanced-MPLight and Advanced-CoLight can
achieve the state-of-the-art.
Keywords: traffic signal control, reinforcement
learning, advanced max pressure, AdvancedXLight, traffic state representation.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Life Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China 2 Institute of Fundamental and
Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 3 School of Computing and
Information Technology, University of Wollongong, Wollongong,
Australia 4 SMART Infrastructure Facility, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia 5 School of Information Engineering,
Jiangxi University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to:
Qiang Wu <qiang.wu@uestc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/LiangZhang1996/Advancd XLight

1. Introduction
Traffic signal control (TSC) is essential for improving transportation efficiency and mitigating traffic congestion. In
many cities, the classical FixedTime (Koonce & Rodegerdts,
2008), SCOOT (Hunt et al., 1982), and SCATS (Lowrie,
1992) are still the most commonly deployed TSC systems. Max pressure (MP) control (Varaiya, 2013) and selforganizing traffic lights (SOTL) (Cools et al., 2013) aim to
maximize the global throughput from observation of traffic
states.
These conventional methods cannot be easily adapted to
complex dynamic traffic flows without experts’ prior knowledge. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) has drawn
increasing interests. Intuitively, RL-based TSC methods
(Van der Pol & Oliehoek, 2016; Zheng et al., 2019) can
directly learn from the complex conditions through trailand-reward, without requiring specific, which are often unrealistic, assumptions about the traffic model. Some RLbased methods have shown superior performance over many
traditional methods in certain situations, which can also be
used to control large-scale traffic signals (Wei et al., 2019a;
Chen et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2019b).
Assume the observation of the number of a lane is n. When
all signal phases (detailed in Section 3) are considered, the
complexity of exploration state space for RL can raise to
O(n8 ) (Zheng et al., 2019). Hence, the complex RL-based
approaches might not be the optimal solutions for TSC. On
the other hand, both traffic state and neural network design play essential roles in RL-based methods for TSC. The
success of both MPLight (Chen et al., 2020) and EfficientCoLight (Wu et al., 2021b) has shown that combining and
optimizing traffic state representations from traditional methods with RL-based models could yield significant improvements, especially in large-scale TSC.
The traffic movement pressure expressed by efficient pressure (EP) (Wu et al., 2021b) is an essential representation of
traffic state. Although EP has strong representativeness, it
ignores the running vehicles in the traffic network. Here, the
”pressure” alone is not sufficient to represent the complex
traffic state. Meanwhile, with a greedy strategy, EfficientMP (Wu et al., 2021b) is not flexible.

