Adaptive Inertia:
Disentangling the Effects of Adaptive Learning Rate and Momentum

Zeke Xie 1 2 Xinrui Wang 1 Huishuai Zhang 3 Issei Sato 1 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam), which
combines Adaptive Learning Rate and Momentum, would be the most popular stochastic optimizer for accelerating the training of deep neural
networks. However, it is empirically known that
Adam often generalizes worse than Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD). The purpose of this paper is to unveil the mystery of this behavior in
the diffusion theoretical framework. Specifically,
we disentangle the effects of Adaptive Learning
Rate and Momentum of the Adam dynamics on
saddle-point escaping and flat minima selection.
We prove that Adaptive Learning Rate can escape saddle points efficiently, but cannot select
flat minima as SGD does. In contrast, Momentum provides a drift effect to help the training
process pass through saddle points, and almost
does not affect flat minima selection. This partly
explains why SGD (with Momentum) generalizes better, while Adam generalizes worse but
converges faster. Furthermore, motivated by the
analysis, we design a novel adaptive optimization framework named Adaptive Inertia, which
uses parameter-wise adaptive inertia to accelerate
the training and provably favors flat minima as
well as SGD. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed adaptive inertia method
can generalize significantly better than SGD and
conventional adaptive gradient methods.

1. Introduction
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), which combines Adaptive
Learning Rate and Momentum, would be the most popular
optimizer for accelerating the training of deep networks.
1

The University of Tokyo 2 RIKEN Center for AIP
Microsoft Research Asia. Correspondence to: Zeke Xie
<zekexie16@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

However, Adam often generalizes worse and finds sharper
minima than SGD (Wilson et al., 2017) for popular convolutional neural networks, where the flat minima have
been argued to be closely related with good generalization
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1995; 1997a; Hardt et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2022).
Meanwhile, the diffusion theory has been used as a tool to
study how SGD selects minima (Jastrzkebski et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019;
Nguyen et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020a;
Li et al., 2021). This line of research also suggests that
injecting or enhancing SGD-like sharpness-dependent gradient noise may effectively help find flatter minima (An,
1996; Neelakantan et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2019; Xie et al.,
2021a;b; HaoChen et al., 2021). Especially, Zhou et al.
(2020) argued the better generalization performance of SGD
over Adam by showing that SGD enjoys smaller escaping
time than Adam from a basin of the same local minimum.
However, this argument does not reflect the whole picture
of the dynamics of SGD and Adam. Empirically, it does
not explain why Adam converges faster than SGD. Moreover, theoretically, all previous works have not touched the
saddle-point escaping property of the dynamics, which is
considered as an important challenge of efficiently training
deep networks (Dauphin et al., 2014; Staib et al., 2019; Jin
et al., 2017; Reddi et al., 2018).
Our work mainly has two contributions. 1) We disentangle
the effects of Adaptive Learning Rate and Momentum in
Adam learning dynamics and characterize their behaviors
in terms of saddle-point escaping and flat minima selection,
which explains why Adam usually converges fast but does
not generalize well. Particularly, we prove that, Adaptive
Learning Rate is good at escaping saddle points but not good
at selecting flat minima, while Momentum helps escape saddle point and matters little to escaping sharp minima1 . 2)
Our theoretical analysis motivated us to propose a novel
Adaptive Inertia (Adai) optimization framework which is
conceptually orthogonal to the existing adaptive gradient
framework. Adai does not parameter-wisely adjust learning
rates, but parameter-wisely adjusts the momentum hyper1
When we talk about saddle points, we mean strict saddle
points in this paper.

