DSTAGNN: Dynamic Spatial-Temporal Aware Graph Neural Network for
Traffic Flow Forecasting

Shiyong Lan * 1 Yitong Ma * 1 Weikang Huang 2 Wenwu Wang 3 Hongyu Yang 1 Piaoyang Li 1

Abstract
As a typical problem in time series analysis, traffic flow prediction is one of the most important
application fields of machine learning. However, achieving highly accurate traffic flow prediction is a challenging task, due to the presence
of complex dynamic spatial-temporal dependencies within a road network. This paper proposes
a novel Dynamic Spatial-Temporal Aware Graph
Neural Network (DSTAGNN) to model the complex spatial-temporal interaction in road network.
First, considering the fact that historical data carries intrinsic dynamic information about the spatial structure of road networks, we propose a new
dynamic spatial-temporal aware graph based on
a data-driven strategy to replace the pre-defined
static graph usually used in traditional graph convolution. Second, we design a novel graph neural
network architecture, which can not only represent dynamic spatial relevance among nodes with
an improved multi-head attention mechanism, but
also acquire the wide range of dynamic temporal
dependency from multi-receptive field features
via multi-scale gated convolution. Extensive experiments on real-world data sets demonstrate that
our proposed method significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With a growing number of vehicles in road networks, there
is increasing pressure on traffic management systems. The
*
Equal contribution , This work was funded in part by Key
R&D Project of Sichuan Science and Technology Department,
China (2021YFG0300), and in part by Key Project of Natural Science Foundation of China (U20A20161). 1 College of Computer
Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. 2 National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Science on Synthetic Vision, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. 3 Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK. Correspondence
to: Shiyong Lan <lanshiyong@scu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

development of Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) is
urgently needed for efficient traffic management. Traffic
flow prediction plays a key role in ITS, as it is a necessary
prerequisite for the implementation of an intelligent traffic
management system.

(a) Road network of a certain (b) Dynamic spatial-temporal
zone.
relevance in traffic flow data.

Figure 1: Dynamic spatial-temporal correlations in realworld traffic data. In (a), the black line represents the actual
road, and the nodes indicate recording points. In (b), elastic
connection means that the spatial adjacency state between
recording points is dynamically changing, while scissors
cutting means that the road may be temporarily closed. The
curve shows the spatial dependency of inter-regional nodes
of similar urban functions, and the dashed line represents
the temporal dependency among different time steps.
The traffic at each recording point (also called node in the
road network) presents patterns of highly dynamic and complex temporal-spatial dependency. On the one hand, the
agents in the road network are affected by various random
factors (such as potentially random traffic accidents, and
temporary road closure for maintenance), which influences
the arrival time interval between adjacent nodes. On the
other hand, similar urban functional areas may lead to correlations of the traffic data between the nodes in the road
network, regardless of the distance between them. For example, during the daily rush hours, the office clustered areas
are often congested at the same time. Fig. 1 illustrates the
dynamic spatial-temporal correlation within the traffic flow.
Moreover, the complex spatial-temporal interaction in road
traffic network can substantially degrade the performance
of traffic prediction algorithms (Yin et al., 2020).
In recent years, deep learning methods have become a popular choice for traffic flow prediction from high-dimensional

