Deep Probability Estimation

Sheng Liu * 1 Aakash Kaku * 1 Weicheng Zhu * 1 Matan Leibovich * 2 Sreyas Mohan * 1 Boyang Yu 1
Haoxiang Huang 2 Laure Zanna 1 2 Narges Razavian 3 Jonathan Niles-Weed 1 2 Carlos Fernandez-Granda 1 2

Abstract
Reliable probability estimation is of crucial importance in many real-world applications where there
is inherent (aleatoric) uncertainty. Probabilityestimation models are trained on observed outcomes (e.g. whether it has rained or not, or
whether a patient has died or not), because the
ground-truth probabilities of the events of interest are typically unknown. The problem is therefore analogous to binary classification, with the
difference that the objective is to estimate probabilities rather than predicting the specific outcome. This work investigates probability estimation from high-dimensional data using deep neural
networks. There exist several methods to improve
the probabilities generated by these models but
they mostly focus on model (epistemic) uncertainty. For problems with inherent uncertainty, it
is challenging to evaluate performance without
access to ground-truth probabilities. To address
this, we build a synthetic dataset to study and compare different computable metrics. We evaluate
existing methods on the synthetic data as well as
on three real-world probability estimation tasks,
all of which involve inherent uncertainty: precipitation forecasting from radar images, predicting
cancer patient survival from histopathology images, and predicting car crashes from dashcam
videos. We also give a theoretical analysis of a
model for high-dimensional probability estimation which reproduces several of the phenomena
evinced in our experiments. Finally, we propose a
new method for probability estimation using neural networks, which modifies the training process
to promote output probabilities that are consis*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, USA 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, USA 3 Department of
Population Health & Department of Radiology, NYU School of
Medicine, New York, USA. Correspondence to: SL, AK, WZ, ML,
SM <{shengliu, ark576, jackzhu, ml7557, sm7582}@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tent with empirical probabilities computed from
the data. The method outperforms existing approaches on most metrics on the simulated as
well as real-world data.1

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of building models that answer
questions such as: Will it rain? Will a patient survive? Will
a car collide with another vehicle? Due to the inherentlyuncertain nature of these real-world phenomena, this requires performing probability estimation, i.e. evaluating the
likelihood of each possible outcome for the phenomenon of
interest. Models for probability prediction must be trained
on observed outcomes (e.g. whether it rained, a patient died,
or a collision occurred), because the ground-truth probabilities are unknown. The problem is therefore analogous to
binary classification, with the important difference that the
objective is to estimate probabilities rather than predicting
specific outcomes. In probability estimation, two identical
inputs (e.g. histopathology images from cancer patients) can
potentially result in two different outcomes (death vs. survival). In contrast, in classification the class label is usually
completely determined by the data (a picture either shows a
cat or it does not).
The goal of this work is to investigate probability estimation
from high-dimensional data using deep neural networks.
Probability estimation is a fundamental problem in machine
learning (Murphy, 2013). Deep networks trained for classification often generate probabilities, which quantify the
uncertainty of the estimate (i.e. how likely the network is
to classify correctly). This quantification has been observed
to be inaccurate, and several methods have been developed
to improve it (Platt, 1999; Guo et al., 2017; Szegedy et al.,
2016; Zhang et al., 2020; Thulasidasan et al., 2020; Mukhoti
et al., 2020; Thagaard et al., 2020), including Bayesian neural networks (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Wang et al., 2016;
Shekhovtsov & Flach, 2019; Postels et al., 2019). However,
these works restrict their attention almost exclusively to
classification in datasets (e.g. CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky,
1
Code available at https://jackzhu727.github.io/
deep-probability-estimation/.

