H2O: Two Hands Manipulating Objects for First Person Interaction Recognition
Taein Kwon1 , Bugra Tekin2 , Jan Stühmer* 3 , Federica Bogo2 , and Marc Pollefeys1,2
1

ETH Zürich, 2 Microsoft, 3 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge

Abstract
We present a comprehensive framework for egocentric
interaction recognition using markerless 3D annotations of
two hands manipulating objects. To this end, we propose a
method to create a unified dataset for egocentric 3D interaction recognition. Our method produces annotations of the
3D pose of two hands and the 6D pose of the manipulated
objects, along with their interaction labels for each frame.
Our dataset, called H2O (2 Hands and Objects), provides
synchronized multi-view RGB-D images, interaction labels,
object classes, ground-truth 3D poses for left & right hands,
6D object poses, ground-truth camera poses, object meshes
and scene point clouds. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first benchmark that enables the study of first-person
actions with the use of the pose of both left and right hands
manipulating objects and presents an unprecedented level
of detail for egocentric 3D interaction recognition. We further propose the method to predict interaction classes by
estimating the 3D pose of two hands and the 6D pose of the
manipulated objects, jointly from RGB images. Our method
models both inter- and intra-dependencies between both
hands and objects by learning the topology of a graph convolutional network that predicts interactions. We show that
our method facilitated by this dataset establishes a strong
baseline for joint hand-object pose estimation and achieves
state-of-the-art accuracy for first person interaction recognition.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been tremendous progress in
video understanding and action recognition. Current algorithms can reliably recognize the action the subject is performing in many unconstrained settings from third person
viewpoints [9, 22, 23, 24, 71, 89]. Although action recognition from first-person views has many applications in augmented reality, robotics and surveillance, it trails behind the
progress in third person views, mostly due to the lack of
large and diverse egocentric datasets. From an egocentric
viewpoint, action recognition is mostly about understanding hand & object interactions. A unified understanding of
* Work performed while at Microsoft.

Project Page: https://www.taeinkwon.com/projects/h2o

Figure 1: Two hands manipulating objects for first person interaction recognition. We propose a dataset providing rich annotations for 3D poses of left & right hands, 6D object poses, camera
poses, object meshes and scene point clouds, along with their associated interaction labels. We leverage our dataset to propose novel
methods for 3D interaction recognition.

the positions and movements of hands and the manipulated
objects is crucial for recognizing egocentric interactions.
However, existing first-person interaction datasets mostly
provide only 2D features (e.g. bounding boxes, hand segmentation) without reasoning in 3D about the motions of
hands and the manipulated objects. In this work, we propose, for the first time, a unified dataset for first person
interaction recognition with markerless 3D annotations of
two hands manipulating objects, as depicted in Fig. 1. We
collect a richly annotated dataset including synchronized
RGB-D images, camera poses, right & left hand poses, object poses, object meshes, scene point clouds and action labels, which provides an unprecedented level of detail for understanding 3D hand-object interactions. With the help of
our dataset, we present the first method to estimate jointly
the 3D pose of two hands and objects from a color image.
We further propose to learn interdependencies within and
across hand and object poses using an adaptive graph convolutional network for 3D interaction recognition.
Jointly capturing hands in action and the manipulated
objects in 3D is a challenging problem due to reciprocal
occlusions. The problem is more challenging from first
person viewpoints due to the unique challenges brought by
egocentric vision such as fast camera motion, large occlusion, background clutter [49] and most importantly, lack of
datasets. Recent works have proposed datasets that successfully addressed some of these challenges. Sridhar et al. [73]
have presented one of the earliest datasets for hand-object
interactions, in which a single hand manipulates a cuboid
object. Pioneering works by [26, 32, 34] have further proposed datasets that include 3D annotations for object ma-

10138

