Transductive Few-Shot Classification on the Oblique Manifold
Guodong Qi 1,2 , Huimin Yu 1,2,3 , Zhaohui Lu 2 , Shuzhao Li 1,2
1
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-League Research & Development Center, 3 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
{guodong qi, yhm2005, leeshuz}@zju.edu.cn, lzh8910210@163.com

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) attempts to learn with limited
data. In this work, we perform the feature extraction in the
Euclidean space and the geodesic distance metric on the
Oblique Manifold (OM). Specially, for better feature extraction, we propose a non-parametric Region Self-attention
with Spatial Pyramid Pooling (RSSPP), which realizes a
trade-off between the generalization and the discriminative ability of the single image feature. Then, we embed
the feature to OM as a point. Furthermore, we design
an Oblique Distance-based Classifier (ODC) that achieves
classification in the tangent spaces which better approximate OM locally by learnable tangency points. Finally, we
introduce a new method for parameters initialization and
a novel loss function in the transductive settings. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm and it outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the
popular benchmarks: mini-ImageNet, tiered-ImageNet, and
Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 (CUB).

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) trained with
large-scale labeled data have achieved the competitive performance as humans in recent years. However, different
from these models struggling with a few labeled instances
per class, humans learn rapidly by leveraging content and
prior knowledge. To address this, few-shot learning (FSL)
has drawn increasing attention. FSL aims to learn a prior
knowledge that can rapidly generalize to new tasks with
limited samples.
The transductive learning methods [66, 38, 33, 4] and
metric learning methods [48, 27, 62] have been promising
in a recent line of works. Transductive learning has shown
superior performance over inductive learning, because the
unlabeled test examples are classified at once, instead of
the one sample at a time as in inductive settings. Metric
learning methods represent the image in an appropriate feature space and replace the fully connected layer in standard

image classification [20] with the distance function, e.g. Euclidean distance or cosine distance. However, these works
may lose the geometric inherent properties in the Euclidean
space. Though it can be alleviated by data dimensionality
reduction [22, 50, 21], these methods are not generalized
well to new tasks or easy to over-fit in the few-shot settings.
Another solution is to make use of Riemannian geometry [11]. Riemannian geometry studies real smooth differential manifolds and it defines several geometric notions,
e.g. the length of a curve, with a Riemannian metric. Admitting the Riemannian geometry, the Grassmannian manifold [26, 55] and the SPD manifold [36] are highly prevalent in modeling characters of image sets and videos, where
intra-class variance, e.g., illumination conditions or other
scenarios, are comprised. They are capable of “filling-in”
missing images. However, the advantages are based on
modeling sufficient number of images for each class. It is
infeasible to apply the aforementioned manifolds to FSL.
Another manifold that admits Riemannian geometry, is
the oblique manifold (OM) [52], which is an embedded submanifold with all normalized columns and it is used for independent component analysis [1]. We argue that OM is
superior in FSL. The reasons are in two-fold: 1) Whitening is not required in OM. The whitening step is to estimate
the covariance matrix and remove the scaling indeterminacy
of data in Grassmannian manifold or SPD manifold, which
is infeasible to perform whitening step for a single image
classification. Without whitening, OM is free of extrinsic
constraints. 2) All the columns of OM have unit Euclidean
norm. OM offers an intrinsic property similar to the L2normalization in Euclidean space. In this way, the CNN
features in Euclidean space can be embedded to OM more
easily.
However, the absence of whitening may lead to weak
generalization of OM, since the whitening step is to remove the impact of intra-variance of data. To address
this, we resort to the powerful CNN to enhance the generalization, as generalization emerged from the pretrained
CNN [20, 64, 34], ensemble learning [9] or SPP [19].
However, more generalization means less discriminative

8412

