3D Local Convolutional Neural Networks for Gait Recognition
Zhen Huang1, 2∗, Dixiu Xue2 , Xu Shen2 , Xinmei Tian1†,
Houqiang Li1 , Jianqiang Huang2 , Xian-Sheng Hua2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Alibaba Group
hz13@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xinmei,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn,
{dixiu.xdx,shenxu.sx,jianqiang.hjq,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
𝑘

The goal of gait recognition is to learn the unique spatiotemporal pattern about the human body shape from its temporal changing characteristics. As different body parts behave differently during walking, it is intuitive to model the
spatio-temporal patterns of each part separately. However,
existing part-based methods equally divide the feature maps
of each frame into fixed horizontal stripes to get local parts.
It is obvious that these stripe partition-based methods cannot accurately locate the body parts. First, different body
parts can appear at the same stripe (e.g., arms and the
torso), and one part can appear at different stripes in different frames (e.g., hands). Second, different body parts
possess different scales, and even the same part in different
frames can appear at different locations and scales. Third,
different parts also exhibit distinct movement patterns (e.g.,
at which frame the movement starts, the position change
frequency, how long it lasts). To overcome these issues,
we propose novel 3D local operations as a generic family of building blocks for 3D gait recognition backbones.
The proposed 3D local operations support the extraction of
local 3D volumes of body parts in a sequence with adaptive spatial and temporal scales, locations and lengths. In
this way, the spatio-temporal patterns of the body parts
are well learned from the 3D local neighborhood in partspecific scales, locations, frequencies and lengths. Experiments demonstrate that our 3D local convolutional neural
networks achieve state-of-the-art performance on popular
gait datasets. Code is available at: https://github.
com/yellowtownhz/3DLocalCNN .

1. Introduction
Gait is one of the most important and effective biometric
patterns since it can be authenticated at a distance from a
∗ This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a research intern.
† Corresponding author.

𝐻

𝑘

𝑘

𝐻

𝑘

𝑘

𝑇

𝑊

𝑊
(b) C3D

(a) C2D
𝑥!
𝐻
𝑥"
𝑊
(c) Non-local

C

𝑇

𝐻
𝑊

𝑇

(d) 3D local CNN

Figure 1. Blocks in backbone CNNs. All these blocks extract
features from a local neighborhood. In C2D and C3D, the local
neighborhood is a fixed 2D patch (k×k) or 3D volume (k×k×k).
Non-local networks learn adaptive long-range dependency with all
positions (H × W × T ). Our 3D local CNN is designed to localize
adaptive 3D volumes, instead of a fixed local neighborhood, for
multiple local paths and extract corresponding local features.

camera without subject’s cooperation. Gait recognition has
broad usage in crime prevention, forensic identification and
social security insurance [2, 14]. In real-world scenarios,
beyond the change of body shape caused by walking movement, variations such as bag-carrying, coat-wearing, and
camera viewpoints switch, also lead to dramatic changes in
body appearance, resulting in significant challenges to gait
recognition.
The essential goal of gait recognition is to learn the
unique and invariant representations from the temporal
changing characteristics of human body shapes. Early
works in gait recognition focused on extracting global features using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [35, 20,
29, 19]. GaitNet [41, 40] proposed an auto-encoder framework to extract the gait-related features from raw RGB images and then used LSTMs to model the temporal changes
of gait sequences. Thomas et al. [33] directly applied 3DCNNs to extract the sequential information using a model
pretrained on natural image classification tasks. However,
global features do not consider the spatial structure and lo-

14920

