Sat2Vid: Street-view Panoramic Video Synthesis from a Single Satellite Image
Zuoyue Li1 Zhenqiang Li2 Zhaopeng Cui3 * Rongjun Qin4 Marc Pollefeys1,5 Martin R. Oswald1*
1
ETH Zürich 2 The University of Tokyo 3 Zhejiang University 4 The Ohio State University 5 Microsoft

Abstract
We present a novel method for synthesizing both temporally and geometrically consistent street-view panoramic
video from a single satellite image and camera trajectory.
Existing cross-view synthesis approaches focus on images,
while video synthesis in such a case has not yet received
enough attention. For geometrical and temporal consistency, our approach explicitly creates a 3D point cloud representation of the scene and maintains dense 3D-2D correspondences across frames that reflect the geometric scene
configuration inferred from the satellite view. As for synthesis in the 3D space, we implement a cascaded network
architecture with two hourglass modules to generate pointwise coarse and fine features from semantics and per-class
latent vectors, followed by projection to frames and an upsampling module to obtain the final realistic video. By
leveraging computed correspondences, the produced streetview video frames adhere to the 3D geometric scene structure and maintain temporal consistency. Qualitative and
quantitative experiments demonstrate superior results compared to other state-of-the-art synthesis approaches that either lack temporal consistency or realistic appearance. To
the best of our knowledge, our work is the first one to synthesize cross-view images to videos..

1. Introduction
Street-view images have been proven to be helpful for
exploring remote places or for strategic ground planning in
emergency or intelligence operations. They are useful for a
variety of applications in virtual or mixed reality, realistic
simulations and gaming, viewpoint interpolation, or crossview matching. Nevertheless, their acquisition is rather expensive, and regular updates to capture changes are required
for some tasks. On the other hand, satellite images are regularly captured, easier to obtain, have significantly better
earth coverage, and are generally much more widely available than street-view images. The generation of street views
* Corresponding author.

Please use Adobe Reader / KDE Okular to view animations, which
are also available with higher resolution in our supplementary materials
and arXiv (https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.06628).

Input Satellite RGB

Synthesized Video

Figure 1: Street-view panoramic video synthesis results
of our method (animations). For a single satellite image
and a given trajectory (indicated by ↑ in the figure), we learn
to synthesize a corresponding street-view panoramic video
with both geometrical and temporal consistency.
from given satellite or aerial images is thus an attractive and
interesting alternative for the aforementioned applications.
While single street-view image generation from satellite
images has recently been investigated [27, 20], these methods are not suitable to create continuous view-point changes
around a given location since they built upon random generators and lack constraints on the correspondence between
frame pixels. They are thus unable to synthesize temporally
and geometrically consistent image sequences that are desired for a better visual experience.
In this paper, we approach the novel task to synthesize
street-view panoramic video sequences as realistically as
possible and as consistent as possible from a single satellite image and given viewing locations. To achieve this, instead of resorting to 2D generators like [27, 20] and generating images individually, we propose to generate the whole
scene in a 3D representation of point cloud, and establish
the correspondence between these visible points and the 2D
frame pixels. In this way, the projected views from the entire generated scene instance will be naturally consistent by
design. In order to generate image frames as good as a single image, we design a two-stage 3D generator in a coarseto-fine manner that exploits the characteristics of different

12436

