Aligning Latent and Image Spaces to Connect the Unconnectable
Ivan Skorokhodov1 , Grigorii Sotnikov2,3,4 , Mohamed Elhoseiny1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
2
3
Gradient, Higher School of Economics, 4 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
ivan.skorokhodov@kaust.edu.sa

gdsotnikov@edu.hse.ru

mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa

Figure 1: Our method can generate infinite images of diverse and complex scenes that transition naturally from one into
another. It does so without any conditioning and trains without any supervision from a dataset of unrelated square images.

Abstract
In this work, we develop a method to generate infinite
high-resolution images with diverse and complex content.
It is based on a perfectly equivariant patch-wise generator with synchronous interpolations in the image and latent
spaces. Latent codes, when sampled, are positioned on the
coordinate grid, and each pixel is computed from an interpolation of the neighboring codes. We modify the AdaIN
mechanism to work in such a setup and train a GAN model
to generate images positioned between any two latent vectors. At test time, this allows for generating infinitely large
images of diverse scenes that transition naturally from one
into another. Apart from that, we introduce LHQ: a new
dataset of 90k high-resolution nature landscapes. We test
the approach on LHQ, LSUN Tower and LSUN Bridge and
outperform the baselines by at least 4 times in terms of quality and diversity of the produced infinite images. The project
website is located at https://universome.github.io/alis.

1. Introduction
Modern image generators are typically designed to synthesize pictures of some fixed size and aspect ratio. The

real world, however, continues outside the boundaries of
any captured photograph, and so to match this behavior,
several recent works develop architectures to produce infinitely large images [29, 10, 57], or images that partially
extrapolate outside their boundary [25, 43, 57].
Most of the prior work on infinite image generation focused on the synthesis of homogeneous texture-like patterns
[20, 2, 29] and did not explore the infinite generation of
complex scenes, like nature or city landscapes. The critical
challenge of generating such images compared to texture
synthesis is making the produced frames globally consistent with one another: when a scene spans across several
frames, they should all be conditioned on some shared information. To our knowledge, the existing works explored
three ways to achieve this: 1) fit a separate model per scene,
so the shared information is encoded in the model’s weights
(e.g., [29, 40, 53, 11]); 2) condition the whole generation
process on a global latent vector [57, 25, 43]; and 3) predict
spatial latent codes autoregressively [10].
The first approach requires having a large-resolution
photograph (like satellite images) and produces pictures
whose variations in style and semantics are limited to the
given imagery. The second solution can only perform some
limited extrapolation since using a single global latent code

14144

