Learning A Single Network for Scale-Arbitrary Super-Resolution
Longguang Wang, Yingqian Wang, Zaiping Lin, Jungang Yang, Wei An, Yulan Guo∗
National University of Defense Technology

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) aims at recovering
a high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR)
counterpart. As a long-standing low-level computer vision
problem, single image SR has been investigated for decades
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Recently, the rise of deep learning provides
a powerful tool to solve this problem, with numerous CNNbased methods [7, 8, 9, 10, 11] being developed to improve
the SR performance.
Although recent CNN-based single image SR networks
[6, 10, 12, 13] have achieved promising performance, they
are developed for image SR with specific integer scale factors (e.g., ×2/3/4). In many real-world applications like
image retargeting, image editing and artworks, non-integer
SR (e.g., from 100 × 100 to 220 × 220) and asymmetric SR
(e.g., from 100 × 100 to 220 × 420) are highly demanded.
However, due to the fixed filters in upscale modules, most

3.15

3.15

1.5

2.5

2
4

Recently, the performance of single image superresolution (SR) has been significantly improved with powerful networks. However, these networks are developed for
image SR with specific integer scale factors (e.g., ×2/3/4),
and cannot handle non-integer and asymmetric SR. In this
paper, we propose to learn a scale-arbitrary image SR network from scale-specific networks. Specifically, we develop
a plug-in module for existing SR networks to perform scalearbitrary SR, which consists of multiple scale-aware feature
adaption blocks and a scale-aware upsampling layer. Moreover, conditional convolution is used in our plug-in module
to generate dynamic scale-aware filters, which enables our
network to adapt to arbitrary scale factors. Our plug-in
module can be easily adapted to existing networks to realize scale-arbitrary SR with a single model. These networks
plugged with our module can produce promising results for
non-integer and asymmetric SR while maintaining state-ofthe-art performance for SR with integer scale factors. Besides, the additional computational and memory cost of our
module is very small.

Asymmetric SR

Abstract

Non-Integer
SR

{wanglongguang15,yulan.guo}@nudt.edu.cn

LR Image

Bicubic

Meta-RCAN
(+Bicubic)

ArbRCAN

GT

Figure 1. Visual comparison achieved by Bicubic, Meta-RCAN
[14] and our ArbRCAN. “(+Bicubic)” means that the network output is further resized to the expected resolution using bicubic interpolation for asymmetric scale factors.

existing networks can only zoom in an image with specific
integer scales and cannot handle scale-arbitrary SR in realworld scenarios.
To address this limitation, Hu et al. [14] proposed a
Meta-SR network to dynamically predict filters in the upscale module for different scale factors using meta-learning.
As a result, Meta-SR achieves promising performance on
non-integer scale factors. However, scale information is
only used for upsampling in Meta-SR. That is, features in
the backbone are the same for all SR tasks with different
scale factors, which hinders the further improvement of performance. Moreover, Meta-SR focuses on SR with noninteger scale factors but cannot handle SR with asymmetric
scale factors.
In this paper, we propose to learn a scale-arbitrary single
image SR network from scale-specific networks. Specifically, we develop a plug-in module for existing SR networks
to enable scale-arbitrary SR, which consists of multiple
scale-aware feature adaption blocks and a scale-aware upsampling layer. The scale-aware feature adaption blocks are
used to adapt features in the backbone to specific scale factors and the scale-aware upsampling layer is used for scalearbitrary upsampling. Within our plug-in module, conditional convolutions are used to generate dynamic scaleaware filters to handle different scale factors. Our plug-in
module can be easily adapted to existing networks for scale-

4801

