Collaborative and Adversarial Learning of Focused and Dispersive
Representations for Semi-supervised Polyp Segmentation
Huisi Wu1 Guilian Chen1 Zhenkun Wen1 Jing Qin2
1
Shenzhen University 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Abstract
Automatic polyp segmentation from colonoscopy images
is an essential step in computer aided diagnosis for colorectal cancer. Most of polyp segmentation methods reported
in recent years are based on fully supervised deep learning. However, annotation for polyp images by physicians
during the diagnosis is time-consuming and costly. In this
paper, we present a novel semi-supervised polyp segmentation via collaborative and adversarial learning of focused
and dispersive representations learning model, where focused and dispersive extraction module are used to deal
with the diversity of location and shape of polyps. In addition, confidence maps produced by a discriminator in an
adversarial training framework shows the effectiveness of
leveraging unlabeled data and improving the performance
of segmentation network. Consistent regularization is further employed to optimize the segmentation networks to
strengthen the representation of the outputs of focused and
dispersive extraction module. We also propose an auxiliary adversarial learning method to better leverage unlabeled examples to further improve semantic segmentation accuracy. We conduct extensive experiments on two
famous polyp datasets: Kvasir-SEG and CVC-Clinic DB.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed model, consistently outperforming state-of-the-art
semi-supervised segmentation models based on adversarial
training and even some advanced fully supervised models.

1. Introduction
Automatic segmentation of polyp plays a key role in
computer-aided diagnosis for Colorectal cancer (CRC),
which is one of the most common type of cancer around
the world [26]. As for polyps, colonoscopy is an significant
detection way, which can help in the removal of the polyps
and greatly prevent them from developing into the CRC.
Recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have exhibited excellent performance in the image segmen-

tation tasks. Semantic segmentation aims to assign each
pixel of an image with a label so that the pixels with the
same label can be used to infer the target of wanted. For
semantic segmentation tasks, most approaches based on
deep learning methods can be utilized in different medical
tasks [6, 29, 33, 34, 36] like segmentation of blood vessel, skin lesion, lung nodule, and cell nuclei. Compared
to manual segmentation by physicians during the diagnosis, which is time-consuming and subjective, medical automatic segmentation has great advantages and huge potential in computer-aided diagnosis (CAD). However, lacking of a large number of pixel-wise annotations for training is a great challenge for automatic medical segmentation
task. Annotating medical data such as polyps, which vary
in shape, texture and appearance location, always needs a
lot of time and effort, results in a challenging task for polyp
segmentation.
Commonly in some medical image segmentation tasks,
allocating each pixel with a correct label in blurred images is very hard. However, obtaining the global information of blurred images can effectively resolve the problem
about distinguishing target and background in a segmentation task. For this purpose, the non-local network [31] is
proposed to model the long-range dependencies using selfattention mechanism [28]. Furthermore, Cao et al. [3] proposed a new instantiation of the general network, called
global context (GC) block by a combination of the optimal implementation of non-local (NL) block and squeezeand-excitation (SE) block [11] at each step. In addition,
convolutional block attention module (CBAM) provides a
simple yet effective attention mechanism for feed-forward
CNNs [32]. But these methods for distinguishing target
and background is in view of paired medical images and
its ground truth images.
In recent years, different kinds of semi-supervised
method are proposed for dealing with the shortage of labeled data. Hung et al. [13] adopted adversarial learning
by using a segmentation network and a discriminator network to produce the confidence map based on the segmentation predictions of unlabeled images as supervisory sig-

3489

