Full-Velocity Radar Returns by Radar-Camera Fusion
Yunfei Long1 , Daniel Morris1 , Xiaoming Liu1 ,
Marcos Castro2 , Punarjay Chakravarty2 , and Praveen Narayanan2
1
Michigan State University, 2 Ford Motor Company
{longyunf,dmorris,liuxm}@msu.edu, {mgerard8,pchakra5,pnaray11}@ford.com

Abstract
Radar

32.5

Flow

27.5

30.0

Possible
Motions

Camera

20.0

x

22.5

25.0

(a)

4

2

0

radial velocity to full velocity, using radial velocity directly
to account for the real movement of radar points is inadequate and sometimes misleading. Here, the full velocity denotes the actual velocity of radar points in 2D or 3D
space. While radial velocity can well approximate full velocity when a point is moving away from or towards the
radar, these two can be very different when the point is
moving in the non-radial directions. An extreme case occurs for objects moving tangentially as these will have zero
radial velocity regardless of target speed. Therefore, acquiring point-wise full velocity instead of radial velocity is
crucial to reliably sense the motion of surrounding objects.

16198

15.0

17.5

(c)

12.5

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Full motion cannot be determined with a single sensor: all motions ending on the blue dashed line (i.e., blue dashed
arrows) map to the same optical flow and all motions terminated
on the red dashed line (i.e., red dashed arrows) fit the same radial motion. However, with a radar-camera pair, the full motion
can be uniquely decided: only the motion drawn in black satisfies both optical flow and radial motion. (b) Optical flow in the
camera-image and (c) a bird’s-eye view of the observed vehicle.
This shows measured radar points with radial velocity (red), our
predicted point-wise, full velocity (black), and ground truth full
velocity of the vehicle (green).
2

Radar is a mainstream automotive 3D sensor, and along
with LiDAR and camera, is used in perception systems for
driving assistance and autonomous driving [34, 18, 2]. Unlike LiDAR, radar has been widely installed on existing vehicles due to its relatively low cost and small sensor size,
which makes it an easy fit into various vehicles without
changing their appearance. Thus, advances in radar vision
systems have potential to make immediate impact on vehicle safety. Recently, with the release of a couple of autonomous driving datasets with radar data included, e.g.,
Oxford Radar RobotCar [1] and nuScenes [5], there is great
interest in the community to explore how to leverage radar
data in various vision tasks such as object detection [24, 37].
In addition to measuring 3D positions, radar has the special capability of obtaining radial velocity of returned points
based on the Doppler effect. This extra capability is a significant advantage over other 3D sensors like LiDAR, enabling, for instance, instantaneous moving object detection.
However, due to the inherently ambiguous mapping from

Radar
Point

4

1. Introduction

Radial Motion

y

A distinctive feature of Doppler radar is the measurement of velocity in the radial direction for radar points.
However, the missing tangential velocity component hampers object velocity estimation as well as temporal integration of radar sweeps in dynamic scenes. Recognizing that
fusing camera with radar provides complementary information to radar, in this paper we present a closed-form solution for the point-wise, full-velocity estimate of Doppler
returns using the corresponding optical flow from camera
images. Additionally, we address the association problem
between radar returns and camera images with a neural
network that is trained to estimate radar-camera correspondences. Experimental results on the nuScenes dataset verify the validity of the method and show significant improvements over the state-of-the-art in velocity estimation and
accumulation of radar points.

