Cortical Surface Shape Analysis Based on Alexandrov Polyhedra
Min Zhang* 1 , Yang Guo* 2 , Na Lei†3 , Zhou Zhao2 , Jianfeng Wu4 , Xiaoyin Xu1 , Yalin Wang4 , and
Xianfeng Gu2
1

Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
2
Stony Brook University
3
Dalian University of Technology
4
Arizona State University

NK (z)

Abstract
Shape analysis has been playing an important role in
early diagnosis and prognosis of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s diseases (AD). However, obtaining effective shape representations remains challenging. This paper proposes to use the Alexandrov polyhedra
as surface-based shape signatures for cortical morphometry analysis. Given a closed genus-0 surface, its Alexandrov polyhedron is a convex representation that encodes
its intrinsic geometry information. We propose to compute the polyhedra via a novel spherical optimal transport (OT) computation. In our experiments, we observe
that the Alexandrov polyhedra of cortical surfaces between
pathology-confirmed AD and cognitively unimpaired individuals are significantly different. Moreover, we propose a
visualization method by comparing local geometry differences across cortical surfaces. We show that the proposed
method is effective in pinpointing regional cortical structural changes impacted by AD.

1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common type of
dementia. It is commonly agreed that an effective presymptomatic diagnosis and treatment of AD could have enormous public health benefits [15]. Brain structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) research has the potential
to provide valid diagnostic biomarkers of AD risk factors.
Although brain structural volumes are the most commonly
used sMRI measures in AD research, surface-based brain
structural measures offer more detailed and patient-specific
shape information [21, 14, 2, 25]. Overall, a geometrically
* These two authors have equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

S2

P

z
K
∂K

GK
NK

S2

Figure 1: The Minkowski Problem
solid method, which is sensitive to intrinsic surface geometric features, is vital to identify reliable imaging biomarkers,
reduce the sheer number of statistical tests, and thereby improve the statistical power of imaging analysis.
It is well known that a general surface in R3 is fully determined by its first fundamental form (Riemannian metric) and the second fundamental form, unique up to a rigid
motion. Closed convex surfaces are solely determined by
their Riemann metrics. According to Gauss’s Theorema
Egregium, the Gaussian curvature is intrinsically determined by the Riemannian metric. Therefore, given a surface, it is natural to ask whether its Gaussian curvature
could be encoded into a convex shape, which enables us
to visualize the Riemannian metric of the input surface, and
helps us compare the Riemannian metric of the given surface to other surfaces.
The existence and computation of such a convex shape
representation relates to the Minkowski problem and the
Minkowski theorem. Mathematically, the Minkowski problem (type II) asks how to reconstruct a convex shape that
fulfils a given Gaussian curvature measure. As shown in
Fig. 1, the setup for the Minkowski problem is as follows:
A domain K ∈ R3 is convex and contains the origin O. The
boundary ∂K is a smooth convex surface, with polar coor-

14244

