Re-Aging GAN: Toward Personalized Face Age Transformation
Farkhod Makhmudkhujaev, Sungeun Hong, and In Kyu Park
Dept. of Information and Communication Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 22212, Korea
{farhodfm, csehong, pik}@inha.ac.kr

Input

3 years old

5 years old

10 years old

20 years old

40 years old

60 years old

Figure 1: Continuous age transformation results by our method on the FFHQ dataset and synthesized image of StyleGAN2.
The first column shows the input images, whereas the remaining ones are generated images. Note that our model is trained
only on the FFHQ; thus, the results in the first row show excellent generalization capability of the proposed method.

Abstract
Face age transformation aims to synthesize past or future face images by reflecting the age factor on given faces.
Ideally, this task should synthesize natural-looking faces
across various age groups while maintaining identity. However, most of the existing work has focused on only one of
these or is difficult to train while unnatural artifacts still appear. In this work, we propose Re-Aging GAN (RAGAN), a
novel single framework considering all the critical factors
in age transformation. Our framework achieves state-ofthe-art personalized face age transformation by compelling
the input identity to perform the self-guidance of the generation process. Specifically, RAGAN can learn the personalized age features by using high-order interactions between
given identity and target age. Learned personalized age features are identity information that is recalibrated according
to the target age. Hence, such features encompass identity
and target age information that provides important clues on
how an input identity should be at a certain age. Experimental result shows the lowest FID and KID scores and
the highest age recognition accuracy compared to previous
methods. The proposed method also demonstrates the visual superiority with fewer artifacts, identity preservation,
and natural transformation across various age groups.

1. Introduction
A face age transformation task is dedicated to learning age progression or regression of a given face according to the target age. Here, target age implies an explicit
conditioning factor that guides the transformation to produce facial images with a certain age. That is, we can
set any target age for an input face image, and expect to
have an output face depicting the target age characteristics,
as shown in Figure 1. Ideally, age transformation models should satisfy the following properties. First, a model
should take into account the identity of the person while
progressing/regressing the face age and sustain it mostly unaltered, i.e., identity preservation. Second, a model should
be able to generate natural-looking faces corresponding to
the target age across various age groups.
In this regard, a number of works on face age transformation have been introduced [1, 48, 46, 39, 12, 42, 33, 47,
24, 45]. These methods, on the basis of powerful generative adversarial networks (GANs) [10, 30], train deep neural
networks to perform a robust age transformation of the input face. Aside from this, several methods [43, 46] adopted
additional mechanisms (i.e., networks and constraints) for
identity preservation to ensure that face identity is unaltered
during the age transformation process. However, even with

3908

