Graph Contrastive Clustering
Huasong Zhong1 ,* Jianlong Wu23∗ , Chong Chen1,4†, Jianqiang Huang1 ,
Minghua Deng4 , Liqiang Nie2 , Zhouchen Lin5 , Xian-Sheng Hua1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 2 Shandong University 3 Zhejiang Lab
4
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
huasong.zhs@alibaba-inc.com, jlwu1992@sdu.edu.cn, {cheung.cc, jianqiang.hjq}@alibaba-inc.com,
dengmh@pku.edu.cn, nieliqiang@gmail.com, zlin@pku.edu.cn, huaxiansheng@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, some contrastive learning methods have been
proposed to simultaneously learn representations and clustering assignments, achieving significant improvements.
However, these methods do not take the category information and clustering objective into consideration, thus
the learned representations are not optimal for clustering
and the performance might be limited. Towards this issue,
we first propose a novel graph contrastive learning framework, and then apply it to the clustering task, resulting in
the Graph Constrastive Clustering (GCC) method. Different from basic contrastive clustering that only assumes
an image and its augmentation should share similar representation and clustering assignments, we lift the instancelevel consistency to the cluster-level consistency with the
assumption that samples in one cluster and their augmentations should all be similar. Specifically, on the one hand,
we propose the graph Laplacian based contrastive loss to
learn more discriminative and clustering-friendly features.
On the other hand, we propose a novel graph-based contrastive learning strategy to learn more compact clustering assignments. Both of them incorporate the latent category information to reduce the intra-cluster variance as
well as increase the inter-cluster variance. Experiments on
six commonly used datasets demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed approach over the state-of-the-art methods.1

attract

(a) Basic Contrastive Clustering

repel

(b) Graph Contrastive Clustering

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed GCC. (a) Existing contrastive
learning based clustering methods mainly focus on instancelevel consistency, which maximizes the correlation between selfaugmented samples and treats all other samples as negative samples. (b) GCC incorporates the category information to perform
the contrastive learning at both the instance and the cluster levels,
which can better minimize the intra-cluster variance and maximize
the inter-cluster variance.

1. Introduction
Based on a large number of annotated training samples, deep learning achieves significant success in the past
* H. Zhong and J. Wu contributed equally and are joint first authors. This work
was done when H. Zhong worked full time at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding author.
1 Code address: https://github.com/mynameischaos/GCC

decade [15]. However, it is very expensive and timeconsuming to manually label a large training dataset. It is
also impractical to collect a labeled dataset for each domain
or task. In this case, clustering attracts more attention recently, which aims to divide the samples into separate clusters without knowing the label information.

9224

