Likelihood-Based Diverse Sampling for Trajectory Forecasting
Yecheng Jason Ma
University of Pennsylvania

Jeevana Priya Inala
MIT CSAIL

Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani
University of Pennsylvania

jasonyma@seas.upenn.edu

jinala@csail.mit.edu

{dineshj, obastani}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Forecasting complex vehicle and pedestrian multi-modal
distributions requires powerful probabilistic approaches.
Normalizing flows (NF) have recently emerged as an attractive tool to model such distributions. However, a key drawback is that independent samples drawn from a flow model
often do not adequately capture all the modes in the underlying distribution. We propose Likelihood-Based Diverse
Sampling (LDS), a method for improving the quality and
the diversity of trajectory samples from a pre-trained flow
model. Rather than producing individual samples, LDS produces a set of trajectories in one shot. Given a pre-trained
forecasting flow model, we train LDS using gradients from
the model, to optimize an objective function that rewards
high likelihood for individual trajectories in the predicted
set, together with high spatial separation among trajectories. LDS outperforms state-of-art post-hoc neural diverse
forecasting methods for various pre-trained flow models as
well as conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) models. Crucially, it can also be used for transductive trajectory
forecasting, where the diverse forecasts are trained on-thefly on unlabeled test examples. LDS is easy to implement,
and we show that it offers a simple plug-in improvement
over baselines on two challenging benchmarks. Code is at:
https://github.com/JasonMa2016/LDS

1. Introduction
A key challenge facing self-driving cars is accurately
forecasting the future trajectories of other vehicles. These
future trajectories are often diverse and multi-modal, requiring a forecasting model to predict not a single ground truth
future but the full range of plausible futures [25].
With the increasing abundance of driving data [4, 6],
a promising approach is to learn a deep generative model
from data to predict the probability distribution over future trajectories [24, 15, 18, 37, 33, 34, 36, 30]. However,
due to natural biases, sampling i.i.d. from a deep generative
model’s prior distribution may fail to cover all modes in the

Figure 1: (a) At this intersection, 90% of cars turn right, and
10% drive straight in our training dataset. (b) A normalizing flow trajectory predictor trained on this data, sampled
100 times i.i.d., does not produce any straight trajectories.
(c) With our LDS sampler plugged in, the same predictor
generates both straight and right-turn trajectories with just
2 samples. Details are in Appendix B.
trajectory distribution, especially given the uneven distribution of real-world traffic maneuvers. Consider the scenario
in Figure 1(a) and a normalizing flow (NF) [32] forecasting model [35, 34]. The i.i.d. forecasts from the flow model
in Figure 1(b) successfully capture the major mode corresponding to turning right; however, for driving safely at this
intersection, we must also anticipate the minor mode corresponding to vehicles driving straight.
We propose a general, post-hoc approach, called
Likelihood-Based Diverse Sampling (LDS), for enhancing
the quality and the diversity of samples from a pre-trained
generative model. The key idea is that rather than drawing
i.i.d. samples from the generative model, LDS learns a sampling distribution over an entire set of trajectories, which
jointly maximizes two objectives: (i) the likelihood of the
trajectories according to the model, and (ii) a robust goalbased diversity objective that encourages high final spatial
separation among trajectories. Intuitively, these two objectives together encourage a set of forecasts to cover modes in
the underlying trajectory distribution. The result of running
LDS on our toy example is shown in Figure 1(c); it correctly
discovers the minor mode of heading straight and distributes
samples over both modes. Figure 2 provides an overview of
the LDS objective and architecture. Because our technique
leverages trajectory likelihood under the learned underlying generative model, it is naturally suited for NF-based

13279

