EM-POSE: 3D Human Pose Estimation from Sparse Electromagnetic Trackers
Manuel Kaufmann1,2
Christopher Twigg2
1

Yi Zhao2 Chengcheng Tang2 Lingling Tao2
Jie Song1 Robert Wang2 Otmar Hilliges1

ETH Zürich, Department of Computer Science

2

Facebook Reality Labs

Figure 1: Reconstructing the subject’s full-body pose is important to create immersive experiences in AR/VR. While external
cameras limit the capture space and head-worn cameras can suffer from heavy self-occlusions in top-down views (A), our
method reconstructs the body pose from electromagnetic (EM) field-based sensing (B). We leverage a customized system
consisting of up to 12 wireless sensors measuring their 6D pose relative to a body-worn source. We adopt learned gradient
descent (LGD) [53] to estimate SMPL pose and shape from as little as 6 EM sensors (C) tested on a newly captured dataset.

Abstract
Fully immersive experiences in AR/VR depend on reconstructing the full body pose of the user without restricting their motion. In this paper we study the use of
body-worn electromagnetic (EM) field-based sensing for
the task of 3D human pose reconstruction. To this end,
we present a method to estimate SMPL parameters from
6-12 EM sensors. We leverage a customized wearable
system consisting of wireless EM sensors measuring timesynchronized 6D poses at 120 Hz. To provide accurate
poses even with little user instrumentation, we adopt a recently proposed hybrid framework, learned gradient descent (LGD), to iteratively estimate SMPL pose and shape
from our input measurements. This allows us to harness
powerful pose priors to cope with the idiosyncrasies of the
input data and achieve accurate pose estimates. The proposed method uses AMASS to synthesize virtual EM-sensor
data and we show that it generalizes well to a newly captured real dataset consisting of a total of 36 minutes of
motion from 5 subjects. We achieve reconstruction errors
as low as 31.8 mm and 13.3 degrees, outperforming both
pure learning- and pure optimization-based methods. Code
and data is available under https://ait.ethz.ch/
projects/2021/em-pose.

1. Introduction
AR and VR (collectively called XR) is a promising
new computing platform for entertainment, communication,
medicine, remote presence and more. An important component of an immersive XR system is a method to accurately reconstruct the full body pose of the user. While
external camera-based pose estimation has progressed at a
rapid pace (e.g., [14, 19, 21, 59]) such approaches inherently limit the mobility of the user due to the requirement
for external cameras. Body-worn tracking using inertialmeasurement units (IMUs) [17, 33, 45, 49, 64, 65] or cameras [48, 51, 57, 69] allow for free movement, but suffer
from lack of accurate positional measurements in the case of
IMUs, and heavy occlusions for camera-based systems, resulting in incorrect pose estimates that may drift over time.
In this paper we propose a new approach to body-worn
pose estimation that is based on electromagnetic-field (EM)
sensing which can replace or complement vision or IMUbased counterparts. In our method an EM field is emitted
from a source that is worn on the body and a small number
of sensors measure their position and orientation relative to
the emitted magnetic field (c.f . Fig. 1). In our implementation, we leverage a fully wireless magnetic tracking system consisting of up to 12 sensors. These sensors are small
(roughly half the size of a credit card), low-powered, and

11510

