Visformer: The Vision-friendly Transformer
Zhengsu Chen1 , Lingxi Xie2 , Jianwei Niu1,5,6 ,* Xuefeng Liu1 , Longhui Wei3 , Qi Tian4
1
Beihang University, 2 Johns Hopkins University, 3 University of Science and Technology of China,
4
Xidian University, 5 Hangzhou Innovation Institute of Beihang University, 6 Zhengzhou University
danczs@buaa.edu.cn, 198808xc@gmail.com, niujianwei@buaa.edu.cn,
liu xuefeng@buaa.edu.cn, longhuiwei@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The past year has witnessed the rapid development of
applying the Transformer module to vision problems. While
some researchers have demonstrated that Transformerbased models enjoy a favorable ability of fitting data,
there are still growing number of evidences showing that
these models suffer over-fitting especially when the training data is limited. This paper offers an empirical study
by performing step-by-step operations to gradually transit
a Transformer-based model to a convolution-based model.
The results we obtain during the transition process deliver
useful messages for improving visual recognition. Based on
these observations, we propose a new architecture named
Visformer, which is abbreviated from the ‘Vision-friendly
Transformer’. With the same computational complexity,
Visformer outperforms both the Transformer-based and
convolution-based models in terms of ImageNet classification accuracy, and the advantage becomes more significant
when the model complexity is lower or the training set is
smaller. The code is available at https://github.
com/danczs/Visformer.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, convolution used to play a central
role in the deep learning models [22, 29, 31, 15] for visual
recognition. This situation starts to change when the Transformer [35], a module that originates from natural language
processing [35, 13, 25], is transplanted to the vision scenarios. It was shown in the ViT model [14] that an image can
be partitioned into a grid of patches and the Transformer is
directly applied upon the grid as if each patch is a visual
word. ViT requires a large amount of training data (e.g.,
the ImageNet-21K [12] or the JFT-300M dataset), arguably
because the Transformer is equipped with long-range attention and interaction and thus is prone to over-fitting. The
* Corresponding author: Jianwei Niu

Network
ResNet-50 DeiT-S Visformer-S
FLOPs (G)
4.1
4.6
4.9
Parameters (M)
25.6
21.8
40.2
Full
base setting
77.43
63.12
77.20
data
elite setting
78.73
80.07
82.19
Part of 10% labels
58.37
40.41
58.74
data
10% classes
89.90
80.06
90.06
Table 1. The comparison among ResNet-50, DeiT-S, and the proposed Visformer-S model in ImageNet classification. Although
DeiT-S performs well under the elite setting, its performance drops
dramatically when the base setting is used or when fewer data are
used for training. In comparison, Visformer-S is friendly to both
the base and elite settings, and reports smaller accuracy drops using a limited number of training data. Please refer to the main texts
for the detailed settings.

follow-up efforts [34] improved ViT to some extent, but
these models still perform badly especially under limited
training data or moderate data augmentation compared with
convolution-based models.
On the other hand, vision Transformers can achieve
much better performance than convolution-based models when trained with large amount of data. Namely,
vision Transformers have higher ‘upper-bound’ while
convolution-based models are better in ‘lower-bound’. Both
upper-bound and lower-bound are important properties for
neural networks. Upper-bound is the potential to achieve
higher performance and lower-bound enables networks to
perform better when trained with limited data or scaled to
different complexity.
Based on the observation of lower-bound and upperbound on Transformer-based and convolution-based networks, the main goal of this paper is to identify the reasons
behind the difference, by which we can design networks
with higher lower-bound and upper-bound. The gap between Transformer-based and convolution-based networks
can be revealed with two different training settings on ImageNet. The first one is the base setting. It is the standard set-

589

