DeepMultiCap: Performance Capture of Multiple Characters
Using Sparse Multiview Cameras
Yang Zheng∗ , Ruizhi Shao∗ , Yuxiang Zhang, Tao Yu, Zerong Zheng, Qionghai Dai, Yebin Liu
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University

Figure 1: Given only sparse multi-view RGB videos (6 views for the left and middle, 8 views for the right), our method is
able to reconstruct various kinds of 3D shapes with temporal-varying surface details even under challenging occlusions for
multi-person interactive scenarios.

Abstract
We propose DeepMultiCap, a novel method for multiperson performance capture using sparse multi-view cameras. Our method can capture time varying surface details without the need of using pre-scanned template models. To tackle with the serious occlusion challenge for close
interacting scenes, we combine a recently proposed pixelaligned implicit function with parametric model for robust
reconstruction of the invisible surface areas. An effective attention-aware module is designed to obtain the finegrained geometry details from multi-view images, where
high-fidelity results can be generated. In addition to the
spatial attention method, for video inputs, we further propose a novel temporal fusion method to alleviate the noise
and temporal inconsistencies for moving character reconstruction. For quantitative evaluation, we contribute a
high quality multi-person dataset, MultiHuman, which consists of 150 static scenes with different levels of occlusions
and ground truth 3D human models. Experimental results
demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our method
and the well generalization to real multiview video data,
which outperforms the prior works by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great progress in visionbased human performance capture, which is promising to
* Equal contribution
Code and dataset available: http://liuyebin.com/dmc/dmc.html

enable various applications (e.g., tele-presence, sportscast,
gaming and mixed reality) with enhanced interactive and
immersive experiences. To achieve surprisingly detailed
geometry and texture reconstruction, dense camera rigs
even equipped with sophisticated lighting systems are introduced [56, 8, 29, 28, 20, 2]. However, the extremely
expensive and professional setups limited their popularity. Although other light-weight multi-view human performance capture systems have achieved impressive results even in real-time, they still relies on pre-scanned templates [36, 35], custom-designed RGBD [15, 13] or commercial RGBD [61, 62] sensors, or limited to single-person
reconstruction [51, 18, 25, 19].
Benefiting from the fast improvement of deep implicit
functions for 3D representations, recent methods [47, 48,
32] are able to recover the 3D body shape only from a single RGB image. Compared with the voxel-based [53, 69]
or mesh-based [40, 1] representations, an implicit function
guides the deep learning models to notice geometric details
in a more efficient way. Specifically, PIFu [47, 32] achieves
plausible single human reconstruction using only RGB images, and PIFuHD [48] further utilizes normal maps and
high resolution images to generate more detailed results.
Despite the prominent performance in digitizing 3D
human body, both PIFu [47] and PIFuHD [48] suffer
from several drawbacks when extending the frameworks
to multi-person scenarios and multi-view setups. Firstly,
the average-pooling-based multi-view feature fusion strategy in PIFu will lead to over-smoothed outputs when high
frequency details (e.g., normal maps) are included in multi16239

