Image2Reverb: Cross-Modal Reverb Impulse Response Synthesis
Nikhil Singh
MIT
Media Lab

Jeff Mentch
Harvard University
SHBT

Jerry Ng
MIT
Mechanical Engineering

Matthew Beveridge
MIT
EECS

nsingh1@mit.edu

jsmentch@g.harvard.edu

jerryng@mit.edu

mattbev@mit.edu

Iddo Drori
MIT
EECS
idrori@mit.edu

Figure 1. An application of our work: matching speaker audio to expected reverberation of a video conference virtual background.
Project page with examples is available at https://web.media.mit.edu/~nsingh1/image2reverb.

Abstract
Measuring the acoustic characteristics of a space is often done by capturing its impulse response (IR), a representation of how a full-range stimulus sound excites it. This
work generates an IR from a single image, which can then
be applied to other signals using convolution, simulating
the reverberant characteristics of the space shown in the image. Recording these IRs is both time-intensive and expensive, and often infeasible for inaccessible locations. We use
an end-to-end neural network architecture to generate plausible audio impulse responses from single images of acoustic environments. We evaluate our method both by comparisons to ground truth data and by human expert evaluation.
We demonstrate our approach by generating plausible impulse responses from diverse settings and formats including
well known places, musical halls, rooms in paintings, images from animations and computer games, synthetic environments generated from text, panoramic images, and video
conference backgrounds.

convolution [38, 31]. Audio IRs are recorded measurements
of how an environment responds to an acoustic stimulus.
IRs can be measured by recording a space during a burst of
white noise like a clap, a balloon pop, or a sinusoid swept
across the range of human hearing [28]. Accurately capturing these room impulse responses requires time, specialized
equipment, knowledge, and planning. Directly recording
these measurements may be entirely infeasible in continuously inhabited or inaccessible spaces of interest. End-toend IR estimation has far ranging applications relevant to
fields including music production, speech processing, and
generating immersive extended reality environments. Our
Image2Reverb system directly synthesizes IRs from images
of acoustic environments. This approach removes the barriers to entry, namely cost and time, opening the door for a
broad range of applications.
In this work we model IR generation as a cross-modal
paired-example domain adaptation problem and apply a
conditional GAN [10, 12, 23] to synthesize plausible audio
impulse responses conditioned on images of spaces. Next,
we will describe related work that informs our approach.

1. Introduction

2. Related Work

An effective and widely used method of simulating
acoustic spaces relies on audio impulse responses (IRs) and

Artificial reverberation. Historically, recording studios
built reverberant chambers with speakers and microphones

286

