Meta Learning on a Sequence of Imbalanced Domains with Difficulty Awareness
Zhenyi Wang 1 , Tiehang Duan 1 , Le Fang1 , Qiuling Suo1 and Mingchen Gao1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
1
{zhenyiwa, tiehangd, lefang, qiulings, mgao8}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Recognizing new objects by learning from a few labeled
examples in an evolving environment is crucial to obtain
excellent generalization ability for real-world machine learning systems. A typical setting across current meta learning
algorithms assumes a stationary task distribution during
meta training. In this paper, we explore a more practical and
challenging setting where task distribution changes over time
with domain shift. Particularly, we consider realistic scenarios where task distribution is highly imbalanced with domain
labels unavailable in nature. We propose a kernel-based
method for domain change detection and a difficulty-aware
memory management mechanism that jointly considers the
imbalanced domain size and domain importance to learn
across domains continuously. Furthermore, we introduce an
efficient adaptive task sampling method during meta training, which significantly reduces task gradient variance with
theoretical guarantees. Finally, we propose a challenging
benchmark with imbalanced domain sequences and varied
domain difficulty. We have performed extensive evaluations
on the proposed benchmark, demonstrating the effectiveness
of our method.

1. Introduction
Learning from a few labeled examples to acquire skills for
new task is essential to achieve machine intelligence. Take
object recognition in personalized self-driving system as an
example [10]. Learning each user’s personal driving preference model forms one task. The system is first deployed in
the small city, Rochester. The company later extends its market to New York. The user base of New York is much larger
than that of Rochester, causing domain imbalance. Also,
after adapting to New York users, the learned user behavior
from Rochester will be easily forgotten. Similar scenarios
occur when learning to solve NLP tasks on a sequence of different languages [13] with imbalanced resources of different

Figure 1: Illustration of meta learning for few shot object
recognition on a sequence of imbalanced domains. Our focused problems including domain change detection, how to
manage memory and sample memory tasks for joint training
with streaming tasks.

languages.
Meta learning is a promising approach for solving such
few-shot learning problems. One common assumption of
current models is that the task distribution is stationary during meta training. However, real world scenarios (such as the
above self-driving system) are more complex and often involve learning across different domains (environments), with
challenges such as: (1) task distributions change among different domains; (2) tasks from previous domains are usually
unavailable when training on a new domain; (3) the number
of tasks from each domain could be highly imbalanced; (4)
domain difficulty could vary significantly in nature across
the domain sequence. An example is shown in Figure 1.
Directly applying current meta learning models to such scenarios is not suitable to tackle these challenges, e.g., the
object recognition accuracy of meta learned neural networks

8947

