Learning Privacy-preserving Optics for Human Pose Estimation

1

Carlos Hinojosa1 , Juan Carlos Niebles2 , Henry Arguello1
Universidad Industrial de Santander 2 Stanford University
https://carloshinojosa.me/project/privacy-hpe/

Figure 1: Standard cameras acquire visual details from the scene that could lead to privacy issues. In this work, we propose to learn
privacy-preserving optics to perform human pose estimation (HPE). Our optimized lens incorporates several optical aberrations that degrade
the image to hide private visual details while it still captures enough visual information to perform human pose estimation.

Abstract
The widespread use of always-connected digital cameras
in our everyday life has led to increasing concerns about
the users’ privacy and security. How to develop privacypreserving computer vision systems? In particular, we want
to prevent the camera from obtaining detailed visual data
that may contain private information. However, we also
want the camera to capture useful information to perform
computer vision tasks. Inspired by the trend of jointly designing optics and algorithms, we tackle the problem of
privacy-preserving human pose estimation by optimizing
an optical encoder (hardware-level protection) with a software decoder (convolutional neural network) in an end-toend framework. We introduce a visual privacy protection
layer in our optical encoder that, parametrized appropriately, enables the optimization of the camera lens’s point
spread function (PSF). We validate our approach with extensive simulations and a prototype camera. We show that
our privacy-preserving deep optics approach successfully
degrades or inhibits private attributes while maintaining
important features to perform human pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Cameras are ubiquitous and pervasive today: we have
them in our smartphones, cars, homes, and cities. The
tremendous amount of data collected from these devices enables a myriad of applications using computer vision-based
technologies. We encounter such technologies in our daily
life. At hospitals, visual sensors have given rise to ambient
intelligence: physical spaces that are sensitive and responsive to the presence of humans. In this scenario, visual systems enable more efficient clinical workflows and improved

patient safety in intensive care units and operating rooms
[15]. In the context of gaming, camera devices use action
and gesture recognition to create an interactive game experience [44, 50]. However, with all these cameras collecting
images in an always-connected digital world, a big challenge has been raised: how to develop privacy-preserving
computer vision systems? Specifically, we want to prevent the camera system from obtaining detailed visual data
containing private information (such as faces), desirably at
the hardware level. Simultaneously, we want the system to
capture useful information that enables understanding surrounding objects and ongoing events.
For decades, cameras have been engineered to imitate
the human vision system. Once the optical system is fixed,
we use the cameras to acquire multiple high-fidelity images. Then we tune computer vision algorithms to optimize their accuracy at specific tasks. Most computer vision applications, even privacy-preserving approaches, rely
on such a traditional digital imaging system. For example,
one can detect privacy-sensitive everyday situations and enable or disable an eye tracker’s first-person camera using
a mechanical shutter [43]. However, such a method performs software-level processing on high-resolution videos
acquired by traditional cameras, which may already contain
privacy-sensitive data that could be exposed in an attack.
Instead of using traditional cameras to acquire the data
and then using software-level processing to preserve privacy, a better idea would be to design a camera that directly
obviates sensitive data while still obtaining useful information for a given task. Recently, thanks to various software
and hardware advances, the entire system (camera’s optical
elements and image processing algorithms parameters) can
be optimized in an end-to-end fashion, enabling the design

2573

