Light Source Guided Single-Image Flare Removal from Unpaired Data
Xiaotian Qiao Gerhard P. Hancke Rynson W.H. Lau
City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Causally-taken images often suffer from flare artifacts,
due to the unintended reflections and scattering of light inside the camera. However, as flares may appear in a variety of shapes, positions, and colors, detecting and removing them entirely from an image is very challenging. Existing methods rely on predefined intensity and geometry priors of flares, and may fail to distinguish the difference between light sources and flare artifacts. We observe that the
conditions of the light source in the image play an important role in the resulting flares. In this paper, we present
a deep framework with light source aware guidance for
single-image flare removal (SIFR). In particular, we first detect the light source regions and the flare regions separately,
and then remove the flare artifacts based on the light source
aware guidance. By learning the underlying relationships
between the two types of regions, our approach can remove
different kinds of flares from the image. In addition, instead of using paired training data which are difficult to
collect, we propose the first unpaired flare removal dataset
and new cycle-consistency constraints to obtain more diverse examples and avoid manual annotations. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms the
baselines qualitatively and quantitatively. We also show
that our model can be applied to flare effect manipulation
(e.g., adding or changing image flares).

1. Introduction
Image flares are common and often undesirable light artifacts, caused by taking pictures of a scene with a very
bright light source [1, 24]. Part of the light undergoes interreflection among the optical elements inside the camera,
producing some unexpected light artifacts in the image [23].
These artifacts tend to appear more often with smartphone
cameras, due to the poor anti-reflective coatings.
The presence of flare artifacts can affect the visual quality of images, and may inhibit understanding of underlying
object/scene information and hamper the performances of
existing vision tasks [31], e.g., semantic segmentation and
depth estimation. However, automatically detecting and re-

(a) Input

(b) Chabert et al. [4] (c) Wu et al. [31]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Single-image flare removal (SIFR). Given an input image with flare artifacts (pointed to by red arrows), existing methods, (b) and (c), can only handle limited flare types (e.g., flare
spot) without removing the entire flare or wrongly consider other
regions as flares (e.g., the cloud in the first row). In contrast, our
light source aware model (d) can remove the flare more accurately.

moving them can be very challenging. Different combinations of lens properties and environment settings, including light source position, characteristics of the lens, and the
camera angle to the light source, may lead to different types
of flares with diverse shapes, colors, and positions.
Professional photographers may apply preventative measures during the image capturing process, such as optimized
barrel design, lens hood, or anti-reflective coating, to help
eliminate the flares. Unfortunately, these hardware solutions can hardly eliminate the entire flare artifacts [20, 22].
This is probably due to the diverse causes of image flares.
They also cannot be applied to existing images already with
flare artifacts. There have been a few attempts to remove
these undesirable flares from images automatically by utilizing predefined intensity and geometry priors of flare artifacts [30, 4]. However, these methods can only handle limited flare types (e.g., flare spot), as shown in Fig. 1(b). Recently, with the popularity of deep neural networks, a deep
model [31] is proposed to learn to remove different types of
flare artifacts from paired synthetic training data. Although
it is shown to outperform existing traditional methods, it
does not generalize well to diverse real-world images, as
shown in Fig. 1(c).

4177

