NeRD: Neural Reflectance Decomposition from Image Collections
Mark Boss1 ,

Raphael Braun1 , Varun Jampani2 , Jonathan T. Barron2 ,
Ce Liu2 , Hendrik P.A. Lensch1
1

Multi-View Images

2

University of Tübingen,

NeRD Volume

Google Research

Basecolor

Metallic

Roughness

Normal

Decomposed BRDF

Relighting &
View synthesis

Textured Mesh

Figure 1: Neural Reflectance Decomposition for Relighting. We encode multiple views of an object under varying or fixed
illumination into the NeRD volume. We decompose each given image into geometry, spatially-varying BRDF parameters
and a rough approximation of the incident illumination in a globally consistent manner. We then extract a relightable textured
mesh that can be re-rendered under novel illumination conditions in real-time.

Abstract
Decomposing a scene into its shape, reflectance, and illumination is a challenging but important problem in computer vision and graphics. This problem is inherently more
challenging when the illumination is not a single light
source under laboratory conditions but is instead an unconstrained environmental illumination. Though recent work
has shown that implicit representations can be used to
model the radiance field of an object, most of these techniques only enable view synthesis and not relighting. Additionally, evaluating these radiance fields is resource and
time-intensive. We propose a neural reflectance decomposition (NeRD) technique that uses physically-based rendering to decompose the scene into spatially varying BRDF
material properties. In contrast to existing techniques, our
input images can be captured under different illumination
conditions. In addition, we also propose techniques to convert the learned reflectance volume into a relightable textured mesh enabling fast real-time rendering with novel
illuminations. We demonstrate the potential of the proposed approach with experiments on both synthetic and
real datasets, where we are able to obtain high-quality relightable 3D assets from image collections. The datasets
and code are available at the project page: https://
markboss.me/publication/2021-nerd/.

1. Introduction
Capturing the geometry and material properties of an
object is essential for several computer vision and graphics applications such as view synthesis [10, 54], relighting [5, 10, 21, 22, 30, 55], object insertion [7, 20, 30]
etc. This problem is often referred to as inverse rendering [24, 41], where shape and material properties are estimated from a set of images, e.g., representing the surface
properties as spatially-varying Bidirectional Reflectance
Distribution functions (SVBRDF) [38].
Modeled according to physics, the reflected color observed by a viewer is the integral of the product of SVBRDF
and the incoming illumination over the hemisphere around
that surface’s normal [23]. Disentangling this integral and
estimating shape, illumination, and SVBRDF from images
is a highly ill-posed and underconstrained inverse problem.
For instance, an image region may appear dark either due to
a dark surface color (material), the absence of incident light
at that surface (illumination), or due to the normal of that
surface facing away from the incident light (shape).
Traditional SVBRDF estimation techniques involve capturing images using a light-stage setup where the light direction and camera view settings are controlled [4, 9, 26,
27, 28]. More recent approaches for SVBRDF estimation
employ more practical capture setups [6, 7, 8, 10, 19, 37],
12684

