Cascade Image Matting with Deformable Graph Refinement
Zijian Yu1,2 ,* Xuhui Li1 ,* Huijuan Huang2 , Wen Zheng2 , Li Chen1†
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University 2 Y-tech, Kuaishou Technology
{zj-yu19,lixh20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {huanghuijuan,zhengwen}@kuaishou.com, chenlee@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Image matting refers to the estimation of the opacity of
foreground objects. It requires correct contours and fine
details of foreground objects for the matting results. To better accomplish human image matting tasks, we propose the
Cascade Image Matting Network with Deformable Graph
Refinement(CasDGR), which can automatically predict precise alpha mattes from single human images without any
additional inputs. We adopt a network cascade architecture
to perform matting from low-to-high resolution, which corresponds to coarse-to-fine optimization. We also introduce
the Deformable Graph Refinement (DGR) module based on
graph neural networks (GNNs) to overcome the limitations
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The DGR module can effectively capture long-range relations and obtain
more global and local information to help produce finer alpha mattes. We also reduce the computation complexity
of the DGR module by dynamically predicting the neighbors and apply DGR module to higher–resolution features.
Experimental results demonstrate the ability of our CasDGR to achieve state-of-the-art performance on synthetic
datasets and produce good results on real human images.

1. Introduction
Image matting refers to the problem of extracting high–
quality alpha mattes (the opacity of foreground object at
each pixel) from a set of given images. As a practical image
processing technology, matting has a variety of applications
for image and video editing. Generally, the composition of
image I is expressed as a linear equation as follows:
  \label {eq1} \mathbf {I}_i=\alpha _i\mathbf {F}_i+(1-\alpha _i)\mathbf {B}_i, \alpha _i\in [0,1], 

(1)

where Ii is the RGB color at pixel i, αi is the matte value
at pixel i and Fi and Bi are the RGB colors of the foreground and background at pixel i. Matting is a highly illposed problem, i.e., there are seven unknown values and
* Joint first authors.
† The corresponding author is Li Chen.

only three known values at each pixel, which increases the
difficulty of solving matting problems. Although existing
works have provided effective ways to perform matting,
they still present limitations.
The first limitation is that most existing works [47, 1,
19, 12, 52] have predicted alpha mattes by using a onepass encoder–decoder network, which may result in inaccurate contours and artifacts when foreground and background have similar local features. This is mainly due to
that those methods predict alpha mattes from single–scale
features and cannot make full use of the global and local
information contained in the image.
The second limitation is that existing CNN-based matting methods cannot well handle certain slender objects
(e.g., human hair). In addition to the basic use of CNN in
the network architecture, some matting works have tried to
refine the details of alpha mattes after the backbone network
with CNN-based module. Xu et al. [47] used a lightweight
fully convolutional neural network (CNN) to generate sharp
boundaries for alpha mattes. Cai et al. [1] proposed a propagation unit that could refine alpha mattes with accurate details and less artifacts. However, these CNN-based refinement methods are restricted by the fixed shape of convolutional kernels and a limited receptive field, leading to performance degradation when manipulating slender objects.
To overcome the first limitation, we simulate the matting
logic of human. While meeting the matting tasks, people
generally first determine the overall contour of the foreground object and then iteratively improve the details in
boundary areas under the guidance of the contour. Therefore, we design a network cascade architecture for image
matting to generate more accurate contours and details of
foreground objects. Our method predicts coarse alpha mattes from low–resolution images as contours and then progressively supplements the details from high–resolution images under the guidance of the contours. Through this lowto-high, coarse-to-fine pipeline, our network can supplement local information with global information and estimate extremely finer alpha mattes with correct contours and
precise details.
To overcome the limitations of CNN and produce bet-

7167

