Modulated Periodic Activations for
Generalizable Local Functional Representations
Ishit Mehta1
Michaël Gharbi2
Connelly Barnes2
2
1
Eli Shechtman
Ravi Ramamoorthi
Manmohan Chandraker1
1
2
UC San Diego
Adobe Research

Abstract

Discrete Input Signal

Modulator
Tile

Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) make powerful functional representations for sampling and reconstruction problems involving low-dimensional signals like images, shapes
and light fields. Recent works have significantly improved
their ability to represent high-frequency content by using
periodic activations or positional encodings. This often
came at the expense of generalization: modern methods are
typically optimized for a single signal. We present a new
representation that generalizes to multiple instances and
achieves state-of-the-art fidelity. We use a dual-MLP architecture to encode the signals. A synthesis network creates
a functional mapping from a low-dimensional input (e.g.
pixel-position) to the output domain (e.g. RGB color). A
modulation network maps a latent code corresponding to
the target signal to parameters that modulate the periodic
activations of the synthesis network. We also propose a localfunctional representation which enables generalization. The
signal’s domain is partitioned into a regular grid, with each
tile represented by a latent code. At test time, the signal is encoded with high-fidelity by inferring (or directly optimizing)
the latent code-book. Our approach produces generalizable
functional representations of images, videos and shapes, and
achieves higher reconstruction quality than prior works that
are optimized for a single signal.

1. Introduction
Functional neural representations using Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) have garnered renewed interest for their
conceptual simplicity and ability to approximate complex
signals like images, videos, audio recordings [38], lightfields [26] and implicitly-defined 3D shapes [8, 32, 2]. They
have shown to be more compact and efficient than their discrete counterparts [21, 39]. While recent contributions have
focused on improving the accuracy of these representations,
in particular to model complex signals with high-frequency
details [38, 44, 26], it is still challenging to generalize them
to unseen signals. Recent approaches typically require train-

Encoder
(optional)

z

x
Grid Tiling

24.13dB

2048 × 2048 SIREN [38]-60m

Cont.
Output
f (x; z)
Synthesizer

34.01dB

Ours-10s

GT

Figure 1: (Top) We propose a new method to encode discrete
signals as neural-functional representations. Each signal is
represented as a structured grid, with each tile defined by
a latent code. The tiles are encoded as continuous signals
by a synthesis network using periodic activations. The latent codes corresponding to the tiles are used to modulate
the activations using a modulation network. (Bottom) Our
generalizable method is faster and enables higher quality
reconstructions than previous methods.
ing a separate MLP for each signal [26, 9]. Previous efforts sought to improve generalization by imposing priors
on the functional space spanned by the MLP parameterization [32, 35], using hypernetworks [14, 38], or via metalearning [37]. But multi-instance generalization still causes
significant degradations in quality.
We introduce a neural functional representation that simultaneously achieves high-reconstruction quality and generalizes to multiple instances. Our approach can encode
functional representations for multiple discrete signals using
a single model. Unlike previous works, which train a model
for each signal, it can do so in a single feed-forward pass
(Fig. 1). We represent each signal using a low-dimensional
latent code. These codes serve as conditioning variables in a
functional mapping that uses two MLPs: a modulator and a
synthesis network. The synthesis network implements a map14214

