A Hybrid Video Anomaly Detection Framework via Memory-Augmented Flow
Reconstruction and Flow-Guided Frame Prediction
Zhian Liu1 , Yongwei Nie1* , Chengjiang Long2 , Qing Zhang3 and Guiqing Li1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China

Abstract
…

…

…

2

1. Introduction
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) refers to the identification of events that do not conform to expected behaviors [3] in a video, with one example shown in Figure 1.
This is an open and very challenging task as abnormal
events usually much less happen than normal ones and the
forms of abnormal events are unbounded in practical applications [25]. Obviously, it is impossible to collect all
kinds of abnormal data in advance. Therefore, a typical solution to video anomaly detection is to train an unsupervised
learning model on normal data, and those events or activities that are recognized by the trained model as outliers are
then deemed as anomalies.
* Corresponding author: nieyongwei@scut.edu.cn

Flow Reconstruction
Anomaly Score

In this paper, we propose HF -VAD, a Hybrid framework
that integrates Flow reconstruction and Frame prediction
seamlessly to handle Video Anomaly Detection. Firstly, we
design the network of ML-MemAE-SC (Multi-Level Memory modules in an Autoencoder with Skip Connections) to
memorize normal patterns for optical flow reconstruction
so that abnormal events can be sensitively identified with
larger flow reconstruction errors. More importantly, conditioned on the reconstructed flows, we then employ a Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE), which captures
the high correlation between video frame and optical flow,
to predict the next frame given several previous frames. By
CVAE, the quality of flow reconstruction essentially influences that of frame prediction. Therefore, poorly reconstructed optical flows of abnormal events further deteriorate the quality of the final predicted future frame, making the anomalies more detectable. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Code
is available at https://github.com/LiUzHiAn/hf2vad.

AUROC: 99.66%

Frame Prediction
AUROC: 96.24%

HF2-VAD (hybrid)
AUROC: 99.90%

Figure 1. An anomaly example from CUHK Avenue [29] dataset.
Here “running” is identified as an anomaly event on the walking
avenue, and the blue dashed rectangles denote ground-truth abnormal sections where a person is running. The blue curve is the
result of HF2 -VAD, the red curve is the result with flow reconstruction only, and the green curve is the result with a CVAE based
frame prediction model conditioned on original flows. Area Under the Receiver Operation Characteristic (AUROC) is calculated.
As can be seen, HF2 -VAD that combines flow reconstruction and
reconstructed-flow guided future prediction performs the best.

Nowadays deep learning has shown great success in
many real-world tasks such as visual recognition [13, 12,
14, 26], object detection [19, 28, 27, 15], shadow detection
and removal [4, 44, 49, 48, 18], trajectory prediction [41],
and image captioning [5]. Rather than traditional handcrafted feature based methods [1, 20, 2, 34], a lot of modern
deep neural network based methods [11, 45, 50, 31, 25, 30,
8, 36, 38, 47, 43, 24] have been proposed for VAD. In the era
of deep learning, reconstruction and future prediction are
two prevalent VAD paradigms. Reconstruction-based methods [11, 31, 8, 36, 7, 38] typically train autoencoders on
normal data. At test time, abnormal data often incurs larger
reconstruction errors, making them detectable from normal
ones. Taking advantage of temporal characteristics of video
frames, prediction-based methods [25, 30, 47] train a net-

13588

