Dynamic Cross Feature Fusion for Remote Sensing Pansharpening
Xiao Wu 1 , Ting-Zhu Huang 1∗, Liang-Jian Deng 1∗, Tian-Jing Zhang 2
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 611731, China
2
Yingcai Honors College, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 611731, China
wxwsx1997@gmail.com; tingzhuhuang@126.com;
liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn; zhangtianjinguestc@163.com

Abstract
Deep Convolution Neural Networks have been adopted
for pansharpening and achieved state-of-the-art performance. However, most of the existing works mainly focus on single-scale feature fusion, which leads to failure in fully considering relationships of information between high-level semantics and low-level features, despite
the network is deep enough. In this paper, we propose a
dynamic cross feature fusion network (DCFNet) for pansharpening. Specifically, DCFNet contains multiple parallel branches, including a high-resolution branch served
as the backbone, and the low-resolution branches progressively supplemented into the backbone. Thus our DCFNet
can represent the overall information well. In order to enhance the relationships of inter-branches, dynamic cross
feature transfers are embedded into multiple branches to
obtain high-resolution representations. Then contextualized features will be learned to improve the fusion of information. Experimental results indicate that DCFNet significantly outperforms the prior arts in both quantitative indicators and visual qualities.

1. Introduction
Pansharpening is a crucial technique in the field of remote sensing image processing, which aims at fusing a
low-resolution multispectral (LRMS) image and a highresolution (HR) panchromatic (PAN) image to generate a
final HR image with the same spectral resolution as the MS
image. The outcome of the pansharpening can provide a
better visual interpretation, on the other hand, it is conducive to further processing, e.g., land monitoring, mineral
exploration, and change detection.
The major point for handling pansharpening task [33,
∗ Corresponding author.

PAN

LRMS

FusionNet

DCFNet

Figure 1: The visual comparison on an original-resolution
WorldView-3 dataset. First row: the original PAN and upsampled low-resolution MS (LRMS) images. Second row:
the pansharpened image by FusionNet [4] and DCFNet.
11, 19] is able to recover more spatial details while retaining more complete spectral information. The traditional methods can be roughly divided into three categories [18, 21, 14], i.e., component substitution (CS) methods, multi-resolution analysis (MRA) methods, variational
optimization (VO) approaches. Recently, with the impressive development driven by deep learning (DL), the existing convolutional neural network (CNN) based methods [4, 6, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32] for pansharpening have
achieved encouraging performances. This is attributed to
the strong nonlinear fitting ability of the CNN, which can
well depict the relationship between LRMS image, PAN image, and the desired high-resolution multispectral (HRMS)
image.
By observing the existing CNN-based methods, it is concluded that the PAN and LRMS images are used as the input

14687

