Seasonal Contrast:
Unsupervised Pre-Training from Uncurated Remote Sensing Data
Oscar Mañas1,2

Alexandre Lacoste1
1

Element AI

Xavier Giró-i-Nieto2
2

David Vazquez1

Pau Rodriguez1

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

oscmansan@gmail.com, pau.rodriguez@servicenow.com

Abstract
Remote sensing and automatic earth monitoring are key
to solve global-scale challenges such as disaster prevention,
land use monitoring, or tackling climate change. Although
there exist vast amounts of remote sensing data, most of
it remains unlabeled and thus inaccessible for supervised
learning algorithms. Transfer learning approaches can reduce the data requirements of deep learning algorithms.
However, most of these methods are pre-trained on ImageNet and their generalization to remote sensing imagery
is not guaranteed due to the domain gap. In this work, we
propose Seasonal Contrast (SeCo), an effective pipeline to
leverage unlabeled data for in-domain pre-training of remote sensing representations. The SeCo pipeline is composed of two parts. First, a principled procedure to
gather large-scale, unlabeled and uncurated remote sensing
datasets containing images from multiple Earth locations at
different timestamps. Second, a self-supervised algorithm
that takes advantage of time and position invariance to
learn transferable representations for remote sensing applications. We empirically show that models trained with SeCo
achieve better performance than their ImageNet pre-trained
counterparts and state-of-the-art self-supervised learning
methods on multiple downstream tasks. The datasets and
models in SeCo will be made public to facilitate transfer
learning and enable rapid progress in remote sensing applications.1

1. Introduction
Remote sensing is becoming increasingly important to
many applications, including land use monitoring [12], precision agriculture [29], disaster prevention [37], wildfire
detection [11], vector-borne disease surveillance [20], and
tackling climate change [33]. Combined with recent advances in deep learning and computer vision, there is enor1 Code, datasets and pre-trained models are available at https://
github.com/ElementAI/seasonal-contrast

Figure 1. Distribution of the Seasonal Contrast (SeCo) dataset.
Each point represents a sampled location. Images are collected
around human settlements to avoid monotonous areas such as
oceans and deserts.

mous potential for monitoring global issues through the automated analysis of remote sensing and other geospatial
data streams.
Remote sensing provides a vast supply of data. The number of Earth-observing satellites is continuously growing,
with over 700 satellites currently in orbit generating terabytes of imagery data every day [30]. However, many
downstream tasks of interest are constrained by a lack of
annotations, which are particularly costly to obtain since
they often require expert knowledge, or expensive ground
sensors. In recent years, a number of techniques have been
developed to mitigate the need for labeled data [24, 26, 25],
but their application to remote sensing images is largely underexplored.
Furthermore, existing remote sensing datasets [38, 19,
42] are highly curated to form well-balanced and diversified classes. Simply discarding the labels does not undo
this careful selection of examples, which also requires considerable human effort. Our goal is to exploit the massive
amount of publicly available remote sensing data for learning good visual representations in a truly unsupervised way.
To enable this, we construct a remote sensing dataset from
Sentinel-2 [10] tiles without any human supervision, neither
for curating nor annotating the data.

9414

