X-World: Accessibility, Vision, and Autonomy Meet
Jimuyang Zhang∗

Minglan Zheng∗ Matthew Boyd
Boston University

Eshed Ohn-Bar

{zhangjim, mzheng27, mcboyd, eohnbar}@bu.edu

Figure 1: The X-World Platform. Our goal is to facilitate accessibility-driven autonomous systems, i.e., systems that can
interact with diverse pedestrians with disabilities who may be rarely observed and represented in data collected by real-world
fleets. Towards this goal, we introduce a novel simulation environment for the training and development of vision-based
systems. A subset of the mobility aids used in the experiments is visualized.

Abstract
An important issue facing vision-based intelligent systems today is the lack of accessibility-aware development.
A main reason for this issue is the absence of any largescale, standardized vision benchmarks that incorporate relevant tasks and scenarios related to people with disabilities. This lack of representation hinders even preliminary
analysis with respect to underlying pose, appearance, and
occlusion characteristics of diverse pedestrians. What is
the impact of significant occlusion from a wheelchair on
instance segmentation quality? How can interaction with
mobility aids, e.g., a long and narrow walking cane, be
recognized robustly? To begin addressing such questions,
we introduce X-World, an accessibility-centered development environment for vision-based autonomous systems. We
tackle inherent data scarcity by leveraging a simulation environment to spawn dynamic agents with various mobility
aids. The simulation supports generation of ample amounts
of finely annotated, multi-modal data in a safe, cheap, and
* Contributed equally.

privacy-preserving manner. Our analysis highlights novel
challenges introduced by our benchmark and tasks, as well
as numerous opportunities for future developments. We
further broaden our analysis using a complementary realworld evaluation benchmark of in-situ navigation by pedestrians with disabilities. Our contributions provide an initial
step towards widespread deployment of vision-based agents
that can perceive and model the interaction needs of diverse
people with disabilities.

1. Introduction
As prototypical vision-based machines move from their
controlled development labs into the real-world, their impact on people with disabilities becomes discernible. People with various abilities (e.g., sighted, visually-impaired,
mobility-impaired) may each react fairly differently when
interacting with an autonomous platform (e.g., ground
robot, autonomous vehicle, wearable system), the dynamic
context of the surrounding scene (e.g., traffic, crowds), and
infrastructure components (e.g., intersection type, potholes,
ramps, stairs) [37, 2, 28, 26]. Hence, such factors are related

9762

