Learning with Privileged Tasks
Yuru Song1 Zan Lou2 Shan You2,3∗ Erkun Yang4 *
Fei Wang5 Chen Qian2 Changshui Zhang3 Xiaogang Wang2,6
1
University of California San Diego 2 SenseTime Research
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI)
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
4
Xidian University 5 University of Science and Technology of China
6
Chinese University of Hong Kong
yus027@ucsd.edu, {louzan,youshan,qianchen}@sensetime.com, erkunyang@gmail.com
wangfei91@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Multi-objective multi-task learning aims to boost the
performance of all tasks by leveraging their correlation and
conflict appropriately. Nevertheless, in real practice, users
may have preference for certain tasks, and other tasks simply serve as privileged or auxiliary tasks to assist the training of target tasks. The privileged tasks thus possess less
or even no priority in the final task assessment by users.
Motivated by this, we propose a privileged multiple descent
algorithm to arbitrate the learning of target tasks and privileged tasks. Concretely, we introduce a privileged parameter so that the optimization direction does not necessarily
follow the gradient from the privileged tasks, but concentrates more on the target tasks. Besides, we also encourage
a priority parameter for the target tasks to control the potential distraction of optimization direction from the privileged tasks. In this way, the optimization direction can be
more aggressively determined by weighting the gradients
among target and privileged tasks, and thus highlight more
the performance of target tasks under the unified multi-task
learning context. Extensive experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets indicate that our method can achieve
versatile Pareto solutions under varying preference for the
target tasks.

1. Introduction
Besides designing strong model structures [32, 46, 35,
13, 34] and informative task losses [19, 48, 5, 44, 52], multitask learning (MTL) [50, 38] is apt to enhance performance
* Corresponding authors.

and efficiency by seeking more appropriate ways to combine multiple tasks, and increasingly gains much research
interest. The paradigm of MTL has been shown to outperform single-task learning (STL) on numerous computer
vision problems, such as attribute recognition [51], scene
understanding [24] and autonomous driving [9]. To exploit
the task correlations, current MTL approaches mainly follow a soft-parameter or hard-parameter sharing principle.
In soft-parameter sharing, tasks are aggregated separately
and cross-talks [28] among these tasks are usually used to
encourage shared knowledge. Nevertheless, the intricacy
of designing the cross-talks is specific to particular problem sets, and does not scale well to many tasks. In contrast, hard-parameter sharing leverages a unique backbone
to pursue direct shared representation of tasks [1, 2], along
with task-specific sub-networks. Therefore, hard-parameter
sharing is able to reduce parameter size in proportion to the
task number, and to promote inference speed during testing.
Though parameters among tasks are shared in a hard
manner, how to balance all tasks still matters for MTL. Task
balancing to circumvent this difficulty goes beyond naive
uniform weighting of tasks [51]. Existing heuristics to find
appropriate weighting of multiple tasks include grid searching, exploring task uncertainties [10], and gradient normalization [6]. Recent avant-garde method is to treat the MTL
as multi-objective optimization (MOO-MTL) [33]. It proposes to find the Pareto front that only allows the common
improvement of tasks rather than sacrificing any individual.
Task weights are evaluated dynamically during learning.
Current MTL methods treat all tasks equally, and focus on the average performance of all tasks during inference. In practice, however, users may only need to scrutinize the performance of some target tasks rather than that of

10685

