Poly-NL: Linear Complexity Non-local Layers With 3rd Order Polynomials
Francesca Babiloni1 , Ioannis Marras1 , Filippos Kokkinos1,3 , Jiankang Deng2,5 , Grigorios Chrysos4 ,
Stefanos Zafeiriou2,5
1

Huawei, Noah’s Ark Lab 2 Imperial College London 3 University College London
4
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 5 Huawei, Multimedia Technology Department

Abstract
Spatial self-attention layers, in the form of Non-Local
blocks, introduce long-range dependencies in Convolutional Neural Networks by computing pairwise similarities
among all possible positions. Such pairwise functions underpin the effectiveness of non-local layers, but also determine a complexity that scales quadratically with respect to
the input size both in space and time. This is a severely
limiting factor that practically hinders the applicability of
non-local blocks to even moderately sized inputs. Previous works focused on reducing the complexity by modifying
the underlying matrix operations, however in this work we
aim to retain full expressiveness of non-local layers while
keeping complexity linear. We overcome the efficiency limitation of non-local blocks by framing them as special cases
of 3rd order polynomial functions. This fact enables us to
formulate novel fast Non-Local blocks, capable of reducing
the complexity from quadratic to linear with no loss in performance, by replacing any direct computation of pairwise
similarities with element-wise multiplications. The proposed method, which we dub as “Poly-NL”, is competitive
with state-of-the-art performance across image recognition,
instance segmentation, and face detection tasks, while having considerably less computational overhead.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have led to a
revolution in machine learning, and, specifically, are currently the undisputed state of the art in computer vision on
various tasks. Nonetheless, CNNs, even if composed by a
deep stack of convolutional operators, have a limited receptive field [34], which makes the crucial long-range dependencies hard to capture.
Recent work on spatial self-attention ameliorated this issue with a novel set of modules for neural networks [52, 47].
These blocks extract non-local interactions among all spa-

tial positions of the input and weight them with a set of
learnable parameters. Passing through a Non-local block,
each input position takes into account the contribution of
all the others, scaled by their similarity with a given reference. These blocks introduce the possibility to reason about
the whole space in one glance and make non-local behavior
easier to be captured by the network. Inserting Non-local
blocks in neural architectures has been proven very effective [2, 15, 51, 39, 40, 38], but the computation of a similarity score for each pair of points scales quadratically with the
number of spatial positions. As such, the expensive computational and storage complexity makes non-local blocks
impractical to compute even upon moderately sized input.
Recent works tackle such limitation via an efficient computation of the similarity matrix [59, 33, 44] but miss to provide a theoretical overview of the Non-local block formulation. In this work, we build upon the aforementioned line of
research, and revisit Non-local layers under the lens of polynomials, framing them as special cases of 3rd order polynomials. Powered by this intuition, we derive an efficient
version of Non-local neural networks, Poly-NL which takes
into account long-range dependencies without the need to
compute explicitly any pairwise similarity. Poly-NL layers
perform computations using the same set of interactions as
the Non-local block of [52], and at the same time reduce the
overall complexity drastically from O(N 2 ) to O(N ) with
no loss in performance.
In this work, we link polynomials and the Non-Local
layer. Our goal is to efficiently extract high-order interactions from the input while capturing long-range spatial dependencies. Thus, our contribution can be summarized as
follows:
• We bridge the formulations between high-order polynomials and non-local attention. In particular, we
prove that self-attention (in the form of Non-local
blocks) can be seen as a particular case of general 3rd
order polynomials.
10518

