Multi-Class Multi-Instance Count Conditioned Adversarial Image Generation
Amrutha Saseendran1 , Kathrin Skubch1 and Margret Keuper2
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, 2 University of Siegen
Amrutha.Saseendran@de.bosch.com

CityCount Examples

Abstract
Image generation has rapidly evolved in recent years.
Modern architectures for adversarial training allow to generate even high resolution images with remarkable quality. At the same time, more and more effort is dedicated
towards controlling the content of generated images. In this
paper, we take one further step in this direction and propose a conditional generative adversarial network (GAN)
that generates images with a defined number of objects from
given classes. This entails two fundamental abilities (1)
being able to generate high-quality images given a complex constraint and (2) being able to count object instances
per class in a given image. Our proposed model modularly extends the successful StyleGAN2 architecture with a
count-based conditioning as well as with a regression subnetwork to count the number of generated objects per class
during training. In experiments on three different datasets,
we show that the proposed model learns to generate images according to the given multiple-class count condition
even in the presence of complex backgrounds. In particular, we propose a new dataset, CityCount, which is derived from the Cityscapes street scenes dataset, to evaluate our approach in a challenging and practically relevant scenario. An implementation is available at https:
//github.com/boschresearch/MCCGAN .

1. Introduction
Developmental studies show that the human brain is endowed with a natural mechanism for understanding numerical quantities [10, 48]. Even young children have an abstract understanding of numeracy and can generalize the
concept of counting from one category to another (e.g. from
objects to sounds) [48]. While counting object instances is
relatively easy for humans, it is challenging for deep learning and computer vision algorithms, especially when objects from multiple classes, e.g. persons and cars, are considered. In this paper, we take a step towards such elementary visual reasoning by addressing the generation of
images conditioned on the number of object instances per

Generated Images

3 cars

2 persons

2 cars + 1 person

Figure 1: Real and generated CityCount images by our
model based on the multiple-class count input.

object class. We are particularly interested in the complex case where objects from multiple classes are present
in the same image (compare Figure 1). This is a fundamental vision task, which can even be solved by small children [10], but remains an unsolved problem in computer vision. Apart from that, many practical applications can benefit from the capability to generate images respecting numerical constraints. Especially, it aids the generation of additional diverse training data for visual question answering
and counting approaches. Further, the generation of technical designs based on the number of different components is
of particular interest in the field of topology design, where
data-based approaches have recently been explored successfully in applications ranging from molecular design [2] for
chemical applications to product design [38] for aesthetics
or engineering performance.
In this paper, we propose to solve multiple-class count
(MC2 ) conditioned image generation (i.e. the generation
of images conditioned on the number of objects of different classes, that are visible in the image) as a modular extension to the state-of-the-art network for adversarial image
generation, StyleGAN2 [29]. We further argue that object

6762

