Energy-Based Open-World Uncertainty Modeling
for Confidence Calibration
Yezhen Wang1 * Bo Li1 * Tong Che2 * Kaiyang Zhou3
Ziwei Liu3 Dongsheng Li1
1

Microsoft Research Asia

2

MILA

Abstract
Confidence calibration is of great importance to the reliability of decisions made by machine learning systems.
However, discriminative classifiers based on deep neural
networks are often criticized for producing overconfident
predictions that fail to reflect the true correctness likelihood
of classification accuracy. We argue that such an inability to
model uncertainty is mainly caused by the closed-world nature in softmax: a model trained by the cross-entropy loss
will be forced to classify input into one of K pre-defined
categories with high probability. To address this problem,
we for the first time propose a novel K+1-way softmax formulation, which incorporates the modeling of open-world
uncertainty as the extra dimension. To unify the learning
of the original K-way classification task and the extra dimension that models uncertainty, we 1) propose a novel
energy-based objective function, and moreover, 2) theoretically prove that optimizing such an objective essentially
forces the extra dimension to capture the marginal data distribution. Extensive experiments show that our approach,
Energy-based Open-World Softmax (EOW-Softmax), is superior to existing state-of-the-art methods in improving confidence calibration.

1. Introduction
Given the considerable success achieved so far by deep
neural networks (DNNs), one might be wondering if DNNbased systems can be readily deployed to solve real-world
problems. On the one hand, DNNs can achieve high accuracy if trained with large-scale datasets [15]. But on
the other hand, contemporary DNNs are often criticized
for producing overconfident predictions [14], which fail
to represent the true correctness likelihood of accuracy.
This has raised concerns over safety and reliability for
* Equal contribution. Ordered by dice rolling. Correspondence to
yezhen.wang0305@gmail.com.

3

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

using machine learning systems in real-world scenarios.
Having a confidence-calibrated system is critical. For instance, in healthcare applications, the intelligence system
should produce low-confidence predictions when it is uncertain about the input—say they differ significantly from
the training data—so the decision-making process can be
transferred to human doctors for more accurate diagnosis and safer handling. Research on confidence calibration for DNNs has received increasing attention in recent
years [14, 27, 19, 23, 27]. Since most classifiers are based
on softmax, a common practice to improve calibration is to
insert a temperature scaling parameter to the softmax function and adjust it in a validation set [14]. Besides, methods
like Smoothing labels [36, 28], which essentially combines
the one-hot ground-truth vector with a uniform distribution,
has also been shown effective in improving calibration.
However, most existing confidence calibration methods
have overlooked the underlying problem that causes neural
network classifiers to generate overconfident predictions,
i.e. the inability to model uncertainty in output probabilities. We argue that the culprit for causing such a problem
is the closed-world nature in softmax [2, 34]. This is easy
to understand: during training the model is asked to classify
input into one of K pre-defined categories with high probability (due to the cross-entropy loss), and as such, the model
has no choice but to assign one of the K categories to any
unseen data, likely with high probability as well.
A potential countermeasure is to adopt a K + 1-way
formulation where the new category can represent uncertainty about the input data. In this way, the K classification
scores might be better regularized, and hence better calibrated. However, learning such a classifier is challenging as
we do not have access to those data with the K + 1-th label, thus lacking supervision to teach the network when to
give low/high confidence. Furthermore, designing the extra
dimension is a non-trivial task as it is directly linked to the
formulation of the learning objective. It is also unclear how
such a dimension should be constructed, e.g., to design it as
another logit produced by the same network or an indepen-

9302

