BabelCalib: A Universal Approach to Calibrating Central Cameras
Yaroslava Lochman1,†
Michal Perdoch2
1

Chalmers University of Technology

{lochman, zach, pritts}@chalmers.se

Kostiantyn Liepieshov3
Jianhui Chen2
Christopher Zach1
James Pritts1,†
2

Facebook Reality Labs

3

Ukrainian Catholic University

liepieshov@ucu.edu.ua

Abstract

{jchen2020, mperdoch}@fb.com

Robust Estimation Wrapper
Non-minimal Sampling

Existing calibration methods occasionally fail for
large field-of-view cameras due to the non-linearity of the
underlying problem and the lack of good initial values for
all parameters of the used camera model. This might occur
because a simpler projection model is assumed in an initial
step, or a poor initial guess for the internal parameters
is pre-defined. A lot of the difficulties of general camera
calibration lie in the use of a forward projection model.
We side-step these challenges by first proposing a solver
to calibrate the parameters in terms of a back-projection
model and then regress the parameters for a target forward model. These steps are incorporated in a robust
estimation framework to cope with outlying detections.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach is
very reliable and returns the most accurate calibration
parameters as measured on the downstream task of absolute pose estimation on test sets. The code is released at
https://github.com/ylochman/babelcalib.

1. Introduction
Cameras with very wide fields of view, such as fisheye lenses and catadioptric rigs [44], usually require highly
nonlinear models with many parameters. Calibrating these
cameras can be a tedious process because of the camera
model’s complexity and its underlying non-linearity. If the
calibration is inaccurate or even fails, then the user is often
required to manually remove problematic images or fiducials, capture additional images, or provide better initial
guesses for the unknown model parameters. A second common problem is that the choice of calibration toolbox limits
the user to a particular set of supported camera models and
extending the toolbox to accommodate more flexible camera models can be a difficult task.
This paper proposes a method that robustly estimates accurate camera models for central projection cameras [39]
with fields of view ranging from both narrow to omni† Part of this work was done when Yaroslava Lochman and James Pritts
were at Facebook Reality Labs.

Camera Model Proposal
Sequence of Linear Solvers
1. Radial Fundamental Matrix
2. Corner Correction
3. Partial Camera Pose
4. Intrinsics + Translation Depth
Model-to-Model Regression
P3P for Remaining Poses
+ Refinement

Figure 1: Method overview and result. (left) BabelCalib
pipeline: the camera model proposal step ensures a good
initialization, (right) example result showing residuals of reprojected corners of test images.
directional. Furthermore, the proposed framework can estimate the most widely used camera models for these lens
types, while also providing an easy and common path to
extend the method to new camera models.
Camera calibration is a very non-linear task, hence a
good initial guess is typically needed to obtain accurate parameters. Poor initial estimates are frequent source of failures. Sensible initial guesses are often available only for
some of the model unknowns, e.g., initial values are often unavailable for parameters describing substantial lens
distortions. A second failure mode is caused by incorrect
or grossly inaccurate measurements, e.g., corner detections,
which are matched to fiducials on the calibration target. If
corrupted data is used to estimate the initial guess, then the
downstream model refinement will likely fail.
Our method addresses both failure modes. We introduce
a solver that recovers all calibration parameters for a wide
range of cameras (and lenses) such as pinhole, fisheye and
catadioptric ones. We show that the proposed solver provides a good initialization for all critical intrinsics, which
includes the center of projection and pixel aspect ratio. Our
solver assumes only a planar calibration target. In addition, the initialization simultaneously improves the accuracy of corner detections while estimating the center of projection and camera pose by enforcing projective constraints.

15253

