Beyond Trivial Counterfactual Explanations with Diverse Valuable Explanations
Pau Rodrı́guez1

Massimo Caccia1,2,3 Alexandre Lacoste1 Lee Zamparo1 Issam Laradji1,2,4
Laurent Charlin2,5,6 David Vazquez1
1
2
3
Element AI MILA UdeM 4 McGill University 5 HEC Montreal 6 CIFAR AI Chair
pau.rodriguez@servicenow.com

Abstract
Explainability for machine learning models has gained
considerable attention within the research community
given the importance of deploying more reliable machinelearning systems. In computer vision applications, generative counterfactual methods indicate how to perturb a
model’s input to change its prediction, providing details
about the model’s decision-making. Current methods tend
to generate trivial counterfactuals about a model’s decisions, as they often suggest to exaggerate or remove the
presence of the attribute being classified. For the machine learning practitioner, these types of counterfactuals offer little value, since they provide no new information about undesired model or data biases. In this work,
we identify the problem of trivial counterfactual generation and we propose DiVE to alleviate it. DiVE learns
a perturbation in a disentangled latent space that is constrained using a diversity-enforcing loss to uncover multiple
valuable explanations about the model’s prediction. Further, we introduce a mechanism to prevent the model from
producing trivial explanations. Experiments on CelebA
and Synbols demonstrate that our model improves the success rate of producing high-quality valuable explanations
when compared to previous state-of-the-art methods. Code
is available at https://github.com/ElementAI/
beyond-trivial-explanations.

1. Introduction
Consider an image recognition model such as a smile
classifier. In case of erroneous prediction, an explainability system should provide information to machine learning practitioners to understand why such error happened
and how to prevent it. Counterfactual explanation methods [3, 8, 9] can help highlight the limitations of an ML
model by uncovering data and model biases. Counterfactual explanations provide perturbed versions of the input
data that emphasize features that contributed the most to
the ML model’s output. For the smile classifier, if the

model is confused by people wearing sunglasses then the
system could generate alternative images of faces without
sunglasses that would be correctly recognized. In order
to discover a model’s limitations, counterfactual generation
systems could be used to generate images that would confuse the classifier, such as people wearing sunglasses or
scarfs occluding the mouth. This is different from other
types of explainability methods such as feature importance
methods [3, 39, 40] and boundary approximation methods [29, 36], which highlight salient regions of the input
like the sunglasses but do not indicate how the ML model
could achieve a different prediction.
According to [30, 37], counterfactual explanations
should be valid, proximal, and sparse. A valid counterfactual explanation changes the prediction of the ML model,
for instance, adding sunglasses to confuse a smile classifier. The explanation is sparse if it only changes a minimal set of attributes, for instance, it only adds sunglasses
and it does not add a hat, a beard, or the like. An explanation is proximal if it is perceptually similar to the original image, for instance, a ninety degree rotation of an image would be a sparse but not proximal. In addition to the
three former properties, generating a set of diverse explanations increases the likelihood of finding a useful explanation [30, 37]. A set of counterfactuals is diverse if each
one proposes to change a different set of attributes. Following the previous example, a diverse set of explanations
would suggest to add or remove sunglasses, beard, or scarf,
while a non-diverse set would all suggest to add or remove
different brands of sunglasses. Intuitively, each explanation
should shed light on a different action that a user can take
to change the ML model’s outcome.
Current generative counterfactual methods like
xGEM [18] generate a single explanation that is not
constrained to be similar to the input. Thus, they fail to be
proximal, sparse, and diverse. Progressive Exaggeration
(PE) [42] provides higher-quality explanations that are
more proximal than xGEM, but it still fails to provide a
diverse set of explanations. In addition, the image generator
of PE is trained on the same data as the image classifier in

1056

