Admix: Enhancing the Transferability of Adversarial Attacks
Xiaosen Wang1 Xuanran He2 Jingdong Wang3 Kun He1 *
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information, Nanyang Technological University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
xiaosen@hust.edu.cn, xhe015@e.ntu.edu.sg, jingdw@microsoft.com, brooklet60@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks are known to be extremely vulnerable to adversarial examples under white-box setting.
Moreover, the malicious adversaries crafted on the surrogate (source) model often exhibit black-box transferability on other models with the same learning task but having different architectures. Recently, various methods are
proposed to boost the adversarial transferability, among
which the input transformation is one of the most effective approaches. We investigate in this direction and observe that existing transformations are all applied on a single image, which might limit the adversarial transferability. To this end, we propose a new input transformation
based attack method called Admix that considers the input
image and a set of images randomly sampled from other
categories. Instead of directly calculating the gradient on
the original input, Admix calculates the gradient on the
input image admixed with a small portion of each add-in
image while using the original label of the input to craft
more transferable adversaries. Empirical evaluations on
standard ImageNet dataset demonstrate that Admix could
achieve significantly better transferability than existing input transformation methods under both single model setting and ensemble-model setting. By incorporating with
existing input transformations, our method could further
improve the transferability and outperforms the state-ofthe-art combination of input transformations by a clear
margin when attacking nine advanced defense models under ensemble-model setting. Code is available at https:
//github.com/JHL-HUST/Admix.

1. Introduction
A great number of works [7, 2, 1] have shown that deep
neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial examples [31, 7], i.e. the malicious crafted inputs that are
* Corresponding author.

indistinguishable from the legitimate ones but can induce
misclassification on the deep learning models. Such vulnerability poses potential threats to security-sensitive applications, e.g. face verification [28], autonomous driving [6]
and has inspired a sizable body of research on adversarial attacks [22, 2, 21, 4, 16, 5, 38, 18]. Moreover, the adversaries often exhibit transferability across neural network
models [25], in which the adversarial examples generated
on one model may also mislead other models. The adversarial transferability matters because hackers may attack a
real-world DNN application without knowing any information of the target model. However, under white-box setting where the attacker has complete knowledge of the target model, existing attacks [2, 11, 1, 21] have demonstrated
great attack performance but with comparatively low transferability against models with defense mechanisms [21, 33],
making it inefficient for real-world adversarial attacks.
To improve the transferability of adversarial attacks, various techniques have been proposed, such as advanced gradient calculations [4, 18, 35], ensemble-model attacks [19,
15], input transformations [38, 5, 18, 10] and model-specific
methods [36]. The input transformation (e.g. randomly resizing and padding, translation, scale etc.) is one of the most
effective approaches. Nevertheless, we observe that existing methods are all applied on a single input image. Since
adversarial attacks aim to mislead the DNNs to classify the
adversary into other categories, it naturally inspires us to explore whether we could further enhance the transferability
by incorporating the information from other categories.
The mixup operation, that linearly interpolates two random images and corresponding labels, is firstly proposed
as a data augmentation approach to improve the generalization of standard training [41, 34, 40]. Recently, mixup is
also used for inference [24] or adversarial training [12, 14]
to enhance the model robustness. Since mixup adopts the
information of a randomly picked image, we try to directly
adopt mixup to craft adversaries but find that the attack performance decays significantly under white-box setting with
little improvement on transferability. To craft highly trans-

16158

