Neural Strokes: Stylized Line Drawing of 3D Shapes
Difan Liu1

Matthew Fisher2
Aaron Hertzmann2
Evangelos Kalogerakis1
1
2
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Adobe Research

Artist B

Artist A

Neural
Strokes

Training shape &
geometric curves

Neural
Strokes

Neural
Strokes

Neural
Strokes

Training artist’s
drawing

Test shape &
geometric curves

Synthesized
drawing

Test shape &
geometric curves

Synthesized
drawing

Figure 1: Our model learns to generate stylized line drawings from a single example of a training shape and corresponding
drawing. Given a test 3D shape and 2D geometric curves representing the shape, our model synthesizes a line drawing in the
style of the training example. Here we show synthesized drawings by transferring the artist’s style A (top) or B (below).

Abstract
This paper introduces a model for producing stylized line
drawings from 3D shapes. The model takes a 3D shape
and a viewpoint as input, and outputs a drawing with textured strokes, with variations in stroke thickness, deformation, and color learned from an artist’s style. The model is
fully differentiable. We train its parameters from a single
training drawing of another 3D shape. We show that, in
contrast to previous image-based methods, the use of a geometric representation of 3D shape and 2D strokes allows
the model to transfer important aspects of shape and texture
style while preserving contours. Our method outputs the resulting drawing in a vector representation, enabling richer
downstream analysis or editing in interactive applications.
Our code and dataset are available at our project page:
www.github.com/DifanLiu/NeuralStrokes

1. Introduction
Understanding and creating stylized outline drawings is
a key task for stylization [34, 4], sketch understanding [16],
and human vision [5, 18]. Artists and amateurs alike draw
pictures of 3D objects in many different styles, whether for
art, animation, architectural design, 3D authoring, or simply
the pleasure of drawing. However, most recent research in
image stylization does not take 3D geometry into account,
producing drawings that frequently lose detail and do not
capture image outlines. Conversely, there is a long history of 3D drawing algorithms that create precise line drawings in hand-authored procedural styles, but they cannot be
learned from data, making them difficult to control and inapplicable for analysis of existing sketches. While there is
a long literature on analysis and shape reconstruction from
sketches, these methods typically assume that artists draw
with plain line styles.

14204

