T-SVDNet: Exploring High-Order Prototypical Correlations for Multi-Source
Domain Adaptation
Ruihuang Li1 ,* Xu Jia2†, Jianzhong He3 , Shuaijun Chen4 , Qinghua Hu1†
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, 2 Dalian University of Technology,
3
Huawei Technologies, 4 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
{liruihuang, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn, xjia@dlut.edu.cn, chensj1110@163.com,
jianzhong.he@huawei.com

Abstract
Most existing domain adaptation methods focus on
adaptation from only one source domain, however, in practice there are a number of relevant sources that could be
leveraged to help improve performance on target domain.
We propose a novel approach named T-SVDNet to address
the task of Multi-source Domain Adaptation (MDA), which
is featured by incorporating Tensor Singular Value Decomposition (T-SVD) into a neural network’s training pipeline.
Overall, high-order correlations among multiple domains
and categories are fully explored so as to better bridge
the domain gap. Specifically, we impose Tensor-Low-Rank
(TLR) constraint on a tensor obtained by stacking up a
group of prototypical similarity matrices, aiming at capturing consistent data structure across different domains.
Furthermore, to avoid negative transfer brought by noisy
source data, we propose a novel uncertainty-aware weighting strategy to adaptively assign weights to different source
domains and samples based on the result of uncertainty estimation. Extensive experiments conducted on public benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our model in addressing the task of MDA compared to state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https://github.com/lslrh/
T-SVDNet.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have shown superior performance with huge amounts of training data as rocket fuel.
However, directly transferring knowledge learned on a certain visual domain to other domains with different distributions would degrade the performance significantly due to
* Work partly done during an internship at Noah’s Ark Lab
† Corresponding Author

the existence of domain shift [42]. To handle this problem, the prominent approaches such as transfer learning
and unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) endeavor to extract domain-invariant features. Discrepancy-based methods reduce the domain gap by minimizing the discrepancy between source and target distributions, such as Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [25], correlation alignment [35], and contrastive domain discrepancy [16]. Adversarial methods attempt to align source and target domains through adversarial training [34, 38] or GAN-based
loss [14, 46]. These methods only focus on domain adaptation with only single source. However, in many practical
application scenarios, there are a number of relevant sources
collected in different ways available, which could be used
to help improve performance on target domain.
Naively combining various sources into one is not an effective way to fully exploit abundant information within
multiple sources, and might even perform worse than
single-source methods, because domain gap among multiple sources causes confusion in the learning process
[44]. Some Multi-Source Domain Adaptation (MDA) approaches [41, 24, 45, 32, 12] focus on aligning multiple
source domains and a target domain by projecting them into
a domain-invariant feature space. This is done by either
explicitly minimizing the discrepancy of different domains
[12, 13, 32] or learning an adversarial discriminator to
align distributions of different domains [41, 43, 24]. However, eliminating distribution discrepancy of data has the
risk of sacrificing discrimination ability. Moreover, these
methods only achieve pair-wise matching, neglecting underlying high-order relations among all domains. Another
widely used way in MDA is distribution-weighted combining rule [13, 43, 24], which takes a weighted combination
of pre-trained source classifiers as the classifier for target
domain. In spite of reasonable performance on MDA task,
they do not take into consideration intra-domain weightings

9991

