Generalized Source-free Domain Adaptation
Shiqi Yang1 , Yaxing Wang1,2 ,* Joost van de Weijer1 , Luis Herranz1 , Shangling Jui3
1
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
2
PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
3
Huawei Kirin Solution, Shanghai, China
{syang,yaxing,joost,lherranz}@cvc.uab.es, jui.shangling@huawei.com

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) aims to transfer the knowledge
learned from a source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
Some recent works tackle source-free domain adaptation
(SFDA) where only a source pre-trained model is available
for adaptation to the target domain. However, those methods
do not consider keeping source performance which is of high
practical value in real world applications. In this paper, we
propose a new domain adaptation paradigm called Generalized Source-free Domain Adaptation (G-SFDA), where the
learned model needs to perform well on both the target and
source domains, with only access to current unlabeled target
data during adaptation. First, we propose local structure
clustering (LSC), aiming to cluster the target features with its
semantically similar neighbors, which successfully adapts
the model to the target domain in the absence of source
data. Second, we propose sparse domain attention (SDA), it
produces a binary domain specific attention to activate different feature channels for different domains, meanwhile the
domain attention will be utilized to regularize the gradient
during adaptation to keep source information. In the experiments, for target performance our method is on par with
or better than existing DA and SFDA methods, specifically
it achieves state-of-the-art performance (85.4%) on VisDA,
and our method works well for all domains after adapting
to single or multiple target domains. Code is available in
https://github.com/Albert0147/G-SFDA.

1. Introduction
Though achieving great success, deep neural networks
typically require a large amount of labeled data for training.
However, collecting labeled data is often laborious and expensive. To tackle this problem, Domain Adaptation (DA)
methods aim to transfer knowledge learned from label-rich
datasets (source domains) to other unlabeled datasets (tar* Corresponding Author.

get domains), by reducing the domain shift between labeled
source and unlabeled target domains.
A crucial requirement in most DA methods is that they
require access to the source data during adaptation, which
is often impossible in many real-world applications, such as
deploying domain adaptation algorithms on mobile devices
where the computation capacity is limited, or in situations
where data-privacy rules limit access to the source domain.
Because of its relevance and practical interest, the sourcefree domain adaptation (SFDA) setting, where instead of
source data only source pretrained model is available, has
started to get traction recently [14, 15, 18, 20, 46]. Among
these methods, SHOT [20] and 3C-GAN [18] are most related to this paper which is for close-set DA where source
and target domains have the same categories. 3C-GAN [18]
is based on target-style image generation by a conditional
GAN, and SHOT [20] proposes to transfer the source hypothesis, i.e. the fixed source classifier, to the target data,
together with maximizing mutual information.
However, in many practical situations models should perform well on both the target and source domain. For example,
we would desire a recognition model deployed in an urban
environment which works well for all four seasons (domains)
after adapting model to the seasons sequentially. As shown
in [47], the source performance of some DA methods will degrade after adaptation even with source data always at hand.
And the current SFDA methods focus on the target domain
by fine tuning the source model, leading to forgetting on old
domains. Thus, existing methods cannot handle the situation
described above. A simple way to address this setting is by
just storing the source and target model, however, we aim
for memory-efficient solutions that scale sub-linear with the
number of domains. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a
new DA paradigm where the model is expected to perform
well on all domains after source-free domain adaptation. We
call this setting Generalized Source-free Domain Adaptation
(G-SFDA). For simplicity, in the paper we will first focus on
a single target domain, and then we describe how to extend
to Continual Source-free Domain Adaptation.

8978

