Dynamic CT Reconstruction from Limited Views with Implicit Neural
Representations and Parametric Motion Fields

1
2

Albert W. Reed1

Hyojin Kim2

Rushil Anirudh2

K. Aditya Mohan2

awreed@asu.edu

hkim@llnl.gov

anirudh1@llnl.gov

mohan3@llnl.gov

Kyle Champley2

Jingu Kang2

Suren Jayasuriya1

champley1@llnl.gov

kang12@llnl.gov

sjayasur@asu.edu

Arizona State University
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

Abstract
Reconstructing dynamic, time-varying scenes with computed tomography (4D-CT) is a challenging and ill-posed
problem common to industrial and medical settings. Existing 4D-CT reconstructions are designed for sparse sampling schemes that require fast CT scanners to capture
multiple, rapid revolutions around the scene in order to
generate high quality results. However, if the scene is
moving too fast, then the sampling occurs along a limited view and is difficult to reconstruct due to spatiotemporal ambiguities. In this work, we design a reconstruction pipeline using implicit neural representations coupled
with a novel parametric motion field warping to perform
limited view 4D-CT reconstruction of rapidly deforming
scenes. Importantly, we utilize a differentiable analysis-bysynthesis approach to compare with captured x-ray sinogram data in a self-supervised fashion. Thus, our resulting optimization method requires no training data to reconstruct the scene. We demonstrate that our proposed
system robustly reconstructs scenes containing deformable
and periodic motion and validate against state-of-the-art
baselines. Further, we demonstrate an ability to reconstruct continuous spatiotemporal representations of our
scenes and upsample them to arbitrary volumes and frame
rates post-optimization. This research opens a new avenue for implicit neural representations in computed tomography reconstruction in general. Code is available at
https://github.com/awreed/DynamicCTReconstruction.

1. Introduction
Computed-tomography (CT) is a mature imaging technology with vital industrial and medical applications [20,
13, 8]. CT scanners capture x-ray data or sinograms by

scanning a sequence of angles around an object. Reconstruction algorithms then estimate the scene from these
measured sinograms. CT imaging in both 2D and 3D of
static objects is a well-studied inverse problem with both
theoretical and practical algorithms [21, 37, 1].
However, reconstruction of dynamic scenes (i.e. scene
features changing over time), known as dynamic 4D-CT,
is a severely ill-posed problem because the sinogram aggregates measurements over time which yields spatio-temporal
ambiguities [12, 24, 51, 52, 30]. Analogous to motion blur,
a static or quasi-static scene is only captured for a small
angular range of the sinogram (motion blur analogy: short
exposure), and this mapping is a function of the amount of
scene motion relative to the CT scanner’s rotation speed.
Traditional CT reconstruction algorithms have limited capability to address 4D-CT problems due to difficulty accounting for this motion. Yet solving these 4D-CT problems is
critically important for a range of applications from clinical
diagnosis to non-destructive evaluation for material characteristics and metrology.
4D-CT reconstruction techniques have been proposed in
the literature to handle periodic motion [33, 24] as well as
more general nonlinear, deformable motion [51, 52, 30].
While the latter methods achieve state-of-the-art for deformable motion, they typically assume slow motion relative to the scanner rotation speed. Specifically, these algorithms assume sparse measurements of the object that span
the full angular range (0 − 360◦ ) and typically require multiple revolutions around the sample to reconstruct images
at each time step. This approach is called sparse view CT
in the literature [31]. However, this setting is not always
practical such as when the object motion is too fast for the
scanner to make multiple revolutions. Instead, an alternative approach is to collect measurements over partial angular ranges in a single revolution – which is the more challenging limited-view reconstruction [43]. Even in the static
case, the limited-view problem is challenging due to missing information often leading to significant artifacts [18].

2258

