Predictive Feature Learning for Future Segmentation Prediction
Zihang Lin1 ,* Jiangxin Sun1 ,* Jian-Fang Hu1,4,5†, Qizhi Yu2 , Jian-Huang Lai1,4 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,3,5
1
Sun Yat-sen University, China 2 Zhejiang Laboratory, China 3 Pengcheng Laboratory, China
4
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Guangzhou, China
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, MOE
{linzh59, sunjx5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn
qyu@ieee.org, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Future segmentation prediction aims to predict the segmentation masks for unobserved future frames. Most existing works addressed it by directly predicting the intermediate features extracted by existing segmentation models. However, these segmentation features are learned to be
local discriminative (with rich details) and are always of
high resolution/dimension. Hence, the complicated spatiotemporal variations of these features are difficult to predict,
which motivates us to learn a more predictive representation. In this work, we develop a novel framework called Predictive Feature Autoencoder. In the proposed framework,
we construct an autoencoder which serves as a bridge between the segmentation features and the predictor. In the
latent feature learned by the autoencoder, global structures
are enhanced and local details are suppressed so that it is
more predictive. In order to reduce the risk of vanishing
the suppressed details during recurrent feature prediction,
we further introduce a reconstruction constraint in the prediction module. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of the proposed approach and our method outperforms
state-of-the-arts by a considerable margin.

1. Introduction
Future segmentation prediction aims to predict the segmentation masks for unobserved future frames. It serves as
a prerequisite for a broad set of applications with decisionmaking intelligent systems such as autonomous driving, visual surveillance, and robot designing. For instance, selfdriving cars can avoid hitting pedestrians if they can forecast possible collisions by predicting the masks of pedestrians in the future. Besides the benefits for potential applications, future segmentation prediction is also closely related
to learning better representation for future reasoning, which
* Equal contributions, † Corresponding author.

Segmentation
Head

Segmentation
Feature

Segmentation
Model

Predictor

Feature
Extractor

Predictive
Feature

(a) Predict segmentation feature
Segmentation
Head

Decoder

Segmentation
Model

Predictive Feature
Autoencoder

Feature
Extractor

Encoder

Predictor

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Previous methods addressed future segmentation prediction by predicting the segmentation featureswhich are of high resolution/dimension and contains rich details. However, learning to
predict the spatio-temporal variations of these features is difficult.
We propose to learn a predictive feature by developing an autoencoder and perform prediction on the learned predictive feature.

motivates us to study this problem in this work.
Previous work [22] found that directly predicting the
segmentation features is much more effective than first predict raw RGB values of future images and then segment. It
is now the mainstream pipeline (Figure 1 (a)) in the community and most recent works [27, 5, 29, 30, 34, 13] focused
on improving the prediction of these features. However, by
revisiting the recent advances of segmentation methods, we
discover a conflict between learning discriminative segmentation features and learning reliable future prediction.
The mainstream of learning a strong segmentation model
is to learn discriminative feature representation for each
pixel. Existing works [2, 38, 43, 10, 41] attempted to
achieve this goal by learning resolution preserved representations and aggregating context to enhance local discrimination. The feature learned in this way is of high-resolution
and contains rich local details. Although increasing the feature resolution and local details can improve the segmentation performance, it also greatly increase the difficulty of
learning accurate future prediction. As the resolution in-

7365

