CCT-Net: Category-Invariant Cross-Domain Transfer for Medical
Single-to-Multiple Disease Diagnosis
Yi Zhou ∗1 , Lei Huang2 , Tao Zhou3 , and Ling Shao4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
SKLSDE, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Source Domain (with Pixel-Level Annotations)
Diabetic Retinopathy Diagnosis
Glioma Diagnosis

Abstract
A medical imaging model is usually explored for the diagnosis of a single disease. However, with the expanding
demand for multi-disease diagnosis in clinical applications,
multi-function solutions need to be investigated. Previous
works proposed to either exploit different disease labels to
conduct transfer learning through fine-tuning, or transfer
knowledge across different domains with similar diseases.
However, these methods still cannot address the real clinical challenge - a multi-disease model is required but annotations for each disease are not always available. In this
paper, we introduce the task of transferring knowledge from
single-disease diagnosis (source domain) to enhance multidisease diagnosis (target domain). A category-invariant
cross-domain transfer (CCT) method is proposed to address
this single-to-multiple extension. First, for domain-specific
task learning, we present a confidence weighted pooling
(CWP) to obtain coarse heatmaps for different disease categories. Then, conditioned on these heatmaps, categoryinvariant feature refinement (CIFR) blocks are proposed to
better localize discriminative semantic regions related to
the corresponding diseases. The category-invariant characteristic enables transferability from the source domain to
the target domain. We validate our method in two popular
areas: extending diabetic retinopathy to identifying multiple ocular diseases, and extending glioma identification to
the diagnosis of other brain tumors.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, increasingly more automatic disease diagnosis systems have been developed for different
medical imaging tasks [35, 51, 57, 59]. In some specific ap∗ Corresponding author: Yi Zhou (yizhou.szcn@gmail.com)

Single-to-Multiple Disease Diagnosis
Target Domain (without Pixel-Level Annotations)
AMD / Hypertension / Myopia / …

Meningioma / Pituitary tumor / Neurilemmoma / …

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed CCT-Net. The knowledge
learned from the well-explored single-disease diagnosis with finegrained annotations can be transferred to improve the diagnosis of
multiple related diseases without annotations.

plications, large data with fine-grained annotations have facilitated model development and led to significant progress.
For example, diabetic retinopathy (DR) diagnosis, including DR grading [19, 21] and lesion segmentation [44, 56],
has been well studied on fundus images. Glioma identification, including tumor segmentation [20, 5, 9], has been
successfully applied on brain MRI scans. Recently, many
COVID-19 detection models [54, 27, 40] have also been
rapidly developed using the annotated lung CT data. However, most of these works only focus on a single disease,
which limits their transferability to other related diseases. In
most clinical departments, multi-disease diagnosis (e.g. ocular diseases: DR, glaucoma, hypertension, myopia; brain
tumors: glioma, meningioma, pituitary tumor; lung inflammation: community acquired, viral, bacteria pneumonia),
has higher practical value and is preferred by clinicians.
Therefore, as illustrated in Fig. 1, this work aims to transfer
the ability of learning discriminative features from the well-

8260

