SS-IL: Separated Softmax for Incremental Learning
Hongjoon Ahn1∗, Jihwan Kwak4∗, Subin Lim3 , Hyeonsu Bang1 , Hyojun Kim2 and Taesup Moon4†
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, 2 Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering,
3
Department of Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{hong0805, tnqls985, bhs1996, leopard101}@skku.edu
{jihwan0508, tsmoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We consider class incremental learning (CIL) problem,
in which a learning agent continuously learns new classes
from incrementally arriving training data batches and aims
to predict well on all the classes learned so far. The main
challenge of the problem is the catastrophic forgetting, and
for the exemplar-memory based CIL methods, it is generally known that the forgetting is commonly caused by the
classification score bias that is injected due to the data imbalance between the new classes and the old classes (in the
exemplar-memory). While several methods have been proposed to correct such score bias by some additional postprocessing, e.g., score re-scaling or balanced fine-tuning,
no systematic analysis on the root cause of such bias has
been done. To that end, we analyze that computing the
softmax probabilities by combining the output scores for
all old and new classes could be the main cause of the
bias. Then, we propose a new method, dubbed as Separated Softmax for Incremental Learning (SS-IL), that consists of separated softmax (SS) output layer combined with
task-wise knowledge distillation (TKD) to resolve such bias.
Throughout our extensive experimental results on several
large-scale CIL benchmark datasets, we show our SS-IL
achieves strong state-of-the-art accuracy through attaining
much more balanced prediction scores across old and new
classes, without any additional post-processing.

1. Introduction
Incremental or continual learning, in which the agent
continues to learn incremental arrival of new training data,
is one of the grand challenges in artificial intelligence and
machine learning. Such setting, which does not assume the
full availability of old training data, is recently gaining more
attention particularly from the perspective of real-world applications. The reason is storing all the training data, which
can easily become large-scale, in one batch often becomes
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding autho r.

unrealistic for memory- and computation-constrained applications, such as mobile phones or robots. Therefore, the
continuous yet effective update of the learning agent without accessing the full data received so far is indispensable.
A viable candidate for such agent is the end-to-end learning based deep neural network (DNN) models. Following
the recent success in many different applications [14, 3, 7],
the DNN-based incremental learning methods have been
also actively pursued in recent years. Despite some promising results, they also possess a critical limitation: the catastrophic forgetting, which refers to the problem that the generalization performance on the old data severely degrades
after a naive fine-tuning of the model with the new data.
In this paper, we focus on the DNN-based class incremental learning (CIL), which we refer to learning a
classifier to classify new object classes from every incremental training data and testing the classifier on all the
classes learned so far. Among several different proposed
approaches, the exemplar-memory based ones [28, 8, 31,
35, 4, 5], which allow to store small amount of training data
from old classes in a separate memory, have been shown to
be effective in mitigating the catastrophic forgetting.
The main challenge of using the exemplar-memory in
CIL is to resolve the severe data imbalance between the
training data points for the new classes and for the old
classes (in the exemplar-memory). That is, the naive finetuning with such imbalanced data would heavily skew the
prediction scores toward the newly learned classes, hence,
the accuracy for the old classes would dramatically drop,
resulting in a significant forgetting. Recently, several stateof-the-art methods [8, 31, 35, 4, 5] proposed to correct such
score bias by some additional post-processing steps, e.g.,
score re-scaling or balanced fine-tuning, after learning the
classification models.
While above mentioned methods were effective to some
extent in terms of improving the accuracy, we argue that
they lack systematic analyses on the main reason of such
bias and that some component of their schemes, e.g., knowledge distillation (KD) [15], was naively used without any

844

