Enriching Local and Global Contexts for Temporal Action Localization
Zixin Zhu1 Wei Tang2 Le Wang1 * Nanning Zheng1 Gang Hua3
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
University of Illinois at Chicago
3
Wormpex AI Research
Time (sec)

Abstract
Effectively tackling the problem of temporal action localization (TAL) necessitates a visual representation that
jointly pursues two confounding goals, i.e., fine-grained discrimination for temporal localization and sufficient visual
invariance for action classification. We address this challenge by enriching both the local and global contexts in the
popular two-stage temporal localization framework, where
action proposals are first generated followed by action classification and temporal boundary regression. Our proposed
model, dubbed ContextLoc, can be divided into three subnetworks: L-Net, G-Net and P-Net. L-Net enriches the local context via fine-grained modeling of snippet-level features, which is formulated as a query-and-retrieval process.
G-Net enriches the global context via higher-level modeling of the video-level representation. In addition, we introduce a novel context adaptation module to adapt the global
context to different proposals. P-Net further models the
context-aware inter-proposal relations. We explore two existing models to be the P-Net in our experiments. The efficacy of our proposed method is validated by experimental
results on the THUMOS14 (54.3% at tIoU@0.5) and ActivityNet v1.3 (56.01% at tIoU@0.5) datasets, which outperforms recent states of the art. Code is available at https:
//github.com/buxiangzhiren/ContextLoc.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) is a fundamental task
in video understanding. It aims at classifying action instances in an untrimmed video and locating their temporal
boundaries. Recently, TAL has drawn increasing attention
from the research community because of its wide range of
applications such as action retrieval, video summarization,
and intelligent security [32, 41, 31, 18].
Prior TAL methods can be divided into two categories.
One-stage approaches [14, 47, 2, 30] classify and lo* Corresponding author.

Snippet

Start Time
Snippet
Local Context

Cricket Bowling
Snippet
Proposal
Boundary Regression

End Time
Snippet
Local Context

(a) Snippet-level local context
Time (sec)
Classification

Long Jump
Proposal
Proposal

Background
Missing Part
Global Context

High Jump
Proposal
Proposal

Background
Missing Part
Global Context

Long Jump
or
High Jump ?

Classification by
Proposal: Difficult

Classification by
Proposal + Global
Context: Easy

(b) Video-level global context

Figure 1. (a) Each proposal consists of a number of video snippets.
A snippet is a small number of consecutive frames and serves as
the basic unit of feature extraction. It is the snippets capturing the
start and end times of the action that play an important role in action localization. (b) The video-level global context is important
as it involves background and high-level activity information that
can be critical to distinguish action categories of similar appearance and motion patterns.

cate action instances from an input video in a single shot.
Two-stage approaches first generate category-agnostic action proposals [20, 21, 10, 25, 11, 50, 1] and then perform action classification and temporal boundary refinement [48, 43, 45, 4, 7] for each proposal. They have their
respective advantages. One-stage approaches can be easily
trained in an end-to-end fashion while two-stage approaches
usually obtain superior performance.
Effectively tackling the task of TAL necessitates a visual representation that jointly pursues two confounding
goals, i.e., fine-grained discrimination for temporal localization and sufficient visual invariance for action classification. This paper addresses this challenge by leveraging
rich local and global contexts in a video, in our proposed
two-stage method.

13516

