Specificity-preserving RGB-D Saliency Detection
Tao Zhou1 , Huazhu Fu2 , Geng Chen2 , Yi Zhou3 , Deng-Ping Fan2 ,* Ling Shao2
1

PCA lab, The Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of MoE,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
3
IIAI, Abu Dhabi, UAE
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China

Abstract

V6

...

...
RGB

RGB-D saliency detection has attracted increasing attention, due to its effectiveness and the fact that depth cues
can now be conveniently captured. Existing works often
focus on learning a shared representation through various
fusion strategies, with few methods explicitly considering
how to preserve modality-specific characteristics. In this
paper, taking a new perspective, we propose a specificitypreserving network (SP-Net) for RGB-D saliency detection,
which benefits saliency detection performance by exploring
both the shared information and modality-specific properties (e.g., specificity). Specifically, two modality-specific
networks and a shared learning network are adopted to
generate individual and shared saliency maps. A crossenhanced integration module (CIM) is proposed to fuse
cross-modal features in the shared learning network, which
are then propagated to the next layer for integrating crosslevel information. Besides, we propose a multi-modal feature aggregation (MFA) module to integrate the modalityspecific features from each individual decoder into the
shared decoder, which can provide rich complementary
multi-modal information to boost the saliency detection performance. Further, a skip connection is used to combine
hierarchical features between the encoder and decoder layers. Experiments on six benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our SP-Net outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.
Code is available at: https://github.com/taozh2017/SPNet.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection aims to locate the most visually
prominent object(s) in a given scene [46]. It has been widely
applied in various vision-related tasks, such as image understanding [75], video/semantic segmentation [55, 58], action recognition [51], [55], and person re-identification [67].
Although significant progress has been made, it is still
challenging to accurately locate salient objects in com* Corresponding author: Deng-Ping Fan (dengpfan@gmail.com).

F
...

Depth

...
Depth

(a)

...
RGB

F

F

(b)
Conv layer

F ...
...

Depth

...

RGB

F

Decoder

F Fusion
(c)

Figure 1. Comparison between existing RGB-D saliency detection frameworks and our proposed model. (a) RGB and depth
images are fed into two separate network streams and then the
fused high-level features are fed into a decoder (e.g., [4,5,25,37]).
(b) Depth features are integrated into the RGB network using a
tailor-maid subnetwork (e.g., [6, 66, 72]). (c) Our method explicitly explores the shared information and modality-specific characteristics. Then, the features learned from the modality-specific
decoders are integrated into the shared decoder to boost saliency
detection performance.

plex scenes, such as instance cluttered background or lowcontrast lighting conditions. Recently, with the large availability of depth sensors in smart devices, depth maps have
been introduced to provide geometric and spatial information to improve the saliency detection performance. Consequently, fusing RGB and depth images has gained increasing interest in the saliency detection community [39,64,69].
For RGB-D saliency detection, it is critical to effectively
fuse RGB and depth images. Some works utilize an early
fusion strategy via a simple concatenation for this. For example, these models [41, 46, 52, 56] directly integrate RGB
and depth images to form a four-channel input. However,
this type of fusion does not consider the distribution gap between the two modalities, which may lead to inaccurate feature fusion. Besides, various models based on a late fusion
strategy use two parallel network streams to generate independent saliency maps for RGB and depth data, then the two
maps are fused to obtain a final prediction map [15, 24, 57].
However, it is difficult to capture the complex interactions
between the two modalities with this type of fusion.

4681

F

