Benchmarking Ultra-High-Definition Image Super-resolution
Kaihao Zhang1 Dongxu Li1 Wenhan Luo2
Wenqi Ren3 Björn Stenger4 Wei Liu2 Hongdong Li1 Ming-Hsuan Yang5,6,7
1
Australian National University 2 Tencent 3 IIE, CAS 4 Rakuten Institute of Technology
5
Google Research 6 University of California, Merced 7 Yonsei University

Abstract
Increasingly, modern mobile devices allow capturing images at Ultra-High-Definition (UHD) resolution, which includes 4K and 8K images. However, current single image
super-resolution (SISR) methods focus on super-resolving
images to ones with resolution up to high definition (HD)
and ignore higher-resolution UHD images. To explore their
performance on UHD images, in this paper, we first introduce two large-scale image datasets, UHDSR4K and
UHDSR8K, to benchmark existing SISR methods. With
70,000 V100 GPU hours of training, we benchmark these
methods on 4K and 8K resolution images under seven different settings to provide a set of baseline models. Moreover,
we propose a baseline model, called Mesh Attention Network (MANet) for SISR. The MANet applies the attention
mechanism in both different depths (horizontal) and different levels of receptive field (vertical). In this way, correlations among feature maps are learned, enabling the network
to focus on more important features.

1. Introduction
The task of single image super-resolution (SISR) is to
produce an image of high resolution (HR) given a low resolution (LR) input. In practice, image super-resolution has
a wide range of applications, such as medical image analysis [33], image generation [19], and face recognition at
large distances [53]. Super-resolving images is inherently
ill-posed, i.e., one LR image can correspond to multiple HR
images. To tackle this problem, traditional methods use
prior cues from HR images or LR exemplar images [14,
12, 46, 13, 6, 22, 47, 11, 18, 37, 31]. Recent deep learning methods remove the need to explicitly design different
types of priors. Networks are trained with pairs of corresponding HR and LR images in an end-to-end manner. With
sufficient training data, deep learning models have achieved
impressive results [8, 44, 32, 20, 35, 26, 51, 52, 29, 43].
Most of them are trained based on HD images of up to
2K resolution, with the DIV8K [15] dataset being an excep-

tion. Thus, it is not clear how they perform in the case of
ultra-high definition (UHD) images, including 4K and 8K
resolution images. Currently, an increasing number of mobile devices supports capturing images at these resolutions.
UHD images provide better visual pleasing effects and they
are also better to train SISR approaches, applicable to large
upscaling factors like 8× or 16×. In this paper, we explore
the SR performance of current SISR methods on such UHD
images. We collect two large-scale datasets of images with
resolutions of 4K and 8K, respectively, from the Internet.
The 4K dataset, UHDSR4K, includes 5, 999 and 2, 100 images for training and testing, respectively. The 8K dataset,
UHDSR8K, contains 2, 029 training and 937 test images, respectively. As far as we know, UHDSR4K and UHDSR8K
are the largest UHD image datasets for 4K and 8K image
super-resolution, respectively. Sample images are shown in
Fig. 1.
We propose seven settings to assess the performance of
existing methods. These include different upsampling factors (from 2× to 16×), and two additional settings to evaluate common image degradations, blur plus downsampling
and downsampling plus noise. We evaluate ten recent SISR
methods on these datasets, and train the respective models
on the new datasets. Training one model on a single dataset
takes approximately three weeks, and the total training time
for all models was over 70, 000 V100 GPU hours.
By conducting this benchmarking study, we thus obtain comprehensive understanding of how the current SISR
models work in the specific 4K and 8K settings, both in
terms of standard metrics, such as PSNR and SSIM, and
perceptual quality.
Further, we propose a Mesh Attention Network (MANet)
to improve the feature representation ability via learning the
inter-dependencies between different feature maps. Specifically, MANet is a mesh architecture, whose horizontal and
vertical layers represent the feature maps from different
depths and different receptive fields, respectively. Within
the MANet, a novel mesh attention module is introduced to
simultaneously learn the relationship between features from
different depths and different levels of receptive fields. Fi14769

