Towards Interpretable Deep Metric Learning with Structural Matching
Wenliang Zhao∗, Yongming Rao∗, Ziyi Wang, Jiwen Lu†, Jie Zhou
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
zhaowl20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; raoyongming95@gmail.com;
wziyi20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Visual similarity plays an important role in a range of
vision tasks including image retrieval [32], person identification [4] and image clustering [30]. Recent advances in
learning visual similarity are mostly driven by Deep Metric
Learning (DML), which leverages deep neural networks to
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

s= 0.449

s = 0.59

Optimal
Transport

CC

CNN

1. Introduction

CNN

How do the neural networks distinguish two images? It
is of critical importance to understand the matching mechanism of deep models for developing reliable intelligent
systems for many risky visual applications such as surveillance and access control. However, most existing deep metric learning methods match the images by comparing feature vectors, which ignores the spatial structure of images
and thus lacks interpretability. In this paper, we present
a deep interpretable metric learning (DIML) method for
more transparent embedding learning. Unlike conventional
metric learning methods based on feature vector comparison, we propose a structural matching strategy that explicitly aligns the spatial embeddings by computing an optimal
matching flow between feature maps of the two images. Our
method enables deep models to learn metrics in a more
human-friendly way, where the similarity of two images can
be decomposed to several part-wise similarities and their
contributions to the overall similarity. Our method is modelagnostic, which can be applied to off-the-shelf backbone networks and metric learning methods. We evaluate our method
on three major benchmarks of deep metric learning including CUB200-2011, Cars196, and Stanford Online Products,
and achieve substantial improvements over popular metric
learning methods with better interpretability. Code is available at https://github.com/wl-zhao/DIML.

image pair

s = 0.12
feature maps

marginal distribution

Figure 1: The main idea of the proposed deep interpretable
metric learning (DIML) method. Unlike most existing deep
metric learning methods that match the images by comparing
feature vectors, we propose a structural matching strategy
that explicitly aligns the spatial embeddings by computing
an optimal matching flow between feature maps of the two
images to improve the interpretability of visual similarity.
learn an embedding space where the embedding similarity
in this space can meaningfully reflect the semantic similarity
between samples. A variety of deep metric learning methods
have been proposed and have shown strong superiority in
learning accurate and generalizable visual similarities on various tasks [7, 40, 16]. Despite the great progress in learning
discriminative embeddings, deep metric learning methods
with better interpretability have drawn limited attention from
the community. Understanding the underlying matching
mechanism of deep metric learning models is of critical importance for developing reliable intelligent systems for many
risky visual applications such as surveillance [33] and access
control [21].
To improve the transparency of deep visual models, many
efforts have been made recently by either explaining the existing models [50, 31, 1, 2] or modifying models to achieve
better interpretability [46, 47]. For example, visual attribution methods leverage correlation or gradient to find the
important regions that have high contributions to the final
prediction. [46] and [47] propose to add part constraints

9887

