Geometry-Free View Synthesis: Transformers and no 3D Priors
Robin Rombach*
Patrick Esser*
Björn Ommer
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich & Heidelberg University, Germany
*Both authors contributed equally to this work. Code is available at https://git.io/JRPPs.

Figure 1. We present a probabilistic approach to Novel View Synthesis based on transformers, which does not require explicit 3D priors.
Given a single source frame and a camera transformation (center), we synthesize plausible novel views that exhibit high fidelity (right).
For comparison, SynSin [72] (left) yields uniform surfaces and unrealistic warps for large camera transformations.

Abstract
Is a geometric model required to synthesize novel views
from a single image? Being bound to local convolutions,
CNNs need explicit 3D biases to model geometric transformations. In contrast, we demonstrate that a transformerbased model can synthesize entirely novel views without any
hand-engineered 3D biases. This is achieved by (i) a global
attention mechanism for implicitly learning long-range 3D
correspondences between source and target views, and (ii)
a probabilistic formulation necessary to capture the ambiguity inherent in predicting novel views from a single image,
thereby overcoming the limitations of previous approaches
that are restricted to relatively small viewpoint changes. We
evaluate various ways to integrate 3D priors into a transformer architecture. However, our experiments show that
no such geometric priors are required and that the transformer is capable of implicitly learning 3D relationships
between images. Furthermore, this approach outperforms
the state of the art in terms of visual quality while covering
the full distribution of possible realizations.

1. Introduction
Imagine looking through an open doorway. Most of the
room on the other side is invisible. Nevertheless, we can estimate how the room likely looks. The few visible features
enable an informed guess about the height of the ceiling, the
position of walls and lighting etc. Given this limited information, we can then imagine several plausible realizations

of the room on the other side. This 3D geometric reasoning
and the ability to predict what the world will look like before
we move is critical to orient ourselves in a world with three
spatial dimensions. Therefore, we address the problem of
novel view synthesis (NVS) [35, 23, 9] based on a single
initial image and a desired change in viewpoint. In particular, we aim at specifically modeling large camera transformations, e.g. rotating the camera by 90◦ and looking at
previously unseen scenery. As this is an underdetermined
problem, we present a probabilistic generative model that
learns the distribution of possible target images and synthesizes them at high fidelity. Solving this task has the potential
to transform the passive experience of viewing images into
an interactive, 3D exploration of the depicted scene. This
requires an approach that both understands the geometry of
the scene and, when rendering novel views of an input, considers their semantic relationships to the visible content.
Interpolation vs. Extrapolation Recently, impressive synthesis results have been obtained with geometry-focused approaches in the multi-view setting [54, 55, 44], where not
just a single but a large number of images or a video of a
scene are available such that the task is closer to a view interpolation than a synthesis of genuinely novel views. In
contrast, if only a single image is available, the synthesis
of novel views is always an extrapolation task. Solving this
task is appealing because it allows a 3D exploration of a
scene starting from only a single picture.
While existing approaches for single-view synthesis make
small camera transformations, such as a rotation by a few

14356

