Feature Importance-aware Transferable Adversarial Attacks
Zhibo Wang†,‡ , Hengchang Guo‡,∗ , Zhifei Zhang⋆ , Wenxin Liu‡ , Zhan Qin† , Kui Ren†,♯
†
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, P. R. China
‡
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, P. R. China, ⋆ Adobe Research
♯
Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Cyberspace Governance of Zhejiang Province, P. R. China
{zhibowang, qinzhan, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn, {hc guo, wxliu111}@whu.edu.cn, zzhang@adobe.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved superior
performance in many vision tasks, e.g., image classification [17, 12], object detection [9, 25], semantic segmenta* Hengchang Guo is the corresponding author.

Original Image

Transferability of adversarial examples is of central importance for attacking an unknown model, which facilitates
adversarial attacks in more practical scenarios, e.g., blackbox attacks. Existing transferable attacks tend to craft adversarial examples by indiscriminately distorting features
to degrade prediction accuracy in a source model without
aware of intrinsic features of objects in the images. We
argue that such brute-force degradation would introduce
model-specific local optimum into adversarial examples,
thus limiting the transferability. By contrast, we propose
the Feature Importance-aware Attack (FIA), which disrupts
important object-aware features that dominate model decisions consistently. More specifically, we obtain feature
importance by introducing the aggregate gradient, which
averages the gradients with respect to feature maps of the
source model, computed on a batch of random transforms of
the original clean image. The gradients will be highly correlated to objects of interest, and such correlation presents
invariance across different models. Besides, the random
transforms will preserve intrinsic features of objects and
suppress model-specific information. Finally, the feature
importance guides to search for adversarial examples towards disrupting critical features, achieving stronger transferability. Extensive experimental evaluation demonstrates
the effectiveness and superior performance of the proposed
FIA, i.e., improving the success rate by 9.5% against normally trained models and 12.8% against defense models as
compared to the state-of-the-art transferable attacks. Code
is available at: https://github.com/hcguoO0/FIA

Traditional

Ours
Adversarial
Images

Attention on
source model

Attention on
target model

Figure 1. Comparison of traditionally indiscriminate attacks (top
row) and our feature importance-aware attacks (bottom row). Adversarial images are generated on the source model (VGG16) and
used to attack the target model (Inception-V3). Our attacks will
suppress important features and promote trivial features, thus significantly defocusing/misleading the models as visualized by the
attention maps, i.e., our adversarial example causes the source and
target models not only failed to capture the important object but
also focus on trivial regions.

tion [4, 22], face recognition [31, 27], etc. However, despite the impressive progress, recent studies showed that
DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples [30] which
are crafted by adding carefully designed perturbations to
fool DNNs. Adversarial attacks have raised great concern for DNN-based applications, especially in safety- and
security-sensitive areas like autonomous driving. Meanwhile, adversarial examples also play an important role in
investigating the internal drawbacks of neural networks and
improving their robustness.
Many works [30, 10, 18, 3, 34, 33, 35] have been proposed to generate adversarial examples, which can be divided into two categories, i.e., white-box attacks vs. blackbox attacks, according to the knowledge owned by attackers. With the progress of adversarial attacks, the more
challenging black-box attacks have attracted more attention. A common type of black-box attacks [33, 14, 2] is to
craft adversarial examples by estimating gradients based on
queried information (e.g., probability vectors and hard labels), which is referred to as the query-based attack. Those

7639

