Confidence Calibration for Domain Generalization under Covariate Shift
Yunye Gong1 , Xiao Lin1 , Yi Yao1 , Thomas G. Dietterich2 , Ajay Divakaran1 , and Melinda Gervasio1
1
SRI International, 2 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University
1

first.last@sri.com,2 tgd@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Existing calibration algorithms address the problem of
covariate shift via unsupervised domain adaptation. However, these methods suffer from the following limitations: 1)
they require unlabeled data from the target domain, which
may not be available at the stage of calibration in realworld applications and 2) their performance depends heavily on the disparity between the distributions of the source
and target domains. To address these two limitations, we
present novel calibration solutions via domain generalization. Our core idea is to leverage multiple calibration domains to reduce the effective distribution disparity between
the target and calibration domains for improved calibration
transfer without needing any data from the target domain.
We provide theoretical justification and empirical experimental results to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms. Compared against state-of-the-art calibration methods designed for domain adaptation, we observe a decrease of 8.86 percentage points in expected calibration error or, equivalently, an increase of 35 percentage
points in improvement ratio for multi-class classification on
the Office-Home dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated high
accuracy for tasks such as classification and detection given
adequate data and supervision [34, 29]. However, for realworld applications, the ability to indicate how much users
should trust model predictions can be even more crucial
than just having an accurate but unpredictable model [2,
12, 28]. While discriminative networks provide confidence
scores that can be used as a heuristic measure of the probability of correct classification, such scores are not guaranteed to match the true probabilities of correct classification [9]. A recent development, referred to as model calibration, addresses this problem directly [24, 9].
A classifier is calibrated with respect to a distribution
(or a dataset sampled from that distribution) if its predicted
probability of being correct matches its true probability. If
the distribution changes, calibration is usually lost, and this
has been demonstrated empirically [20]. Recent work has

Figure 1: Calibration for domain adaptation with a single
source domain may suffer from a large variance of the density ratio (i.e., P T /P S ) caused by disjoint P S and P T and,
therefore, a large calibration error as shown in (a). Our
proposed calibration algorithms for domain generalization
leverage multiple calibration domains to reduce the disparity between P C and P T for a decreased variance of the density ratio P T /P C and, in turn, improved calibration performance, as shown in (b) and (c).
begun to investigate the problem of calibration in the context of transfer learning, specifically in an unsupervised domain adaptation scenario under the assumption of covariate
shift [22, 32, 20]. However, these methods need at least
unlabeled data from the target domain, which may not be
available at the stages of training and calibration in realworld applications. Furthermore, as these methods are designed to handle a single source domain, there may be an
undesired disparity between selected source and target domains either due to the limited availability of sources or uncertainties (e.g., extreme weather/unexplored terrain) in the
target. Fig. 1(a) notionally depicts such a scenario. This
disparity results in a large variance of the density ratio defined as P T /P S , which significantly degrades the accuracy
of calibration [20, 4].

8958

