Self-Mutating Network for Domain Adaptive Segmentation of Aerial Images
Kyungsu Lee
DGIST
Korea Republic of

Haeyun Lee
DGIST
Korea Republic of

Jae Youn Hwang*
DGIST
Korea Republic of

ks_lee@dgist.ac.kr

haeyun@dgist.ac.kr

jyhwang@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract
The domain-adaptive semantic segmentation of aerial
images using a deep-learning technique is still challenging
owing to the domain gaps between aerial images obtained
in different areas. Currently, various convolutional neural
network (CNN)-based domain adaptation methods have
been developed to decrease the domain gaps. However, they
still show poor performance for object segmentation when
they are applied to images from other domains. In this
paper, we propose a novel CNN-based self-mutating network (SMN), which can adaptively adjust the parameter
values of convolutional filters as a response to the domain
of an input image for better domain-adaptive segmentation. For the SMN, the parameter mutation technique was
devised for adaptively changing parameters, and a parameter fluctuation technique was developed to randomly convulse the parameters. By adopting the parameter mutation
and fluctuation, adaptive self-changing and fine-tuning of
parameters can be realized for images from different domains, resulting in better prediction in domain-adaptive
segmentation. Meanwhile, the results of the ablation study
indicate that the SMN provided 11.19% higher Intersection over Union values than other state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating its potential for the domain-adaptive
segmentation of aerial images.

1. Introduction
Aerial imagery has been widely utilized for urban planning, autonomous vehicles, and digital map generation
in the field of remote sensing. In particular, building
segmentation is crucial for digital map generation using aerial imagery. To segment buildings from aerial images, many convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [18]based segmentation methods have been developed so far
[26, 34, 37]. CNN-based segmentation methods outperform classical segmentation methods in the segmentation of buildings from aerial images. However, in general, aerial imagery has a variety of domains depending
on time, countries, and aviation providers. Aerial images

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Sample images in different domain: (a) Inria Dataset, (b) Massachusetts Dataset, (c) WHU Dataset,
and (d) Our Urban Dataset
from various domains typically exhibit different resolutions, locations, and styles (Fig. 1). Although CNNs have
shown powerful capabilities in a wide range of fields, they
exhibit severe performance degradation when CNNs are
applied to unobserved scenes and objects in other domains for various applications [7, 11]. That is, when a network trained with an aerial image of one main is applied
to segment buildings from an aerial image of another domain, severe performance degradation of the network has
been observed [5, 24, 38]. Therefore, domain adaptation (DA) has recently gained attention as an unmet need
technique for resolving the limitations of CNNs.
To address this problem, a few deep learning techniques have been developed, such as transfer learning
[24, 30, 38] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[10]. The transfer learning technique that reuses deep
learning networks optimized in one domain has been introduced for many applications [24, 30, 38]. Despite the
improved performance of the transfer learning technique
for a building segmentation task, the transfer learning for
the DA of aerial images did not show sufficient performance owing to a domain gap. Meanwhile, GANs have
gained great attention as a novel technique that can be
applied to DA [5, 36]. By using the GAN, style transfer for DA was realized. In addition, GAN-based layers
were developed to decrease the domain gap during training [2, 8, 9]. However, because the images translated by
GAN are not perfectly recognized as an image in the same
domain, generalized feature extractions cannot be fully
achieved [31]. That is, because the domain gap still ex-

7068

