Learning Skeletal Graph Neural Networks for Hard 3D Pose Estimation
Ailing Zeng1 , Xiao Sun2 , Lei Yang3 , Nanxuan Zhao1 , Minhao Liu1 , Qiang Xu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Microsoft Research Asia, 3 Sensetime Group Ltd.
Abstract
Various deep learning techniques have been proposed
to solve the single-view 2D-to-3D pose estimation problem. While the average prediction accuracy has been improved signiﬁcantly over the years, the performance on
hard poses with depth ambiguity, self-occlusion, and complex or rare poses is still far from satisfactory. In this
work, we target these hard poses and present a novel skeletal GNN learning solution. To be speciﬁc, we propose a
hop-aware hierarchical channel-squeezing fusion layer to
effectively extract relevant information from neighboring
nodes while suppressing undesired noises in GNN learning.
In addition, we propose a temporal-aware dynamic graph
construction procedure that is robust and effective for 3D
pose estimation. Experimental results on the Human3.6M
dataset show that our solution achieves 10.3% average
prediction accuracy improvement and greatly improves on
hard poses over state-of-the-art techniques. We further apply the proposed technique on the skeleton-based action
recognition task and also achieve state-of-the-art performance. Our code is available at https://github.
com/ailingzengzzz/Skeletal-GNN .

1. Introduction
Single-view skeleton-based 3D pose estimation problem
plays an important role in numerous applications, such as
human-computer interaction, video understanding, and human behavior analysis. Given the 2D skeletal positions detected by a 2D keypoint detector (e.g., [3, 26, 37]), this task
aims to regress the 3D positions of the corresponding joints.
It is a challenging task and has drawn lots of attention from
academia in recent years. Even though the average performance increases steadily over the years, the prediction errors on some poses are still quite high.
Fig. 1 shows some examples in a widely used dataset,
Human3.6M [9]. Some actions (e.g., “Sit” and “Sit Down”)
contain many poses with depth ambiguity, self-occlusion,
or complex poses. Also, there inevitably exist some poses
rarely seen in the training dataset. Similar to the deﬁnition
of hard examples in object detection [16] and semantic seg-

mentation [14], we collectively regard those poses with high
prediction errors as hard poses.
Early attempts [23, 28] simply use fully-connected networks (FCN) to lift the 2D keypoints into 3D space. However, the dense connection of FCN is prone to overﬁt, leading to relatively poor performance. To tackle this problem,
geometric dependencies are incorporated into the network
in [7, 27, 38, 45], which signiﬁcantly improve prediction
accuracy. As articulated human body can be naturally modeled as a graph, with the recent development of graph neural networks (GNN) [10, 12, 1, 40, 46], various GNN-based
methods [48, 6, 19, 2, 50] are proposed in the literature for
2D-to-3D pose estimation.
GNN-based solutions naturally capture the relationship
between body joints. For a target node, aggregating features
from its neighboring nodes facilitates bringing in semantic
information to relieve the uncertainty in estimating its 3D
position. In other words, for the estimation of a particular
node in the graph (e.g., left hand), both its direct neighbor
(i.e., left elbow) and other nodes that are multiple hops away
in the graph (e.g., left shoulder and even right foot in some
poses) may provide useful information that contributes to
the position estimation of the target node, and the learning
of skeletal graph neural networks is to capture such context
information for better 2D-to-3D pose estimation. However,
existing GNN-based solutions do not fully tap the potential
of the skeleton graph. The reasons are two-fold:
• The power of graph neural networks lies in the aggregation of neighboring nodes, which, however, contributes both useful information and undesired noises.
On the one hand, aggregating distant nodes in the
skeletal graph does provide useful information; On the
other hand, the more distant the nodes, the more likely
undesired noises are introduced into the aggregation
procedure. Existing works do not consider such signalto-noise issues in message passing over the GNN.
• The relationship between body joints varies with different poses. For example, for poses in “running”, the
hand-foot joints are closely related, while for poses in
“Sitting”, there is no such strong relationship. It is
rather difﬁcult to capture such information with a static

11436

