Orthogonal Projection Loss
Kanchana Ranasinghe†,⋆ Muzammal Naseer◦,† Munawar Hayat§
Salman Khan†,◦ Fahad Shahbaz Khan†,‡
†
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE ◦ Australian National University, Australia
§
Monash University, Australia ‡ Linköping University, Sweden ⋆ Stony Brook University, USA
kranasinghe@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance on a range of classification tasks, with softmax crossentropy (CE) loss emerging as the de-facto objective function. The CE loss encourages features of a class to have
a higher projection score on the true class-vector compared
to the negative classes. However, this is a relative constraint
and does not explicitly force different class features to be
well-separated. Motivated by the observation that groundtruth class representations in CE loss are orthogonal (onehot encoded vectors), we develop a novel loss function
termed ‘Orthogonal Projection Loss’ (OPL) which imposes
orthogonality in the feature space. OPL augments the properties of CE loss and directly enforces inter-class separation
alongside intra-class clustering in the feature space through
orthogonality constraints on the mini-batch level. As compared to other alternatives of CE, OPL offers unique advantages e.g., no additional learnable parameters, does not
require careful negative mining and is not sensitive to the
batch size. Given the plug-and-play nature of OPL, we evaluate it on a diverse range of tasks including image recognition (CIFAR-100), large-scale classification (ImageNet),
domain generalization (PACS) and few-shot learning (miniImageNet, CIFAR-FS, tiered-ImageNet and Meta-dataset)
and demonstrate its effectiveness across the board. Furthermore, OPL offers better robustness against practical nuisances such as adversarial attacks and label noise. Code
is available at: https://github.com/kahnchana/opl.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great success across a range
of computer vision tasks owing to progress in deep neural
networks (DNNs) [23]. Effective loss functions for DNNs
training have been a crucial component of these advancements [15]. In particular, the softmax cross entropy (CE)
loss, commonly used for tackling classification problems,

Figure 1: Orthogonal Projection Loss: During training of a deep
neural network, within each mini-batch, OPL enforces separation
between features of different class samples while clustering together features of the same class samples. OPL integrates well
with softmax CE loss as it simply complements its intrinsic angular property, leading to consistent performance improvements on
various classification tasks with a variety of DNN backbones.

has been pivotal for stable and efficient training of DNNs.
Multiple variants of CE have been explored to enhance
discriminativity and generalizability of feature representations learned during training. Contrastive [16] and triplet
[43] loss functions are a common class of methods that have
gained popularity on tasks requiring more discriminative
features. At the same time, methods like centre loss [57]
and contrastive centre loss [37] have attempted to explicitly enforce inter-class separation and intra-class clustering
through Euclidean margins between class prototypes. Angular margin based losses [32, 31, 7, 53, 52] compose another class of objective functions that increase inter-class
margins through altering the logits prior to the CE loss.

12333

