GP-S3Net: Graph-based Panoptic Sparse Semantic Segmentation Network
Ryan Razani ∗ , Ran Cheng ∗, Enxu Li, Ehsan Taghavi, Yuan Ren, and Liu Bingbing †
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Toronto, Canada
Abstract
Panoptic segmentation as an integrated task of both
static environmental understanding and dynamic object
identiﬁcation, has recently begun to receive broad research
interest. In this paper, we propose a new computationally
efﬁcient LiDAR based panoptic segmentation framework,
called GP-S3Net. GP-S3Net is a proposal-free approach
in which no object proposals are needed to identify the objects in contrast to conventional two-stage panoptic systems, where a detection network is incorporated for capturing instance information. Our new design consists of a
novel instance-level network to process the semantic results
by constructing a graph convolutional network to identify
objects (foreground), which later on are fused with the background classes. Through the ﬁne-grained clusters of the
foreground objects from the semantic segmentation backbone, over-segmentation priors are generated and subsequently processed by 3D sparse convolution to embed each
cluster. Each cluster is treated as a node in the graph and its
corresponding embedding is used as its node feature. Then
a GCNN predicts whether edges exist between each cluster
pair. We utilize the instance label to generate ground truth
edge labels for each constructed graph in order to supervise
the learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GPS3Net outperforms the current state-of-the-art approaches,
by a signiﬁcant margin across available datasets such as,
nuScenes and SemanticPOSS, ranking 1st on the competitive public SemanticKITTI leaderboard upon publication.

1. Introduction
One of the main tasks in realizing autonomy in robotic
applications is scene understanding using the available data
collected from sensors such as camera, Light Detection
And Ranging (LiDAR) and RAdio Detection and Ranging
(RADAR). Scene understanding can be divided into different tasks such as scene classiﬁcation, object detection, se∗ Indicates equal contribution.

† Emails:
{ryan.razani, ran.cheng1,
thomas.enxu.li, ehsan.taghavi, yuan.ren3,
liu.bingbing}@huawei.com

mantic/instance segmentation and more recently panoptic
segmentation. In recent years, deep learning has been used
as the main solution to object detection and segmentation.
With more granular data available, specially from high resolution LiDARs, the task of semantic/instance segmentation has become a more vital part of any perception module due to generating all the fundamental perceptual information needed for robotic applications such as free space,
parking area and vegetation, in addition to all dynamic objects in 3D coordinates.

DS-Net

TORNADO-Net

Ours

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Comparison of our proposed method with DS-Net
[15] and TORNADONet [11] on SemanticKITTI benchmark [1]. DS-Net and TORNADONet suffer from oversegmentation problem, while ours shows successful panoptic predictions.
Normally, the task of semantic segmentation and instance segmentation are treated separately, using two different DNN models. In contrast, panoptic segmentation
combines semantic and instance segmentation tasks as explained in [19] by deﬁning two different categories of model
predictions, namely, “things” and “stuff”. “Things” is re-

16076

