Representative Color Transform for Image Enhancement
Hanul Kim1 ,
1

Su-Min Choi2 ,

Chang-Su Kim3 ,

Yeong Jun Koh2∗

Seoul National University of Science and Technology
2
Chungnam National University
3
Korea University

hukim@seoultech.ac.kr, smchoi@o.cnu.ac.kr, changsukim@korea.ac.kr, yjkoh@cnu.ac.kr,

Abstract
Recently, the encoder-decoder and intensity transformation approaches lead to impressive progress in image
enhancement. However, the encoder-decoder often loses
details in input images during down-sampling and upsampling processes. Also, the intensity transformation has
a limited capacity to cover color transformation between
low-quality and high-quality images. In this paper, we propose a novel approach, called representative color transform (RCT), to tackle these issues in existing methods. RCT
determines different representative colors specialized in input images and estimates transformed colors for the representative colors. It then determines enhanced colors using these transformed colors based on the similarity between input and representative colors. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms recent state-of-the-art algorithms on various image
enhancement problems.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, more and more people take photographs to
record and to share their valuable moments. Unfortunately,
their photographs often have low dynamic ranges or distorted color tones due to inadequate lighting conditions.
Therefore, image enhancement becomes popular to improve
the visual aesthetics of these photos. For image enhancement, many attempts have been proposed, and considerable
progress has been made.
In particular, some studies [6, 50, 52, 22] based on
the encoder-decoder architecture [38] in Figure 1a provide
promising results by learning a robust non-linear mapping
from large amounts of paired data composed of low-quality
and high-quality images. In these models, the encoder extracts features from the input image to exploit the high∗ Corresponding author

level context information for image enhancement. The decoder conveys the high-level information to low-level pixel
values while recovering the spatial information. Although
these methods have led to the performance improvement,
they have some limitations. First, details of the input image are not preserved in the up-sampling process of the decoder, even though they employ skip-connections. Second,
these approaches train networks with fixed input size, which
makes it difficult to enhance images of arbitrary spatial resolutions in the inference phase.
To overcome these issues, some methods [7, 21, 34, 16,
25, 13] estimate transformation functions to enhance images globally as in Figure 1b. Since these global enhancement methods do not require the down-sampling and upsampling processes for image enhancement, images can be
enhanced while preserving details. However, the existing
global methods rely on intensity transformation functions
on specific color space e.g. RGB [21, 13] or CIELab [7],
pre-defined lookup tables [54], and pre-defined enhancement operations [34, 16, 25]. Also, they perform channelwise color transformation and thus fail to consider all channels simultaneously. These pre-defined models have the
limited capacity to cover color transformation between lowquality and high-quality images.
In this paper, we propose a novel enhancement approach,
called representative color transform (RCT), which effectively achieves a large capacity for color transformation.
First, we encode an input image to extract the high-level
context information for image enhancement. Using the
high-level context, we determine representative colors for
the input image and estimate transformed colors for the representative colors, as in Figure 1c. Then, we compute the
similarity between the input image and the representative
colors in an embedding space. Finally, we develop a representative color transform to obtain the enhanced image by
combining the similarity and the representative color transformation. Based on the proposed RCT, we propose a representative color transform network (RCTNet), which con-

4459

