HAA500: Human-Centric Atomic Action Dataset with Curated Videos
Jihoon Chung1,2 Cheng-hsin Wuu1,3 Hsuan-ru Yang1 Yu-Wing Tai1,4 Chi-Keung Tang1
1
HKUST 2 Princeton University 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 Kuaishou Technology
jc5933@princeton.edu cwuu@andrew.cmu.edu hyangap@ust.hk yuwing@gmail.com cktang@cs.ust.hk

Abstract
We contribute HAA5001 , a manually annotated humancentric atomic action dataset for action recognition on 500
classes with over 591K labeled frames. To minimize ambiguities in action classification, HAA500 consists of highly
diversified classes of fine-grained atomic actions, where
only consistent actions fall under the same label, e.g.,
“Baseball Pitching” vs “Free Throw in Basketball”. Thus
HAA500 is different from existing atomic action datasets,
where coarse-grained atomic actions were labeled with
coarse action-verbs such as “Throw”. HAA500 has been
carefully curated to capture the precise movement of human figures with little class-irrelevant motions or spatiotemporal label noises.
The advantages of HAA500 are fourfold: 1) humancentric actions with a high average of 69.7% detectable
joints for the relevant human poses; 2) high scalability since
adding a new class can be done under 20–60 minutes; 3)
curated videos capturing essential elements of an atomic
action without irrelevant frames; 4) fine-grained atomic action classes. Our extensive experiments including crossdata validation using datasets collected in the wild demonstrate the clear benefits of human-centric and atomic characteristics of HAA500, which enable training even a baseline deep learning model to improve prediction by attending to atomic human poses. We detail the HAA500 dataset
statistics and collection methodology and compare quantitatively with existing action recognition datasets.

1. Introduction
Observe the coarse annotation provided by commonlyused action recognition datasets such as [21, 25, 42], where
the same action label was assigned to a given complex video
action sequence (e.g., Play Soccer, Play Baseball) typically
lasting 10 seconds or 300 frames, thus introducing a lot of
ambiguities during training as two or more action categories
may contain the same atomic action (e.g., Run is one of the
atomic actions for both Play Soccer and Play Baseball).
1 HAA500 project page: https://www.cse.ust.hk/haa.

This work was supported by Kuaishou Technology and the Research
Grant Council of the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201818.

Recently, atomic action datasets [5, 16, 17, 36, 39] have
been introduced in an attempt to resolve the aforementioned
issue. Google’s AVA actions dataset [17] provides dense annotations of 80 atomic visual actions in 430 fifteen-minute
video clips where actions are localized in space and time.
AVA spoken activity dataset [36] contains temporally labeled face tracks in videos, where each face instance is
labeled as speaking or not, and whether the speech is audible. Something-Something dataset [16] contains clips of
humans performing pre-defined basic actions with daily objects.
However, some of their actions are still coarse which
can be further split into atomic classes with significantly
different motion gestures. E.g., AVA [17] and SomethingSomething [16] contain Play Musical Instrument and Throw
Something as a class, respectively, where the former should
be further divided into sub-classes such as Play Piano and
Play Cello, and the latter into Soccer Throw In and Pitch
Baseball, etc., because each of these atomic actions has significantly different gestures. Encompassing different visual
postures into a single class poses a deep neural network almost insurmountable challenge to properly learn the pertinent atomic action, which probably explains the prevailing
low performance employing even the most state-of-the-art
architecture, ACAR-Net (mAP: 38.30%) [33], in AVA [17],
despite only having 80 classes.
The other problem with existing action recognition video
datasets is that their training examples contain actions irrelevant to the target action. Video datasets typically have
fixed clip lengths, allowing unrelated video frames to be
easily included during the data collection stage. Kinetics
400 dataset [21], with a fixed 10-second clip length, contains a lot of irrelevant actions, e.g., showing the audience
before the main violin playing, or a person takes a long run
before kicking the ball. Another problem is having too limited or too broad field-of-view, where a video only exhibits
a part of a human interacting with an object [16], or a single
video contains multiple human figures with different actions
present [17, 21, 48].
Recently, FineGym [39] has been introduced to solve the
aforementioned limitations by proposing fine-grained action annotations, e.g., Balance Beam-Dismount-Salto Forward Tucked. But due to the expensive data collection pro-

13465

