IoU:0.51
Cls Score:0.91

IoU:0.90
Cls Score:0.48

IoU:0.90
Cls Score:0.48

IoU:0.55
Cls Score:0.63

Reconcile Prediction Consistency for Balanced Object Detection
Keyang Wang, Lei Zhang( )
IoU:0.94(LiVE) Group
Learning Intelligence & Vision Essential
Cls Score:0.88
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, China
{wangkeyang, leizhang}@cqu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Object detection serves as a prerequisite for a broad
set of downstream vision applications, such as person reidentification [3], instance segmentation [9] and action recognition [8]. With the foundation of deep neural networks,
object detection has achieved significant advances in recent
years. On the whole, all the detectors that use deep CNN can
be divided into two categories: (1) The multi-stage approaches, including [7, 22, 15, 1, 14, 30]. For the multi-stage object
detectors, multi-stage classification and localization are applied sequentially, which make these models more powerful

After NMS

Classification and regression are two pillars of object
detectors. In most CNN-based detectors, these two pillars
are optimized independently. Without direct interactions between them, the classification loss and the regression loss
can not be optimized synchronously toward the optimal direction in the training phase. This clearly leads to lots of
inconsistent predictions with high classification score but
low localization accuracy or low classification score but high
localization accuracy in the inference phase, especially for
the objects of irregular shape and occlusion, which severely
hurts the detection performance of existing detectors after NMS. To reconcile prediction consistency for balanced object
detection, we propose a Harmonic loss to harmonize the optimization of classification branch and localization branch.
The Harmonic loss enables these two branches to supervise
and promote each other during training, thereby producing
consistent predictions with high co-occurrence of top classification and localization in the inference phase. Furthermore,
in order to prevent the localization loss from being dominated by outliers during training phase, a Harmonic IoU loss
is proposed to harmonize the weight of the localization loss
of different IoU-level samples. Comprehensive experiments
on benchmarks PASCAL VOC and MS COCO demonstrate
the generality and effectiveness of our model for facilitating
existing object detectors to state-of-the-art accuracy.

Before NMS

Abstract

IoU:0.55
Cls Score:0.83

IoU:0.59
Cls Score:0.73

IoU:0.85
Cls Score:0.43

IoU:0.94
Cls Score:0.88

IoU:0.55
Cls Score:0.83

IoU:0.94
Cls Score:0.88

(a) Baseline

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Irregular (e.g., tail) and occluded (e.g., background) object
detection outputs of the baseline detector and our detector trained
with Harmonic loss. The red bounding boxes denote the groundtruth. The baseline detector (a) produces inconsistent bounding
boxes with high classification score but low localization IoU (the
blue bbox), or low classification score but high localization IoU (the
yellow bbox), which will hurt the detection accuracy after NMS
(i.e., suboptimal blue bbox is selected). Our detector (b) produces
bounding boxes with high co-occurrence of top classification and
localization by harmonizing the optimization of these two branches,
leading to better detection results after NMS.

on classification and localization tasks. So these approaches
have achieved top performance on benchmark datasets. (2)
The one-stage approaches, including [19, 21, 16, 29, 26].
The one-stage approaches apply object classifiers and regressors in a dense manner without object-based pruning. The
main advantage of the one-stage detectors is their inference
efficiency, but the detection accuracy is usually inferior to
the two-stage approaches.
Modern CNN-based object detectors divide the object
detection task into two branches, classification branch and
regression branch, which are trained with independent objective functions without knowing each other explicitly. Specifically, a classification loss (e.g., cross-entropy loss [7]) is
adopted to optimize the classifier and a distance loss (e.g.,
smoothL1 loss [7]) is used to optimize the regressor. However, since the correlation between classification task and
localization task is ignored in existing detectors, the opti-

3631

Io
Cl

