Factorizing Perception and Policy for Interactive Instruction Following
https://github.com/gistvision/moca

Kunal Pratap Singh∗,2,§ Suvaansh Bhambri∗,1 Byeonghwi Kim∗,1 Roozbeh Mottaghi2 Jonghyun Choi1,†
1
2
GIST, South Korea
Allen Institute for AI
kunals@allenai.org, suvaansh2008bhambri@gmail.com, byeonghwikim@gm.gist.ac.kr
roozbehm@allenai.org, jhc@gist.ac.kr

Single Stream

Text
Instruction

Perception

Current Frame

Fail

Object Local.
Action Pred.
Proposed Factorized Model

Policy

Performing simple household tasks based on language
directives is very natural to humans, yet it remains an open
challenge for AI agents. The ‘interactive instruction following’ task attempts to make progress towards building agents
that jointly navigate, interact, and reason in the environment at every step. To address the multifaceted problem,
we propose a model that factorizes the task into interactive
perception and action policy streams with enhanced components and name it as MOCA, a Modular Object-Centric
Approach. We empirically validate that MOCA outperforms
prior arts by significant margins on the ALFRED benchmark with improved generalization.

Task
Put a candle on
the back of a toilet.

Perception
& Policy

Abstract

"Candle"

PICKOBJECT

Success

PICKOBJECT
PICKOBJECT

Figure 1: We divide interactive instruction following into perception and policy. Each heat-map indicates where a stream focuses
on in the given visual observation. While a single stream exploits
the same features for pixel-level and global understanding and thus
fails to interact with the object, our factorized approach handles
perception and policy separately and interacts successfully.

1. Introduction
The prospect of having a robotic assistant that can carry
out daily chores based on language directives is a distant dream that has eluded the research community for
decades. On recent progress in computer vision, natural language processing and embodiment, several benchmarks have been developed to encourage research on various components of such instruction following agents including navigation [2, 6, 8, 23], object interaction [30, 41],
and interactive reasoning [11, 15] in visually rich 3D environments [5,22,33]. However, to move towards building realistic assistants, the agent should possess all these abilities.
Taking a step forward, we address the more holistic task of
interactive instruction following [15, 30, 34, 41] which requires an agent to navigate through an environment, interact with objects, and complete long-horizon tasks, following natural language instructions with egocentric vision.
To accomplish a goal in the interactive instruction following task, the agent should infer a sequence of actions
and object interactions. While action prediction requires
global semantic cues, object localisation needs a pixel-level
∗ : equal contribution. § : work done while with GIST. † : corresponding

author.

understanding of the environment, making them semantically different tasks. In addition, in neuroscience literature [14], there is a human visual cortex model that has two
pathways; the ventral stream (involved with object perception) and the dorsal stream (involved with action control).
Inspired by them, we present a Modular Object-Centric
Approach (MOCA) to factorize interactive perception and
action policy in separate streams in a unified end-to-end
framework for building an interactive instruction following
agent. Specifically, our agent has the action policy module
(APM) which is responsible for sequential action prediction
and the interactive perception module (IPM) that localises
the objects to interact with.
Figure 1 shows that our two-stream model is more beneficial than the single-stream one. The heat maps indicate the
model’s visual attention. For the action of ‘picking up the
candle,’ the proposed factorized model focuses on a candle
in both the streams and results in a successful interaction.
In contrast, the single-stream model does not attend on the
candle, implying the challenge to handle two different predictions in a single stream.
In the IPM, we propose to reason about object classes

1888

