AdvRush: Searching for Adversarially Robust Neural Architectures
Jisoo Mok1
Byunggook Na1
Hyeokjun Choe1
Sungroh Yoon1,2, *
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
2
ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and Institute of Engineering Research, Seoul National University
{magicshop1118, skqudrnrnabk, genesis1104, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

51

Deep neural networks continue to awe the world with
their remarkable performance. Their predictions, however,
are prone to be corrupted by adversarial examples that are
imperceptible to humans. Current efforts to improve the robustness of neural networks against adversarial examples
are focused on developing robust training methods, which
update the weights of a neural network in a more robust
direction. In this work, we take a step beyond training of
the weight parameters and consider the problem of designing an adversarially robust neural architecture with high
intrinsic robustness. We propose AdvRush, a novel adversarial robustness-aware neural architecture search algorithm, based upon a finding that independent of the training
method, the intrinsic robustness of a neural network can be
represented with the smoothness of its input loss landscape.
Through a regularizer that favors a candidate architecture
with a smoother input loss landscape, AdvRush successfully discovers an adversarially robust neural architecture.
Along with a comprehensive theoretical motivation for AdvRush, we conduct an extensive amount of experiments to
demonstrate the efficacy of AdvRush on various benchmark
datasets. Notably, on CIFAR-10, AdvRush achieves 55.91%
robust accuracy under FGSM attack after standard training
and 50.04% robust accuracy under AutoAttack after 7-step
PGD adversarial training.

1. Introduction
The rapid growth and integration of deep neural networks in every-day applications have led researchers to explore the susceptibility of their predictions to malicious external attacks. Among proposed attack mechanisms, adversarial examples [56], in particular, raise serious security
concerns because they can cause neural networks to make
erroneous predictions with the slightest perturbations in the
input data that are indistinguishable to the human eyes. This
* Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

Robust Accuracy under AutoAttack (%)

Abstract

50
49
48
47

ResNet-18
DenseNet-121
DARTS
PDARTS
RobNet-free
RACL
AdvRush

46
45
44
43
84

84.5

85

85.5

86

Standard Accuracy (%)

86.5

87

87.5

Figure 1. Standard accuracy vs. robust accuracy evaluation results
on CIFAR-10 for various neural architectures and the neural architecture searched by AdvRush. All architectures are adversarially trained using 7-step PGD and evaluated under AutoAttack.
AdvRush architecture achieves both standard accuracy-wise and
robust accuracy-wise optimal frontiers.

interesting property of adversarial examples has been drawing much attention from the deep learning community, and
ever since their introduction, a plethora of defense methods have been proposed to improve the robustness of neural
networks against adversarial examples [33, 60, 65]. However, there remains one important question that is yet to
be explored extensively: Can the adversarial robustness of
a neural network be improved by utilizing an architecture
with high intrinsic robustness? And if so, is it possible to
automatically search for a robust neural architecture?
We tackle the problem of searching for a robust neural architecture by employing Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) [69]. Due to the heuristic nature of designing a
neural architecture, it used to take machine learning engineers with years of experience and expertise to fully exploit the power of neural networks. NAS, a newly budding
branch of automated machine learning, aims to automate
this labor-intensive architecture search process. As the neural architectures discovered automatically through NAS be-

12322

