3DStyleNet: Creating 3D Shapes with Geometric and Texture Style Variations
Kangxue Yin1

Jun Gao1,2,3
NVIDIA1

Maria Shugrina1
University of Toronto2

Sameh Khamis1

Sanja Fidler1,2,3

Vector Institute3

{kangxuey, jung, mshugrina, skhamis, sfidler}@nvidia.com

Figure 1: We propose 3DS TYLE N ET, a neural stylization method for 3D textured shapes. Our method creates novel geometric and texture
variations of 3D objects by transferring the shape and texture style from one 3D object (target) to another (source).

Abstract
We propose a method to create plausible geometric and
texture style variations of 3D objects in the quest to democratize 3D content creation. Given a pair of textured source
and target objects, our method predicts a part-aware affine
transformation field that naturally warps the source shape
to imitate the overall geometric style of the target. In addition, the texture style of the target is transferred to the
warped source object with the help of a multi-view differentiable renderer. Our model, 3DS TYLE N ET, is composed
of two sub-networks trained in two stages. First, the geometric style network is trained on a large set of untextured
3D shapes. Second, we jointly optimize our geometric style
network and a pre-trained image style transfer network with
losses defined over both the geometry and the rendering of
the result. Given a small set of high-quality textured objects,
our method can create many novel stylized shapes, resulting
in effortless 3D content creation and style-ware data augmentation. We showcase our approach qualitatively on 3D
content stylization, and provide user studies to validate the
quality of our results. In addition, our method can serve as
a valuable tool to create 3D data augmentations for computer vision tasks. Extensive quantitative analysis shows
that 3DS TYLE N ET outperforms alternative data augmentation techniques for the downstream task of single-image
3D reconstruction.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of neural image style transfer
has demonstrated deep learning as a powerful tool to create artistic images [13, 21, 44, 29, 30, 14, 28], with both
casual and professional applications [24]. Although editing
3D content is arguably a more arduous and time-consuming
task, which makes automatic tools especially attractive,
equally successful formulation of style transfer for the 3D
domain has not been proposed. At the same time, the demand for 3D content is growing due to the popularity of
gaming, AR/VR, 3D animated films, and virtual simulation.
In our work, we seek a style transfer formulation applicable
to 3D content creation, including both the geometric shape
of objects and their color texture.
Prior works in 3D style transfer address either shape or
color stylization, but do not extend to both of these critical
attributes of 3D objects. Classical methods consider deformation transfer from one object to another with the guidance of shape correspondence [49] and the transfer of the
texture map from one shape to another by minimizing distortion [41, 40]. Deep learning methods likewise addressed
either geometry [33, 35, 58] or texture stylization [39].
For example, [33] proposes an energy optimization framework based on surface normals for geometry cubification,
while [58] deforms a shape by utilizing a neural network to
predict a cage defining a smooth warp of the shape. In [39]
and [25], the style of an artistic painting is transferred to
the texture or surface of a 3D object. None of the above

12456

