VidTr: Video Transformer Without Convolutions
Yanyi Zhang 1,2 ,* Xinyu Li 1 ,* Chunhui Liu 1 , Bing Shuai 1 , Yi Zhu 1 ,
Biagio Brattoli 1 , Hao Chen 1 , Ivan Marsic 2 and Joseph Tighe 1
1
Amazon Web Service; 2 Rutgers University
{xxnl,chunhliu,bshuai,yzaws,biagib,hxen,tighej}@amazon.com; {yz593,marsic}@rutgers.edu

Abstract
We introduce Video Transformer (VidTr) with separableattention for video classification. Comparing with commonly used 3D networks, VidTr is able to aggregate spatiotemporal information via stacked attentions and provide
better performance with higher efficiency. We first introduce
the vanilla video transformer and show that transformer
module is able to perform spatio-temporal modeling from
raw pixels, but with heavy memory usage. We then present
VidTr which reduces the memory cost by 3.3× while keeping the same performance. To further optimize the model,
we propose the standard deviation based topK pooling for
attention (pooltopK std ), which reduces the computation by
dropping non-informative features along temporal dimension. VidTr achieves state-of-the-art performance on five
commonly used datasets with lower computational requirement, showing both the efficiency and effectiveness of our
design. Finally, error analysis and visualization show that
VidTr is especially good at predicting actions that require
long-term temporal reasoning.

1. Introduction
We introduce Video Transformer (VidTr) with separableattention, one of the first transformer-based video action classification architecture that performs global spatiotemporal feature aggregation. Convolution-based architectures have dominated the video classification literature
in recent years [19, 32, 55], and although successful, the
convolution-based approaches have two drawbacks: 1. they
have limited receptive field on each layer and 2. information is slowly aggregated through stacked convolution layers, which is inefficient and might be ineffective [31, 55].
Attention is a potential candidate to overcome these limitations as it has a large receptive field which can be leveraged for spatio-temporal modeling. Previous works use attention to modeling long-range spatio-temporal features in
* Equally Contributed.

videos but still rely on convoluational backbones [31, 55].
Inspired by recent successful applications of transformers
on NLP [12, 52] and computer vision [14, 47], we propose
a transformer-based video network that directly applies attentions on raw video pixels for video classification, aiming
at higher efficiency and better performance.
We first introduce a vanilla video transformer that directly learns spatio-temporal features from raw-pixel inputs
via vision transformer [14], showing that it is possible to
perform pixel-level spatio-temporal modeling. However,
as discussed in [56], the transformer has O(n2 ) complexity with respect to the sequence length. The vanilla video
transformer is memory consuming, as training on a 16frame clip (224 × 224) with only batch size of 1 requires
more than 16GB GPU memory, which makes it infeasible
on most commercial devices. Inspired by the R(2+1)D convolution that breaks down 3D convolution kernel to a spatial kernel and a temproal kernel [50], we further introduce
our separable-attention, which performs spatial and temporal attention separately. This reduces the memory consumption by 3.3× with no drop in accuracy. We can further reduce the memory and computational requirements of our
system by exploiting the fact that a large portion of many
videos have redundant information temporally. This notion
has been explored in the context of convolutional networks
to reduce computation previously [32]. We build on this intuition and propose a standard deviation based topK pooling
operation (topK std pooling), which reduces the sequence
length and encourages the transformer network to focus on
representative frames.
We evaluated our VidTr on 6 most commonly used
datasets, including Kinetics 400/700, Charades, Somethingsomething V2, UCF-101 and HMDB-51. Our model
achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) or comparable performance on five datasets with lower computational requirements and latency compared to previous SOTA approaches.
Our error analysis and ablation experiments show that the
VidTr works significantly better than I3D on activities that
requires longer temporal reasoning (e.g. making a cake
vs. eating a cake), which aligns well with our intuition.

13577

