PnP-DETR: Towards Efficient Visual Analysis with Transformers
Tao Wang1,3 *

Li Yuan4∗
1

3

Yunpeng Chen2

Jiashi Feng4

Shuicheng Yan4

Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore 2 Yitu Technology

Integrative Science and Engineering Programme, NUS Graduate School, National University of Singapore
4

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore

twangnh@gmail.com

ylustcnus@gmail.com

jshfeng@gmail.com

yunpeng.chen@yitu-inc.com

shuicheng.yan@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, DETR [3] pioneered the solution of vision
tasks with transformers, it directly translates the image feature map into the object detection result. Though effective,
translating the full feature map can be costly due to redundant computation on some area like the background. In
this work, we encapsulate the idea of reducing spatial redundancy into a novel poll and pool (PnP) sampling module, with which we build an end-to-end PnP-DETR architecture that adaptively allocates its computation spatially
to be more efficient. Concretely, the PnP module abstracts
the image feature map into fine foreground object feature
vectors and a small number of coarse background contextual feature vectors. The transformer models information
interaction within the fine-coarse feature space and translates the features into the detection result. Moreover, the
PnP-augmented model can instantly achieve various desired trade-offs between performance and computation with
a single model by varying the sampled feature length, without requiring to train multiple models as existing methods.
Thus it offers greater flexibility for deployment in diverse
scenarios with varying computation constraint. We further
validate the generalizability of the PnP module on panoptic segmentation and the recent transformer-based image
recognition model ViT [7] and show consistent efficiency
gain. We believe our method makes a step for efficient visual
analysis with transformers, wherein spatial redundancy is
commonly observed. Code and models will be available.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental computer vision task
aiming to recognize object instances in the image and localize them with precise bounding boxes. Modern detectors
address this set prediction task mainly with proxy learning
* Work done during an internship at Yitu Tech.

Figure 1. Left: Detection result. Right: Transformer computation
density map. Proposed method allows the model to adaptively
allocate computation spatially and avoid computation expenditure
on less informative background area.

objectives, i.e., regressing offset from pre-defined anchor
boxes [23, 18] or boundaries from grid locations [27, 34, 9].
Those heuristic designs not only complicate the model design but also require hand-crafted post-processing for duplicate removal. A recent method DETR [3] eliminates
those hand-crafted designs and achieves end-to-end object
detection. It builds an effective set prediction framework
on top of convolution feature maps with transformers [28]
and shows competitive performance to the two-stage Faster
R-CNN [23] detector. The image feature map is flattened
in the spatial dimension into one-dimensional feature vectors. The transformer then processes them with its strong
attention mechanism to generate the final detection list.
Albeit simple and effective, applying the transformer
networks to a image feature map can be computationally
costly, mainly due to the attention operation [28] over the
long flattened feature vectors. These features may be redundant: natural images often contain enormous background
areas apart from the interested objects, which may occupy
large part in the corresponding feature representation; also,
some discriminative feature vectors may already suffice for
detecting the objects. Existing works improving the transformer efficiency mainly focus on accelerating the attention
operation [16, 15, 29, 5], and few of them consider the spatial redundancy discussed above.
To address the above limitation, we develop a learnable

4661

