High-Performance Discriminative Tracking with Transformers
Bin Yu1,2 , Ming Tang2 , Linyu Zheng1,2 , Guibo Zhu1,2 , Jinqiao Wang1,2,3 ,
Hao Feng4 , Xuetao Feng4 , Hanqing Lu1,2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS, China
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS, China
3
ObjectEye Inc. 4 Alibaba Group
{bin.yu,tangm,linyu.zheng,gbzhu,jqwang,luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{yuanning.fh,xuetao.fxt}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
End-to-end discriminative trackers improve the state of
the art significantly, yet the improvement in robustness and
efficiency is restricted by the conventional discriminative
model, i.e., least-squares based regression. In this paper, we
present DTT, a novel single-object discriminative tracker,
based on an encoder-decoder Transformer architecture. By
self- and encoder-decoder attention mechanisms, our approach is able to exploit the rich scene information in an
end-to-end manner, effectively removing the need for handdesigned discriminative models. In online tracking, given a
new test frame, dense prediction is performed at all spatial
positions. Not only location, but also bounding box of the
target object is obtained in a robust fashion, streamlining
the discriminative tracking pipeline. DTT is conceptually simple and easy to implement. It yields state-of-the-art
performance on four popular benchmarks including GOT10k, LaSOT, NfS, and TrackingNet while running at over 50
FPS, confirming its effectiveness and efficiency. We hope
DTT may provide a new perspective for single-object visual
tracking.

1. Introduction
Generic visual tracking is a long-standing topic in the
field of computer vision and has attracted increasing attention over the last decades. Despite significant progress in
recent years [2,6, 7, 19, 23,26, 33, 34, 41,42], visual tracking
remains challenging due to numerous factors such as very
limited online training samples, large appearance variation,
and heavy background clutters.
In recent years, Siamese network based trackers [1,5,11–
13, 19, 20, 36, 37] have attracted great attention because of
their balanced speed and accuracy. These methods formulate the visual tracking task as a target matching problem

and aim to learn a general similarity metric between the target template and the search region (see Fig. 1(a)). Powerful backbone networks [19] and effective proposal networks [11] are proposed to achieve promising results. However,
the Siamese learning framework cannot exploit the background information effectively to improve the discrimination.
On the contrary, modern discriminative trackers [2,3,42]
are able to exploit the background information and typically learn an adaptive discriminative model by minimizing the
regression loss (see Fig. 1(b)). Although they have achieved
leading performance on serval benchmarks [15, 16, 35], we
point out that such tracking scheme has the following three
limitations. 1) The discrimination of the applied regression
models (i.e., least-squares based regression) is rough and insufficient for robust tracking because the conventional models often fail to reserve the detailed scene information and
encode the relationships among the distractors in the background. 2) Modern discriminative models can only contribute to localization, and thus have to rely on other methods like ATOM [6] for final predicted bounding box, resulting in a separated tracking pipeline. 3) In online tracking,
iterative solution is needed in both the model predictor [2]
and the bounding box refinement module [6], which is not
friendly to most embedded devices and may negatively affect the efficiency.
To this end, we present a novel discriminative tracker
with Transformers, termed as DTT, which is a conceptually simple, efficient and robust tracking architecture. The
core advantage of DTT is that it can effectively and efficiently exploit the rich scene information for both classification and bounding box regression. Specifically, DTT is built upon an encoder-decoder Transformer architecture [32] where the features of training image obtained by
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are fed to the encoder, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Due to the self-attention
mechanism in the encoder, its outputs, called discrimina-

9856

