An End-to-End Transformer Model for 3D Object Detection
Ishan Misra

Rohit Girdhar
Armand Joulin
Facebook AI Research

https://facebookresearch.github.io/3detr

Abstract
We propose 3DETR, an end-to-end Transformer based
object detection model for 3D point clouds. Compared to
existing detection methods that employ a number of 3Dspecific inductive biases, 3DETR requires minimal modifications to the vanilla Transformer block. Specifically,
we find that a standard Transformer with non-parametric
queries and Fourier positional embeddings is competitive
with specialized architectures that employ libraries of 3Dspecific operators with hand-tuned hyperparameters. Nevertheless, 3DETR is conceptually simple and easy to implement, enabling further improvements by incorporating
3D domain knowledge. Through extensive experiments, we
show 3DETR outperforms the well-established and highly
optimized VoteNet baselines on the challenging ScanNetV2
dataset by 9.5%. Furthermore, we show 3DETR is applicable to 3D tasks beyond detection, and can serve as a building block for future research.

1. Introduction
3D object detection aims to identify and localize objects in 3D scenes. Such scenes, often represented using point clouds, contain an unordered, sparse and irregular set of points captured using a depth scanner. This setlike nature makes point clouds significantly different from
the traditional grid-like vision data like images and videos.
While there are other 3D representations such as multipleviews [60], voxels [1] or meshes [8], they require additional
post-processing to be constructed, and often loose information due to quantization. Hence, point clouds have emerged
as a popular 3D representation, and spurred the development of specialized 3D architectures.
Many recent 3D detection models directly work on the
3D points to produce the bounding boxes. Of particular interest, VoteNet [42] casts 3D detection as a set-to-set problem, i.e., transforming an unordered set of inputs (point
cloud), into an unordered set of outputs (bounding boxes).
VoteNet uses an encoder-decoder architecture: the encoder
is a PointNet++ network [44] which converts the unordered

Input Point Cloud

Decoder Attention

Detections

Figure 1: 3DETR. We train an end-to-end Transformer model for
3D object detection on point clouds. Our model has a Transformer
encoder for feature encoding and a Transformer decoder for predicting boxes. For an unseen input, we compute the self-attention
from the reference point (blue dot) to all points in the scene and
display the points with the highest attention values in red. The decoder attention groups points within an instance which presumably
makes it easier to predict bounding boxes.

point set into a unordered set of point features. The point
features are then input to a decoder that produces the 3D
bounding boxes. While effective, such architectures have
required years of careful development by hand-encoding
inductive biases, radii, and designing special 3D operators
and loss functions.
In parallel to 3D, set-to-set encoder-decoder models have
emerged as a competitive way to model 2D object detection. In particular, the recent Transformer [68] based model,
called DETR [4], casts 2D object detection as a set-to-set
problem. The self-attention operation in Transformers is designed to be permutation-invariant and capture long range
contexts, making them a natural candidate for processing
unordered 3D point cloud data. Inspired by this observation,
we ask the following question: can we leverage Transformers to learn a 3D object detector without relying on handdesigned inductive biases?
To that end, we develop 3D DEtection TRansformer
(3DETR) a simple to implement 3D detection method that
uses fewer hand-coded design decisions and also casts detection as a set-to-set problem. We explore the similarities
between VoteNet and DETR, as well as between the core
mechanisms of PointNet++ and the self-attention of Trans-

2906

