YouRefIt : Embodied Reference Understanding with Language and Gesture
Yixin Chen1 , Qing Li1 , Deqian Kong1 , Yik Lun Kei1 ,
Song-Chun Zhu2,3,4 , Tao Gao1 , Yixin Zhu2,3 , Siyuan Huang1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
3
Peking University 4 Tsinghua University
https://yixchen.github.io/YouRefIt
Abstract
We study the machine’s understanding of embodied reference: One agent uses both language and gesture to refer
to an object to another agent in a shared physical environment. Of note, this new visual task requires understanding
multimodal cues with perspective-taking to identify which
object is being referred to. To tackle this problem, we introduce YouRefIt, a new crowd-sourced dataset of embodied
reference collected in various physical scenes; the dataset
contains 4,195 unique reference clips in 432 indoor scenes.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first embodied reference dataset that allows us to study referring expressions
in daily physical scenes to understand referential behavior,
human communication, and human-robot interaction. We
further devise two benchmarks for image-based and videobased embodied reference understanding. Comprehensive
baselines and extensive experiments provide the very first
result of machine perception on how the referring expressions and gestures affect the embodied reference understanding. Our results provide essential evidence that gestural cues are as critical as language cues in understanding
the embodied reference.

1. Introduction
Human communication [51] relies heavily on establishing common ground [50, 48] by referring to objects in a
shared environment. This process usually takes place in
two forms: language (abstract symbolic code) and gesture
(unconventionalized and uncoded). In the computer vision
community, efforts of understanding reference have been
primarily devoted in the first form through an artificial task,
Referring Expression Comprehension (REF) [64, 17, 63,
32, 60, 56, 57], which localizes a particular object in an
image with a natural language expression generated by the
annotator. Evidently, the second form, gesture, has been
left almost untouched. Yet, this nonverbal (gesture) form is
more profound in the communication literature compared
to the pure verbal (language) form with ample evolutionary
evidence [1, 36, 14]; it is deeply rooted in human cognition
development [29, 30] and learning process [7], and tightly
coupled with the language development [23, 6, 18].




Figure 1: Imagine you walk into a bakery for your favorite. To precisely express your intent, you point to it and produce an utterance
“the white cheese in front of the bread.” This multimodal communicative act is produced by assuming it can be properly understood
by the staff, whose embodiment differs in the shared physical environment. Such a daily deictic-interaction scenario illustrates the
significance of visual perspective-taking in embodied reference.

Fundamentally, most modern literature deviates from the
natural setting of reference understanding in daily scenes,
which is embodied: An agent refers to an object to another
in a shared physical space [39, 54, 11], as exemplified by
Fig. 1. Embodied reference possesses two distinctive characteristics compared to REF. First, it is multimodal. People often use both natural language and gestures when referring to an object. The gestural component and language
component are semantically coherent and temporally synchronous to coordinate with one another, creating a concise
and vivid message [22] while elucidating the overloaded
meaning if only one modality is presented [20]. Second, recognizing embodied reference requires visual perspectivetaking [25, 2, 39], the awareness that others see things from
different viewpoints and the ability to imagine what others see from their perspectives. It requires both the message
sender and receiver to comprehend the immediate environments [11], including the relationship between the interlocutors and the relationships between objects, in the shared
perceptual fields for effective communication.
To address the deficiencies in prior work and study ref-

1385

