SemIE: Semantically-aware Image Extrapolation
Bholeshwar Khurana1,2 *
Aniruddha Mahapatra2
1

IIT Kanpur

Soumya Ranjan Dash1,2∗
Hrituraj Singh2,3
2

Adobe Research India

Abhishek Bhatia1,2∗
Kuldeep Kulkarni2
3

Triomics

{bkhurana, sodash, abbhatia, anmahapa, kulkulka}@adobe.com, hrituraj@triomics.in

Abstract
We propose a semantically-aware novel paradigm to perform image extrapolation that enables the addition of new
object instances. All previous methods are limited in their
capability of extrapolation to merely extending the already
existing objects in the image. However, our proposed approach focuses not only on (i) extending the already present
objects but also on (ii) adding new objects in the extended
region based on the context. To this end, for a given image, we first obtain an object segmentation map using a
state-of-the-art semantic segmentation method. The, thus,
obtained segmentation map is fed into a network to compute the extrapolated semantic segmentation and the corresponding panoptic segmentation maps. The input image
and the obtained segmentation maps are further utilized to
generate the final extrapolated image. We conduct experiments on Cityscapes and ADE20K-bedroom datasets and
show that our method outperforms all baselines in terms
of FID, and similarity in object co-occurrence statistics.
Project url: https://semie-iccv.github.io/

Figure 1. Illustration of our results. Dotted white rectangle refers
to the input image. Our method not only extrapolates the objects
present in the input but also generates new objects (blue bounding
boxes) while maintaining the texture consistency.

1. Introduction
Image extrapolation or out-painting refers to the problem
of extending an input image beyond its boundaries. While
the problem has applications in virtual reality, sharing photos on social media like Instagram, and even generating
scenes during game development especially if the scenes are
repetitive, it is relatively under-explored compared to the
image inpainting counterpart, which has been extensively
researched. Image inpainting solutions based on deep networks and generative adversarial networks (GANs), when
applied to the out-painting problem, have been shown to
yield poor results [36]. This has led to researchers exploring and proposing new solutions to the out-painting problem [47, 41, 38]. However, the solutions have been mainly
* BK, SRD, AB contributed to the work during their Adobe internship.

restricted to images that involve outdoor domains like natural scenes where the problem is limited to just extending the
existing textures for ‘stuff’ classes like mountains, water,
trees [11, 36] or single-object images of classes like faces,
flowers, and cars. These methods are not suitable to other
domains like traffic scenes and indoor scenes where a desirable image extrapolation necessitates 1) extending not only
the ‘stuff’ classes but also the ‘things’ classes like cars, persons, beds, tables that have very definite structure as well
as 2) adding new objects based on the context that were not
present in the original image. So, why cannot we use the
existing techniques [47, 41, 38, 36] for such domains? The
answer is they fail spectacularly by filling the extrapolated
region with artifacts (see figures 5 and 6). They attempt to
extrapolate the image by capturing the low-level statistics
like textures and colors from the input image while ignor-

14900

