GNeRF: GAN-based Neural Radiance Field without Posed Camera
Quan Meng1 Anpei Chen1 Haimin Luo1 Minye Wu1
Hao Su2 Lan Xu1 Xuming He1 Jingyi Yu1
1
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
School of Information Science and Technology,
2
ShanghaiTech University
University of California, San Diego
{mengquan,chenap,luohm,wumy,xulan1,hexm,yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

{haosu}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We introduce GNeRF, a framework to marry Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN) with Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) reconstruction for the complex scenarios with unknown and even randomly initialized camera poses. Recent
NeRF-based advances have gained popularity for remarkable realistic novel view synthesis. However, most of them
heavily rely on accurate camera poses estimation, while
few recent methods can only optimize the unknown camera
poses in roughly forward-facing scenes with relatively short
camera trajectories and require rough camera poses initialization. Differently, our GNeRF only utilizes randomly initialized poses for complex outside-in scenarios. We propose
a novel two-phases end-to-end framework. The first phase
takes the use of GANs into the new realm for optimizing
coarse camera poses and radiance fields jointly, while the
second phase refines them with additional photometric loss.
We overcome local minima using a hybrid and iterative optimization scheme. Extensive experiments on a variety of
synthetic and natural scenes demonstrate the effectiveness
of GNeRF. More impressively, our approach outperforms
the baselines favorably in those scenes with repeated patterns or even low textures that are regarded as extremely
challenging before.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D representations from multi-view 2D images is one of the core tasks in computer vision. Recently,
significant progress has been made with the emergence of
neural radiance fields methods (e.g., NeRF [31]), which represents a scene as a continuous 5D function and uses volume rendering to synthesize new views. Although NeRF
and its follow-ups [6, 26, 29, 53, 61] achieve an unprecedented level of fidelity on a range of challenging scenes,
most of these methods rely heavily on knowing the accurate

Figure 1. Our approach estimates both camera poses and neural
radiance fields using only randomly initialized poses in complex
scenarios, even in the extreme case when the input views are only
texture-less gray masks.

camera poses, which is yet a long-standing but challenging
task. The conventional camera pose estimation process suffers in challenging scenes with repeated patterns, varying
lighting, or few keypoints, and building on these methods
adds additional uncertainty to the NeRF training process.
To explore the possibilities of alleviating the dependence
on accurate camera pose information, recently, iNeRF [60]
and NeRF−− [55] attempt to optimize camera pose along
with other parameters when training NeRF. While certain
progress has been made, both of them can only optimize
camera poses when relatively short camera trajectories with
reasonable camera pose initialization are available. It is
worth noting that, NeRF−− is limited to roughly forwardfacing scenes, the focus of iNeRF is camera pose estimation
but not radiance field estimation, and it assumes a trained
NeRF which in turn requires known camera poses as supervision. When greater viewpoint uncertainty presents, camera poses estimation is extremely challenging and prone to
falling into local minima.

6351

