The Pursuit of Knowledge:
Discovering and Localizing Novel Categories using Dual Memory
Sai Saketh Rambhatla1
Rama Chellappa2
Abhinav Shrivastava1
1
2
University of Maryland, College Park
Johns Hopkins University
Abstract

Detection Training Set (VOC)

We tackle object category discovery, which is the problem of discovering and localizing novel objects in a large
unlabeled dataset. While existing methods show results
on datasets with less cluttered scenes and fewer object instances per image, we present our results on the challenging COCO dataset. Moreover, we argue that, rather than
discovering new categories from scratch, discovery algorithms can benefit from identifying what is already known
and focusing their attention on the unknown. We propose a
method that exploits prior knowledge about certain object
types to discover new categories by leveraging two memory modules, namely Working and Semantic memory. We
show the performance of our detector on the COCO minival dataset to demonstrate its in-the-wild capabilities.

…

1. Introduction
Unsupervised visual category discovery aims to automatically identify recurring “patterns,” which can be objects
or object parts, and consequently learn recognition models
to identify them from a large collection of unlabeled images with minimal human supervision. Such algorithms can
dramatically reduce annotation costs as they only need labels for already mined object clusters. Moreover, automatically discovering categories from unstructured data can help
mitigate the biases that occur when manually constructing
datasets by collecting images for a fixed-set of concepts.
Then, why is this setup not a mainstay in recognition?
A key issue is the lack of consistent task definition,
with two disparate families of approaches aiming to address unsupervised object discovery. The first set of approaches [1–4] reduces the problem to co-localization or cosegmentation, by only answering whether a pair of images
share the same object and then localizing them. The other
set of, arguably more generic, approaches [5–7] use clustering techniques to discover semantically similar regions
and can sometimes leverage prior knowledge. Because of
these different goals, each set defines evaluation protocols

Standard Detection Output on:
VOC

COCO
COCO

Our Discovery and Localization Output (COCO)

Training boxes for 20 VOC (known) classes
Detection boxes for 20 VOC (known) classes
Incorrect detection for known classes in
out-of-distribution COCO images

Proposed Framework and Benchmark
Discovered and localized examples of
unknown classes (from COCO). In this
illustration these correspond to (clockwise):
traffic-light, tie, umbrella, bear.

Figure 1: Motivation. A detector trained on 20 VOC (known) classes
struggles on out-of-distribution images (e.g., COCO) in the presence of
novel (unknown) objects (e.g., bear). Our discovery and localization framework builds on this detector and can reliably localize and group semantically meaningful “patterns” in images with both known and novel objects
in challenging images. Novel objects belonging to the same class are assigned the same bounding box color. Best viewed in color.

that are incompatible with others. The second issue that
limits the wide adoption of unsupervised discovery is the
scalability of contemporary approaches – most works use
small curated datasets and cannot scale to a realistic setup
with a large number of images, a large number of object
categories, and complex images (e.g., a large number of objects and categories per image). Finally, a desirable property of unsupervised discovery approaches, often lacking in
contemporary works, is online processing of new data as it
arrives. To address these issues, it is necessary to define
a standardized protocol (datasets and metrics), that more
closely reflect real-world requirements of a task like unsupervised object discovery.
Towards this, this paper proposes a large-scale benchmark for evaluating unsupervised object discovery approaches and a scalable never-ending discovery approach
that can deal with real-world complexities. Our approach is
loosely inspired by how humans learn – continuously, utilizing prior knowledge. Our benchmark is designed to evalu-

9153

