Perception-Aware Multi-Sensor Fusion for 3D LiDAR Semantic Segmentation
Zhuangwei Zhuang1,2 Rong Li1,2 Kui Jia1 Qicheng Wang3 Yuanqing Li2,1† Mingkui Tan1,2†
1
South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Lab 3 Shenzhen Youjia Innov Tech Co., Ltd
{z.zhuangwei, selirong}@mail.scut.edu.cn, wangqicheng@minieye.cc
{auyqli, kuijia, mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
3D LiDAR (light detection and ranging) semantic segmentation is important in scene understanding for many
0030
applications, such as auto-driving and robotics. For example, for autonomous cars equipped with RGB cameras
and LiDAR, it is crucial to fuse complementary information
from different sensors for robust and accurate segmentation.
Existing fusion-based methods, however, may not achieve
promising performance due to the vast difference between
the two modalities. In this work, we investigate a collaborative fusion scheme called perception-aware multi-sensor
fusion (PMF) to exploit perceptual information from two
modalities, namely, appearance information from RGB images and spatio-depth information from point clouds. To
this end, we first project point clouds to the camera coordinates to provide spatio-depth information for RGB images.
Then, we propose a two-stream network to extract features
from the two modalities, separately, and fuse the features
by effective residual-based fusion modules. Moreover, we
propose additional perception-aware losses to measure the
perceptual difference between the two modalities. Extensive
experiments on two benchmark data sets show the superiority of our method. For example, on nuScenes, our PMF
outperforms the state-of-the-art method by 0.8% in mIoU.

1. Introduction
Semantic scene understanding is a fundamental task for
many applications, such as auto-driving and robotics [16, 34,
47, 48]. Specifically, in the scenes of auto-driving, it provides fine-grained environmental information for high-level
motion planning and improves the safety of autonomous
cars [3, 18]. One of the important tasks in semantic scene
understanding is semantic segmentation, which assigns a
class label to each data point in the input data, and helps
autonomous cars to better understand the environment.
According to the sensors used by semantic segmenta-

(a) Input RGB Image

(b) Input Point Cloud

(c) Results of Spherical Projection

(d) Results of Perspective Projection

Figure 1. Comparisons of spherical projection [40, 54] and perspective projection. With spherical projection, most of the appearance
information from RGB images is lost. Instead, we preserve the
information of images with perspective projection. To distinguish
different classes, we colorize the point clouds using semantic labels
from SemanticKITTI.

tion methods, recent studies can be divided into three categories: camera-only methods [2, 9, 10, 35, 58], LiDARonly methods [1, 13, 26, 54, 62] and multi-sensor fusion
methods [30, 37, 39, 52, 59]. Camera-only methods have
achieved great progress with the help of a massive amount
of open-access data sets [6, 12, 14]. Since images obtained
by a camera are rich in appearance information (e.g., texture
and color), camera-only methods can provide fine-grained
and accurate semantic segmentation results. However, as
passive sensors, cameras are susceptible to changes in lighting conditions and are thus unreliable [50].1 To address
this problem, researchers conduct semantic segmentation on
point clouds from LiDAR. Compared with camera-only approaches, LiDAR-only methods are more robust to different
light conditions, as LiDAR provides reliable and accurate
spatio-depth information on the physical world. Unfortunately, LiDAR-only semantic segmentation is challenging
due to the sparse and irregular distribution of point clouds.

† Corresponding authors.

1 See Section 4.5 for more details.

16280

