Globally Optimal and Efficient Manhattan Frame Estimation
by Delimiting Rotation Search Space
Wuwei Ge2 , Yu Song ∗,1,2 , Baichao Zhang2 , and Zehua Dong2
1

Beijing Jiaotong University

Abstract
A typical man-made structure can be abstracted as the
Manhattan world assumption, in which notion is further
represented as a Manhattan Frame (MF) defined by three
orthogonal axes. The problem of MF estimation can be formulated as the solution of the rotation between the MF and
the camera frame (called the ”MF rotation”). However, the
whole rotation space is quite redundant for solving the MF
rotation, which is one of the main factors that disturb the
computational efficiency of those methods associated with
a rotation space search. This paper proves that the volume of the space that just contains all MF rotations (called
the ”MFR space”) is only 1 / 24 of that of the whole rotation space, and then an exact MFR space is delimited
from the rotation space. Searching in the delimited MFR
space, the MF estimation solved by a branch-and-bound
(BnB) framework guarantees stability and efficiency simultaneously. Furthermore, the general rotation problems associated with a rotation space search are solved more efficiently. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets have
successfully confirmed the validity of our approach.

1. Introduction
Most man-made environments generally exhibit particular regularity like parallelism and orthogonality, which can
be represented by a set of parallel and orthogonal structural lines. These structural forms are commonly abstracted
as Manhattan world (MW) [1] assumption that consists of
three mutually orthogonal directions corresponding to three
orthogonal vanishing points (VP) in image plane of camera. By virtue of its simplicity, MW assumption has been
successfully applied to many higher-level computer vision
tasks, such as calibration of camera parameters [2, 3], scene

2

Zongmu Tech, Beijing, China

understanding [7, 8, 9] and SLAM [10, 11, 12].
Since the introduction of the notion of Manhattan Frame
(MF) [20], which is defined by three orthogonal axes corresponding to the three directions of MW, a considerable
amount of work has been devoted to the stability and efficiency of MF estimation. However it is still challenging to
satisfy both of the two properties. By formulating the problem of MF estimation as the solution of the rotation between
the MF and the camera frame (called the ”MF rotation”),
state-of-the-art methods [15, 16] exhaustively search in the
whole rotation space to meet a globally optimal solution in
terms of maximizing the number of inliers. These methods
are robust and accurate enough to guarantee the stability,
but the computational efficiency is intractable for the time
critical applications, e.g., SLAM and navigation.
A remarkable fact is that the whole rotation space is quite
redundant for all MF rotations, which is one of the main factors that disturbs the computational efficiency of the parameter search-based methods (typically using a branch-andbound (BnB) framework [14]). The goal of this paper is
to delimit a special sub-space that just contains all MF rotations (hereinafter called the ”MFR space”). To achieve
this, we prove that the whole rotation space can be evenly
divided into 24 congruent MFR spaces, any of which just
contains all MF rotations. Within a delimited MFR space,
the MF estimation approach, e.g., BnB-based algorithm,
guarantees globally optimal solution satisfying both stability and efficiency. Moreover, based on the theory of rotation
space delimitation, the general rotation estimation problems
solved by the BnB-based algorithm associated with a rotation space search, e.g., the panorama stitching [15, 17, 35],
the estimation of camera pose [13, 26], the 3D registration
[15, 33, 34] and the tilt-pan camera calibration [4, 5, 6], can
be improved greatly. Overall, the main contributions of this
paper are summarized as follows:
• We prove the redundancy of search in whole rotation
space for the MF estimation. The volume of the MFR
space is only 1 / 24 of that of the whole rotation space

This research is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation
of China (Grant No. 61573053, 61673385).
∗ The corresponding author is Yu Song, songyu@bjtu.edu.cn.

15213

