DeepPanoContext: Panoramic 3D Scene Understanding with
Holistic Scene Context Graph and Relation-based Optimization
Cheng Zhang1 Zhaopeng Cui2 * Cai Chen1 Shuaicheng Liu1 * Bing Zeng1 Hujun Bao2 Yinda Zhang3 *
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University 3 Google

Abstract
Panorama images have a much larger field-of-view thus
naturally encode enriched scene context information compared to standard perspective images, which however is not
well exploited in the previous scene understanding methods.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for panoramic
3D scene understanding which recovers the 3D room layout and the shape, pose, position, and semantic category
for each object from a single full-view panorama image. In
order to fully utilize the rich context information, we design
a novel graph neural network based context model to predict the relationship among objects and room layout, and
a differentiable relationship-based optimization module to
optimize object arrangement with well-designed objective
functions on-the-fly. Realizing the existing data are either
with incomplete ground truth or overly-simplified scene, we
present a new synthetic dataset with good diversity in room
layout and furniture placement, and realistic image quality
for total panoramic 3D scene understanding. Experiments
demonstrate that our method outperforms existing methods
on panoramic scene understanding in terms of both geometry accuracy and object arrangement. Code is available at
https://chengzhag.github.io/publication/dpc.

1. Introduction
Image-based holistic 3D indoor scene understanding is
a long-lasting challenging problem in computer vision, due
to scene clutter and 3D ambiguity in perspective geometry.
Over decades, the scene context, which encodes high-order
relations across multiple objects following certain design
rules, has been widely utilized to improve the scene understanding [48, 5]. However, it is still arguable and unclear if
the top-down context is more or less important than bottomup local appearance-based approaches for the scene parsing task, especially with the rapidly emerging deep learning
methods that have achieved great success on object classification and detection. One possible reason could be that
* Corresponding author

Figure 1: From a single panorama image as input, our proposed pipeline estimates layout and object poses, then reconstructs the scene with object reconstruction, to achieve
total scene understanding.
the field of view of a standard camera photo is normally
less than 60◦ , and thus only limited context can be utilized
among a small number of objects co-existing in the image.
Zhang et al. [48] proposed a 3D scene parsing method that
takes a 360◦ full-view panorama as the input, where almost
all major objects are visible. They showed that the context became significantly stronger with more objects in the
same image, which enables accurate 3D scene understanding even with less engineered local features.
In this paper, we empower the panoramic scene understanding task with stronger 3D perception capability and
aim to predict the objects’ shapes, 3D poses, and semantic categories as well as the room layout by taking a single
color full-view panorama image as the input. To fulfill this
goal, we propose a novel deep learning based framework
that leverages both local image information and global context for panoramic 3D scene understanding. Specifically,
we first extract room layout and object hypothesis from
local image regions with the algorithms customized for
panorama images, and rely on a global graph-based context
model to effectively refine the initial estimations. Overall,
our method achieves phenomenal performance on both geometry accuracy and object arrangement for 3D panoramic
scene understanding.
Besides renovating the predecessor [48] with a more advanced deep learning algorithm, the key to the significant

12632

