HIRE-SNN: Harnessing the Inherent Robustness of Energy-Efficient
Deep Spiking Neural Networks by Training with Crafted Input Noise
Souvik Kundu, Massoud Pedram, Peter A. Beerel
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
{souvikku, pedram, pabeerel}@usc.edu

Abstract
Low-latency deep spiking neural networks (SNNs) have
become a promising alternative to conventional artificial
neural networks (ANNs) because of their potential for increased energy efficiency on event-driven neuromorphic
hardware.Neural networks, including SNNs, however, are
subject to various adversarial attacks and must be trained
to remain resilient against such attacks for many applications. Nevertheless, due to prohibitively high training
costs associated with SNNs, an analysis and optimization
of deep SNNs under various adversarial attacks have been
largely overlooked. In this paper, we first present a detailed analysis of the inherent robustness of low-latency
SNNs against popular gradient-based attacks, namely fast
gradient sign method (FGSM) and projected gradient descent (PGD). Motivated by this analysis, to harness the
model’s robustness against these attacks we present an SNN
training algorithm that uses crafted input noise and incurs no additional training time. To evaluate the merits of our algorithm, we conducted extensive experiments
with variants of VGG and ResNet on both CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100 dataset. Compared to standard trained directinput SNNs, our trained models yield improved classification accuracy of up to 13.7% and 10.1% on FGSM and
PGD attack generated images, respectively, with negligible loss in clean image accuracy. Our models also outperform inherently-robust SNNs trained on rate-coded inputs with improved or similar classification performance
on attack-generated images while having up to 25× and
∼4.6× lower latency and computation energy, respectively.
For reproducibility, we have open-sourced the code at
github.com/ksouvik52/hiresnn2021.

1. Introduction
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) have become enormously successful in various computer vision applications
[36, 10, 31, 37, 19]. However, as these applications are
often part of safety-critical and trusted systems, concerns
about their vulnerability to adversarial attacks have grown

Figure 1. (a) Direct and rate-coded input variants of the original
image. (b) Layer wise average spikes for VGG11. (c) Performance
of direct-input VGG11 SNN and its equivalent ANN under various
white-box (WB) and black-box (BB) attacks on CIFAR-100.

rapidly. In particular, well crafted adversarial images with
small, often unnoticeable perturbations can fool a well
trained ANN to make incorrect and possibly dangerous decisions [25, 1, 39], despite their otherwise impressive performance on clean images. To improve the model performance of ANNs against attacks, training with various adversarially generated images [22, 17] has proven to be very
effective. Few other prior art references [40, 33] have applied noisy inputs to train robust models. However, all these
training schemes incur non-negligible clean image accuracy
drop and require significant additional training time.
Brain-inspired [23] deep spiking neural networks
(SNNs) have also gained significant traction due to their
potential for lowering the required power consumption of
machine learning applications [13, 28]. The underlying
SNN hardware can use binary spike-based sparse processing via accumulate (AC) operations over a fixed number
of time steps1 T which consume much lower power than
the traditional energy-hungry multiply-accumulate (MAC)
operations that dominate ANNs [8]. Recent advances in
SNN training by using approximate gradient [2] and hybrid
direct-input-coded ANN-SNN training with joint threshold,
leak, and weight optimization [29] have improved the SNN
1 Here, a time step is the unit of time taken by each input image to be
processed through all layers of the model.

5209

