Meta-Learning with Task-Adaptive Loss Function for Few-Shot Learning
Sungyong Baik1 Janghoon Choi1 Heewon Kim1 Dohee Cho1 Jaesik Min2 Kyoung Mu Lee1
1
1

ASRI, Department of ECE, Seoul National University

{dsybaik, ultio791, ghimhw, jdh12245, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

2

Hyundai Motor Group
2

jaesik.min@hyundai.com

Abstract
In few-shot learning scenarios, the challenge is to generalize and perform well on new unseen examples when
only very few labeled examples are available for each
task. Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) has gained
the popularity as one of the representative few-shot learning methods for its flexibility and applicability to diverse
problems. However, MAML and its variants often resort to
a simple loss function without any auxiliary loss function
or regularization terms that can help achieve better generalization. The problem lies in that each application and
task may require different auxiliary loss function, especially
when tasks are diverse and distinct. Instead of attempting
to hand-design an auxiliary loss function for each application and task, we introduce a new meta-learning framework
with a loss function that adapts to each task. Our proposed
framework, named Meta-Learning with Task-Adaptive Loss
Function (MeTAL), demonstrates the effectiveness and the
flexibility across various domains, such as few-shot classification and few-shot regression.

1. Introduction
Training deep neural networks entails a tremendous
amount of labeled data and the corresponding efforts, which
hinder the prompt application to new domains. As such,
there has been growing interests in few-shot learning, in
which the goal is to imbue the artificial intelligence systems
with the capability of learning new concepts, given only few
labeled examples (e.g. support examples). The core challenge in few-shot learning is to alleviate the susceptibility of
deep neural networks to overfitting under few-data regime
and achieve generalization on new examples (e.g. query examples).
Recently, meta-learning [34, 40], a.k.a. learning-tolearn, has emerged as one of the prominent methods for
few-shot learning. Meta-learning is used in the field of
few-shot learning to learn a learning framework that can
adapt to novel tasks and generalize under few-data regime.

Figure 1. Overview of inner-loop optimization in optimizationbased meta-learning frameworks. (a) Conventional approaches,
such as MAML [10], utilize a fixed given classical loss function (e.g. cross entropy for classification) during adaptation to a
task. (b) Our proposed scheme, MeTAL, instead meta-learns a
loss function whose parameters ϕ are made adaptive to the current
task state τ at the j-th step of adaptation to the i-th task.

Among the meta-learning algorithms, optimization-based
meta-learning has enjoyed the attention from different domains for its flexibility that enables application across diverse domains. Optimization-based meta-learning algorithms are often formulated as bi-level optimization [10,
25, 29]. In such formulation, an outer-loop optimization
trains a learning algorithm to achieve generalization while
an inner-loop optimization uses the learning algorithm to
adapt a base learner to a new task with few examples.
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) [10], one of the
seminal optimization-based meta-learning methods, learns
an initial set of values of network weights to achieve generalization. The learned initialization serves as a good
starting point for adapting to new tasks with few examples and few updates. Although the learned initialization is

9465

