Towers of Babel: Combining Images, Language, and 3D Geometry for
Learning Multimodal Vision
Xiaoshi Wu1∗
1

Hadar Averbuch-Elor2∗

Tsinghua University

2

Jin Sun2

Noah Snavely2

Cornell Tech, Cornell University

Figure 1: Our WikiScenes dataset combines 3D reconstructions, images, and language descriptions for dozens of landmarks, like the
Barcelona and Reims Cathedrals pictured above. WikiScenes enables new tasks that combine different modalities, such as associating
semantic concepts like “portal”, “facade”, and “tower” (colored in pink, blue and brown, respectively) with 3D structure across all cathedrals.

Abstract
The abundance and richness of Internet photos of landmarks and cities has led to significant progress in 3D vision over the past two decades, including automated 3D
reconstructions of the world’s landmarks from tourist photos.
However, a major source of information available for these
3D-augmented collections—namely language, e.g., from image captions—has been virtually untapped. In this work, we
present WikiScenes, a new, large-scale dataset of landmark
photo collections that contains descriptive text in the form
of captions and hierarchical category names. WikiScenes
forms a new testbed for multimodal reasoning involving images, text, and 3D geometry. We demonstrate the utility
of WikiScenes for learning semantic concepts over images
and 3D models. Our weakly-supervised framework connects
images, 3D structure, and semantics—utilizing the strong

constraints provided by 3D geometry—to associate semantic
concepts to image pixels and 3D points.1

1. Introduction
Internet photos capturing tourist landmarks around the
world have driven research in 3D computer vision for over a
decade [43, 18, 16, 2, 40, 30]. Diverse photo collections of
landmarks are unified by the underlying 3D scene geometry,
despite the fact that a scene can look dramatically different
from one image to the next due to varying illumination, alternating seasons, or special events. This geometric anchoring
can be exploited when learning a range of geometry-related
vision tasks, such as novel view synthesis [31, 26], singleview depth prediction [25], and relighting [51, 50], that require large amounts of diverse training data. However, prior
work on tourist photos of landmarks has focused almost
exclusively on lower-level reconstruction tasks, and not on

∗ : indicates equal contribution.

1 https://www.cs.cornell.edu/projects/babel/

428

