Adaptive Curriculum Learning
Yajing Kong1 , Liu Liu1 , Jun Wang2 , Dacheng Tao3,1 ,
1
The University of Sydney, Australia, 2 City University of Hong Kong, China, 3 JD Explore Academy, China
ykon9947@uni.sydney.edu.au, liuliu1@sydney.edu.au, jwang.cs@cityu.edu.hk, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Inspired by the human learning principle that learning
easier concepts first and then gradually paying more attention to harder ones, curriculum learning uses the nonuniform sampling of mini-batches according to the order of
examples’ difficulty. Just as a teacher adjusts the curriculum according to the learning progress of each student, a
proper curriculum should be adapted to the current state
of the model. Therefore, in contrast to recent works using a fixed curriculum, we devise a new curriculum learning method, Adaptive Curriculum Learning (Adaptive CL),
adapting the difficulty of examples to the current state of the
model. Specifically, we make use of the loss of the current
model to adjust the difficulty score while retaining previous useful learned knowledge by KL divergence. Moreover,
under a non-linear model and binary classification, we theoretically prove that the expected convergence rate of curriculum learning monotonically decreases with respect to
the loss of a point regarding the optimal hypothesis, and
monotonically increases with respect to the loss of a point
regarding the current hypothesis. The analyses indicate that
Adaptive CL could improve the convergence properties during the early stages of learning. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach
over existing competitive curriculum learning methods.

1. Introduction
In human education, a teacher arranges the learning materials in the order of increasing difficulty, such that students
can learn more complex concepts faster after gaining sufficient basic and easy knowledge [8,24]. Curriculum learning
(CL), inspired by the teaching strategy, learns by starting
with easy examples and then gradually putting more weight
on harder ones [2].
Learning with a proper curriculum can benefit the generalizability and convergence [2, 46]. However, a good curriculum is not always easy to develop, as it must address
the key question of how to measure the difficulty of each
example. Various methods have tried to address the ques-

Fixed

Random
Sequence

Update

Sorted Data
FCL

Fixed
Score
Initialize

Adaptive
CL

Sorted Data

Score

Current State
Easy

Hard

Figure 1. Comparison of fixed curriculum learning (FCL) [11] and
our method (Adaptive CL). Different from FCL that uses a fixed
difficulty score to determine the order of data, our method uses an
adaptive difficulty score that is adjusted by the current state of the
model during training. The bottom line shows sorted data that are
gradually updated based on the Adaptive CL algorithm.

tion. For example, self-paced learning (SPL) [19] favored
training examples with smaller current losses and selected
the easy examples by solving a biconvex optimization problem. Different from SPL, [11, 27, 46] obtained the difficulty
score, i.e., the measurement of difficulty, by transfer learning or bootstrapping before training, and used the score to
determine a fixed curriculum. However, using a fixed curriculum ignores the fact that a proper curriculum should be
adjusted according to the learning progress of every example, just as students learn better if the teacher can adjust the
curriculum according to the progress of every student.
Our work is inspired by the excellent work of [11], but
does not depend on a fixed curriculum. We propose a simple but effective curriculum learning approach that takes the
feedback of the current state of the model into account. As
shown in Figure 1, the proposed method can gradually adapt
the order of examples from easy to hard. In particular, we
use the difficulty score to measure the difficulty of examples and regard the examples with lower scores as easier examples. We first obtain the initial (pseudo-ideal) difficulty

5067

