Wanderlust: Online Continual Object Detection in the Real World
Jianren Wang1
1

Xin Wang2

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Yue Shang-Guan3

Microsoft Research

3

Abhinav Gupta1

University of Texas, Austin

Figure 1: Wanderlust: Imagine an embodied agent is walking on the street. It may observe new classes and old classes
simultaneously. The agent needs to learn fast given only a few samples (red) and recognize the subsequent instances of the
class once a label has been provided (green). In this work, we introduce a new online continual object detection benchmark
through the eyes of a graduate student to continuously learn emerging tasks in changing environments.

Abstract
Online continual learning from data streams in dynamic
environments is a critical direction in the computer vision
field. However, realistic benchmarks and fundamental studies in this line are still missing. To bridge the gap, we
present a new online continual object detection benchmark
with an egocentric video dataset, Objects Around Krishna
(OAK). OAK adopts the KrishnaCAM videos, an ego-centric
video stream collected over nine months by a graduate student. OAK provides exhaustive bounding box annotations of
80 video snippets (∼17.5 hours) for 105 object categories
in outdoor scenes. The emergence of new object categories
in our benchmark follows a pattern similar to what a single person might see in their day-to-day life. The dataset
also captures the natural distribution shifts as the person
travels to different places. These egocentric long running
videos provide a realistic playground for continual learning algorithms, especially in online embodied settings. We
also introduce new evaluation metrics to evaluate the model
performance and catastrophic forgetting and provide baseline studies for online continual object detection. We believe
this benchmark will pose new exciting challenges for learning from non-stationary data in continual learning. The
OAK dataset and the associated benchmark are released at
https://oakdata.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Modern object detectors have made substantial progress
on internet images [5, 16, 37]. Nevertheless, challenges remain when detecting small objects [7], scaling to a large
number of categories [15] or learning from only a few labeled examples [19, 44]. The detector often degenerates
significantly when deployed on robots or ego-centric videos
in an embodied environment [8].
If we take a closer look at the typical learning setup, most
of the advances in object detection have been realized using
static images in an offline learning setup. In this setup, the
data is labeled with a fixed set of categories and divided into
two parts: training and testing. There is a training phase
where the detectors are learned by randomly shuffling and
feeding the training data for hundreds of epochs, followed
by an evaluation on the test set. However, this offline training and evaluation setup often does not reflect how humans
or embodied AI agents learn.
Unlike the current static offline settings, humans receive
a continuous temporal stream of visual data and train and
test the model on the same visual data, which is an online
continual setting. The categories of interest are unknown
beforehand. The model needs to learn new object categories
when objects belonging to previously unseen categories appear. Most of the learning happens online; we cannot use
the training data repeatedly across hundreds of epochs.
A side effect of this online continual learning setting is
10829

