CSG-Stump: A Learning Friendly CSG-Like Representation
for Interpretable Shape Parsing
Daxuan Ren1,2 Jianmin Zheng1,† Jianfei Cai3 Jiatong Li1,2 Haiyong Jiang5
Zhongang Cai2,4 Junzhe Zhang2,4 Liang Pan4 Mingyuan Zhang2,4 Haiyu Zhao2 Shuai Yi2
1
Nanyang Technological University (NTU) 2 SenseTime Research 3 Monash University
4
S-Lab, NTU 5 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{daxuan001, asjmzheng, E180176, haiyong.jiang, junzhe001, liang.pan}@ntu.edu.sg
{zhangmingyuan, caizhongang, zhaohaiyu, yishuai}@sensetime.com jianfei.cai@monash.edu

Abstract
Generating an interpretable and compact representation
of 3D shapes from point clouds is an important and challenging problem. This paper presents CSG-Stump Net, an
unsupervised end-to-end network for learning shapes from
point clouds and discovering the underlying constituent
modeling primitives and operations as well. At the core
is a three-level structure called CSG-Stump, consisting of
a complement layer at the bottom, an intersection layer in
the middle, and a union layer at the top. CSG-Stump is
proven to be equivalent to CSG in terms of representation,
therefore inheriting the interpretable, compact and editable
nature of CSG while freeing from CSG’s complex tree structures. Particularly, the CSG-Stump has a simple and regular structure, allowing neural networks to give outputs of a
constant dimensionality, which makes itself deep-learning
friendly. Due to these characteristics of CSG-Stump, CSGStump Net achieves superior results compared to previous
CSG-based methods and generates much more appealing
shapes, as confirmed by extensive experiments.

1. Introduction
Shape is a geometric form, which helps us understand
objects, surrounding environments and even the world.
Therefore shape modeling and understanding has always
been a research topic in computer vision and graphics. Various representations have been developed for 3D shapes. Examples are point clouds [23, 24, 35, 30], 3D voxels [34], implicit fields [16, 19, 5, 10, 4, 26, 17], meshes [9, 1, 32, 22,
36], and parametric representations [28, 11]. With the adProject Page: https://kimren227.github.io/projects/CSGStump/
† Indicates corresponding author
The work is partially supported by a joint WASP/NTU project
(04INS000440C130).

Figure 1. A CAD model (a) can be represented as either a CSG
representation (b) or a CSG-Stump representation (c). CSG-Stump
is equivalent to CSG but frees from CSG’s irregular tree structure.
Thus CSG-Stump is more friendly to optimization formulation and
network designs. Here nodes “I”, “U”, “D”, and “C” denote intersection, union, difference, and (shape) complement, respectively.

vance in 3D acquisition technologies, point clouds are easily generated, but they are a set of unstructured points and
lack explicit high-level structure and semantic information.
There is a great demand for converting point clouds to highlevel shape representations that help recognize and understand the shapes, supporting the designer to re-create new
products and facilitate various applications such as building

12478

