Bayesian Deep Basis Fitting for Depth Completion with Uncertainty
Chao Qu

Wenxin Liu
Camillo J. Taylor
University of Pennsylvania

Depth Pred. Depth GT
Uncert.

In this work we investigate the problem of uncertainty
estimation for image-guided depth completion. We extend
Deep Basis Fitting (DBF) [54] for depth completion within
a Bayesian evidence framework to provide calibrated perpixel variance. The DBF approach frames the depth completion problem in terms of a network that produces a set
of low-dimensional depth bases and a differentiable least
squares fitting module that computes the basis weights using
the sparse depths. By adopting a Bayesian treatment, our
Bayesian Deep Basis Fitting (BDBF) approach is able to
1) predict high-quality uncertainty estimates and 2) enable
depth completion with few or no sparse measurements. We
conduct controlled experiments to compare BDBF against
commonly used techniques for uncertainty estimation under
various scenarios. Results show that our method produces
better uncertainty estimates with accurate depth prediction.

Pred. Error

Abstract

Image

{quchao, wenxinl, cjtaylor}@seas.upenn.edu

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Qualitative results of our method, Bayesian Deep
Basis Fitting (BDBF), which outputs uncertainty estimates
with depth completion.

As we seek to incorporate learned modules in safety critical applications such as autonomous driving, reliable uncertainty estimation becomes as critical as prediction accuracy [59]. Depth completion is one such task where wellcalibrated uncertainty estimates can help to enable robust
machine perception. Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) are commonly used to solve structured regression
problems like depth prediction due to their strong expressive power and inductive bias [12]. However, in its native
form, a CNN only produces a point estimate, which offers few insights into whether or where its output should
be trusted. Many probabilistic deep learning methods have
been proposed to address this issue [44, 17], but they often
fail to output calibrated uncertainty [23] or become susceptible to distributional shift [50]. Moreover, these methods
can be expensive to compute due to the need for test time
sampling [18] or inference over multiple models [36].
In this work, we propose a method for depth completion
with uncertainty estimation that avoids the above limita-

tions. Our approach builds on the idea of Deep Basis Fitting
(DBF) [54]. DBF replaces the last layer of a depth completion network with a set of data-dependent weights. These
weights are computed by a differentiable least squares fitting module between the penultimate features and the sparse
depths. The network can also be seen as an adaptive basis
function which explicitly models scene structure on a lowdimensional manifold [4, 60]. It can be used as a replacement to the final layer (with no change to the rest of the
network or training scheme), which greatly improves depth
completion performance.
We extend DBF by formulating it within a Bayesian evidence framework [3]. This is done by placing a prior distribution on the DBF weights and marginalizing it out during
inference. Such last-layer probabilistic approach have been
shown to be reasonable approximations to full Bayesian
Neural Networks [34], while providing the advantage of
tractable inference [48]. This is conceptually similar to

16147

