AdaMML: Adaptive Multi-Modal Learning for Efficient Video Recognition
Rameswar Panda1,† , Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen1,† , Quanfu Fan1 , Ximeng Sun2 ,
Kate Saenko1,2 , Aude Oliva1,3 , Rogerio Feris1
†: Equal Contribution
1
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 2 Boston University, 3 MIT

Abstract
Multi-modal learning, which focuses on utilizing various modalities to improve the performance of a model, is
widely used in video recognition. While traditional multimodal learning offers excellent recognition results, its computational expense limits its impact for many real-world
applications. In this paper, we propose an adaptive multimodal learning framework, called AdaMML, that selects
on-the-fly the optimal modalities for each segment conditioned on the input for efficient video recognition. Specifically, given a video segment, a multi-modal policy network is used to decide what modalities should be used for
processing by the recognition model, with the goal of improving both accuracy and efficiency. We efficiently train
the policy network jointly with the recognition model using standard back-propagation. Extensive experiments on
four challenging diverse datasets demonstrate that our proposed adaptive approach yields 35% − 55% reduction in
computation when compared to the traditional baseline
that simply uses all the modalities irrespective of the input, while also achieving consistent improvements in accuracy over the state-of-the-art methods. Project page:
https://rpand002.github.io/adamml.html.

1. Introduction
Videos are rich in multiple modalities: RGB frames, motion (optical flow), and audio. As a result, multi-modal
learning which focuses on utilizing various modalities to
improve the performance of a video recognition model, has
attracted much attention in the recent years. Despite encouraging progress, multi-modal learning becomes computationally impractical in real-world scenarios where the
videos are untrimmed and span several minutes or even
hours. Given a long video, some modalities often provide
irrelevant/redundant information for the recognition of the
action class. Thus, utilizing information from all the input
modalities may be counterproductive as informative modalities are often overwhelmed by uninformative ones in long
videos. Furthermore, some modalities require more compu-

tation than others and hence selecting the cheaper modality
with good performance can significantly save computation
leading to more efficient video recognition.
Let us consider the video in Figure 1, represented by eight
uniformly sampled video segments from a video. We ask,
Do all the segments require both RGB and audio stream to
recognize the action as “Mowing the Lawn” in this video?
The answer is clear: No, the lawn mower is moving with
relevant audio only in the third and sixth segment, therefore
we need both RGB and audio streams for these two video
segments to improve the model confidence for recognizing
the correct action, while the rest of the segments can be
processed with only one modality or even skipped (e.g., the
first and last video segment) without losing any accuracy,
resulting in large computational savings compared to processing all the segments using both modalities. Thus, in
contrast to the commonly used one-size-fits-all scheme for
multi-modal learning, we would like these decisions to be
made individually per input segment, leading to different
amounts of computation for different videos. Based on this
intuition, we present a new perspective for efficient video
recognition by adaptively selecting input modalities, on a
per segment basis, for recognizing complex actions.
In this paper, we propose AdaMML, a novel and differentiable approach to learn a decision policy that selects optimal
modalities conditioned on the inputs for efficient video recognition. Specifically, our main idea is to learn a model (referred to as the multi-modal policy network) that outputs the
posterior probabilities of all the binary decisions for using or
skipping each modality on a per segment basis. As these decision functions are discrete and non-differentiable, we rely
on an efficient Gumbel-Softmax sampling approach [23]
to learn the decision policy jointly with the network parameters through standard back-propagation, without resorting to complex reinforcement learning as in [60, 61]. We
design the objective function to achieve both competitive
performance and efficiency required for video recognition.
We demonstrate that adaptively selecting input modalities
by a lightweight policy network yields not only significant
savings in computation (e.g., about 47.3% and 35.2% less

7576

