Improve Unsupervised Pretraining for Few-label Transfer
Suichan Li1, ,* Dongdong Chen2,∗,† , Yinpeng Chen2 , Lu Yuan2 , Lei Zhang2 , Qi Chu1 , Bin Liu1 , Nenghai Yu1 ,
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Research
{lsc1230@mail., qchu@, flowice@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn, cddlyf@gmail.com,
{ yiche, luyuan, leizhang}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Unsupervised pretraining has achieved great success
and many recent works have shown unsupervised pretraining can achieve comparable or even slightly better transfer
performance than supervised pretraining on downstream
target datasets. But in this paper, we find this conclusion
may not hold when the target dataset has very few labeled
samples for finetuning, i.e., few-label transfer. We analyze
the possible reason from the clustering perspective: 1) The
clustering quality of target samples is of great importance
to few-label transfer; 2) Though contrastive learning is essential to learn how to cluster, its clustering quality is still
inferior to supervised pretraining due to lack of label supervision. Based on the analysis, we interestingly discover that
only involving some unlabeled target domain into the unsupervised pretraining can improve the clustering quality,
subsequently reducing the transfer performance gap with
supervised pretraining. This finding also motivates us to
propose a new progressive few-label transfer algorithm for
real applications, which aims to maximize the transfer performance under a limited annotation budget. To support our
analysis and proposed method, we conduct extensive experiments on nine different target datasets. Experimental results show our proposed method can significantly boost the
few-label transfer performance of unsupervised pretraining.

1. Introduction
Model pretraining plays a key role for deep transfer
learning. By pretraining the model on a large auxiliary
source dataset and then fine-tuning on the small-scale target dataset, it can achieve better performance than the trainfrom-scratch counterpart. The recent work BiT [25] has
shown that supervised pretraining on large scale source
dataset can achieve very strong transfer performance. Despite the great success of supervised pretraining, a large
amount of labeled source data is required. Recently, unsupervised pretraining [20, 7, 18, 6, 8, 19] has achieved great
* Equal contribution, † Dongdong Chen is the corresponding author

Figure 1: t-SNE visualization of features on Pet [30] by using different models: (a) unsupervised pretrained model, (b)supervised
pretrained model, (c) target-aware unsupervised pretrained(TUP)
model, (d) finetuned TUP model by using a few labeled samples.

progress. By directly pretraining on the larger-scale unlabeled data (e.g., ImageNet), many state-of-the-art (SOTA)
unsupervised learning works [7, 18, 19, 6] demonstrate that
unsupervised pretraining can achieve comparable or even
slightly better transfer performance than supervised pretraining on many downstream target datasets.
In this paper, we ask the question “does unsupervised pretraining really achieves comparable transfer performance as supervised pretraining?”. And we empirically
find the answer is “no” when the downstream target dataset
has limited label samples for finetuning, i.e., “few-label
transfer”. We seek to investigate the underlying reason
from the clustering perspective. We hypothesize that the
clustering of target samples in the feature space is of great
importance for few-label transfer and unsupervised pretraining has worse clustering quality than supervised pretraining. Intuitively, if the pretrained representation has a
very good clustering in the target space, it will only need
very few labels to learn a good classifier boundary. To verify our hypothesis, we compare the clustering quality of un-

10201

