Unsupervised Layered Image Decomposition into Object Prototypes
Tom Monnier1 Elliot Vincent1,2 Jean Ponce2 Mathieu Aubry1
1
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
2
Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, Paris, France
imagine.enpc.fr/˜monniert/DTI-Sprites
Abstract
We present an unsupervised learning framework for decomposing images into layers of automatically discovered
object models. Contrary to recent approaches that model image layers with autoencoder networks, we represent them as
explicit transformations of a small set of prototypical images.
Our model has three main components: (i) a set of object prototypes in the form of learnable images with a transparency
channel, which we refer to as sprites; (ii) differentiable parametric functions predicting occlusions and transformation
parameters necessary to instantiate the sprites in a given
image; (iii) a layered image formation model with occlusion for compositing these instances into complete images
including background. By jointly learning the sprites and
occlusion/transformation predictors to reconstruct images,
our approach not only yields accurate layered image decompositions, but also identifies object categories and instance
parameters. We first validate our approach by providing
results on par with the state of the art on standard multiobject synthetic benchmarks (Tetrominoes, Multi-dSprites,
CLEVR6). We then demonstrate the applicability of our
model to real images in tasks that include clustering (SVHN,
GTSRB), cosegmentation (Weizmann Horse) and object discovery from unfiltered social network images. To the best
of our knowledge, our approach is the first layered image
decomposition algorithm that learns an explicit and shared
concept of object type, and is robust enough to be applied to
real images.

Figure 1: Our approach learns without supervision to decompose images into layers modeled as transformed instances of
prototypical objects called sprites. We show an example of
decomposition on CLEVR [30] (top) and examples of discovered sprites for Tetrominoes [21] and GTSRB [60] (bottom).
Transparency is visualized using light gray checkerboards.

1. Introduction
The aim of this paper is to learn without any supervision
a layered decomposition of images, where each layer is a
transformed instance of a prototypical object. Such an interpretable and layered model of images could be beneficial for
a plethora of applications like object discovery [16, 6], image
edition [72, 21], future frame prediction [71], object pose
estimation [53] or environment abstraction [1, 44]. Recent
works in this direction [6, 21, 46] typically learn layered im-

age decompositions by generating layers with autoencoder
networks. In contrast, we explicitly model them as transformations of a set of prototypical images with transparency,
which we refer to as sprites. These sprites are mapped onto
their instances through geometric and colorimetric transformations resulting in what we call object layers. An image is
then assembled from ordered object layers so that each layer
occludes previous ones in regions where they overlap.

8640

