Exploration and Estimation for Model Compression
Yanfu Zhang1∗ , Shangqian Gao1∗ , Heng Huang1,2
1
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, 2 JD Explore Academy
yaz91@pitt.edu, shg84@pitt.edu, henghuanghh@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks achieve great success in many visual recognition tasks. However, the model deployment is
usually subject to some computational resources. Model
pruning under computational budget has attracted growing
attention. In this paper, we focus on the discriminationaware compression of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). In prior arts, directly searching the optimal subnetwork is an integer programming problem, which is nonsmooth, non-convex, and NP-hard. Meanwhile, the heuristic pruning criterion lacks clear interpretability and doesn’t
generalize well in applications. To address this problem,
we formulate sub-networks as samples from a multivariate Bernoulli distribution and resort to the approximation
of continuous problem. We propose a new flexible search
scheme via alternating exploration and estimation. In the
exploration step, we employ stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo with budget-awareness to generate subnetworks, which allows large search space with efficient
computation. In the estimation step, we deduce the subnetwork sampler to a near-optimal point, to promote the
generation of high-quality sub-networks. Unifying the exploration and estimation, our approach avoids early falling
into local minimum via a fast gradient-based search in a
larger space. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performances on pruning several popular CNNs.

1. Introduction
With the advance of high-performance GPUs, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) achieve great success in
computer vision tasks [20, 38, 39]. Via exploiting deeper
structure and over-parameterization, modern CNNs have
strong generalization abilities. However, the complexity
of CNNs is also growing, both in the computational cost
and the size of model parameters. These requirements re∗ Equal contributions. This work was partially supported by NSF IIS
1845666, 1852606, 1838627, 1837956, 1956002, IIA 2040588.

strict the deployment of modern CNNs to resource-sensitive
platforms, such as mobile devices and low-end facilities.
Another severe issue also arises for mobile devices, as the
computational burden typically leads to high energy costs,
which depletes the battery quickly. To address these problems, pruning weights or structures [13, 23] from computational heavy models is an effective solution.
Among existing methods, structural pruning, particularly channel pruning, is an efficient scheme since postprocessing is not necessary. Although various effective
methods are proposed to target this problem, these methods still suffer from several problems. In some works, the
pruned networks are obtained via solving the relaxation of
the integer optimization. However, bias may be introduced
into the reduced pruning criterion due to the small but ineluctable impacts of certain channels. Importance sampling [27, 30] attempts to estimate the global or relative importance of neurons, but the performance is heavily affected
by the priors. Recently, discrimination power [46, 10] is
used as an effective criterion for channel pruning. Nevertheless, the intra-neuron relation is delicate and difficult to
deal with.
To address these problems, we propose a new continuous
formulation for the pruning problem of pretrained deep convolutional networks, which can be solved via alternating exploration and estimation. We characterize the sub-network
space with an interpretable probabilistic model, that shares
the same optimum with the naive formulation and avoids
the ambiguity of non-integer values and the potential bias in
naive relaxation methods. Instead of directly searching the
optimal sub-networks, we compute the parameter to generate high-quality sub-networks via alternating exploration
and estimation. More specifically, in the exploration step,
we sample sub-networks from the temporary distribution
by virtue of stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
(SGHMC), which can explore more sub-networks and avoid
falling into sub-optimal areas encoded by the temporary distribution. Of note, the exploration is gradient-based and
computationally efficient, particularly for high-dimension
parameter space. In the estimation step, we compute the optimal distribution that generates high-quality sub-networks,

487

