MGSampler: An Explainable Sampling Strategy for Video Action Recognition
Yuan Zhi Zhan Tong Limin WangB Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{yuanzhi,tongzhan}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {lmwang,gswu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Frame sampling is a fundamental problem in video action recognition due to the essential redundancy in time
and limited computation resources. The existing sampling
strategy often employs a fixed frame selection and lacks
the flexibility to deal with complex variations in videos.
In this paper, we present a simple, sparse, and explainable frame sampler, termed as Motion-Guided Sampler
(MGSampler). Our basic motivation is that motion is an
important and universal signal that can drive us to adaptively select frames from videos. Accordingly, we propose
two important properties in our MGSampler design: motion sensitive and motion uniform. First, we present two
different motion representations to enable us to efficiently
distinguish the motion-salient frames from the background.
Then, we devise a motion-uniform sampling strategy based
on the cumulative motion distribution to ensure the sampled frames evenly cover all the important segments with
high motion salience. Our MGSampler yields a new principled and holistic sampling scheme, that could be incorporated into any existing video architecture. Experiments on five benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of
our MGSampler over the previous fixed sampling strategies, and its generalization power across different backbones, video models, and datasets. The code is available at
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/MGSampler.

1. Introduction
Video understanding is becoming more and more important in computer vision research as huge numbers of videos
are captured and uploaded online. Human action recognition [31, 37, 40, 24] has witnessed great progress in the past
few years by designing various deep convolutional networks
in videos. The core effort has been devoted to obtaining
compact yet effective video representations for efficient and
robust recognition. Compared with static images, the extra
time dimension requires us to devise a sophisticated temB: Corresponding author.

poral module equipped with high capacity and figure out
an efficient inference strategy for fast processing. However,
in addition to these modeling and computational issues, a
more fundamental problem in video understanding is sampling. Due to the essential redundancy in time and as well
limited computational budget in practice, it is unnecessary
and also infeasible to feed the whole video for subsequent
processing. How to sample a small subset of frames is very
important for developing a practical video recognition system, but it still remains to be an unsolved problem.
Currently, deep convolutional networks (CNNs) typically employ a fixed hand-crafted sampling strategy for
training and testing in videos [31, 37, 40]. In the training phase, CNN is trained on frames/clips which are randomly sampled either evenly or successively with a fixed
stride from the original video. In the test phase, in order to
cover the full temporal duration of video, clips are densely
sampled from video and the final result is averaged from
these dense prediction scores. There are multiple problems
with these fixed sampling strategies. First, the action instance varies with different videos and sampling should not
be fixed across videos. Second, not all the frames are of
equal importance for classification and sampling should pay
more attention to discriminative frames rather than irrelevant background frames.
Recently, some works [47, 45, 5] focus on frame selection in untrimmed videos, and try to improve the inference
efficiency with an adaptive sampling module. These methods typically employ a learnable module to automatically
select more discriminative frames for subsequent processing. However, these methods heavily rely on the training data with complicated learning strategies, and can not
easily transfer to unseen action classes in practice. In addition, they typically deal with untrimmed video recognition by selecting foreground frames and removing background information. But it is unclear how to adapt them
to trimmed video sampling due to the inherent difference
between trimmed and untrimmed videos.
Based on the analysis above, how to devise a principled and adaptive sampling strategy for trimmed videos still
needs further consideration in research. In this paper, we

1513

