Dissecting Image Crops
Basile Van Hoorick
Columbia University

Carl Vondrick
Columbia University

basile@cs.columbia.edu

vondrick@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
The elementary operation of cropping underpins nearly
every computer vision system, ranging from data augmentation and translation invariance to computational photography and representation learning. This paper investigates
the subtle traces introduced by this operation. For example, despite refinements to camera optics, lenses will leave
behind certain clues, notably chromatic aberration and vignetting. Photographers also leave behind other clues relating to image aesthetics and scene composition. We study
how to detect these traces, and investigate the impact that
cropping has on the image distribution. While our aim is
to dissect the fundamental impact of spatial crops, there are
also a number of practical implications to our work, such
as revealing faulty photojournalism and equipping neural
network researchers with a better understanding of shortcut learning. Code is available at https://github.com/
basilevh/dissecting-image-crops.

1. Introduction
The basic operation of cropping an image underpins
nearly every computer vision paper that you will be reading
this week. Within the first few lectures of most introductory computer vision courses, convolutions are motivated
as enabling feature invariance to spatial shifts and cropping [52, 31, 2]. Neural networks rely on image crops as
a form of data augmentation [28, 50, 21]. Computational
photography applications will automatically crop photos
in order to improve their aesthetics [47, 12, 60]. Predictive models extrapolate pixels out from crops [51, 57, 55].
Even the latest self-supervised efforts depend on crops for
contrastive learning to induce rich visual representations
[13, 20, 45, 49].
This core visual operation can have a significant impact
on photographs. As Oliva and Torralba told us twenty years
ago, scene context drives perception [44]. Recently, image
cropping has been at the heart of media disinformation. Figure 1 shows two popular photographs where the photographer or media organization spatially cropped out part of the
context, altering the message of the image. Twitter’s autocrop feature relied on a saliency prediction network that was

Figure 1: We show two infamous image crops, visualized by the
red box. (left) An Ugandan climate activist had been cropped out
of the photo before it was posted in an online news article, the
discovery of which sparked controversy [16]. (right) A news network had cropped out a large stick being held by a demonstrator
during a protest [14]. Cropping dramatically alters the message of
the photographs.

racially biased [10].
The guiding question of this paper is to understand the
traces left behind from this fundamental operation. What
impact does image cropping have on the visual distribution?
Can we determine when and how a photo has been cropped?
Despite extensive refinements to the manufacturing process of camera optics and sensors, nearly every modern
camera pipeline will leave behind subtle lens artefacts onto
the photos that it captures. For example, vignetting is
caused by a lens focusing more light at the center of the
sensor, creating images that are slightly brighter in the middle than near its borders [36]. Chromatic aberration, also
known as purple fringing, is caused by the lens focusing
each wave length differently [5]. Since these artefacts are
correlated with their spatial position in the image plane,
they cause image crops to have trace signatures.
Physical aberrations are not the only traces left behind
during the operation. Photographers will prefer to take photos of interesting objects and in canonical poses [53, 4, 22].
Aesthetically pleasing shots will have sensible compositions that respect symmetry and certain ratios in the scene.
Violating these principles leaves behind another trace of the
cropping operation.
These traces are very subtle, and the human eye often
cannot detect them, which makes studying and characterizing them challenging. However, neural networks are excellent at identifying these patterns. Indeed, extensive effort
goes into preventing neural networks from learning such

9741

