Partial Video Domain Adaptation with
Partial Adversarial Temporal Attentive Network

1

Yuecong Xu1,2, *

Jianfei Yang1, *

Haozhi Cao1

xuyu0014@e.ntu.edu.sg

yang0478@ntu.edu.sg

haozhi001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Zhenghua Chen2,†

Qi Li1

Kezhi Mao1

chen0832@e.ntu.edu.sg

liqi0024@e.ntu.edu.sg

ekzmao@ntu.edu.sg

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore

Abstract
Partial Domain Adaptation (PDA) is a practical and
general domain adaptation scenario, which relaxes the fully
shared label space assumption such that the source label space subsumes the target one. The key challenge of
PDA is the issue of negative transfer caused by source-only
classes. For videos, such negative transfer could be triggered by both spatial and temporal features, which leads
to a more challenging Partial Video Domain Adaptation
(PVDA) problem. In this paper, we propose a novel Partial Adversarial Temporal Attentive Network (PATAN) to
address the PVDA problem by utilizing both spatial and
temporal features for filtering source-only classes. Besides,
PATAN constructs effective overall temporal features by attending to local temporal features that contribute more toward the class filtration process. We further introduce new
benchmarks to facilitate research on PVDA problems, covering a wide range of PVDA scenarios. Empirical results
demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our proposed PATAN across the multiple PVDA benchmarks. Code
will be provided at: https://github.com/xuyu0010/PATAN.

1. Introduction
Video-based problems have long been studied thanks to
their wide applications in various fields. Neural networks
have made notable advances in these problems with the
availability of large-scale labeled video data. However, sufficiently large-scale training video data is sometimes unavailable, as annotations of video data are costly. Various
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.
‡ This research is supported by A*STAR under its AME Programmatic
Funds (Grant No. A20H6b0151).

Figure 1. PVDA is a more general setting where the source label space subsumes the target label space. The key challenge
of PVDA is the negative transfer caused by outlier source-only
classes (‘walk’ and ‘situp’), with extra probability triggered by the
incorrect alignment of target temporal features to the source temporal features of the outlier classes, depicted as the left dashed
arrow between videos from classes ‘run’ and ‘walk’.

Video-based Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (VUDA)
methods have been proposed to enable networks to transfer
knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled
target domain by learning domain-invariant feature representations in the absence of target labels.
Though existing VUDA methods enable the learning of
transferable features across domains, they generally assume
that the video source and target domains share an identical label space, which may not hold in real-world applications. With the presence of large-scale labeled public datasets, it is more feasible to transfer representations
learned in these datasets to unlabeled small-scale datasets.
Such a scenario is defined as Partial Domain Adaptation
(PDA), which relaxes the constraint of identical source and
target label spaces by assuming that the target label space
is a subspace of the source one. This assumption is more
practical since large-scale public video datasets can subsume categories of the small-scale target datasets. The PDA

9332

