Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transformer using Shifted Windows
Ze Liu1,2†*

Yutong Lin1,3†* Yue Cao1* Han Hu1*‡ Yixuan Wei1,4†
Zheng Zhang1 Stephen Lin1 Baining Guo1
1
Microsoft Research Asia 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Xian Jiaotong University 4 Tsinghua University
{v-zeliu1,v-yutlin,yuecao,hanhu,v-yixwe,zhez,stevelin,bainguo}@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper presents a new vision Transformer, called
Swin Transformer, that capably serves as a general-purpose
backbone for computer vision. Challenges in adapting
Transformer from language to vision arise from differences
between the two domains, such as large variations in the
scale of visual entities and the high resolution of pixels
in images compared to words in text. To address these
differences, we propose a hierarchical Transformer whose
representation is computed with Shifted windows. The
shifted windowing scheme brings greater efficiency by limiting self-attention computation to non-overlapping local
windows while also allowing for cross-window connection.
This hierarchical architecture has the flexibility to model
at various scales and has linear computational complexity
with respect to image size. These qualities of Swin Transformer make it compatible with a broad range of vision
tasks, including image classification (87.3 top-1 accuracy
on ImageNet-1K) and dense prediction tasks such as object
detection (58.7 box AP and 51.1 mask AP on COCO testdev) and semantic segmentation (53.5 mIoU on ADE20K
val). Its performance surpasses the previous state-of-theart by a large margin of +2.7 box AP and +2.6 mask AP on
COCO, and +3.2 mIoU on ADE20K, demonstrating the potential of Transformer-based models as vision backbones.
The hierarchical design and the shifted window approach
also prove beneficial for all-MLP architectures. The code
and models are publicly available at https://github.
com/microsoft/Swin-Transformer.

1. Introduction
Modeling in computer vision has long been dominated
by convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Beginning with
AlexNet [35] and its revolutionary performance on the
ImageNet image classification challenge, CNN architec* Equal contribution. † Interns at MSRA. ‡ Contact person.

Figure 1. (a) The proposed Swin Transformer builds hierarchical
feature maps by merging image patches (shown in gray) in deeper
layers and has linear computation complexity to input image size
due to computation of self-attention only within each local window (shown in red). It can thus serve as a general-purpose backbone for both image classification and dense recognition tasks.
(b) In contrast, previous vision Transformers [19] produce feature maps of a single low resolution and have quadratic computation complexity to input image size due to computation of selfattention globally.

tures have evolved to become increasingly powerful through
greater scale [27, 69], more extensive connections [31], and
more sophisticated forms of convolution [64, 17, 75]. With
CNNs serving as backbone networks for a variety of vision
tasks, these architectural advances have led to performance
improvements that have broadly lifted the entire field.
On the other hand, the evolution of network architectures
in natural language processing (NLP) has taken a different
path, where the prevalent architecture today is instead the
Transformer [58]. Designed for sequence modeling and
transduction tasks, the Transformer is notable for its use
of attention to model long-range dependencies in the data.
Its tremendous success in the language domain has led researchers to investigate its adaptation to computer vision,
where it has recently demonstrated promising results on certain tasks, specifically image classification [19] and joint
vision-language modeling [43].

10012

