DualPoseNet: Category-level 6D Object Pose and Size Estimation
Using Dual Pose Network with Refined Learning of Pose Consistency
Jiehong Lin1 , Zewei Wei1,2 , Zhihao Li3 , Songcen Xu3 , Kui Jia1 *, Yuanqing Li1
1
South China University of Technology
2
DexForce Technology Co. Ltd. 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd.
{lin.jiehong, eeweizewei}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {zhihao.li, xusongcen}@huawei.com,
{kuijia, auyqli}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Category-level 6D object pose and size estimation is to
predict full pose configurations of rotation, translation, and
size for object instances observed in single, arbitrary views
of cluttered scenes. In this paper, we propose a new method
of Dual Pose Network with refined learning of pose consistency for this task, shortened as DualPoseNet. DualPoseNet
stacks two parallel pose decoders on top of a shared pose
encoder, where the implicit decoder predicts object poses
with a working mechanism different from that of the explicit one; they thus impose complementary supervision on
the training of pose encoder. We construct the encoder
based on spherical convolutions, and design a module of
Spherical Fusion wherein for a better embedding of posesensitive features from the appearance and shape observations. Given no testing CAD models, it is the novel introduction of the implicit decoder that enables the refined pose
prediction during testing, by enforcing the predicted pose
consistency between the two decoders using a self-adaptive
loss term. Thorough experiments on benchmarks of both
category- and instance-level object pose datasets confirm
efficacy of our designs. DualPoseNet outperforms existing
methods with a large margin in the regime of high precision.
Our code is released publicly at https://github.
com/Gorilla-Lab-SCUT/DualPoseNet.

1. Introduction
Object detection in a 3D Euclidean space is demanded
in many practical applications, such as augmented reality,
robotic manipulation, and self-driving car. The field has
been developing rapidly with the availability of benchmark
datasets (e.g., KITTI [10] and SUN RGB-D [25]), where
carefully annotated 3D bounding boxes enclosing object instances of interest are prepared, which specify 7 degrees of
* Corresponding author

freedom (7DoF) for the objects, including translation, size,
and yaw angle around the gravity axis. This 7DoF setting
of 3D object detection is aligned with common scenarios
where the majority of object instances stand upright in the
3D space. However, 7DoF detection cannot precisely locate objects when the objects lean in the 3D space, where
the most compact bounding boxes can only be determined
given full pose configurations, i.e., with the additional two
angles of rotation. Pose predictions of full configurations
are important in safety-critical scenarios, e.g., autonomous
driving, where the most precise and compact localization of
objects enables better perception and decision making.
This task of pose prediction of full configurations (i.e.,
6D pose and size) is formally introduced in [30] as
category-level 6D object pose and size estimation of novel
instances from single, arbitrary views of RGB-D observations. It is closely related to category-level amodal 3D
object detection [22, 31, 36, 24, 35, 21] (i.e., the above
7DoF setting) and instance-level 6D object pose estimation
[12, 8, 14, 16, 32, 26, 20, 17, 29, 18]. Compared with them,
the focused task in the present paper is more challenging
due to learning and prediction in the full rotation space of
SO(3); more specifically, (1) the task is more involved in
terms of both defining the category-level canonical poses
(cf. Section 3 for definition of canonical poses) and aligning object instances with large intra-category shape variations [15, 4], (2) deep learning precise rotations arguably
requires learning rotation-equivariant shape features, which
is less studied compared with the 2D counterpart of learning translation-invariant image features, and (3) compared
with instance-level 6D pose estimation, due to the lack of
testing CAD models, the focused task cannot leverage the
privileged 3D shapes to directly refine pose predictions, as
done in [2, 32, 29, 18].
In this work, we propose a novel method for categorylevel 6D object pose and size estimation, which can partially
address the second and third challenges mentioned above.

3560

