Deep Transport Network for Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation
Kaihua Zhang1 , Zicheng Zhao2 , Dong Liu3 , Qingshan Liu1 , Bo Liu4∗
1
ERCDF, Ministry of Education and School of Computing and Software, 2 School of Automation
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
3
Netflix Inc. Los Gatos, CA, 95032, USA
4
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
{zhkhua,kfliubo}@gmail.com

Abstract
The popular unsupervised video object segmentation
methods fuse the RGB frame and optical flow via a twostream network. However, they cannot handle the distracting noises in each input modality, which may vastly deteriorate the model performance. We propose to establish the correspondence between the input modalities while
suppressing the distracting signals via optimal structural
matching. Given a video frame, we extract the dense local features from the RGB image and optical flow, and
treat them as two complex structured representations. The
Wasserstein distance is then employed to compute the global optimal flows to transport the features in one modality
to the other, where the magnitude of each flow measures
the extent of the alignment between two local features. To
plug the structural matching into a two-stream network for
end-to-end training, we factorize the input cost matrix into
small spatial blocks and design a differentiable long-short
Sinkhorn module consisting of a long-distant Sinkhorn layer and a short-distant Sinkhorn layer. We integrate the module into a dedicated two-stream network and dub our model
TransportNet. Our experiments show that aligning motionappearance yields the state-of-the-art results on the popular
video object segmentation datasets.

(a) Input

(c) Ground truth

(d) TransportNet

(e) W/o OSM

Figure 1. Examples of distracting signals in the appearance and
motion input in UVOS. Our proposed TransportNet can generate accurate segmentation masks (column (d)) comparing to the
method without Optimal Structural Matching (OSM) (column (e)).

trained over a training set, and at the test time the model is
provided with the ground-truth mask on the first frame as
prior to track the objects to be segmented in the subsequent
frames. The other is called Unsupervised VOS (UVOS) or
primary object segmentation [21]1 , where no ground-truth
mask is provided at the test time and there is no prior information about the target object. UVOS discovers the most
salient, or primary, objects that move against a video’s background2 , and all objects that consistently appear throughout
the video with predominant motion is defined as one object [36, 2] (e.g., the person and the motorbike in Figure 1 are
defined as one object). This is essentially different from the
recently proposed task of Unsupervised Multi-object Segmentation [2], a variant of the conventional UVOS for segmenting separate objects in DAVIS-17 dataset [39], or the
task of Video Instance Segmentation [60].
We focus on the UVOS as it requires no user interactions. Since the target objects are unknown, the stateof-the-art UVOS methods rely on the motion cues (i.e.,

1. Introduction
Video Object Segmentation (VOS) aims to track the
moving objects with an accurate segmentation mask. It can
be divided into two scenarios depending on whether the target objects are indicated at the test time. One scenario is
the Semi-supervised VOS (SVOS) [59], where a model is
∗ Corresponding author. This work is supported in part by National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.
2018AAA0100400, in part by the NSFC (61876088, 61825601), in part
by the 333 High-level Talents Cultivation Project of Jiangsu Province
(BRA2020291).

(b) Optical flow

1
2

Besides these two names, it is also called “zero-shot VOS” in the literature.
In UVOS, the moving objects that are more likely to be followed by human gaze are referred to as “foreground” while the remaining regions (e.g.,
“people in crowds” or “still cars in the background”) are referred to as
“background” and not annotated as target objects in the ground truth [57].

8781

