Learning to Discover Reflection Symmetry via Polar Matching Convolution
Ahyun Seo∗

Woohyeon Shim∗

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/PMCNet

Abstract
The task of reflection symmetry detection remains challenging due to significant variations and ambiguities of
symmetry patterns in the wild. Furthermore, since the local regions are required to match in reflection for detecting
a symmetry pattern, it is hard for standard convolutional
networks, which are not equivariant to rotation and reflection, to learn the task. To address the issue, we introduce
a new convolutional technique, dubbed the polar matching
convolution, which leverages a polar feature pooling, a selfsimilarity encoding, and a systematic kernel design for axes
of different angles. The proposed high-dimensional kernel
convolution network effectively learns to discover symmetry patterns from real-world images, overcoming the limitations of standard convolution. In addition, we present a new
dataset and introduce a self-supervised learning strategy by
augmenting the dataset with synthesizing images. Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in terms of accuracy and robustness.

1. Introduction
The world is built on symmetry. From the physical structures of nature, the biological patterns of life, to the artifacts of human, symmetries reveal themselves almost everywhere. Perception of such symmetries plays a crucial
role at different levels of human vision [38]; it provides humans with pre-attentive cues for early visual analysis and
also acts as an integral part for 3D object perception under
perspective distortion. Among common groups of symmetry, the most basic and popular form is reflection, mirror,
or bilateral symmetry, which is the focus of this work. The
task of reflection symmetry detection is to discover reflective patterns from images by detecting their axes of symmetry. Despite the apparent simplicity of the mathematical
concept [40] and the long history of research [24], the problem remains challenging due to significant variations and
ambiguities of symmetry patterns in the wild.
* Equal contributions.

=?

=?

=?

Figure 1. Feature matching in reflection symmetry. Perception of
reflection symmetry requires matching features of corresponding
regions in reflection with respect to its symmetry axis. Grids represent feature maps, and red squares denote corresponding regions.

One of the most promising directions for tackling the
challenge would be to learn from data [15]. While deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have made remarkable progress in a wide range of computer vision problems,
there has been little work for learning symmetry detection
on real-world images. Previous work [14] adapts a CNN [3]
to regress a dense heatmap of symmetry axes for symmetry
detection. While the results demonstrate the effectiveness
of learning, the method does not consider the limitation of
conventional CNNs in learning symmetry. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, discovering symmetry requires recognizing matching pairs of local regions in reflection, and this may make it
hard for CNNs, which are neither invariant nor equivariant
to reflection [8, 20], to learn the task. Furthermore, the rotational freedom of the symmetry axis makes it even harder
since conventional CNNs are not invariant to rotation either. Standard convolution alone is not effective in learning
the required properties solely from data.
In this work, we introduce a new convolutional technique, dubbed the polar matching convolution (PMC),
which leverages a polar feature pooling, a self-similarity encoding, and a systematic kernel design for axes of different
angles. On the basis of symmetrically matched feature pairs
in a polar structure, the polar matching kernel computes the
confidence of symmetry by exploiting both local similarities

1285

