Aligning Subtitles in Sign Language Videos
Hannah Bull1 * Triantafyllos Afouras2∗ Gül Varol2,3
Samuel Albanie2,4 Liliane Momeni2 Andrew Zisserman2
1
LISN, Univ Paris-Saclay, CNRS, France
2
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford, UK
3
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
4
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK
hannah.bull@lisn.upsaclay.fr; {afourast,gul,albanie,liliane,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/bslalign/

Saudio

Overlooked by a small hill known as Leopard
Rock.

Sgt

To keep her cubs alive in this dangerous neighbourhood,

Overlooked by a small hill known as Leopard Rock.

the mother must make sure they stay hidden.

the mother must make sure
they stay hidden.

To keep her cubs alive in this dangerous neighbourhood,

Time
14:12

14:14

14:16

14:18

14:20

14:22

14:24

14:26

14:28

14:30

Figure 1: Subtitle alignment: We study the task of aligning subtitles to continuous signing in sign language interpreted TV broadcast
data. The subtitles in such settings usually correspond to and are aligned with the audio content (top: audio subtitles, Saudio ) but are
unaligned with the accompanying signing (bottom: Ground Truth annotation of the signing corresponding to the subtitle, Sgt ). This
is a very challenging task as (i) the order of subtitles varies between spoken and sign languages, (ii) the duration of a subtitle differs
considerably between signing and speech, and (iii) the signing corresponds to a translation of the speech as opposed to a transcription.

Abstract
The goal of this work is to temporally align asynchronous subtitles in sign language videos. In particular,
we focus on sign-language interpreted TV broadcast data
comprising (i) a video of continuous signing, and (ii) subtitles corresponding to the audio content. Previous work exploiting such weakly-aligned data only considered finding
keyword-sign correspondences, whereas we aim to localise
a complete subtitle text in continuous signing. We propose
a Transformer architecture tailored for this task, which we
train on manually annotated alignments covering over 15K
subtitles that span 17.7 hours of video. We use BERT subtitle embeddings and CNN video representations learned for
sign recognition to encode the two signals, which interact
through a series of attention layers. Our model outputs
frame-level predictions, i.e., for each video frame, whether
it belongs to the queried subtitle or not. Through extensive
evaluations, we show substantial improvements over existing alignment baselines that do not make use of subtitle text
* Equal contribution

embeddings for learning. Our automatic alignment model
opens up possibilities for advancing machine translation
of sign languages via providing continuously synchronized
video-text data.

1. Introduction
Sign languages constitute a key form of communication
for Deaf communities [50]. Our goal in this paper is to
temporally localise subtitles in continuous signing video.
Automatic alignment of subtitle text to signing content has
great potential for a wide range of applications including
assistive tools for education and translation, indexing of
sign language video corpora, efficient subtitling technology
for signing vloggers1 , and automatic construction of largescale sign language datasets that support computer vision
and linguistic research.
Despite recent advances in computer vision, machine
1 Unlike spoken vlogs that benefit from automatic closed captioning on
sites such as YouTube, signing vlog creators who wish to provide written
subtitles must both translate and align their subtitles manually.

11552

