Vi2 CLR: Video and Image for Visual Contrastive Learning of Representation
Ali Diba1,2 , Vivek Sharma5,6 , Reza Safdari2 , Dariush Lotfi2 , M. Saquib Sarfraz3,4 ,
Rainer Stiefelhagen3 , Luc Van Gool1,2,7 ,
1
5

KU Leuven, 2 Sensifai, 3 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 4 Daimler TSS,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 6 Harvard Medical School, 7 ETH Zurich

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel self-supervised visual
representation learning method which understands both images and videos in a joint learning fashion. The proposed
neural network architecture and objectives are designed
to obtain two different Convolutional Neural Networks for
solving visual recognition tasks in the domain of videos
and images. Our method called Video/Image for Visual
Contrastive Learning of Representation(Vi2 CLR) uses unlabeled videos to exploit dynamic and static visual cues for
self-supervised and instances similarity/dissimilarity learning. Vi2 CLR optimization pipeline consists of visual clustering part and representation learning based on groups of
similar positive instances within a cluster and negative ones
from other clusters and learning visual clusters and their
distances. We show how a joint self-supervised visual clustering and instance similarity learning with 2D (image) and
3D (video) CovNet encoders yields such robust and near to
supervised learning performance.
We extensively evaluate the method on downstream tasks
like large scale action recognition, image and object classification on datasets like Kinetics, ImageNet, Pascal VOC’07
and UCF101 and achieve outstanding results compared to
state-of-the-art self-supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Learning strong and discriminative representations is important for diverse applications in computer vision tasks
such as image classification, object detection, image segmentation, activity recognition, video classification, medical imaging as well as natural language processing. More
recently unsupervised or self-supervised representation
learning has received a lot of attention as these methods are
not dependent on manually curated ground-truth labels but
rather utilize the supervision coming from the data itself and
still rapidly close the performance gap with the supervised
training. Most recent state-of-the-art methods are largely
driven by instance [77, 12, 29] or prototype [44, 11] dis-

crimination tasks. These discrimination methods rely on
combination of two key components: (a) contrastive loss
and (b) image [77, 29, 44, 12, 11] or video [28, 27, 56]
augmentation. The contrastive loss [25] encourages small
distances by pulling samples from the same label together
and pushing far apart at least by the margin for the samples of different labels in feature space. The current contrastive loss functions are in the form of noise contrastive
estimator [24] to compare instances (InfoNCE [51]), prototypes (ProtoNCE [44]), instances that include samples
with the same semantic labels (UberNCE [28]) or complementary views, and multiple instances (Multi-Instance InfoNCE [45]). The data augmentation or transformation can
be categorized into two types on the basis of the datatype,
namely for images, and for videos. For instance discrimination [12] each sample of the dataset is treated as a class
and enforce the augmented version of the same sample to be
more similar, while in case of prototypes [44, 11] enforcing
the augmented version of the samples to be closer to the
prototype. Data augmentation plays a crucial role in the images and videos contrastive representation learning. In particular, for images [12, 11] the most popular augmentation
methods are color transformation, geometric transformation
and multi-crop; and for videos [28, 27, 56] randomly mining clips from the same video as positives, temporally consistent spatial augmentation, and mining complementary information from different views of the RGB-stream/opticalflow data are the transformation methods. See Section 2 in
the related work for an extended review.
In this paper, we propose to extend the self-supervised
training of ConvNets for solving visual recognition tasks
both in videos and images simultaneously. Our contribution named as Vi2 CLR is a method that jointly optimizes
two ConvNets for Videos and Images for Visual Contrastive
Learning of Representation as a multi-task learning problem. We achieve this by learning both dynamic and static visual cues simultaneously in an end-to-end learning pipeline.
Vi2 CLR optimization utilizes clustering as supervision
for learning an effective visual (2D ConvNets) and video
(3D ConvNets) representations. We believe clustering of-

1502

