Sensor-Guided Optical Flow
Matteo Poggi
Filippo Aleotti
Stefano Mattoccia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{m.poggi, filippo.aleotti2, stefano.mattoccia }@unibo.it

(a)

(b)

(c)

.

Figure 1. Guided optical flow in action. Column (a): reference images, columns (b,c): optical flow (top) and corresponding error maps
(bottom). When facing challenging conditions at test time (a), an optical flow network alone (b) may struggle, while an external guide can
make it more robust (c). Both networks in (b,c) have been trained on synthetic data only.

Abstract
This paper proposes a framework to guide an optical
flow network with external cues to achieve superior accuracy either on known or unseen domains. Given the availability of sparse yet accurate optical flow hints from an external source, these are injected to modulate the correlation
scores computed by a state-of-the-art optical flow network
and guide it towards more accurate predictions. Although
no real sensor can provide sparse flow hints, we show how
these can be obtained by combining depth measurements
from active sensors with geometry and hand-crafted optical
flow algorithms, leading to accurate enough hints for our
purpose. Experimental results with a state-of-the-art flow
network on standard benchmarks support the effectiveness
of our framework, both in simulated and real conditions.

1. Introduction
The task of optical flow computation [21] aims at estimating the motion of pixels in a video sequence (e.g., in
the most common settings, from two consecutive frames in
time). As a result, several higher-level tasks can be faced
from it, such as action recognition, tracking and more. Although its long history, optical flow remains far from being
solved due to many challenges; the lack of texture, occlusions or the blurring effect introduced by high-speed moving objects make the problem particularly hard.
Indeed, the adoption of deep learning for dense optical

flow estimation has represented a turning point during the
years. The possibility of learning more robust pixels similarities [2, 73] allowed, at first, to soften the issues above.
Then the research trend in the field rapidly converged towards direct inference of the optical flow field in an end-toend manner [15, 29, 62, 63, 26, 27, 25, 64], achieving both
unrivaled accuracy and run time in comparison to previous
approaches. The availability of a large amount of training
data annotated with ground-truth flow labels, in most cases
obtained for free on synthetic images [10, 15, 29], ignited
this spread. Common to most end-to-end networks is the
use of a correlation layer [15], explicitly computing similarity scores between pixels in the two images in order to
find matches, and thus flow.
This trend, however, introduced new challenges inherently connected to the learning process. Specifically, the use
of synthetic images is rarely sufficient to achieve top performance on real data. As witnessed by many works in the field
[15, 29, 62, 63, 26, 27, 25, 64], a network trained on synthetic images already excels on benchmarks such as Sintel
[10], yet struggles at generalizing to real benchmarks such
as KITTI [17, 47]. This phenomenon is known as domainshift and is usually addressed by fine-tuning on few real images with available ground-truth. Nevertheless, achieving
generalization without fine-tuning still represents a desirable property when designing a neural network. The main
cause triggering the domain-shift issue is the very different
appearance of synthetic versus real images, with the former unable to faithfully model noise, lightning conditions

7908

