How Shift Equivariance Impacts Metric Learning for Instance Segmentation
Josef Lorenz Rumberger*1,2 , Xiaoyan Yu*1,3 , Peter Hirsch*1,3 , Melanie Dohmen*1,2 ,
Vanessa Emanuela Guarino*1,3 , Ashkan Mokarian1 , Lisa Mais1 , Jan Funke4 , Dagmar Kainmueller1
1

Max-Delbrueck-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC),
Berlin, Germany, {firstnames.lastname}@mdc-berlin.de
2
Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany
3
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Berlin, Germany
4
HHMI Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, VA, USA

Abstract
Metric learning has received conflicting assessments
concerning its suitability for solving instance segmentation
tasks. It has been dismissed as theoretically flawed due
to the shift equivariance of the employed CNNs and their
respective inability to distinguish same-looking objects.
Yet it has been shown to yield state of the art results for
a variety of tasks, and practical issues have mainly been
reported in the context of tile-and-stitch approaches, where
discontinuities at tile boundaries have been observed.
To date, neither of the reported issues have undergone
thorough formal analysis. In our work, we contribute a
comprehensive formal analysis of the shift equivariance
properties of encoder-decoder-style CNNs, which yields
a clear picture of what can and cannot be achieved with
metric learning in the face of same-looking objects. In
particular, we prove that a standard encoder-decoder
network that takes d-dimensional images as input, with l
pooling layers and pooling factor f , has the capacity to
distinguish at most f dl same-looking objects, and we show
that this upper limit can be reached. Furthermore, we show
that to avoid discontinuities in a tile-and-stitch approach,
assuming standard batch size 1, it is necessary to employ
valid convolutions in combination with a training output
window size strictly greater than f l , while at test-time it
is necessary to crop tiles to size n · f l before stitching,
with n ≥ 1. We complement these theoretical findings by
discussing a number of insightful special cases for which
we show empirical results on synthetic and real data.
Code:https://github.com/Kainmueller-Lab/
shift_equivariance_unet
* equal contribution

1. Introduction
Metric learning is a popular proposal-free technique
for instance segmentation that often yields state-of-the-art
results, particularly in applications from the biomedical
domain for which proposal-based techniques do not apply [6, 7, 11, 13, 14, 19, 24]. In discord with its empirical
success, numerous works from the computer vision community have noted a theoretical deficiency of metric learning
for instance segmentation, namely that same-looking objects cannot be distinguished by means of shift equivariant
CNNs [15, 19]. Empirical attempts at tackling this apparent
deficiency include leveraging pixel coordinates or encodings of said as additional inputs or features [11, 18, 19, 27],
or limiting the problem to distinguishing neighboring objects [6, 12], while related theoretical work is limited to discussions of shift equivariance properties of individual CNN
layers like pooling [2, 25, 28] and upsampling [20].
What is thus lacking to date is a comprehensive formal analysis of the shift equivariance properties of the
encoder-decoder style CNNs typically employed for metriclearning-based instance segmentation, as well as an assessment of respective implications concerning the capacity of
said CNNs to distinguish same-looking objects. To this end,
in this paper, we prove that an encoder-decoder-style CNN
with l pooling layers and pooling factor f is periodic-f l
shift equivariant, and in consequence has the capacity to
distinguish at most f dl instances of identical appearance in
d-dimensional input images.
Concerning practical issues, biomedical applications often deal with large 3d input images and thus apply CNNs for
instance segmentation in a tile-and-stitch manner to cope
with GPU memory constraints. Here, issues with discontinuities in predictions at output tile boundaries, which lead
to false splits of objects, have been reported [13, 21]. How-

7128

