Instance Segmentation in 3D Scenes using Semantic Superpoint Tree Networks
Zhihao Liang1,2 , Zhihao Li3 , Songcen Xu3 , Mingkui Tan1 and Kui Jia1,4,5 *
1
South China University of Technology, 2 DexForce Technology Co., Ltd.
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, 4 Pazhou Laboratory, 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
eezhihaoliang@mail.scut.edu.cn, {kuijia, mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn,
{zhihao.li, xusongcen}@huawei.com

Abstract
Instance segmentation in 3D scenes is fundamental in
many applications of scene understanding. It is yet challenging due to the compound factors of data irregularity
and uncertainty in the numbers of instances. State-of-theart methods largely rely on a general pipeline that first
learns point-wise features discriminative at semantic and
instance levels, followed by a separate step of point grouping for proposing object instances. While promising, they
have the shortcomings that (1) the second step is not supervised by the main objective of instance segmentation, and
(2) their point-wise feature learning and grouping are less
effective to deal with data irregularities, possibly resulting
in fragmented segmentations. To address these issues, we
propose in this work an end-to-end solution of Semantic
Superpoint Tree Network (SSTNet) for proposing object instances from scene points. Key in SSTNet is an intermediate, semantic superpoint tree (SST), which is constructed
based on the learned semantic features of superpoints, and
which will be traversed and split at intermediate tree nodes
for proposals of object instances. We also design in SSTNet a refinement module, termed CliqueNet, to prune superpoints that may be wrongly grouped into instance proposals. Experiments on the benchmarks of ScanNet and S3DIS
show the efficacy of our proposed method. At the time of
submission, SSTNet ranks top on the ScanNet (V2) leaderboard, with 2% higher of mAP than the second best method.
The source code in PyTorch is available at https://
github.com/Gorilla-Lab-SCUT/SSTNet.

1. Introduction
The task of 3D instance segmentation is fundamental in
many applications concerned with 3D scene understanding.
Given an observed scene of point cloud reconstructed from
depth cameras via multi-view fusion techniques [8, 14], the
task is to both assign semantic labels of pre-defined object
* Correspondence to Kui Jia <kuijia@scut.edu.cn>

categories to individual scene points, and differentiate those
belonging to different object instances. Learning to achieve
3D instance segmentation is challenging at least in the following aspects: (1) observed scene points are usually sparse
and irregular, which poses difficulties for learning pointwise classification based on shape features of local (and
possibly global) contexts around individual points; (2) the
unknown number of object instances in a scene introduces
additional uncertainties to the problem of learning pointinstance associations that is already combinatorial; (3) even
though point-wise classification and point-instance associations can be conducted, learning consistencies among spatially adjacent points are not guaranteed, which may cause
fragmented segmentations, especially around object boundaries (cf. Fig. 1 for an illustration).
State-of-the-art methods [16, 37, 9], e.g., those ranking top on the ScanNet benchmark [7], tackle (some of)
the above challenges with the following general pipeline.
They first train networks to learn point-wise features that
are discriminative at both the semantic and instance levels,
followed by a separate step of point clustering that groups
together those believed to be on same instances, using the
learned point-wise features. While promising, they have the
following shortcomings. Firstly, the second step of point
clustering is independent of network training, whose results
are thus not guaranteed by guiding towards the ground-truth
groupings of object instances. Secondly, while superpoints
[19] have been commonly used for semantic segmentation
of 3D points [18, 4], when coming to instance segmentation, these state-of-the-art methods, except OccuSeg [15],
choose to conduct both feature learning and grouping in a
point-wise manner, which takes away their chance to leverage the geometric regularities established at the mid-level
shape representation of superpoints.
To overcome these shortcomings, we are motivated to
develop an end-to-end solution for proposing object instances from an observed scene of points. Considering
that a superpoint represents a geometrically homogeneous
neighborhood, we choose to work with superpoints pre-

2783

