Explanations for Occluded Images
Hana Chockler
causaLens and
King’s College London

Daniel Kroening*
Amazon.com, Inc.

Youcheng Sun
Queen’s University Belfast

daniel.kroening@gmail.com

youcheng.sun@qub.ac.uk

hana.chockler@kcl.ac.uk

(a) Input

(b) DC - Causal

(c) DC-SBFL

(d) Extremal

(e) RISE

(f) RAP

(g) LRP

Figure 1: Explanations for the classification as 'German shepherd dog' (a). DC-Causal is the tool presented here.

Abstract
Existing algorithms for explaining the output of image
classifiers perform poorly on inputs where the object of
interest is partially occluded. We present a novel, black-box
algorithm for computing explanations that uses a principled
approach based on causal theory. We have implemented the
method in the D EEP C OVER tool. We obtain explanations
that are much more accurate than those generated by the
existing explanation tools on images with occlusions and
observe a level of performance comparable to the state of
the art when explaining images without occlusions.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are now a primary building
block of many computer vision systems. DNNs are complex
non-linear functions with algorithmically generated (and not
engineered) coefficients. In contrast to traditionally engineered image processing pipelines it is difficult to retrace
how the pixel data are interpreted by the layers of the DNN.
This “black box” nature of DNNs creates demand for techniques that explain why a particular input yields the output
that is observed.
An explanation of an output of an automated procedure
is essential in many areas, including verification, planning,
diagnosis and the like. A good explanation can increase a
user’s confidence in the result. Explanations are also useful
for determining whether there is a fault in the automated
* The work reported in this paper was done prior to joining Amazon.

procedure: if the explanation does not make sense, it may
indicate that the procedure is faulty. It is less clear how to
define what a good explanation is. There have been a number
of definitions of explanations over the years in various domains of computer science [3, 11, 23], philosophy [16] and
statistics [26]. The recent increase in the number of machine
learning applications and the advances in deep learning led
to the need for explainable AI, which is advocated, among
others, by DARPA [12] to promote understanding, trust, and
adoption of future autonomous systems based on learning
algorithms (and, in particular, image classification DNNs).
DARPA provides a list of questions that a good explanation
should answer and an epistemic state of the user after receiving a good explanation. The description of this epistemic
state boils down to adding useful information about the output of the algorithm and increasing trust of the user in the
algorithm.
Explanations for the results of image classifiers are typically based on or are given in the form of a ranking of the
pixels, which is a numerical measure of importance: the
higher the score, the more important the pixel is for the
DNN’s classification outcome.
A user-friendly explanation can then be a subset of
highest-ranked pixels that is sufficient for the original classification outcome. Given an image that features an object,
good algorithms are able to generate rankings that identify
that object with a high accuracy. Another typical proxy for
the quality of a ranking is how many of the high-ranked
pixels (constituting an explanation) need to be masked before the classification generated by the DNN changes. Good

1234

