High Quality Disparity Remapping with Two-Stage Warping
Bing Li1 , Chia-Wen Lin2 , Cheng Zheng1 , Shan Liu3 , Junsong Yuan4 , Bernard Ghanem1 , C.-C. Jay Kuo5
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
3
Tencent Media Lab, Palo Alto, USA
4
University at Buffalo, NY, USA
5
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA

Abstract
A high quality disparity remapping method that preserves 2D shapes and 3D structures, and adjusts disparities
of important objects in stereo image pairs is proposed. It is
formulated as a constrained optimization problem, whose
solution is challenging, since we need to meet multiple
requirements of disparity remapping simultaneously. The
one-stage optimization process either degrades the quality of important objects or introduces serious distortions in
background regions. To address this challenge, we propose
a two-stage warping process to solve it. In the first stage,
we develop a warping model that finds the optimal warping
grids for important objects to fulfill multiple requirements
of disparity remapping. In the second stage, we derive another warping model to refine warping results in less important regions by eliminating serious distortions in shape,
disparity and 3D structure. The superior performance of the
proposed method is demonstrated by experimental results.

1. Introduction
Stereoscopic 3D visual contents have been popular
nowadays. With recent hardware development, stereo visual content can be viewed in various environments with
different viewing conditions (e.g. theaters, computers and
VR devices). The disparity (or depth) dimension of
stereo images often introduces unsatisfactory viewing experience [9, 29]. For example, a pair of stereo images with
a large disparity range may yield a strong depth effect on a
large screen, which may exceed the comfort zone of the human visual system. In contrast, stereo images with a small
disparity range tend to exhibit a small depth effect, leading
to poor 3D viewing experience. Consequently, it is important to develop disparity remapping tools that can adjust the
disparity to meet various viewing conditions and adjust the
disparity according to the viewer’s preference.

Figure 1: Illustration of the advantage of our method. The
disparities of the man and monkey are decreased to enhance
their depth strength. The state-of-the-art method [11] fails
to preserve the 3D structure of monkey. Our method faithfully adjusts the disparities while preserving the 3D structure well. Original frame is from The Monkey King 2.
Being different from 2D images, stereo images offer virtual 3D scenes to viewers through the inherent disparity information. In a 3D scene, an object has not only a spatial shape projected on the x-y plane but also a geometric
structure (i.e. 3D structure) along the depth direction. This
structure information is crucial to human viewing experience. For example, given an object (see Figure 1 ), the 3D
structure determines whether the object is parallel with the
display screen or tilted in the 3D scene. To enhance the 3D
viewing experience, we aim to design a disparity remapping method that adjusts the disparity, while preserving the
3D structure for important objects.
Lang et al. [11] adopt content-aware warping for disparity remapping. Image regions are non-uniformly warped to
preserve the shapes of important objects and the disparity is
adjusted by constraining the disparity values of a few correspondence pairs to be identical to their target values. Different from classical disparity remapping methods, warpingbased methods [11][38] do not need to resort to image completion to fill in holes with synthesized content. On the other
hand, they often distort the 3D structure of an object, since

2269

