VENet: Voting Enhancement Network for 3D Object Detection
Qian Xie1 , Yu-Kun Lai2 , Jing Wu2 , Zhoutao Wang1 , Dening Lu1 , Mingqiang Wei1 , and Jun Wang * 1
1

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
Cardiff University

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D object detection is an active research topic in computer vision with a wide range of applications, such as
autonomous driving [29], robotic manipulation [39] and
high-level semantic SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and
Mapping) [45]. However, locating and classifying objects
from scanned 3D point clouds in cluttered indoor scenes
is still a challenging problem, without color information in
particular. Although many efforts have been made to improve its performance over past few years [44, 32, 2, 27, 42],
driven by the success of deep learning techniques, the per* Corresponding author: wjun@nuaa.edu.cn

(a) VoteNet

enhanced seed

object center

foreground vote

seed voting

background vote adjacent vote
Noise vote

vote aggregation

proposal
feature

Voting enhancement
(b) VENet (Ours)

Hough voting, as has been demonstrated in VoteNet, is
effective for 3D object detection, where voting is a key step.
In this paper, we propose a novel VoteNet-based 3D detector
with vote enhancement to improve the detection accuracy
in cluttered indoor scenes. It addresses the limitations of
current voting schemes, i.e., votes from neighboring objects
and background have signiﬁcant negative impacts. Before
voting, we replace the classic MLP with the proposed Attentive MLP (AMLP) in the backbone network to get better
feature description of seed points. During voting, we design
a new vote attraction loss (VALoss) to enforce vote centers
to locate closely and compactly to the corresponding object
centers. After voting, we then devise a vote weighting module to integrate the foreground/background prediction into
the vote aggregation process to enhance the capability of
the original VoteNet to handle noise from background voting. The three proposed strategies all contribute to more
effective voting and improved performance, resulting in a
novel 3D object detector, termed VENet. Experiments show
that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
benchmark datasets. Ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed components.

seed point

1 Before voting

2 During voting

3 After voting

seed
enhancement

vote
attraction

vote
weighting

proposal
feature

Figure 1. Comparison with VoteNet. (a) VoteNet. (b) Our approach. Our approach enhances the voting procedure from three
aspects (i.e., seed enhancement, vote attraction and vote weighting) to get better proposal features.

formance is still far from being satisfactory.
Recently, a deep Hough voting network, VoteNet [28],
was proposed to detect 3D objects directly from scanned
point clouds, and has achieved signiﬁcant improvements
on several benchmark datasets. This method ﬁrst samples
seed points from the whole point cloud, and then extracts
high-dimensional features of these seed points using PointNet++ [30]. Then, inspired by Hough voting in 2D object
detection, these seed points produce vote centers based on
the extracted features. The voting process is formulated as
center point regression and implemented via MLP (MultiLayer Perceptron). These votes are then clustered and aggregated to generate object proposal features, which are
used to classify objects and regress their locations. Voting,
as the essence in VoteNet, plays a vital role in information
aggregation for object detection.
However, there are two disturbing factors in voting using
the current VoteNet architecture, i.e., object-noise: votes
from adjacent objects, and background-noise: votes from
background seed points. As shown in Figure 1, VoteNet
will choose a vote as the cluster center, and then aggregate
information with no difference from all the votes within the
bounding sphere to form the aggregated feature for the cen-

3712

