Skeleton Cloud Colorization for Unsupervised 3D Action
Representation Learning
Shijian Lu1
Meng Hwa Er1
Alex C. Kot1
Siyuan Yang1
Jun Liu2 *
1
2
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore University of Technology and Design
siyuan005@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Skeleton-based human action recognition has attracted
increasing attention in recent years. However, most of
the existing works focus on supervised learning which requiring a large number of annotated action sequences that
are often expensive to collect. We investigate unsupervised representation learning for skeleton action recognition, and design a novel skeleton cloud colorization technique that is capable of learning skeleton representations
from unlabeled skeleton sequence data. Specifically, we
represent a skeleton action sequence as a 3D skeleton
cloud and colorize each point in the cloud according to
its temporal and spatial orders in the original (unannotated) skeleton sequence. Leveraging the colorized skeleton point cloud, we design an auto-encoder framework
that can learn spatial-temporal features from the artificial
color labels of skeleton joints effectively. We evaluate our
skeleton cloud colorization approach with action classifiers
trained under different configurations, including unsupervised, semi-supervised and fully-supervised settings. Extensive experiments on NTU RGB+D and NW-UCLA datasets
show that the proposed method outperforms existing unsupervised and semi-supervised 3D action recognition methods by large margins, and it achieves competitive performance in supervised 3D action recognition as well.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is a fast developing area due to
its wide applications in human-computer interaction, video
surveillance, game control, etc. According to the types of
input data, human action recognition can be grouped into
different categories such as RGB-based [2, 35, 38, 42, 47,
49, 55, 56], depth-based [26, 28, 45] and 3D skeleton-based
[1, 9, 17, 18, 20, 21, 31], etc. Among these types of inputs,
3D skeleton data, which represents a human body by the locations of keypoints in the 3D space, has attracted increas* Corresponding author.

{Shijian.Lu, emher, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg

jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

ing attention in recent years. Compared with RGB videos or
depth data, 3D skeleton data encodes high-level representations of human behaviors and it is generally lightweight
and robust to the variations in appearances, surrounding distractions, viewpoint changes, etc. Additionally, skeleton sequences can be easily captured by depth sensors and thus
a large number of supervised methods have been designed
to learn spatio-temporal representations for skeleton based
action recognition.
Deep neural networks have been widely studied to model
the spatio-temporal representation of skeleton sequences
under supervised scenarios [9, 20, 21, 31]. For example,
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) has been explored for
modelling skeleton actions since it can capture temporal relations well [6, 20, 21, 29, 52]. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have also been explored to build skeletonbased recognition frameworks by converting joint coordinates to 2D maps [5, 9, 13, 43]. In addition, Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs) have attracted increasing attention due to their outstanding performance [27, 31, 48].
However, all these methods are supervised which require
a large number of labelled training samples that are often costly to collect. How to learn effective feature representations with minimal annotations thus becomes critically important. To the best of our knowledge, only a few
works [10, 14, 19, 37, 54] explored representation learning from unlabelled skeleton data for the task of action
recognition, where the major approach is to reconstruct
skeleton sequences from the encoded features via certain
encoder-decoder structures. Unsupervised skeleton-based
action representation learning remains a great challenge.
In this work, we propose to represent skeleton sequences
as a 3D skeleton cloud, and design an unsupervised representation learning scheme that learns features from spatial
and temporal color labels. We treat a skeletal sequence as
a spatial-temporal skeleton cloud by stacking the skeleton
data of all frames together, and colorize each point in the
cloud according to its temporal and spatial orders in the
original skeleton sequence. Specifically, we learn spatialtemporal features from the corresponding joints’ colors by

13423

