Learning to Adversarially Blur Visual Object Tracking
Qing Guo1,5∗ , Ziyi Cheng2 ,* Felix Juefei-Xu3 , Lei Ma4† , Xiaofei Xie5†, Yang Liu5,6 , Jianjun Zhao2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China,
Kyushu University, Japan, 3 Alibaba Group, USA, 4 University of Alberta, Canada,
5
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 6 Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, China
2

(t­1) th frame

Abstract
Motion blur caused by the moving of the object or camera during the exposure can be a key challenge for visual
object tracking, affecting tracking accuracy significantly. In
this work, we explore the robustness of visual object trackers against motion blur from a new angle, i.e., adversarial
blur attack (ABA). Our main objective is to online transfer
input frames to their natural motion-blurred counterparts
while misleading the state-of-the-art trackers during the
tracking process. To this end, we first design the motion
blur synthesizing method for visual tracking based on the
generation principle of motion blur, considering the motion information and the light accumulation process. With
this synthetic method, we propose optimization-based ABA
(OP-ABA) by iteratively optimizing an adversarial objective
function against the tracking w.r.t. the motion and light accumulation parameters. The OP-ABA is able to produce
natural adversarial examples but the iteration can cause
heavy time cost, making it unsuitable for attacking realtime trackers. To alleviate this issue, we further propose
one-step ABA (OS-ABA) where we design and train a joint
adversarial motion and accumulation predictive network
(JAMANet) with the guidance of OP-ABA, which is able to
efficiently estimate the adversarial motion and accumulation parameters in a one-step way. The experiments on four
popular datasets (e.g., OTB100, VOT2018, UAV123, and
LaSOT) demonstrate that our methods are able to cause
significant accuracy drops on four state-of-the-art trackers
with high transferability. Please find the source code at
https://github.com/tsingqguo/ABA

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking (VOT) has played an integral part
in multifarious computer vision applications nowadays rang* Qing Guo and Ziyi Cheng are co-first authors and contribute equally.
† Lei Ma and Xiaofei Xie are corresponding authors (ma.lei@acm.org,

xfxie@ntu.edu.sg).

t th frame

Adv. Blur Attack

Live video

...

Prediction results on the original and
adversarially blurred frames:

Deployed Tracker

Adversarially blurred
t th frame

Figure 1: An example of our adversarial blur attack against a deployed
tracker, e.g., SiamRPN++ [30]. Two adjacent frames are fed to our attack
and it generates an adversarially blurred frame that misleads the tracker to
output an inaccurate response map.

ing from augmented reality [1, 46] to video surveillance
[47], from human-computer interaction [36, 32] to traffic
control [49], etc. Since the infusion of deep learning, VOT
has become more powerful in terms of both algorithmic
performance and efficiency [20], leading to the more pervasive deployment of VOT-enabled on-device applications.
However, the VOT can still exhibit robustness brittleness
when faced with less ideal video feed. Among many known
degrading factors such as illumination variations, noise variations, etc., motion blur is perhaps one of the most important
adverse factors for visual object tracking, which is caused
by the moving of the object or camera during the exposure,
and can severely jeopardize tracking accuracy [18]. Most of
the existing benchmarks [28, 50, 35] only indicate whether
a video or a frame contains motion blur or not and this piece
of information is still insufficient to analyze the influence
from motion blur by means of controlling all the variables,
e.g., eliminating other possible interference from other degradation modes, which may lead to incomplete conclusions
regarding the effects of motion blur in these benchmarks.
Moreover, the currently limited datasets, albeit being
large-scale, cannot well cover the diversity of motion blur
in the real world because motion blur is caused by camera
and object moving in the scene which is both dynamic and
unknown. Existing motion blur generation methods cannot
10839

