The Spatio-Temporal Poisson Point Process:
A Simple Model for the Alignment of Event Camera Data
Cheng Gu
TU Berlin

Erik Learned-Miller
UMass Amherst

Daniel Sheldon
UMass Amherst

c.gu@campus.tu-berlin.de

elm@cs.umass.edu

sheldon@cs.umass.edu

Guillermo Gallego
TU Berlin & Einstein Center Digital Future

Pia Bideau
TU Berlin

guillermo.gallego@tu-berlin.de

p.bideau@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
Event cameras, inspired by biological vision systems,
provide a natural and data efficient representation of visual information. Visual information is acquired in the form
of events that are triggered by local brightness changes.
However, because most brightness changes are triggered
by relative motion of the camera and the scene, the events
recorded at a single sensor location seldom correspond
to the same world point. To extract meaningful information from event cameras, it is helpful to register events that
were triggered by the same underlying world point. In this
work we propose a new model of event data that captures
its natural spatio-temporal structure. We start by developing a model for aligned event data. That is, we develop
a model for the data as though it has been perfectly registered already. In particular, we model the aligned data
as a spatio-temporal Poisson point process. Based on this
model, we develop a maximum likelihood approach to registering events that are not yet aligned. That is, we find
transformations of the observed events that make them as
likely as possible under our model. In particular we extract
the camera rotation that leads to the best event alignment.
We show new state of the art accuracy for rotational velocity estimation on the DAVIS 240C dataset [20]. In addition,
our method is also faster and has lower computational complexity than several competing methods. Code: https:
//github.com/pbideau/Event-ST-PPP

1. Introduction
Inspired by biological vision systems, event cameras [14,
25, 33, 4, 5] mimic certain biological features of the human vision system, such as recording brightness changes
as events, asynchronously, and at high temporal resolution.

(a) Method overview

(b) Video frame

(c) Unaligned events, (d) Aligned events, sharp
‘blurred’ event image. event image.

Figure 1. Alignment of event data by maximizing the joint probability of a set of events pA (Rω (O)). Top row: Events are plotted
in red/blue depending on their polarity. The projection of events
onto the 2D image plane is shown in black - indicating the quality of their alignment over time. Aligned events projected onto
2D lead to sharp edge map, where as unaligned events are dispersed over the image plane. Bottom row: video frame, accumulated events, accumulated aligned events.

This relatively new way of acquiring visual information differs significantly from classical frame-based video recordings, leading to new research directions in computer vision
and drawing close connections to robotics and the cognitive sciences. Prior work has shown that event data is rich
enough to recover high quality brightness images, even in
high-speed and high dynamic range (HDR) scenarios [26],
and it allows early stage information processing such as motion perception and recognition [35, 12]. Despite these advantages, current vision algorithms still struggle to unlock
the benefits of events cameras.

13495

