Monocular, One-stage, Regression of Multiple 3D People
Yu Sun1 * Qian Bao2 Wu Liu2† Yili Fu1† Michael J. Black3 Tao Mei2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 JD AI Research
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
yusun@stu.hit.edu.cn, baoqian@jd.com, liuwu@live.cn, meylfu@hit.edu.cn
black@tuebingen.mpg.de, tmei@live.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on the regression of multiple 3D people from a single RGB image. Existing approaches predominantly follow a multi-stage pipeline that first detects
people in bounding boxes and then independently regresses
their 3D body meshes. In contrast, we propose to Regress
all meshes in a One-stage fashion for Multiple 3D People (termed ROMP). The approach is conceptually simple,
bounding box-free, and able to learn a per-pixel representation in an end-to-end manner. Our method simultaneously
predicts a Body Center heatmap and a Mesh Parameter
map, which can jointly describe the 3D body mesh on the
pixel level. Through a body-center-guided sampling process, the body mesh parameters of all people in the image are easily extracted from the Mesh Parameter map.
Equipped with such a fine-grained representation, our onestage framework is free of the complex multi-stage process
and more robust to occlusion. Compared with state-ofthe-art methods, ROMP achieves superior performance on
the challenging multi-person benchmarks, including 3DPW
and CMU Panoptic. Experiments on crowded/occluded
datasets demonstrate the robustness under various types
of occlusion. The code, released at https://github.
com/Arthur151/ROMP, is the first real-time implementation of monocular multi-person 3D mesh regression.

1. Introduction
Recently, great progress has been made in monocular
3D human pose and shape estimation, particularly in images with a single person [20, 22, 23, 48, 51]. However, for
more general scenes with multiple people, it is crucial to
deal with truncation by the image frame, person-person occlusion, and environmental occlusion. Robustness to such
occlusions is critical for real-world applications.
Existing approaches [15, 22, 52, 53] follow a multi* This work was done when Yu Sun was an intern at JD AI Research.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Given a challenging multi-person image like (a), the
state-of-the-art approaches, e.g., VIBE [22] (left), fail to deal with
truncation, scene occlusion, and person-person occlusion. The
reason lies in the multi-stage design (b), where the bounding-boxlevel features are often implicit, ambiguous, and inseparable in
multi-person cases. We propose to regress all meshes in one single
stage for multiple 3D people. Specifically, we develop an explicit
pixel-level representation (c) for fine-grained one-stage estimation
that increases robustness to truncation and occlusion while significantly reducing computational complexity.

stage design that equips the single-person method with a
2D person detector to handle multi-person scenes. Generally, they first detect regions with people and then extract
the bounding-box-level features, which are used to regress
each single 3D human mesh [11, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 39, 47,
51, 60]. However, as shown in Fig. 1, this strategy is prone

11179

