Manifold Matching via Deep Metric Learning for Generative Modeling
Mengyu Dai*
Microsoft

Haibin Hang*
University of Delaware

mendai@microsoft.com

haibin@udel.edu

Abstract
We propose a manifold matching approach to generative models which includes a distribution generator (or data
generator) and a metric generator. In our framework, we
view the real data set as some manifold embedded in a highdimensional Euclidean space. The distribution generator
aims at generating samples that follow some distribution
condensed around the real data manifold. It is achieved
by matching two sets of points using their geometric shape
descriptors, such as centroid and p-diameter, with learned
distance metric; the metric generator utilizes both real data
and generated samples to learn a distance metric which is
close to some intrinsic geodesic distance on the real data
manifold. The produced distance metric is further used for
manifold matching. The two networks learn simultaneously
during the training process. We apply the approach on both
unsupervised and supervised learning tasks: in unconditional image generation task, the proposed method obtains
competitive results compared with existing generative models; in super-resolution task, we incorporate the framework
in perception-based models and improve visual qualities by
producing samples with more natural textures. Experiments
and analysis demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of
the proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models including Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [21], Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
[13] and their variants [3, 26, 24, 42, 10, 55, 41] have
achieved great success in generative tasks such as image
and video synthesis, super-resolution (SR), image-to-image
translation, text generation, neural rendering, etc. The
above approaches try to generate samples which mimic real
data by minimizing various discrepancies between their corresponding statistical distributions, such as using KL divergence [21], Jensen-Shannon divergence [13], Wasserstein
distance [3], Maximum Mean Discrepancy [26] and so on.

These approaches focused on the data distribution aspect
and did not pay enough attention to the underlying metrics
of these distributions. The interplay between distribution
measure and its underlying metric is a central topic in optimal transport (cf. [47]). Despite that researchers have successfully employed optimal transport theory in generative
models [3, 50, 9], simply assuming the underlying metric
to be Euclidean metric may neglect some rich information
lying in the data [1]. In addition, although the above approaches are validated to be effective, successful training
setups are mostly based on empirical observations and lack
of physical interpretations.
In this paper we bring up a geometric perspective which
serves as an important parallel view of generative models as
GANs. Table 1 summarizes the main differences between
classic GANs and our proposed (so-called MvM) framework. Instead of directly matching statistical discrepancies under Euclidean distance, we provide a more ﬂexible
framework which is built upon learning the intrinsic distances among data points. Speciﬁcally, we treat the real data
set as some manifold embedded in high-dimensional Euclidean space, and generate a fake distribution measure condensed around the real data manifold by optimizing a Manifold Matching (MM) objective. The MM objective is built
on shape descriptors, such as centroid and p-diameter with
respect to some proper metric learnt by a metric generator
using Metric Learning (ML) approaches. During training
process, the (fake data) distribution generator and the metric
generator work interchangeably and produces better distribution (metric) that facilitates the efﬁcient training of metric
(distribution) generator. The learned distances can not only
be used to formulate energy-based loss functions [22] for
MM, but can also reveal meaningful geometric structures
of real data manifold.
Table 1. Main differences between GANs and MvM.
Differences
Main point of view
Matching terms
Matching criteria
Underlying metric
Objective functions

GANs
statistics
means, moments, etc.
statistical discrepancy
default Euclidean
one min-max value function

MvM
geometry
centroids, p-diameters
learned distances
learned intrinsic
two distinct objectives

We apply the proposed framework on two tasks: uncon-

* Equal contributions.

6587

