Motion Adaptive Pose Estimation from Compressed Videos
Zhipeng Fan1
Jun Liu2 * Yao Wang1
Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn NY, USA1
Information Systems Technology and Design Pillar, Singapore University of
Technology and Design, Singapore2
zf606@nyu.edu jun liu@sutd.edu.sg yw523@nyu.edu

Abstract
Human pose estimation from videos has many realworld applications. Existing methods focus on applying
models with a uniform computation profile on fully decoded frames, ignoring the freely-available motion signals
and motion-compensation residuals from the compressed
stream. A novel model, called Motion Adaptive Pose Net is
proposed to exploit the compressed streams to efficiently decode pose sequences from videos. The model incorporates a
Motion Compensated ConvLSTM to propagate the spatially
aligned features, along with an adaptive gate to dynamically determine if the computationally expensive features
should be extracted from fully decoded frames to compensate the motion-warped features, solely based on the residual errors. Leveraging the informative yet readily available
signals from compressed streams, we propagate the latent
features through our Motion Adaptive Pose Net efficiently
Our model outperforms the state-of-the-art models in poseestimation accuracy on two widely used datasets with only
around half of the computation complexity.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has drawn increasing amount of
attentions over the years [1, 27, 38, 22, 45, 34, 41, 25]. It
has a wild range of applications in action recognition, human computer interactions, AR/VR and robotics. Over the
years, there have been growing interests in the pose estimation from videos, in which human dynamics has been faithfully captured compared to still images. In applications like
intelligent surveillance camera analysis or imitation learning for robots, thousands of hours videos need to be analyzed by the deep models, which draws attention to more
efficient approaches [23, 49, 7] to process the frames.
Directly adopting the state-of-the-art models to perform
pose estimation on each frame is sub-optimal as it not only
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. We introduce the Motion Adaptive Pose Net, which exploit the usage of the free of charge yet valuable motion vectors
and motion-compensation residuals from compressed streams to
dramatically boost the efficiency of the video based pose estimation models. Exploiting the readily available motion and residual
information stored in the compressed streams, we obtain state of
the art performance with about half of the computation.

ignores the valuable temporal dynamics embedded across
consecutive frames but also results in huge amount of redundant computations. Recent approaches [19, 20, 41, 25]
adopt temporal modules to model the temporal dynamics
frame by frame, e.g. Recurrent Neural Net [19], LSTM
models [20, 41] and temporal convolution models [25], etc.
However, features from each frame are still extracted independently without considering the natural coherence between neighboring frames.
On the other hand, video compression techniques relies
heavily on the temporal coherence to drastically reduce the
size of the videos. The modern standard [30, 29] split the
entire videos into group of pictures (GOP) and only fraction
of frames are encoded in its complete form. For the remaining frames, only sparse motion vectors (MV) and residual
errors (R) are stored. The SOTA pose machines operate
on fully decoded frames while constantly ignore the free of
charge yet valuable motion field encoded in the compressed
streams.
Motivated by the tremendous amount of space savings

11719

