DivAug: Plug-in Automated Data Augmentation with Explicit Diversity
Maximization
Zirui Liu* 1 , Haifeng Jin* 2 , Ting-Hsiang Wang2 , Kaixiong Zhou1 , and Xia Hu1
1
Rice Univeristy
2
Texas A&M University
{zl105, kz34, xia.hu}@rice.edu
{jin, thwang1231}@tamu.edu

Abstract
Human-designed data augmentation strategies have
been replaced by automatically learned augmentation policy in the past two years. Specifically, recent work has empirically shown that the superior performance of the automated data augmentation methods stems from increasing
the diversity of augmented data [4, 5]. However, two factors
regarding the diversity of augmented data are still missing:
1) the explicit definition (and thus measurement) of diversity and 2) the quantifiable relationship between diversity
and its regularization effects. To bridge this gap, we propose a diversity measure called Variance Diversity and theoretically show that the regularization effect of data augmentation is promised by Variance Diversity. We validate in
experiments that the relative gain from automated data augmentation in test accuracy is highly correlated to Variance
Diversity. An unsupervised sampling-based framework, DivAug, is designed to directly maximize Variance Diversity and hence strengthen the regularization effect. Without requiring a separate search process, the performance
gain from DivAug is comparable with the state-of-the-art
method with better efficiency. Moreover, under the semisupervised setting, our framework can further improve the
performance of semi-supervised learning algorithms compared to RandAugment, making it highly applicable to realworld problems, where labeled data is scarce. The code is
available at https://github.com/warai-0toko/
DivAug.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation is a technique to create synthetic data
from existing data with controlled perturbation. For example, in the context of image recognition, data augmentation
refers to applying image operations, e.g., cropping and flip* The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.

ping, to input images to generate augmented images, which
have labels the same as their originals. In practice, data
augmentation has been widely used to improve the generalization in deep learning models and is thought to encourage
model insensitivity towards data perturbation [19, 14, 16].
Although data augmentation works well in practice, designing data augmentation strategies requires human expertise,
and the strategy customized for one dataset often works
poorly for another dataset. Recent efforts have been dedicated to automating the design of augmentation strategies.
It has been shown that training models with a learned data
augmentation policy may significantly improve test accuracy [20, 28, 5, 15, 13].
However, we do not yet have a good theory to explain how data augmentation improves model generalization. Currently, the most well-known hypothesis is that data
augmentation improves generalization by imposing a regularization effect: it regularizes models to give consistent
outputs within the vicinity of the original data, where the
vicinity of the original data is defined as the space that contains all augmented data after applying operations that do
not drastically alter image features [27, 6, 23]. Meanwhile,
previous automated data augmentation works claim that the
performance gain from applying learned augmentation policies arises from the increase in diversity [4, 5, 15]. However, the “diversity” in the claims remains a hand-waving
concept: it is evaluated by the number of distinct subpolicies utilized during training or visually evaluated from a
human perspective. Without formally defining diversity and
its relation to regularization, the augmentation strategies
can only be evaluated indirectly by evaluating the models
trained on the augmented data, which may cost thousands of
GPU hours [4]. It motivates us to explore the possibility of
using an explicit diversity measure to quantify the regularization effect of the augmented data may have on the model.
Thus, in this way we can directly maximize the diversity of
the augmented data to strengthen the regularization effect to
improve the generalization of the model.

4762

