Bridging Unsupervised and Supervised Depth from Focus
via All-in-Focus Supervision
Ning-Hsu Wang1,2
Ren Wang1
Yu-Lun Liu1
Yu-Hao Huang1
1
1
Yu-Lin Chang
Chia-Ping Chen
Kevin Jou1
1

MediaTek Inc.

2

National Tsing Hua University

https://github.com/albert100121/AiFDepthNet

Abstract
Depth estimation is a long-lasting yet important task in
computer vision. Most of the previous works try to estimate
depth from input images and assume images are all-in-focus
(AiF), which is less common in real-world applications. On
the other hand, a few works take defocus blur into account
and consider it as another cue for depth estimation. In this
paper, we propose a method to estimate not only a depth
map but an AiF image from a set of images with different
focus positions (known as a focal stack). We design a shared
architecture to exploit the relationship between depth and
AiF estimation. As a result, the proposed method can be
trained either supervisedly with ground truth depth, or unsupervisedly with AiF images as supervisory signals. We
show in various experiments that our method outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods both quantitatively and qualitatively, and also has higher efficiency in inference time.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation has been one of the most fundamental
computer vision problems in decades. Many downstream
tasks, such as augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR)
and autonomous driving, highly rely on this research topic.
Recently, it also enabled an increasing number of applications for smartphone photography, such as depth-of-field
adjustment, background substitution, and changing focus
after the picture is taken.
Consequently, depth sensing has become a fundamental
component for capturing devices. Active depth sensing solutions such as Time-of-Flight (ToF) and structured light are
often expensive and power-consuming due to the need for
specialized hardware. Passive techniques, such as binocular
or multi-view stereo, are more cost and power-efficient but
prone to errors in textureless regions.
Deep learning based stereo matching methods tackle this

problem in a data-driven way by learning depth estimation
directly from input images. However, they require a large
amount of high-quality paired training data, which are timeconsuming and expensive to acquire. They also suffer when
the training data are imperfect: synthesized and unrealistic
input images, or inaccurately registered depth maps.
Some unsupervised learning approaches [9, 42] were proposed to address this problem. They usually use image
reconstruction loss and consistency loss without the need for
ground truth depth data. They can also mitigate domain gaps
by training directly with real-world stereo images without
corresponding registered depth maps.
Another relatively under-explored cue for depth estimation is defocus blur. The task of depth-from-focus (or defocus) aims to estimate the depth of a scene from a focal
stack, i.e., images taken at different focal positions by the
same camera. This allows consumer auto-focus monocular
cameras to estimate depth without additional hardware.
Conventional optimization based depth-from-focus approaches [37, 36, 26] estimate the level of sharpness for
each pixel and often suffer from textureless objects or aperture problems. Deep learning techniques [11, 23] help to
overcome these issues but need ground truth depth data for
supervised learning. It’s difficult and time-consuming to
retrieve focal stacks with registered depth maps, let alone the
imperfect depth data obtained by hardware solutions such as
ToF sensors [11]. One could synthesize defocus blur on a
synthetic dataset with synthetic depth maps [23]. However,
it is still questionable whether the thin lens synthesis model
could represent real-world optics well.
In this paper, we propose a novel method to estimate
depth and an all-in-focus (AiF) image jointly from an input
focal stack. We exploit the relationship between these two
tasks and design a shared common network. Moreover, the
proposed network can be trained either supervisedly with
ground truth depth maps or unsupervisedly with only ground
truth AiF images. Compared to high-quality labeled depth,
acquiring AiF images is relatively easier because AiF images
can be captured with smaller apertures along with longer

12621

