ROBUST N AV: Towards Benchmarking Robustness in Embodied Navigation
Prithvijit Chattopadhyay1,2 *
1

Georgia Tech

Judy Hoffman1
2

Roozbeh Mottaghi2,3
3

PRIOR @ Allen Institute of AI

{prithvijit3,judy}@gatech.edu

Aniruddha Kembhavi2,3

University of Washington

{roozbehm,anik}@allenai.org

prior.allenai.org/projects/robustnav

Abstract
As an attempt towards assessing the robustness of embodied navigation agents, we propose ROBUST N AV, a
framework to quantify the performance of embodied navigation agents when exposed to a wide variety of visual
– affecting RGB inputs – and dynamics – affecting transition dynamics – corruptions. Most recent efforts in visual
navigation have typically focused on generalizing to novel
target environments with similar appearance and dynamics characteristics. With ROBUST NAV, we find that some
standard embodied navigation agents significantly underperform (or fail) in the presence of visual or dynamics corruptions. We systematically analyze the kind of idiosyncrasies that emerge in the behavior of such agents when
operating under corruptions. Finally, for visual corruptions in ROBUST NAV, we show that while standard techniques to improve robustness such as data-augmentation
and self-supervised adaptation offer some zero-shot resistance and improvements in navigation performance, there
is still a long way to go in terms of recovering lost performance relative to clean “non-corrupt” settings, warranting
more research in this direction. Our code is available at
https://github.com/allenai/robustnav.

1. Introduction
A longstanding goal of the artificial intelligence community has been to develop algorithms for embodied agents
that are capable of reasoning about rich perceptual information and thereby accomplishing tasks by navigating in
and interacting with their environments. In addition to being able to exhibit these capabilities, it is equally important
that such embodied agents are able to do so in a robust and
generalizable manner.
A major challenge in Embodied AI is to ensure that
agents can generalize to environments with different appearance statistics and motion dynamics than the environment used for training those agents. For instance, an agent
* Part of the work done when PC was a research intern at AI2.

Agent Operating in
a RoboTHOR Scene

Clean Frame

Camera Crack

Visual Corruption

(b)
Agent — LoCoBot

Ideal

Corrupted

Dynamics Corruption

MOVE_AHEAD
(with Drift)

MOVE_AHEAD

(a)

(c)

Figure 1. ROBUST N AV. (a) A navigation agent pretrained in clean
environments is asked to navigate to targets in unseen environments in the presence of (b) visual and (c) dynamics based corruptions. Visual corruptions (ex. camera crack) affect the agent’s egocentric RGB observations while Dynamics corruptions (ex. drift in
translation) affect transition dynamics in the unseen environment.

that is trained to navigate in “sunny” weather should continue to operate in rain despite the drastic changes in the
appearance, and an agent that is trained to move on carpet
should decidedly navigate when on a hardwood floor despite the discrepancy in friction. While a potential solution
may be to calibrate the agent for a specific target environment, it is not a scalable one since there can be enormous
varieties of unseen environments and situations. A more robust, efficient and scalable solution is to equip agents with
the ability to autonomously adapt to new situations by interaction without having to train for every possible target
scenario. Despite the remarkable progress in Embodied AI,
especially in embodied navigation [59, 46, 48, 54, 7], most
efforts focus on generalizing trained agents to unseen environments, but critically assume similar appearance and dynamics attributes across train and test environments.
As a first step towards assessing general purpose robustness of embodied agents, we propose ROBUST NAV, a
framework to quantify the performance of embodied navigation agents when exposed to a wide variety of common
visual (vis) and dynamics (dyn) corruptions – artifacts that
affect the egocentric RGB observations and transition dy-

15691

