Learning Self-Consistency for Deepfake Detection
Tianchen Zhao* Xiang Xu

Mingze Xu Hui Ding
Amazon/AWS AI

Yuanjun Xiong

Wei Xia

ericolon@umich.edu, {xiangx,xumingze,huidin,yuanjx,wxia}@amazon.com

Abstract
We propose a new method to detect deepfake images using the cue of the source feature inconsistency within the
forged images. It is based on the hypothesis that images’
distinct source features can be preserved and extracted after going through state-of-the-art deepfake generation processes. We introduce a novel representation learning approach, called pair-wise self-consistency learning (PCL),
for training ConvNets to extract these source features and
detect deepfake images. It is accompanied by a new image synthesis approach, called inconsistency image generator (I2G), to provide richly annotated training data for PCL.
Experimental results on seven popular datasets show that
our models improve averaged AUC over the state of the
art from 96.45% to 98.05% in the in-dataset evaluation and
from 86.03% to 92.18% in the cross-dataset evaluation.

1. Introduction
Deepfakes are synthetic media in which the identity or
expression of a target subject is replaced by that of another
source subject. They are predominantly generated by image stitching, which includes face detection, warping, and
blending. Attacks using deepfakes have caused a significant
amount of negative social impact, and also motivated methods to detect these forged videos. Most of these defense
methods [60, 26, 37, 51, 46, 5, 23, 21, 6] target detecting
suspicious artifacts left in the stitching process, such as eye
blinking [26], face warping [27], blending boundaries [23],
and fake prototypes [48]. In the wake of these defenders,
forgery techniques are also evolving on reducing these artifacts to avoid detection, forming an enduring arms race.
In this paper, we propose a new method to detect deepfakes generated by stitching-based methods. Unlike other
methods focusing on detecting artifacts described above,
our approach uses the cue of inconsistency of source features within the forged images. Conceptually, images carry
* Currently at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. The work was conducted while at Amazon/AWS AI.

Target Image

Extract
Source Features

Stitching

PRNU noise
Encoding artifacts
GAN fingerprints
…

Forged Image

Source feature type 1
Source feature type 2

Source Image
Deepfake

Figure 1: The forged image is generated by stitching target and
source images. We hypothesize that each of them carries distinct
source features that can uniquely identify their sources. Therefore, the forged image contains different source features at different locations, whereas those of a pristine image must be consistent
across all positions. By extracting the local source features and
measuring their self-consistency, we can detect forged images.

content-independent [14], spatially-local information that
can uniquely identify their sources. We call them the source
features. They could come from either imaging pipelines
(e.g., PRNU noise [30], specifications [14]), encoding approaches (e.g., JPEG compression patterns [1], compression rates) or image synthesis models [58]. We hypothesize
that these source features are still preserved after the modified image having gone through the state-of-the-art deepfake generation processes [28, 8, 15, 22, 39, 35]. Therefore,
a forged image would contain different source features at
different positions, whereas those of a pristine image must
be consistent across all positions. By extracting the local source features and measuring their self-consistency, we
can detect forged images.
Specifically, we use a convolutional neural network
(ConvNet) to extract source features in the form of downsampled feature maps. Each feature vector represents the
source features of a corresponding location in the input image. To train this ConvNet, we introduce a novel representation learning method, called pair-wise self-consistency
learning (PCL), which uses the consistency loss for supervision. We calculate the cosine similarity between very pairs
of feature vectors in the source feature map, and compute
the consistency loss on all pairs according to whether their

15023

