PlenOctrees for Real-time Rendering of Neural Radiance Fields
Alex Yu1
Hao Li1,3
1

UC Berkeley

2

Ruilong Li1,2
Matthew Tancik1
Ren Ng1
Angjoo Kanazawa1

USC Institute for Creative Technologies

Abstract
We introduce a method to render Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) in real time using PlenOctrees, an octree-based
3D representation which supports view-dependent effects.
Our method can render 800×800 images at more than 150
FPS, which is over 3000 times faster than conventional
NeRFs. We do so without sacrificing quality while preserving the ability of NeRFs to perform free-viewpoint rendering
of scenes with arbitrary geometry and view-dependent effects. Real-time performance is achieved by pre-tabulating
the NeRF into a PlenOctree. In order to preserve viewdependent effects such as specularities, we factorize the appearance via closed-form spherical basis functions. Specifically, we show that it is possible to train NeRFs to predict a spherical harmonic representation of radiance, removing the viewing direction as an input to the neural network. Furthermore, we show that PlenOctrees can be directly optimized to further minimize the reconstruction loss,
which leads to equal or better quality compared to competing methods. Moreover, this octree optimization step
can be used to reduce the training time, as we no longer
need to wait for the NeRF training to converge fully. Our
real-time neural rendering approach may potentially enable new applications such as 6-DOF industrial and product visualizations, as well as next generation AR/VR systems. PlenOctrees are amenable to in-browser rendering as
well; please visit the project page for the interactive online
demo, as well as video and code: https://alexyu.
net/plenoctrees.

1. Introduction
Despite the progress of real-time graphics, interactive
3D content with truly photorealistic scenes and objects are
still time consuming and costly to produce due to the necessity of optimized 3D assets and dedicated shaders. Instead, many graphics applications opt for image-based solutions. E-commerce websites often use a fixed set of views to
showcase their products; VR experiences often rely on 360

3

Pinscreen

Offline Model Generation

Input Images

NeRF-SH

PlenOctree

Real-time Rendering
PlenOctrees Demo

150 FPS

Figure 1: Real-time NeRF with PlenOctrees. Given a set of
posed images of a scene, our method creates a 3D volumetric
model that can be rendered in real-time. We propose PlenOctrees,
which are octrees that can capture view-dependent dependent effects such as specularities. Rendering using our approach is orders
of magnitude faster than NeRF.

video recordings to avoid the costly production of real 3D
scenes, and mapping services such as Google Street View
stitch images into panoramic views limited to 3-DOF.
Recent advances in neural rendering, such as neural volumes [23] and neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [28], open a
promising new avenue to model arbitrary objects and scenes
in 3D from a set of calibrated images. NeRFs in particular can faithfully render detailed scenes and appearances
with non-Lambertian effects from any view, while simultaneously offering a high degree of compression in terms of
storage. Partly due to these exciting properties, of late, there
has been an explosion of research based on NeRF.
Nevertheless, for practical applications, runtime performance remains a critical limitation of NeRFs: due to the
extreme sampling requirements and costly neural network
queries, rendering a NeRF is agonizingly slow. For illustration, it takes roughly 30 seconds to render an 800x800

5752

