Distilling Optimal Neural Networks: Rapid Search in Diverse Spaces
Bert Moons, Parham Noorzad, Andrii Skliar, Giovanni Mariani,
Dushyant Mehta, Chris Lott and Tijmen Blankevoort
Qualcomm AI Research∗
{bmoons,parham,askliar,gmariani,dushmeht,clott,tijmen}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) methods neither efficiently scale to multiple hardware
platforms, nor handle diverse architectural search-spaces.
To remedy this, we present DONNA (Distilling Optimal
Neural Network Architectures), a novel pipeline for rapid,
scalable and diverse NAS, that scales to many user scenarios. DONNA consists of three phases. First, an accuracy
predictor is built using blockwise knowledge distillation
from a reference model. This predictor enables searching
across diverse networks with varying macro-architectural
parameters such as layer types and attention mechanisms,
as well as across micro-architectural parameters such as
block repeats and expansion rates. Second, a rapid evolutionary search finds a set of pareto-optimal architectures for
any scenario using the accuracy predictor and on-device
measurements. Third, optimal models are quickly finetuned to training-from-scratch accuracy. DONNA is up to
100× faster than MNasNet in finding state-of-the-art architectures on-device. Classifying ImageNet, DONNA architectures are 20% faster than EfficientNet-B0 and MobileNetV2 on a Nvidia V100 GPU and 10% faster with
0.5% higher accuracy than MobileNetV2-1.4x on a Samsung S20 smartphone. In addition to NAS, DONNA is
used for search-space extension and exploration, as well as
hardware-aware model compression.

1. Introduction
Although convolutional neural networks (CNN) have
achieved state-of-the-art performance for a wide range of
vision tasks, they do not always execute efficiently on hardware platforms like desktop GPUs or mobile DSPs and
NPUs. To alleviate this issue, CNNs are specifically optimized to minimize latency and energy consumption for
on-device performance. However, the optimal CNN architecture can vary significantly between different platforms.
∗ Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

Inc.

Even on a single platform, their efficiency can change with
different operating conditions or driver versions. To solve
this problem, low-cost methods for automated hardwareaware neural architecture search (NAS) are required.
Current NAS algorithms, however, suffer from several
limitations. First, many optimization algorithms [32, 12, 31,
20] target only a single deployment scenario: a hardwareagnostic complexity metric, a hardware platform, or different latency, energy, or accuracy requirements. This
means the search has to be repeated whenever any part
of that scenario changes. Second, many methods cannot
search in truly diverse search spaces, with different types
of convolutional kernels, activation functions and attention mechanisms. Current methods either search through
large and diverse spaces at a prohibitively expensive search
cost [32, 12], or limit their applicability by trading search
time for a more constrained and less diverse search [3, 31,
33, 41, 23, 22]. Most of such speedups in NAS come
from a reliance on weight sharing mechanisms, which require all architectures in the search space to be structurally
similar. Thus, these works typically only search among
micro-architectural choices such as kernel sizes, expansion
rates, and block repeats and not among macro-architectural
choices of layer types, attention mechanisms and activation
functions. As such, they rely on prior expensive methods
such as [32, 12] for an optimal choice of macro-architecture.
We present DONNA (Distilling Optimal Neural Network Architectures), a method that addresses both issues: it
scales to multiple deployment scenarios with low additional
cost, and performs rapid NAS in diverse search spaces. The
method starts with a trained reference model. The first issue is resolved by splitting NAS into a scenario-agnostic
training phase, and a scenario-aware search phase that requires only limited training, as depicted in Figure 1. After an accuracy predictor is built in the training phase, the
search is executed quickly for each new deployment scenario, typically in the time-frame of hours, and only requiring minimal fine-tuning to finalize optimal models. Second,
DONNA considers diverse macro-architectural choices in
addition to micro-architectural choices, by creating this ac-

12229

