FIERY: Future Instance Prediction in Bird’s-Eye View
from Surround Monocular Cameras
Anthony Hu1,2
Zak Murez1
Nikhil Mohan1
Sofı́a Dudas1
1
1
Jeffrey Hawke
Vijay Badrinarayanan
Roberto Cipolla2
Alex Kendall1
1

Wayve, UK.

2

University of Cambridge, UK.

Abstract
Driving requires interacting with road agents and predicting their future behaviour in order to navigate safely.
We present FIERY: a probabilistic future prediction model
in bird’s-eye view from monocular cameras. Our model predicts future instance segmentation and motion of dynamic
agents that can be transformed into non-parametric future
trajectories. Our approach combines the perception, sensor fusion and prediction components of a traditional autonomous driving stack by estimating bird’s-eye-view prediction directly from surround RGB monocular camera inputs. FIERY learns to model the inherent stochastic nature
of the future solely from camera driving data in an end-toend manner, without relying on HD maps, and predicts multimodal future trajectories. We show that our model outperforms previous prediction baselines on the NuScenes and
Lyft datasets. The code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/wayveai/fiery.

1. Introduction
Prediction of future states is a key challenge in many
autonomous decision making systems. This is particularly
true for motion planning in highly dynamic environments:
for example in autonomous driving where the motion of
other road users and pedestrians has a substantial influence
on the success of motion planning [10]. Estimating the motion and future poses of these road users enables motion
planning algorithms to better resolve multimodal outcomes
where the optimal action may be ambiguous knowing only
the current state of the world.
Autonomous driving is inherently a geometric problem,
where the goal is to navigate a vehicle safely and correctly
through 3D space. As such, an orthographic bird’s-eye view
(BEV) perspective is commonly used for motion planning
and prediction based on LiDAR sensing [38, 49]. Recent
advances in camera-based perception have rivalled LiDAR-

based perception [48], and we anticipate that this will also
be possible for wider monocular vision tasks, including prediction. Building a perception and prediction system based
on cameras would enable a leaner, cheaper and higher resolution visual recognition system over LiDAR sensing.
Most of the work in camera-based prediction to date has
either been performed directly in the perspective view coordinate frame [1, 23], or using simplified BEV raster representations of the scene [28, 12, 10] generated by HDmapping systems such as [29, 16]. We wish to build predictive models that operate in an orthographic bird’s-eye view
frame (due to the benefits for planning and control [34]),
though without relying on auxiliary systems to generate a
BEV raster representation of the scene.
A key theme in robust perception systems for autonomous vehicles has been the concept of early sensor
fusion, generating 3D object detections directly from image and LiDAR data rather than seeking to merge the predicted outputs of independent object detectors on each sensor input. Learning a task jointly from multiple sources
of sensory data as in [50], rather than a staged pipeline,
has been demonstrated to offer improvement to perception
performance in tasks such as object detection. We seek
similar benefits in joining perception and sensor fusion to
prediction by estimating bird’s-eye-view prediction directly
from surround RGB monocular camera inputs, rather than a
multi-stage discrete pipeline of tasks.
Lastly, traditional autonomous driving stacks [13] tackle
future prediction by extrapolating the current behaviour of
dynamic agents, without taking into account possible interactions. They rely on HD maps and use road connectivity to
generate a set of future trajectories. Instead, FIERY learns
to predict future motion of road agents directly from camera driving data in an end-to-end manner, without relying
on HD maps. It can reason about the probabilistic nature of
the future, and predicts multimodal future trajectories (see
blog post and Figure 1).
To summarise the main contributions of this paper:

15273

