Collaborative Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning
from Decentralized Data

1

Weiming Zhuang1,3 Xin Gan2 Yonggang Wen2 Shuai Zhang3 Shuai Yi3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 SenseTime Research
{weiming001,ganx0005}@e.ntu.edu.sg,ygwen@ntu.edu.sg,{zhangshuai,yishuai}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Unsupervised representation learning has achieved outstanding performances using centralized data available on
the Internet. However, the increasing awareness of privacy
protection limits sharing of decentralized unlabeled image
data that grows explosively in multiple parties (e.g., mobile phones and cameras). As such, a natural problem is
how to leverage these data to learn visual representations
for downstream tasks while preserving data privacy. To address this problem, we propose a novel federated unsupervised learning framework, FedU. In this framework, each
party trains models from unlabeled data independently using contrastive learning with an online network and a target
network. Then, a central server aggregates trained models
and updates clients’ models with the aggregated model. It
preserves data privacy as each party only has access to its
raw data. Decentralized data among multiple parties are
normally non-independent and identically distributed (nonIID), leading to performance degradation. To tackle this
challenge, we propose two simple but effective methods: 1)
We design the communication protocol to upload only the
encoders of online networks for server aggregation and update them with the aggregated encoder; 2) We introduce a
new module to dynamically decide how to update predictors
based on the divergence caused by non-IID. The predictor
is the other component of the online network. Extensive experiments and ablations demonstrate the effectiveness and
significance of FedU. It outperforms training with only one
party by over 5% and other methods by over 14% in linear
and semi-supervised evaluation on non-IID data.

1. Introduction
Learning good visual representations without supervision is attracting considerable attention in recent years.
These visual representations can facilitate efficient training of downstream tasks [29, 24] like image segmentation [19]. Researchers have proposed many unsupervised

representation learning methods by designing pretext tasks
[5, 37, 22, 6]. Among them, contrastive learning [9, 23]
based on instance-level discrimination has achieved the
state-of-the-art performance [33, 1, 10, 8, 2]. These unsupervised representation learning methods rely on the assumption that data can be collected and stored in a centralized database, such as images from the Internet.
However, in real-world scenarios, decentralized image
data are growing explosively and the data collected in multiple parties may not be centralized due to data privacy regulations [3]. For example, photos taken on phones or images collected from street cameras could contain sensitive
information. Centralizing them for training could reveal the
identity and locality of individuals [42]. Besides, compared
with training representations using only publicly available
data from the Internet, representations learned from the actual data may be more representative for downstream tasks
applied on similar scenarios. Utilizing the decentralized
unlabeled image data to learn representations with privacy
guaranteed is an important but overlooked problem.
Existing methods cannot leverage decentralized unlabeled data to learn a generic representation while preserving
data privacy. Federated learning is an emerging distributed
training technique [21] that have empowered multiple parties to collaboratively learn computer vision models, such
as segmentation [18, 28], object detection [20], and person re-identification [42]. But traditional federated learning
relies on data labels. Decentralized data is normally nonindependent and identically distributed (non-IID), which is
one of the key challenges for learning from multiple parties
[38, 16]. For example, in real-world street datasets [20],
cameras capture diverse two or three out of seven object
categories. The state-of-the-art unsupervised learning approaches are effective, but they may not work well with
non-IID data, as shown in Figure 1(a). Although Federated Contrastive Averaging (FedCA) [36] addresses the unlabeled and non-IID problems, it imposes potential privacy
leakage risks by directly sharing features of clients’ data.
In this paper, we propose a new federated unsupervised
representation learning framework, FedU, to learn generic

4912

