Towards Real-World Prohibited Item Detection: A Large-Scale X-ray
Benchmark
Boying Wang1,2 , Libo Zhang1,2,3∗, Longyin Wen4 , Xianglong Liu5 , Yanjun Wu1
1
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, UCAS, Hangzhou, China
4
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
5
Beihang University, Beijing, China
{boying2018, libo, yanjun}@iscas.ac.cn longyin.wen.cv@gmail.com xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic security inspection using computer vision
technology is a challenging task in real-world scenarios
due to various factors, including intra-class variance, class
imbalance, and occlusion. Most of the previous methods
rarely solve the cases that the prohibited items are deliberately hidden in messy objects due to the lack of large-scale
datasets, restricted their applications in real-world scenarios. Towards real-world prohibited item detection, we collect a large-scale dataset, named as PIDray, which covers
various cases in real-world scenarios for prohibited item
detection, especially for deliberately hidden items. With
an intensive amount of effort, our dataset contains 12 categories of prohibited items in 47, 677 X-ray images with
high-quality annotated segmentation masks and bounding
boxes. To the best of our knowledge, it is the largest prohibited items detection dataset to date. Meanwhile, we design
the selective dense attention network (SDANet) to construct
a strong baseline, which consists of the dense attention
module and the dependency refinement module. The dense
attention module formed by the spatial and channel-wise
dense attentions, is designed to learn the discriminative features to boost the performance. The dependency refinement
module is used to exploit the dependencies of multi-scale
features. Extensive experiments conducted on the collected
PIDray dataset demonstrate that the proposed method per∗ Corresponding author (libo@iscas.ac.cn).
This work was supported by the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, CAS,
Grant No. ZDBS-LY-JSC038, the National Natural Science Foundation of China, Grant No.
61807033 and Tencent Youtu Lab.
Libo Zhang was supported by Youth Innovation Promotion Association, CAS (2020111), and Outstanding Youth Scientist Project of ISCAS. The PIDray dataset are available at https://github.com/
bywang2018/security-dataset.

Figure 1. Comparisons between the natural image (left) and X-ray
image (right).

forms favorably against the state-of-the-art methods, especially for detecting the deliberately hidden items.

1. Introduction
Security inspection is a process of checking assets
against set criteria and the evaluation of security systems
and access controls to ensure safety, which is important to
uncover any potential risks in various scenarios, such as
public transportation and sensitive departments. In practice, the inspectors are required to monitor the scanned Xray images acquired by the security inspection machine to
uncover prohibited items, such as guns, ammunition, explosives, corrosive substances, toxic and radioactive substances. However, the inspectors struggle to localize prohibited items hidden in messy objects accurately and efficiently, which poses a great threat to safety.
In recent years, due to the substantial development of
deep learning and computer vision technologies[31, 24, 34,
14, 13, 16, 3], automatic security inspection of prohibited items becomes possible. The security inspectors can
quickly identify the locations and categories of prohibited

5412

