Joint Visual Semantic Reasoning: Multi-Stage Decoder for Text Recognition
Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Aneeshan Sain1,2 Amandeep Kumar* Shuvozit Ghose*
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{a.bhunia, a.sain, p.chowdhury, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk {shuvozit.ghose, kumar.amandeep015}@gmail.com.

Abstract

Text recognition has been a popular area of research
[1, 33, 53] for decades thanks to its wide range of commercial applications [42], from translation apps in mixed
reality, street signs recognition in autonomous driving to assistive technology for the visually impaired [10], to name
a few. Significant progress in fundamental deep learning
components [25, 2] alongside sequence-to-sequence learning frameworks [53, 33, 46], have boosted unconstrained
word recognition accuracy (WRA) in recent times. Despite
* Interned with SketchX

FPN
Backbone
CNN

Gumbel
Noise

Temperature
Softmax

LSTM Decoder

Probabilities
Differentiable
Semantic Space
Visual-Semantic
Reasoning

Backward Pass

2 layer
Bi-LSTM

Logits

Visual-Semantic
Reasoning

argmax

One Hot

Forward Pass

1. Introduction

Differentiable
Semantic Space

LSTM
Decoder

Multi-scale 2D attention

Although text recognition has significantly evolved over
the years, state-of the-art (SOTA) models still struggle in the
wild scenarios due to complex backgrounds, varying fonts,
uncontrolled illuminations, distortions and other artifacts.
This is because such models solely depend on visual information for text recognition, thus lacking semantic reasoning
capabilities. In this paper, we argue that semantic information offers a complementary role in addition to visual only.
More specifically, we additionally utilize semantic information by proposing a multi-stage multi-scale attentional decoder that performs joint visual-semantic reasoning. Our
novelty lies in the intuition that for text recognition, prediction should be refined in a stage-wise manner. Therefore
our key contribution is in designing a stage-wise unrolling
attentional decoder where non-differentiability, invoked by
discretely predicted character labels, needs to be bypassed
for end-to-end training. While the first stage predicts using
visual features, subsequent stages refine on-top of it using
joint visual-semantic information. Additionally, we introduce multi-scale 2D attention along with dense and residual connections between different stages to deal with varying scales of character sizes, for better performance and
faster convergence during training. Experimental results
show our approach to outperform existing SOTA methods
by a considerable margin.

LSTM Decoder

reserved

Via Straight-Through
Gumbel-Softmax

Figure 1: Compared to existing attentional decoder architectures [53, 33], we design a novel multi-scale attention
decoder for text recognition which is unpacked in a stagewise manner . The problem of non-differentiability, due
to discrete-character prediction is bypassed via straightthrough Gumbel-Softmax operator [26], such that the later
stages can learn refining strategy over the previous prediction in an end-to-end differentiable way, with joint visualsemantic information.
such developments, state-of-the-art text recognition frameworks [3, 14, 37, 55, 8, 7, 9] still struggle in wild scenarios
[1, 42] due to complex backgrounds, varying fonts, uncontrolled illuminations, distortions and other artifacts. While
machines struggle with a combination of these challenges,
humans recognise them easily via joint visual-semantic reasoning. Therefore, the question in focus is – how to develop
a visual-semantic reasoning skill for text recognition?
State-of-the-art text recognition systems [1] mostly rely
on extracted visual features to recognize a word image
as a machine readable character-sequence. Follow-up efforts have been made towards improving reasoning ability
by increasing the depth of convolutional feature extractor
[14] having larger receptive fields, or introducing pyramidal
pooling [55] and stacking multiple Bi-LSTM layers [37].
Despite all these attempts that merely lead towards a better
context modeling [1], a semantic reasoning potential [13] is
largely missing beyond enriching the visual feature. In wild
scenarios, a word image might be blurred, distorted, partly

14940

