Discover the Unknown Biased Attribute of an Image Classifier
Zhiheng Li
Chenliang Xu
University of Rochester
{zhiheng.li,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

Abstract

• Face images: age
• Videos: “scene bias”

Recent works find that AI algorithms learn biases from
data. Therefore, it is urgent and vital to identify biases in
AI algorithms. However, the previous bias identification
pipeline overly relies on human experts to conjecture potential biases (e.g., gender), which may neglect other underlying
biases not realized by humans. To help human experts better
find the AI algorithms’ biases, we study a new problem in
this work – for a classifier that predicts a target attribute of
the input image, discover its unknown biased attribute.
To solve this challenging problem, we use a hyperplane
in the generative model’s latent space to represent an image attribute; thus, the original problem is transformed to
optimizing the hyperplane’s normal vector and offset. We
propose a novel total-variation loss within this framework as
the objective function and a new orthogonalization penalty
as a constraint. The latter prevents trivial solutions in which
the discovered biased attribute is identical with the target or
one of the known-biased attributes. Extensive experiments
on both disentanglement datasets and real-world datasets
show that our method can discover biased attributes and
achieve better disentanglement w.r.t. target attributes. Furthermore, the qualitative results show that our method can
discover unnoticeable biased attributes for various object
and scene classifiers, proving our method’s generalizability
for detecting biased attributes in diverse domains of images.

Step 1:
Humans speculate
potential biases.

1. Introduction
Although the performance of deep neural networks is
greatly improved by training on large-scale datasets, worrisome biases are also learned by AI algorithms. Thus it is
imperative to identify AI algorithms’ biases, whereas the
previous bias identification pipeline [5, 39] has some shortcomings. First, it overly relies on human experts to speculate
potential biases (Step 1 in Fig. 1 (a)), which may leave other
unconsidered biases unexposed. For example, people may
The code is available at https://git.io/J3kMh.

Step 2:
Humans collect and
label testing images.

Step 3:
Analyze classifier’s
predictions.

(a) Previous Bias Identification Pipeline

update

traversal images
Generative
Model

biased
attribute
hyperplane

Image
Classifier

LV + L?

objective and
constraint
<latexit sha1_base64="+glgLWtaKDs+mNBda1Dep4vDmjY=">AAACJnicbVBJS8NAGJ241rpFPXoZLIJgKUkV9CIUvXjwUMEukIQwmU7aoZOFmYlQQn6NF/+KFw8VEW/+FCdpDrX1wcDjfdub58WMCmkY39rK6tr6xmZlq7q9s7u3rx8cdkWUcEw6OGIR73tIEEZD0pFUMtKPOUGBx0jPG9/l9d4z4YJG4ZOcxMQJ0DCkPsVIKsnVb1K7WGLxoeekZt2oG5kdIDnCiKUPmduF59Bmat8AwXndjgmPM1evGQ2jAFwmZklqoETb1af2IMJJQEKJGRLCMo1YOinikmJGsqqdCBIjPEZDYikaooAIJy0cZvBUKQPoR1y9UMJCnZ9IUSDEJPBUZ+5ULNZy8b+alUj/2klpGCeShHh2yE8YlBHMM4MDygmWbKIIwpwqrxCPEEdYqmSrKgRz8cvLpNtsmBeN5uNlrXVbxlEBx+AEnAETXIEWuAdt0AEYvIA3MAUf2qv2rn1qX7PWFa2cOQJ/oP38Alxcpbs=</latexit>

Step 1: Hyperplane optimization.
Step 2: Human Interpretation.

Biased
attribute :
age

traversal images

young

old

Humans

(b) New Framework: Unknown Bias Discovery
Figure 1: While the previous pipeline (a) overly relies on
human efforts to identify biases, we devise a new automated
framework (b) that helps humans discover the unknown
biased attribute of an image classifier. In step 1, a generative models’ biased attribute hyperplane in the latent space
is optimized by our proposed optimization objective and
constraints. In step 2, humans can interpret the semantic
meaning of the biased attribute hyperplane from the transformation in the synthesized traversal images. For example,
images changing from “young” to “old” imply the biased
attribute age.
conjecture legally protected attributes (e.g., age, gender1 )
for face image classifiers and consider “scene bias” for the
action recognition task [7]. However, people may neglect
other unnoticeable biased attributes such as hair length [3]
and the presence of children [53] spuriously correlated with
gender. Although they are not legally protected attributes,
not considering these biased attributes may still lead to unfairness against different genders [53]. Second, the previous
pipeline also needs expensive human efforts to collect testing images and annotate biased attributes (Step 2 in Fig. 1
(a)) for analyzing classifier’s predictions. When one wants
to analyze biases in a new domain of images (e.g., object
1 In this paper, we use gender to denote visually perceived gender, which
does not indicate the person’s true gender identity.

14970

A
th
at
sp

