Learning Cross-Modal Contrastive Features for Video Domain Adaptation
Donghyun Kim1 , Yi-Hsuan Tsai2 , Bingbing Zhuang2 , Xiang Yu2
Stan Sclaroff1 , Kate Saenko1,3 , Manmohan Chandraker2
1
Boston University, 2 NEC Labs America, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
1

{donhk, sclaroff, saenko}@bu.edu, 2 {ytsai, bzhuang, xiangyu, manu}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Learning transferable and domain adaptive feature representations from videos is important for video-relevant tasks
such as action recognition. Existing video domain adaptation methods mainly rely on adversarial feature alignment,
which has been derived from the RGB image space. However, video data is usually associated with multi-modal information, e.g., RGB and optical flow, and thus it remains a
challenge to design a better method that considers the crossmodal inputs under the cross-domain adaptation setting. To
this end, we propose a unified framework for video domain
adaptation, which simultaneously regularizes cross-modal
and cross-domain feature representations. Specifically, we
treat each modality in a domain as a view and leverage
the contrastive learning technique with properly designed
sampling strategies. As a result, our objectives regularize
feature spaces, which originally lack the connection across
modalities or have less alignment across domains. We conduct experiments on domain adaptive action recognition
benchmark datasets, i.e., UCF, HMDB, and EPIC-Kitchens,
and demonstrate the effectiveness of our components against
state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Recently, domain adaptation has gained a lot of attention due to its efficiency during training without the need
of collecting ground truth labels in the target domain. Existing methods have made significant progress in imagebased tasks, such as classification [33, 14, 54, 42], semantic segmentation [16, 53, 56, 31, 38] and object detection
[8, 43, 24, 17]. While several works have sought to extend
this success to video-based tasks like action recognition by
aligning appearance (e.g., RGB) features through adversarial
learning [6, 9, 37], challenges persist in video adaptation
tasks due to the greater complexity of the video data. Moreover, different from the image data, domain shifts in videos
for action recognition often involve more complicated environments, which increases the difficulty for adaptation. For

Figure 1. We propose a cross-modal contrastive learning framework for video domain adaptation. Our framework consists of
two contrastive learning objectives: (1) cross-modal contrastive
learning to align cross-modal representations from the same video,
and (2) cross-domain contrastive learning to align representations
between the source and target domains in each modality.

example, the “fencing” action usually happens in a stadium,
but it can happen in other places such as home or outdoors.
Also, different actions can take place under the same background. Therefore, purely relying on aligning RGB features
can be biased to the background and affect the performance.
In addition to the appearance cue, other modalities such
as motion, audio, and text are considered in (self-)supervised
learning methods on the video data [46, 2, 26, 39]. In
this work, we focus on appearance and motion as the two
most common modalities in the cross-domain action recognition task, in which the motion modality (i.e., optical flow)
is shown to be more domain-invariant (e.g., background
changes) than RGB [36]. As a result, motion can better
capture background-irrelevant information, while RGB can
identify semantically meaningful information under different
camera setups, e.g., camera perspective.
As shown in Figure 1, with two modalities across two
domains, adaptation becomes a task of how to explore the
relationship of cross-modal and cross-domain features, to
fully exploit the multi-modal property for video domain
13618

