SCOUTER: Slot Attention-based Classifier for Explainable Image Recognition
Liangzhi Li1 , Bowen Wang2 , Manisha Verma1 , Yuta Nakashima1 ,
Ryo Kawasaki3 , Hajime Nagahara1
Osaka University, Japan
1
2

{li, mverma, n-yuta, nagahara}@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

bowen.wang@is.ids.osaka-u.ac.jp 3 ryo.kawasaki@ophthal.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

1

“7”

why “7”

why “1”

why “2”

why not “7”

why not “1”

why not “2”

loan

why loan

why tobacco

why cinema

why not loan

why not toba.

why not cine.

red-face cor.

why r-cor

why pel. cor.

why chat

why not r-cor

why not pel.

why not chat

Input

SCOUTER (+)

0

SCOUTER (-)

Figure 1. Positive and negative explanations. The images from top to down are from the test sets of MNIST [18], Con-text
[16], and CUB-200 [34] datasets. The models trained with positive (+) and negative (−) SCOUTER losses can respectively
highlight the positive and negative supports, based on which one can reason why or why not the images are classified into the
corresponding categories.

Abstract
Explainable artificial intelligence has been gaining attention in the past few years. However, most existing methods are based on gradients or intermediate features, which
are not directly involved in the decision-making process of
the classifier. In this paper, we propose a slot attentionbased classifier called SCOUTER for transparent yet accurate classification. Two major differences from other
attention-based methods include: (a) SCOUTER’s explanation is involved in the final confidence for each category,
offering more intuitive interpretation, and (b) all the categories have their corresponding positive or negative explanation, which tells “why the image is of a certain category” or “why the image is not of a certain category.” We
design a new loss tailored for SCOUTER that controls the

model’s behavior to switch between positive and negative
explanations, as well as the size of explanatory regions. Experimental results show that SCOUTER can give better visual explanations in terms of various metrics while keeping
good accuracy on small and medium-sized datasets. Code
is available1 .

1. Introduction
It is of great significance to know how deep models make
predictions, especially for the fields like medical diagnosis, where potential risks exist when black-box models are
adopted. Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI), which
can give a close look into models’ inference process, therefore has gained lots of attention.
1 https://github.com/wbw520/scouter

1046

