Partial Off-policy Learning: Balance Accuracy and Diversity for
Human-Oriented Image Captioning
Jiahe Shi
Yali Li*
Shengjin Wang
Department of Eletronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
shijh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Human-oriented image captioning with both high diversity and accuracy is a challenging task in vision+language
modeling. The reinforcement learning (RL) based frameworks promote the accuracy of image captioning, yet seriously hurt the diversity. In contrast, other methods based
on variational auto-encoder (VAE) or generative adversarial network (GAN) can produce diverse yet less accurate
captions. In this work, we devote our attention to promote the diversity of RL-based image captioning. To be
specific, we devise a partial off-policy learning scheme to
balance accuracy and diversity. First, we keep the model
exposed to varied candidate captions by sampling from the
initial state before RL launched. Second, a novel criterion
named max-CIDEr is proposed to serve as the reward for
promoting diversity. We combine the above-mentioned offpolicy strategy with the on-policy one to moderate the exploration effect, further balancing the diversity and accuracy for human-like image captioning. Experiments show
that our method locates the closest to human performance
in the diversity-accuracy space, and achieves the highest
Pearson correlation as 0.337 with human performance.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is a challenging task in the field of
computer vision and natural language processing. It requires not only extracting semantic information from images but also understanding and reorganizing such information in the form of natural language. To describe like humans, image captioning models should be capable of producing diverse and accurate captions. Besides generating
correct captions, several different captions about the visual
content should also be provided. From such a perspective, image caption models are supposed to generate humanoriented predictions by balancing accuracy and diversity.
Recent image captioning methods focus more on accu* corresponding author

On-policy:
Two zebras grazing in the grass in a field.
Two zebras grazing in the grass in a field.
Two zebras grazing in the grass in a field.
Two zebras grazing in the grass in a field.
Two zebras grazing in the grass in a field.

Diverse:
A backside of a zebra standing in some brush in a zoo.
A rear view of a zebra in a field near a deer.
A striped zebra stands near trees in a tree area.
A pair of zebras standing in a green field.
A zebra drinks water from a container at the side.

Ours:
A couple of zebras are grazing in a field.
Two zebras eating grass on a sunny day.
Two zebras grazing in their habitat near a fence.
Two zebras standing on a grass field and eating grass.
Two zebras grazing grass together side by side.

Figure 1. Typical outputs from different models by sampling 5
times according to the posteriors, where the captions generated by
on-policy trained model are correct but unvaried (top), and captions generated by models like VAE are diverse but less accurate
(middle). We aim at balancing the two aspects to mimic generating human-oriented captions (bottom).

racy with deep reinforcement learning (RL). In particular,
on-policy RL is adopted in [26, 23] to reduce the exposure bias and acquire sentence-level supervision. These
methods are proven to benefit the accuracy performance on
multiple metrics [22, 31, 9, 18, 1, 45]. However, they are
prone to generate common sentences, resulting in poor diversity [21]. Some other works focus on maintaining diversity [27, 10, 35, 38, 3, 4]. Based on VAE or GAN, the
diverse captions can be obtained. Yet the reported fair accuracy is acquired under the selection of oracle or consensus
re-ranking [11] process. When considering the entire posterior, there will be noticeable inaccurate cases predicted by
these models. As demonstrated in Fig. 1, we sample 5 times
according to the modeled posterior to evaluate the quality
on both accuracy and diversity. Though the on-policy RL
trained model [34] generates captions with no faults, it fails
to produce distinct sentences in other forms. The diverse
captioning model [35] can provide varied predictions, but
incorrect descriptions exist within the outputs. In a word,
there are obvious performance gaps on either diversity or
accuracy for existing image captioning methods.
In this paper, we motivate to balance the accuracy and diversity of image captioning models. To favor accuracy, we
train the image captioning model based on deep reinforcement learning. We investigate why current RL-based methods fail to generate diverse captions. We discover that the

2187

