Information-theoretic regularization for Multi-source Domain Adaptation
Geon Yeong Park
Sang Wan Lee
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
{pky3436, sangwan}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

result on MDA [2], many deep MDA approaches have been
proposed, mainly depend on the adversarial framework.

Adversarial learning strategy has demonstrated remarkable performance in dealing with single-source Domain
Adaptation (DA) problems, and it has recently been applied
to Multi-source DA (MDA) problems. Although most existing MDA strategies rely on a multiple domain discriminator
setting, its effect on the latent space representations has been
poorly understood. Here we adopt an information-theoretic
approach to identify and resolve the potential adverse effect
of the multiple domain discriminators on MDA: disintegration of domain-discriminative information, limited computational scalability, and a large variance in the gradient of
the loss during training. We examine the above issues by
situating adversarial DA in the context of information regularization. This also provides a theoretical justification for
using a single and unified domain discriminator. Based on
this idea, we implement a novel neural architecture called a
Multi-source Information-regularized Adaptation Networks
(MIAN). Large-scale experiments demonstrate that MIAN,
despite its structural simplicity, reliably and significantly
outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.

Most of existing adversarial MDA works [44, 46, 21, 48,
47, 43] have focused on approximating all combinations
of pairwise domain discrepancy between each source and
the target, which inevitably necessitates training of multiple
binary domain discriminators. While substantial technical
advances have been made in this regard, the pitfalls of using
multiple domain discriminators have not been fully studied. This paper focuses on the potential adverse effects of
using multiple domain discriminators on MDA in terms of
both quantity and quality. First, the domain-discriminative
information is inevitably distributed across multiple discriminators. For example, such discriminators primarily focus
on domain shift between each source and the target, while
the discrepancies between the source domains are neglected.
Moreover, the multiple source-target discriminator setting
often makes it difficult to approximate the combined \protect \mathcal  {H}divergence between mixture of sources and the target domain
because each discriminator is deemed to utilize the samples
only from the corresponding source and target domain as
inputs. Compared to a bound using combined divergence,
a bound based on pairwise divergence is not sufficiently
flexible to accommodate domain structures [2]. Second, the
computational load of the multiple domain discriminator
setting rapidly increases with the number of source domains
(\protect \mathcal  {O}(N)), which significantly limits scalability. Third, it could
undermine the stability of training, as earlier works solve
multiple adversarial min-max problems.

1. Introduction
Although a large number of studies have demonstrated
the ability of deep learning to solve challenging tasks, the
problems are mostly confined to a similar type or a single
domain. One remaining challenge is the problem known
as domain shift [15], where a direct transfer of information gleaned from a single source domain to unseen target
domains may lead to significant performance impairment.
Domain adaptation (DA) approaches aim to mitigate this
problem by learning to map data of both domains onto a
common feature space. Whereas several theoretical results
[3, 45] and algorithms for DA [23, 25, 11] have focused
on the case in which only a single-source domain dataset
is given, we consider a more challenging and generalized
problem of knowledge transfer, referred to as Multi-source
unsupervised DA (MDA). Following a seminal theoretical

To overcome such limitations, instead of relying on multiple pairwise domain discrepancy, we constrain the mutual
information between latent representations and domain labels. The contribution of this study is summarized as follows. First, we show that such mutual information regularization is closely related to the explicit optimization of the
\protect \cal  {H}-divergence between the source and target domains. This
affords the theoretical insight that the conventional adversarial DA can be translated into an information-theoretic regularization problem. Second, from these theoretical findings
we derive a new optimization problem for MDA: minimiz-

9214

