Self-born Wiring for Neural Trees
Ying Chen1 , Feng Mao2 , Jie Song1 , Xinchao Wang3 , Huiqiong Wang4 ,* and Mingli Song1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 National University of Singapore
4
Ningbo Research Institute, Zhejiang University
{lynesychen,sjie,huiqiong wang,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,
maofeng.mf@alibaba-inc.com, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Neural trees aim at integrating deep neural networks and
decision trees so as to bring the best of the two worlds, including representation learning from the former and faster
inference from the latter. In this paper, we introduce a
novel approach, termed as Self-born Wiring (SeBoW), to
learn neural trees from a mother deep neural network. In
contrast to prior neural-tree approaches that either adopt
a pre-defined structure or grow hierarchical layers in a
progressive manner, task-adaptive neural trees in SeBoW
evolve from a deep neural network through a constructionby-destruction process, enabling a global-level parameter
optimization that further yields favorable results. Specifically, given a designated network configuration like VGG,
SeBoW disconnects all the layers and derives isolated filter groups, based on which a global-level wiring process
is conducted to attach a subset of filter groups, eventually
bearing a lightweight neural tree. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that, with a lower computational cost, SeBoW
outperforms all prior neural trees by a significant margin
and even achieves results on par with predominant non-tree
networks like ResNets. Moreover, SeBoW proves its scalability to large-scale datasets like ImageNet, which has been
barely explored by prior tree networks.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [33, 11] have been arguably the most successful machine learning models in the
last decade, dominating a large spectrum of applications
such as computer vision and natural language processing.
The unprecedented success is largely attributed to its hierarchical representation learning through the composition
of nonlinear transformations, which alleviates the need for
feature engineering. Nevertheless, DNNs are not flawless:
they typically suffer from the expensive computation cost,
* Corresponding author

the daunting architecture design process, as well the lack of
interpretation, which hinders their more widespread applications.
Decision Trees (DTs), as an alternative category of machine learning models, have also demonstrated their power
in real-world applications [9, 31]. Unlike DNNs where
hierarchical representations with varying abstraction are
learned, DTs are characterized by learning hierarchical
clusters of data, so that in each cluster a linear model suffices to explain the data. As DTs conduct classification
through a relatively short root-to-leaf sequence, they usually yield faster inference, in which the decision process is
also task-adaptive. Moreover, the decisions in DTs are often made directly in the original feature space, resulting in
better model interpretability. Albeit these appealing properties, DTs often require hand-engineering features; the capacity of a single DT is also limited due to the simple routing functions along the root-to-leaf path. Such attributes,
unfortunately, substantially precludes DTs’ applications to
more complex real-world scenarios.
In light of the mutual exclusive benefits and limitations
of DNNs and DTs, it is therefore desirable to integrate
DNNs and DTs into a single model, termed as neural trees,
in the hope that the complementary merits of both worlds
are preserved. Several pilot endeavours have been made
towards this ambitious goal. For example, Frosst and Hinton adopted a soft decision tree to imitate the output of a
neural network for better interpretability [8]. However, as
every decision is made in the original input space and no
representation learning is performed, better interpretability
is achieved by sacrificing the performance. Kontschieder et
al. proposed Deep Neural Decision Forest (DNDF) [19],
an ensemble of DTs, in which each DT is built upon Inception V1 [35]. Despite the promising accuracy, the cumbersome backbone and the separate optimization pipeline
for network parameters and prediction distribution render
both the training and the inference highly costly. The
pre-defined model structure also makes it not adaptive to
tasks. More recently, Tanno et al. proposed Adaptive Neu-

5047

