Event Stream Super-Resolution via Spatiotemporal Constraint Learning
Siqi Li1 , Yutong Feng1 , Yipeng Li2 , Yu Jiang3 , Changqing Zou4 , Yue Gao1 *
1
BNRist, THUICBS, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
4
Huawei Technologies Canada Co., Ltd
{lsq19, fyt19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, aaronzou1125@gmail.com, jiangyu2011@jlu.edu.cn, {liep, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that respond to
brightness changes asynchronously and output in the form
of event streams instead of frame-based images. They own
outstanding advantages compared with traditional cameras: higher temporal resolution, higher dynamic range,
and lower power consumption. However, the spatial resolution of existing event cameras is insufficient and challenging to be enhanced at the hardware level while maintaining the asynchronous philosophy of circuit design. Therefore, it is imperative to explore the algorithm of event
stream super-resolution, which is a non-trivial task due to
the sparsity and strong spatio-temporal correlation of the
events from an event camera. In this paper, we propose
an end-to-end framework based on spiking neural network
for event stream super-resolution, which can generate highresolution (HR) event stream from the input low-resolution
(LR) event stream. A spatiotemporal constraint learning
mechanism is proposed to learn the spatial and temporal
distributions of the event stream simultaneously. We validate our method on four large-scale datasets and the results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance. The satisfying results on two downstream applications, i.e. object classification and image reconstruction,
further demonstrate the usability of our method. To prove
the application potential of our method, we deploy it on a
mobile platform. The high-quality HR event stream generated by our real-time system demonstrates the effectiveness
and efficiency of our method.

1. Introduction
Event cameras, e.g. Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) [6],
are bio-inspired vision sensors. Different from traditional
frame-based sensors that capture images at a fixed rate, the
event cameras respond to the pixel-wise brightness changes
of the scene asynchronously. Specifically, let I(x, y, t) be
* Corresponding author

(b) Frame-based output
Positive
Negative

y

t
(a) Motion: t
moving rightward

x
(c) Event-based output

Figure 1. A comparison of the outputs of an event camera and a
frame-based camera while capturing (a) an ellipse and a star moving rightward. Different from the frame-based camera (b) that captures the scene at a fixed rate, the event camera asynchronously
responds to the brightness changes of the scene and outputs a spatiotemporal event stream (c), where the red and blue points represent the positive and negative events, respectively, i.e. the increase
and decrease of the brightness. Figure inspired by [32].

the brightness intensity of the spatial coordinates (x, y) at
time t. When the change of its logarithm reaches a threshold value C, i.e. |∆ log I(x, y, t)| > C, an event will be
triggered [34]. Each event is denoted as ei = (xi , yi , ti , pi ),
where pi ∈ {1, −1} is the polarity, indicating whether the
brightness is increased or decreased. Therefore, the output
of the event camera is a tuple list called event stream, deN
noted as E = {ei }i=1 . Figure 1 compares the output of an
event camera and a traditional frame-based camera.
Compared with traditional cameras, event cameras own
many outstanding properties: high dynamic range (140 dB
vs. 60 dB for traditional cameras), high temporal resolution,
and free from motion blur, which make them widely used
in many applications, e.g. object recognition [31, 41], gesture recognition [1, 2], optical flow estimation [47, 33], high
frame rate video reconstruction [32, 36, 16], visual-inertial
odometry [46, 24], and 3D reconstruction [17, 8].
However, the spatial resolution of existing event cameras is insufficient. Many influential works are based on
the 128 × 128 pixels DVS128 [34] or 240 × 180 pixels

4480

