3D Building Reconstruction from Monocular Remote Sensing Images
Weijia Li* 1,2 , Lingxuan Meng* 2,3 , Jinwang Wang2,4 , Conghui He2 , Gui-Song Xia4 , and Dahua Lin1,5
1

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
Wuhan University
5
Shanghai AI Laboratory

{wjli,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, xuanxuanling@std.uestc.edu.cn, guisong.xia@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D building reconstruction from monocular remote sensing imagery is an important research problem and an economic solution to large-scale city modeling, compared with
reconstruction from LiDAR data and multi-view imagery.
However, several challenges such as the partial invisibility of building footprints and facades, the serious shadow
effect, and the extreme variance of building height in largescale areas, have restricted the existing monocular image
based building reconstruction studies to certain application
scenes, i.e., modeling simple low-rise buildings from nearnadir images. In this study, we propose a novel 3D building
reconstruction method for monocular remote sensing images, which tackles the above difficulties, thus providing an
appealing solution for more complicated scenarios. We design a multi-task building reconstruction network, named
MTBR-Net, to learn the geometric property of oblique images, the key components of a 3D building model and their
relations via four semantic-related and three offset-related
tasks. The network outputs are further integrated by a prior
knowledge based 3D model optimization method to produce
the the final 3D building models. Results on a public 3D
reconstruction dataset and a novel released dataset demonstrate that our method improves the height estimation performance by over 40% and the segmentation F1-score by
2% - 4% compared with current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
3D building reconstruction is an important and fundamental task for monitoring the human settlements and urban environment, assessing the disasters, maintaining the
* Equal Contribution.

Figure 1. An example of the 3D building reconstruction result obtained from our approach. The purple, brown, pink and green colors denote the roof, footprint, facade and overlapped regions, respectively. Our method produces vector 3D model for buildings
with complex shapes and an extreme variance of heights.

geographical information, etc. During the past few decades,
existing methods were mostly based on aerial LiDAR data
[31], which is difficult to be applied to large-scale areas due
to the expensive cost, low frequency, and limited coverage.
For large-scale applications, many approaches have been
proposed towards building reconstruction from multi-view
imagery [10]. Although the satellite images have a higher
acquisition frequency and a larger coverage, the application
scenarios of these methods are seriously restricted by the re-

12548

