Self-Motivated Communication Agent for Real-World Vision-Dialog Navigation
Yi Zhu2 ,* Yue Weng1 ,* Fengda Zhu3 , Xiaodan Liang1†, Qixiang Ye4 , Yutong Lu1 , Jianbin Jiao4
1
2
Sun Yat-sen University
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
3
4
Monash University
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Vision-Dialog Navigation (VDN) requires an agent to ask
questions and navigate following the human responses to find
target objects. Conventional approaches are only allowed
to ask questions at predefined locations, which are built
upon expensive dialogue annotations, and inconvenience
the real-word human-robot communication and cooperation.
In this paper, we propose a Self-Motivated Communication
Agent (SCoA) that learns whether and what to communicate with human adaptively to acquire instructive information for realizing dialogue annotation-free navigation and
enhancing the transferability in real-world unseen environment. Specifically, we introduce a whether-to-ask (WeTA)
policy, together with uncertainty of which action to choose,
to indicate whether the agent should ask a question. Then,
a what-to-ask (WaTA) policy is proposed, in which, along
with the oracle’s answers, the agent learns to score question candidates so as to pick up the most informative one
for navigation, and meanwhile mimic oracle’s answering.
Thus, the agent can navigate in a self-Q&A manner even in
real-world environment where the human assistance is often
unavailable. Through joint optimization of communication
and navigation in a unified imitation learning and reinforcement learning framework, SCoA asks a question if necessary
and obtains a hint for guiding the agent to move towards the
target with less communication cost. Experiments on seen
and unseen environments demonstrate that SCoA shows not
only superior performance over existing baselines without
dialog annotations, but also competing results compared
with rich dialog annotations based counterparts.

1. Introduction
The richness and generalizability of natural language have
significantly boosted the prosperity of navigation tasks in
which the agents are encouraged to navigate in the indoor
environment to reach the target [1, 27, 3, 34]. In particular,
the Vision-Dialog Navigation (VDN) [26, 35, 20, 18], where
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

What to ask?
Whether to ask?
Yes!

Q: Is it correct to walk
toward the table?
A: Yes, it is!

wall

table

table
room

Detected object

Whether to ask?
No!

Target: tv

Navigable node

Figure 1: Our Self-Motivated Communication Agent (SCoA)
learns whether and what to communicate with human adaptively to acquire instructive information for guiding the navigation without using any dialog annotations.
the question-answering dialogs can be conducted in a humanrobot communication manner to facilitate the navigation, has
attracted increasing attention in the field of visual navigation.
Cutting-edge practice implements VDN on the premise
of tremendous dialog annotations and the dialog occurs in
hand-crafted locations during navigation. For example, [26,
35] require to annotate question-answering pairs at fixed
locations of the environment in advance to assist the agent
training. On the contrary, Roman et al. [20] utilized these
dialog annotations to pre-train a language model, which is
then plugged into the navigation model for dialog generation
at every given step interval. In [18], dialog happens only if
the agent enters a pre-annotated assistant zone where strong
language instructions and image views are provided by the
oracle to guide the agent to move towards the target.
Despite the progress, the massive dialog annotations required in existing researches result in two major drawbacks
that barricade the real-world deployment of the trained
agents: First, the communication is inflexible since the
agents are only allowed to ask questions at predefined locations that may contain bias induced by annotators, not
at the time when communication is needed. Second, the
learning cost is expensive since existing methods are built
upon large amounts of labor-intensive dialog annotations. To
solve the above problems, we argue that the agent should be
able to adaptively communicate with the oracle if necessary,

1594

