COMISR: Compression-Informed Video Super-Resolution

Yinxiao Li, Pengchong Jin, Feng Yang, Ce Liu, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Peyman Milanfar
{yinxiao, pengchong, fengyang, celiu, minghsuan, milanfar}@google.com

Google Inc.

Vid4
REDS4
26
25
24
23
22
21
20 DUF TecoGan RSDN FRVSR MuCAN EDVR COMISR
VSR models

Most video super-resolution methods focus on restoring high-resolution video frames from low-resolution videos
without taking into account compression. However, most
videos on the web or mobile devices are compressed, and
the compression can be severe when the bandwidth is
limited. In this paper, we propose a new compressioninformed video super-resolution model to restore highresolution content without introducing artifacts caused by
compression. The proposed model consists of three modules for video super-resolution: bi-directional recurrent
warping, detail-preserving flow estimation, and Laplacian enhancement. All these three modules are used
to deal with compression properties such as the location of the intra-frames in the input and smoothness in
the output frames. For thorough performance evaluation,
we conducted extensive experiments on standard datasets
with a wide range of compression rates, covering many
real video use cases. We showed that our method not
only recovers high-resolution content on uncompressed
frames from the widely-used benchmark datasets, but also
achieves state-of-the-art performance in super-resolving
compressed videos based on numerous quantitative metrics. We also evaluated the proposed method by simulating streaming from YouTube to demonstrate its effectiveness and robustness. The source codes and trained models
are available at https://github.com/google-research/googleresearch/tree/master/comisr.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution is a fundamental research problem in
computer vision with numerous applications. It aims to reconstruct detailed high-resolution (HR) image(s) from lowresolution (LR) input(s). When the input is one single image, the reconstruction process usually uses learned image
priors to recover high-resolution details of the given image,
which is called single-image super-resolution (SISR) [56].
When numerous frames in a video are available, the re-

Average PSNR(dB)

Abstract

Figure 1. Video super-resolution results (4×, RGB-channels) on
compressed Vid4 and REDS datasets. Here we show the results
using the most widely adopted compression rate (CRF 23 [10]).

construction process uses both image priors and inter-frame
information to generate temporally smooth high-resolution
results, which is known as video super-resolution (VSR).
Although great progress has been made, existing SISR
and VSR methods rarely take compressed images as input.
We note that the uncompressed videos used in prior work
in fact are high-quality image sequences with low compression rate. As such, these SR methods tend to generate significant artifacts when operating on heavily compressed images or videos. However, most videos on the web or mobile
devices are stored and streamed with images compressed at
different levels. For example, a wide-used compression rate
(Constant Rate Factor (CRF)) for H.264 encoding is 23 as
a trade-off between visual quality and file size. We note the
state-of-the-art VSR algorithms do not perform well when
the input videos are compressed.
To handle compressed videos, one potential solution is
to first denoise images and remove compression artifacts in
images [35, 36, 58] before applying one of the state-of-theart VSR models. At first glance, this is appealing since a
VSR model is fed with high-quality frames, similar to directly using the evaluation data, such as Vid4 [32]. However, our experiments in Section 4.3 show that this approach
would not improve SR results and instead negatively affect
the visual quality. With pre-processing, it is likely that the
denoising model in the first step will be significantly differ-

2543

