Semi-Supervised Learning of Visual Features by Non-Parametrically
Predicting View Assignments with Support Samples
Mahmoud Assran, Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin,
Nicolas Ballas*, and Michael Rabbat*
Facebook AI Research
{massran, mathilde, imisra, bojanowski, ajoulin, ballasn, mikerabbat}@fb.com

Abstract

(ImageNet, ResNet-50, 10% labels)
76

1. Introduction
Learning with less labeled data has been a longstanding challenge of computer vision and machine learning research. One popular approach for learning with few labels is to first perform unsupervised pre-training on a large
dataset followed by supervised fine-tuning on the small set
of available labels. Self-supervised methods generally adhere to this paradigm (e.g., see [1] for an analysis in the
context of semi-supervised learning), and they have demonstrated competitive performance on semi-supervised learning benchmarks across a wide range of self-supervised pretraining strategies [2, 1, 3, 4]. However, the self-supervised
⇤ Co-last author

Code: github.com/facebookresearch/suncet

PAWS

75
74

MPL

73
Top 1 (%)

This paper proposes a novel method of learning by
predicting view assignments with support samples (PAWS).
The method trains a model to minimize a consistency loss,
which ensures that different views of the same unlabeled
instance are assigned similar pseudo-labels. The pseudolabels are generated non-parametrically, by comparing the
representations of the image views to those of a set of randomly sampled labeled images. The distance between the
view representations and labeled representations is used
to provide a weighting over class labels, which we interpret as a soft pseudo-label. By non-parametrically incorporating labeled samples in this way, PAWS extends the
distance-metric loss used in self-supervised methods such
as BYOL and SwAV to the semi-supervised setting. Despite
the simplicity of the approach, PAWS outperforms other
semi-supervised methods across architectures, setting a new
state-of-the-art for a ResNet-50 on ImageNet trained with
either 10% or 1% of the labels, reaching 75.5% and 66.5%
top-1 respectively. PAWS requires 4⇥ to 12⇥ less training
than the previous best methods.

72

FixMatch
SwAV+CT

71

SimCLRv2
(+Self.Dist.)

SwAV

70
69

label prop.
repr. learning

68
0

200

400

BYOL
UDA
600

800

1,000

1,200

Pre-training Epochs

Figure 1: Training a ResNet-50 on ImageNet when only 10% of the training set is labeled. The figure shows top-1 validation accuracy as a function
of the number of training epochs. The proposed method, PAWS, achieves
higher accuracy than previous work while requiring significantly fewer
training epochs. Concretely, 100 epochs of PAWS training takes less than
8.5 hours using 64 NVIDIA V100-16G GPUs.

paradigm also requires substantially more computational effort than other approaches and does not make use of labeled
data when it is available.
An alternative line of work suggests to use available labeled data to generate pseudo-labels for the unlabeled data,
and then train a model using the labeled and pseudo-labeled
data [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. This begs the question, can we get
the best of both worlds, leveraging labeled data throughout
training while also building on advances in self-supervised
learning?
This paper proposes a novel method of learning by
predicting view assignments with support samples (PAWS).
The method trains a model to minimize a consistency loss,
which ensures that different views of the same unlabeled
instance are assigned similar pseudo-labels. The pseudolabels are generated non-parametrically, by comparing the
representations of the image views to those of a set of ran-

8443

