Pyramid Spatial-Temporal Aggregation for Video-based Person Re-Identification
Yingquan Wang1 , Pingping Zhang2 , Shang Gao3 , Xia Geng1 , Hu Lu1 ,* Dong Wang3
1
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
3
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
{yingquan1995, gs940601k}@gmail.com; {zhpp, wdice}@dlut.edu.cn; {Luhu, Gengxia}@ujs.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match a particular person from non-overlapping camera views, which is an
important technology in many applications, such as video
surveillance, tracking, and smart city. However, it is challenging due to many practical obstacles, such as background
clutter, blur, occlusion and viewpoint variations.
Recently, image-based person ReID has achieved impressive progress [2, 39, 54, 26, 43]. Most of these works
* Corresponding Author

(a) Aggregate features by adjacent references

W3

W4

Video feature

Video feature

Video-based person re-identification aims to associate
the video clips of the same person across multiple nonoverlapping cameras. Spatial-temporal representations can
provide richer and complementary information between
frames, which are crucial to distinguish the target person when occlusion occurs. This paper proposes a novel
Pyramid Spatial-Temporal Aggregation (PSTA) framework
to aggregate the frame-level features progressively and fuse
the hierarchical temporal features into a final video-level
representation. Thus, short-term and long-term temporal
information could be well exploited by different hierarchies. Furthermore, a Spatial-Temporal Aggregation Module (STAM) is proposed to enhance the aggregation capability of PSTA. It mainly consists of two novel attention
blocks: Spatial Reference Attention (SRA) and Temporal
Reference Attention (TRA). SRA explores the spatial correlations within a frame to determine the attention weight
of each location. While TRA extends SRA with the correlations between adjacent frames, temporal consistency
information can be fully explored to suppress the interference features and strengthen the discriminative ones.
Extensive experiments on several challenging benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed PSTA, and
our full model reaches 91.5% and 98.3% Rank-1 accuracy on MARS and DukeMTMC-VID benchmarks. The
source code is available at https://github.com/
WangYQ9/VideoReID-PSTA.

Video feature

Abstract

W2

Global reference

W1

(b) Aggregate features by a global reference

Clean Feature
Interference Feature

(c) Aggregate features by our pyramid structure

Figure 1. Illustration of various solutions that employ temporal
context information to aggregate frame-level features. (a) Transferring information from adjacent frames. (b) Using a global reference to guide the attention of each frame. (c) Fusing frame-level
features with a pyramid structure (ours). The green lines indicate
the clean features of the target person while the red ones indicate
the features interfered by occlusions. The pyramid structure can
alleviate the irrelevant feature by aggregating progressively.

focus on extracting more discriminative features within a
single image. Therefore, it is difficult to retrieve the target
person when occlusion occurs, or missing crucial parts. In
contrast, the richer spatial-temporal information can alleviate the limitation of image-based ReID and is more powerful to obtain discriminative features and robust results.
Several works [17, 38, 49, 32] have been proposed to enhance the discriminative features of the target person and
suppress the irrelevant features with the help of spatialtemporal context information. Subramaniam et al. [38] propose a co-segmentation module to activate a common set
of features across multiple frames. Hou et al. [17] aim to
solve the problem of partial occlusion. They use the information from adjacent frames to reconstruct the occlusion
part, thus could alleviate the interference of irrelevant features. The message passing flow of these methods is shown
in Fig. 1 (a). Although the information from the temporal adjacent frames can somewhat suppress the occluded
features, it would lose efficacy when long-range occlusion
occurs because it lacks the long-term dependence. Yan et

12026

