Learning to Bundle-adjust: A Graph Network Approach
to Faster Optimization of Bundle Adjustment for Vehicular SLAM
Tetsuya Tanaka∗
Socionext Inc.

Yukihiro Sasagawa∗
Socionext Inc.

tanaka.tetsuya@socionext.com

sasagawa.yukihiro@socionext.com

Takayuki Okatani
Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University / RIKEN Center for AIP
okatani@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract
Bundle adjustment (BA) occupies a large portion of the
execution time of SfM and visual SLAM. Local BA over
the latest several keyframes plays a crucial role in visual
SLAM. Its execution time should be sufficiently short for robust tracking; this is especially critical for embedded systems with a limited computational resource. This study proposes a learning-based bundle adjuster using a graph network. It works faster and can be used instead of conventional optimization-based BA. The graph network operates
on a graph consisting of the nodes of keyframes and landmarks and the edges representing the landmarks’ visibility.
The graph network receives the parameters’ initial values
as inputs and predicts their updates to the optimal values.
It internally uses an intermediate representation of inputs
which we design inspired by the normal equation of the
Levenberg-Marquardt method. It is trained using the sum
of reprojection errors as a loss function. The experiments
show that the proposed method outputs parameter estimates
with slightly inferior accuracy in 1/60–1/10 of time compared with the conventional BA.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and visual SLAM (simultaneous localization and mapping) have been successfully
used in many real-world applications of computer vision,
robotics, augmented reality, and related areas [25, 29]. To
improve the accuracy and robustness of 3D reconstruction,
researchers have considered several different approaches,
such as feature-point-based methods [27], direct methods
[7], learning-based methods [24, 23], and their hybrids [3].
Among these, the feature-point-based methods are cur∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Limiting the computational time budget for local BA
results in frequent tracking failures. Left: Without a limit. Right:
With a limit. See the text for details.

rently the most widely used. Visual SLAM is often used
in embedded systems with limited computational resources,
narrowing choices to those using light-weight feature descriptors, such as ORB-SLAM [16, 17]. Many SfM systems
also use feature-point-based methods; they are used to estimate camera poses for the subsequent step of multi-view
stereo, in which the dense surfaces of objects/scenes are reconstructed.
Although it is comparatively smaller, the feature-pointbased methods still have a high computational cost. What
dominates in their execution time is the step of bundle adjustment (BA). It optimizes the unknown parameters, the
3D positions of the landmarks associated with the feature
points and camera poses, refining their initial values to get
accurate estimates. This step is usually the bottleneck in
terms of the speed of visual SLAM and SfM systems. Taking ORB-SLAM, for instance, it frequently performs BA
locally over several keyframes and their associated landmarks, maintaining the accuracy of the most recent reconstruction. BA occupies roughly 60–80% of the execution
time needed for the mapping operation.
More importantly, the speed of local BA determines

6250

