Minimal Adversarial Examples for Deep Learning on 3D Point Clouds
Jaeyeon Kim1

Binh-Son Hua2,3

Duc Thanh Nguyen4

1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Deakin University

2

Sai-Kit Yeung1

VinAI Research, Vietnam
VinUniversity, Vietnam

3

Abstract
With recent developments of convolutional neural networks, deep learning for 3D point clouds has shown significant progress in various 3D scene understanding tasks,
e.g., object recognition, semantic segmentation. In a safetycritical environment, it is however not well understood how
such deep learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples. In this work, we explore adversarial attacks for
point cloud-based neural networks. We propose a unified
formulation for adversarial point cloud generation that can
generalise two different attack strategies. Our method generates adversarial examples by attacking the classification
ability of point cloud-based networks while considering the
perceptibility of the examples and ensuring the minimal
level of point manipulations. Experimental results show
that our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance
with higher than 89% and 90% of attack success rate on
synthetic and real-world data respectively, while manipulating only about 4% of the total points.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has shown great potentials in solving a wide
spectrum of computer vision tasks. In life-crucial applications, one concern is that deep neural networks can be
vulnerable to adversarial examples, a special kind of inputs
that can fool the networks to make undesirable predictions.
Several adversarial attack techniques have been proposed
to generate such examples. In contrast, adversarial defense
methods have been developed to detect and neutralise adversarial examples. Therefore, understanding how adversarial attacks and defenses operate is of great importance to
make deep learning techniques more reliable and robust.
With the growing popularity of low-cost 3D sensors and
light-field cameras, the community has started investigating
the vulnerability of deep networks on 3D data, especially
3D point clouds [40, 19, 20, 43, 36]. However, existing
works focus on common scenarios, such as generating adversarial point clouds by perturbing points. While such approaches have high attack success rates, the perturbations

Figure 1: Left: input point cloud (1,024 points) classified
correctly by PointNet [27] and 15 selected points (in green).
Right: adversarial point cloud misclassified by PointNet
and perturbed locations (in red).
are not imperceptible and can be identified easily by outlier
detection or noise removal algorithms. In addition, existing
adversarial attack methods do not perform optimally since
all points in a point cloud are involved in the manipulation.
In this work, we study 3D adversarial attack in a more
extreme but practical setting: how to generate an adversarial point cloud with minimum number of points perturbed
from an original point cloud while maintaining the perceptibility of the original point cloud (see Figure 1). To address
this problem, we propose a new formulation for adversarial
point cloud generation that can be adapted to different attack strategies. The novelty of our work lies in both the
research problem and proposed solution. Specifically, minimal 3D point cloud attack is an unexplored problem. We
are also the first to propose a formulation that (i) considers
both the perceptibilty and optimality of adversarial samples,
and (ii) generalises both point perturbation and addition in a
unified framework. In summary, our contributions include:
• A new technique to generate minimal 3D adversarial
point clouds;
• A unified formulation that generalises two adversarial
point cloud generation strategies: point perturbation and
point addition;
• A vulnerability analysis on the relation between the perturbed points found by our method and the concept of

7797

