Unsupervised Domain Adaptive 3D Detection with Multi-Level Consistency
Zhipeng Luo1,2∗ Zhongang Cai1,2,3 * Changqing Zhou2,4∗ Gongjie Zhang4 Haiyu Zhao2,3
Shuai Yi2,3 Shijian Lu4† Hongsheng Li5 Shanghang Zhang6 Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Sensetime Research 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
Nanyang Technological University 5 Chinese University of Hong Kong 6 UC Berkeley
{zhipeng001, zhou0365}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {caizhongang, zhaohaiyu, yishuai}@sensetime.com
{shijian.lu}@ntu.edu.sg, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, shz@eecs.berkeley.edu, zwliu.hust@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep learning-based 3D object detection has achieved
unprecedented success with the advent of large-scale autonomous driving datasets. However, drastic performance
degradation remains a critical challenge for cross-domain
deployment. In addition, existing 3D domain adaptive detection methods often assume prior access to the target domain annotations, which is rarely feasible in the real world.
To address this challenge, we study a more realistic setting, unsupervised 3D domain adaptive detection, which
only utilizes source domain annotations. 1) We first comprehensively investigate the major underlying factors of the
domain gap in 3D detection. Our key insight is that geometric mismatch is the key factor of domain shift. 2) Then, we
propose a novel and unified framework, Multi-Level Consistency Network (MLC-Net), which employs a teacherstudent paradigm to generate adaptive and reliable pseudotargets. MLC-Net exploits point-, instance- and neural
statistics-level consistency to facilitate cross-domain transfer. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MLC-Net outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods (including those
using additional target domain information) on standard
benchmarks. Notably, our approach is detector-agnostic,
which achieves consistent gains on both single- and twostage 3D detectors. Code will be released.

1. Introduction
With the prevalent use of LiDARs for autonomous vehicles and mobile robots, 3D object detection on point clouds
has drawn increasing research attention. Large-scale 3D object detection datasets [11, 35, 3] in recent years has empowered deep learning-based models [32, 42, 41, 21, 31,
43, 25, 34, 33, 50, 45] to achieve remarkable success. How* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Ground Truth

Ground Truth

Prediction

Prediction

Figure 1: Visualization of detection results for domain adaptation from KITTI to Waymo dataset. Left: Predictions of baseline model trained on KITTI dataset and directly tested on Waymo
dataset. The model can classify and localize the objects, but
produces inaccurate box scale due to geometric mismatch. The
predicted boxes are therefore noticeably smaller than the ground
truth. Right: Predictions of our domain-adaptive MLC-Net, which
demonstrates accurate bounding box scale even though MLC-Net
is trained without access to any target domain annotations. Best
viewed in color.

ever, deep learning models trained on one dataset (source
domain) often suffer tremendous performance degradation
when evaluated on another dataset (target domain). We investigate the bounding box scale mismatch problem (e.g.,
vehicle size in the U.S. is noticeably larger than that in Germany), which is found to be a major contributor to the domain gap, in alignment with previous work [38]. This is
unique to 3D detection: compared to 2D bounding boxes
that can have a large variety of size, depending on the distance of the object from the camera, 3D bounding boxes
have a more consistent size in the same dataset, regardless of the objects’ location relative to the LiDAR sensor.
Hence, the detector tends to memorize a narrow and datasetspecific distribution of bounding box size from the source
domain (Figure 2).
Unfortunately, existing works are inadequate to address
the domain gap with a realistic setup. Recent methods on
domain adaptive 3D detection either require some labeled
data from the target domain for finetuning or utilize some
additional statistics (such as the mean size) of the target
domain [38]. However, such knowledge of the target do-

8866

