Spatial and Semantic Consistency Regularizations for Pedestrian Attribute
Recognition
Jian Jia 1,2 , Xiaotang Chen 1,2 , Kaiqi Huang 1,2,3 *
1 the School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2 CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3 CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology

jiajian2018@ia.ac.cn, {xtchen,kqhuang} @nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

proposed and significant progress has been made in the last
decade.

While recent studies on pedestrian attribute recognition
have shown remarkable progress in leveraging complicated
networks and attention mechanisms, most of them neglect
the inter-image relations and an important prior: spatial
consistency and semantic consistency of attributes under
surveillance scenarios. The spatial locations of the same
attribute should be consistent between different pedestrian
images, e.g., the “hat” attribute and the “boots” attribute
are always located at the top and bottom of the picture respectively. In addition, the inherent semantic feature of the
“hat” attribute should be consistent, whether it is a baseball cap, beret, or helmet. To fully exploit inter-image relations and aggregate human prior in the model learning
process, we construct a Spatial and Semantic Consistency
(SSC) framework that consists of two complementary regularizations to achieve spatial and semantic consistency
for each attribute. Specifically, we first propose a spatial
consistency regularization to focus on reliable and stable
attribute-related regions. Based on the precise attribute locations, we further propose a semantic consistency regularization to extract intrinsic and discriminative semantic features. We conduct extensive experiments on popular benchmarks including PA100K, RAP, and PETA. Results show
that the proposed method performs favorably against stateof-the-art methods without increasing parameters.

Existing methods [16, 15, 17, 19] mainly utilize the complicated network, such as Feature Pyramid Network (FPN),
to enrich attribute representation from multi-level feature
maps, and combine the attention mechanisms to precisely
locate attribute-related regions. Recently, VAC [2] utilizes
a human prior, that attention regions of random augmentations of the same image are consistent, to improve model
robustness. The above methods [16, 15, 17, 19] mainly
emphasize learning discriminative attribute features from
an individual image, instead of exploiting the relation between different pedestrian images of the same attribute. In
contrast, our methods show that mining the inter-image relations between different images of the same attribute can
significantly help the model locate attribute-related regions
and extract inherent semantic features. We exploit interimage relations from the perspective of spatial relation and
semantic relation.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian attribute recognition [26, 20] aims to predict
multiple human attributes, such as age, gender, and clothing, as semantic descriptions for a pedestrian image. Due
to the ubiquitous application in surveillance scenarios [21],
scene understanding [18], and human perception [7], numerous methods [1, 10, 13, 20, 12, 15, 17, 2, 19] have been
* Corresponding author.

For the inter-image spatial relation, we hypothesize that
the spatial location of the same attribute is basically consistent between different pedestrian images, which is called
SPAtial Consistency (SPAC) in this work. For example, the
“hat” attribute and the “boots” attribute mostly appears at
the top and bottom of the picture, respectively, which is
shown in the first row of Figure 1(a). However, we observe that Class Activation Maps (CAMs) [25] of the same
attribute of the baseline method have significant location
variations. Some examples are shown in the second row of
Figure 1(a). These CAMs of the same attribute between different pedestrians are inconsistent, some of which (with red
boundary) deviate seriously from attribute-related areas, no
matter for the “short sleeve”, “boots”, or “hat” attributes.
This phenomenon contradicts our spatial consistency hypothesis, and indicates that the baseline model easily inclines to focus on the background, irrelevant foreground,
or a small part of attribute-related regions, which is called

962

