Focus on the Positives: Self-Supervised Learning for Biodiversity Monitoring
Omiros Pantazis1 Gabriel J. Brostow1,2 Kate E. Jones1 Oisin Mac Aodha3
1
2
3
University College London
Niantic
University of Edinburgh
www.github.com/omipan/camera_traps_self_supervised
(a) Image Space

Abstract
We address the problem of learning self-supervised representations from unlabeled image collections. Unlike existing approaches that attempt to learn useful features by maximizing similarity between augmented versions of each input image or by speculatively picking negative samples, we
instead also make use of the natural variation that occurs
in image collections that are captured using static monitoring cameras. To achieve this, we exploit readily available
context data that encodes information such as the spatial
and temporal relationships between the input images. We
are able to learn representations that are surprisingly effective for downstream supervised classification, by first identifying high probability positive pairs at training time, i.e.
those images that are likely to depict the same visual concept. For the critical task of global biodiversity monitoring,
this results in image features that can be adapted to challenging visual species classification tasks with limited human supervision. We present results on four different camera trap image collections, across three different families
of self-supervised learning methods, and show that careful
image selection at training time results in superior performance compared to existing baselines such as conventional
self-supervised training and transfer learning.

1. Introduction
Learning transferable representations of visual data
without requiring explicit semantic supervision at training
time is an important and open problem in computer vision.
Recent progress on this front has been impressive, resulting in self-supervised methods that are capable of learning features that approach, and in some cases even surpass, their fully supervised counterparts across a range of
downstream tasks [22, 17]. As a result of not having access to any semantic supervision (e.g. discrete category labels in the case of image classification), current best performing self-supervised methods typically use aggressive
image augmentation strategies to generate different “views”
of an input image during training [57, 26, 10, 23, 11]. The

(b) Context Space

(c) Combined Space

Figure 1. (a) Conventional self-supervised methods are capable
of bringing visually similar examples closer in image embedding
space. (b) There is often rich context information (e.g. encoding
where and when an image was captured) that can also convey similarity. (c) By combing the complimentary nature of both signals,
we can improve the quality of the final embedding space.

training time objective then consists of pulling these distinct
“views” of the same image close to one another in feature
space. The ability to generate plausible image variation using these manually designed image augmentation strategies
would then appear to be a limiting factor in the further advancement of self-supervised learning (SSL).
Current state-of-the-art self-supervised methods have
predominantly been designed using image collections originally constructed for supervised learning e.g. [15, 62]. This
has necessitated the exploration of different augmentation
strategies to introduce appearance variation during training. However, a more natural signal to use is to exploit
the fact that image observations that are made close in time
and space are very likely to contain the same object instance. This form of natural variation has been used in selfsupervised learning from video [43, 38, 39] or spatially distributed image collections [28, 3]. More generally, one can
think of having access to not only a collection of images at
training time, but also potentially rich context information
pertaining to when and where each image was captured, in
addition to other cues.

10583

