Learning Realistic Human Reposing using Cyclic Self-Supervision with 3D
Shape, Pose, and Appearance Consistency
Soubhik Sanyal2∗
Alex Vorobiov1
Timo Bolkart2
Matthew Loper1
1
1
1
Betty Mohler
Larry Davis
Javier Romero
Michael J. Black1
1
2
Amazon
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
{ssanyal,tbolkart}@tue.mpg.de

{vorobioo,mloper,btmohler,lrrydav,javier,mjblack}@amazon.com

Figure 1: SPICE (Self-supervised Person Image CrEation) generates an image of a person in a novel pose given a source
image and a target pose. Each triplet in the figure consists of the source image (left), a reference image in target pose (middle)
and the generated image in the target pose (right); input and reference images are from the DeepFashion test set [22].

Abstract
Synthesizing images of a person in novel poses from a
single image is a highly ambiguous task. Most existing approaches require paired training images; i.e. images of the
same person with the same clothing in different poses. However, obtaining sufficiently large datasets with paired data is
challenging and costly. Previous methods that forego paired
supervision lack realism. We propose a self-supervised
framework named SPICE (Self-supervised Person Image
CrEation) that closes the image quality gap with supervised methods. The key insight enabling self-supervision
is to exploit 3D information about the human body in several ways. First, the 3D body shape must remain unchanged
when reposing. Second, representing body pose in 3D enables reasoning about self occlusions. Third, 3D body parts
that are visible before and after reposing, should have similar appearance features. Once trained, SPICE takes an image of a person and generates a new image of that person
*This work was done during an internship at Amazon.

in a new target pose. SPICE achieves state-of-the-art performance on the DeepFashion dataset, improving the FID
score from 29.9 to 7.8 compared with previous unsupervised
methods, and with performance similar to the state-of-theart supervised method (6.4). SPICE also generates temporally coherent videos given an input image and a sequence
of poses, despite being trained on static images only.

1. Introduction
Given a single source image of a person, can we generate a realistic image of what they would look like from a
different viewpoint, in a different pose? While this problem is inherently ambiguous, there is significant statistical
regularity in human pose, clothing, and appearance, that
could make this possible as illustrated in Fig. 1. A solution
to the problem would have widespread applications in online fashion, gaming, personal avatar creation or animation,
and has consequently generated significant research interest
[6, 16, 31, 33, 38, 42].

11138

