On the Robustness of Vision Transformers to Adversarial Examples
Kaleel Mahmood
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Connecticut, CT, 06269, USA kaleel.mahmood@uconn.edu
Rigel Mahmood
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Connecticut, CT, 06269, USA

Abstract
Recent advances in attention-based networks have
shown that Vision Transformers can achieve state-of-the-art
or near state-of-the-art results on many image classification
tasks. This puts transformers in the unique position of being
a promising alternative to traditional convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). While CNNs have been carefully studied with respect to adversarial attacks, the same cannot be
said of Vision Transformers. In this paper, we study the
robustness of Vision Transformers to adversarial examples.
Our analyses of transformer security is divided into three
parts. First, we test the transformer under standard whitebox and black-box attacks. Second, we study the transferability of adversarial examples between CNNs and transformers. We show that adversarial examples do not readily
transfer between CNNs and transformers. Based on this
finding, we analyze the security of a simple ensemble defense of CNNs and transformers. By creating a new attack,
the self-attention blended gradient attack, we show that
such an ensemble is not secure under a white-box adversary. However, under a black-box adversary, we show that
an ensemble can achieve unprecedented robustness without
sacrificing clean accuracy. Our analysis for this work is
done using six types of white-box attacks and two types of
black-box attacks. Our study encompasses multiple Vision
Transformers, Big Transfer Models and CNN architectures
trained on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet.

1. Introduction
For vision tasks, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [20] are the de facto architecture [37, 19]. On
the other hand, in natural language processing (NLP),
attention-based transformers are one of the most commonly
used models [35]. Based on the success of transformers in
NLP, various works have attempted to apply self-attention

Marten van Dijk
CWI, Amsterdam
The Netherlands

(both with and without CNNs) to image processing
tasks [4, 36]. In particular, in [12], the training of
self-attention transformers is achieved by processing the
image in patches. The training in [12] is unique in that the
transformer is first trained on the dataset ImageNet-21K
(or JFT) before training on a smaller dataset, to achieve
near state-of-the-art results on ImageNet, CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100. These types of transformers are referred
to as Vision Transformers (ViT) [12]. It is important to
note that the same kind of training regime can be applied
to CNNs. In [19], they also propose training on a large
dataset (ImageNet-21K or JFT) and fine tuning on a
smaller dataset. Using this approach, CNNs are also able
to achieve state-of-the-art results on ImageNet, CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100. CNNs trained in this manner are referred
to as Big Transfer Models (BiT-M) [19].
While CNNs are popular for vision tasks, they are not
without deficiencies. It has been widely documented that
CNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples [33, 14]. Adversarial examples are benign input images to which small
perturbations are added. This perturbation causes the CNN
to misclassify the image with high confidence. Broadly
speaking, an attacker creates an adversarial example using
one of two threat models. Under a white-box adversary [5],
the attacker has access to the CNN’s parameters (architecture and trained weights). The adversary can directly obtain
gradient information from the model to create an adversarial
example. The other type of threat is a black-box adversary.
In this scenario, the attacker does not know the CNN’s parameters or architecture but can repeatedly query the CNN,
or build their own synthetic CNN to estimate gradient information and generate adversarial examples.
It has also been shown that adversarial examples generated using CNNs exhibit transferability [28, 21, 29]. Here,
transferability refers to the fact that adversarial examples
crafted to fool one CNN are often misclassified by other
CNNs as well. Overall, CNNs have an expansive body of

7838

