Online Continual Learning with Natural Distribution Shifts:
An Empirical Study with Visual Data
Zhipeng Cai
Intel Labs

Ozan Sener
Intel Labs

Abstract
Continual learning is the problem of learning and retaining knowledge through time over multiple tasks and
environments. Research has primarily focused on the incremental classification setting, where new tasks/classes are
added at discrete time intervals. Such an “offline” setting
does not evaluate the ability of agents to learn effectively
and efficiently, since an agent can perform multiple learning
epochs without any time limitation when a task is added.
We argue that “online” continual learning, where data is a
single continuous stream without task boundaries, enables
evaluating both information retention and online learning
efficacy. In online continual learning, each incoming small
batch of data is first used for testing and then added to
the training set, making the problem truly online. Trained
models are later evaluated on historical data to assess information retention. We introduce a new benchmark for
online continual visual learning that exhibits large scale and
natural distribution shifts. Through a large-scale analysis,
we identify critical and previously unobserved phenomena
of gradient-based optimization in continual learning, and
propose effective strategies for improving gradient-based
online continual learning with real data. The source code
and dataset are available in: https://github.com/
IntelLabs/continuallearning.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning aims to find models that can predict
labels given input data, with satisfactory performance when
evaluated on a specific population of interest. This population is typically sampled to create training data for the model
to learn over. The critical requirement for successful learning
is a set of training data points that are independent and identically distributed (iid.). Continual learning challenges this
assumption and considers a sequence of learning problems
where the distribution changes dramatically through time.
This setting is crucial when learned models are deployed in
interactive systems, since the environment with which agents
interact continually evolves.

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

There are two critical performance metrics for a continual
learner: learning efficacy and information retention. Learning efficacy entails the simple question, “is learning the n-th
thing easier than learning the first thing?” [31]. This ability
is critical for fast learning and quick adaptation. Information
retention considers the model’s ability to quickly recall when
faced with a historical task that had been previously considered. This question is also studied to understand a property
of neural networks called catastrophic forgetting [21].
Continual learning algorithms are typically evaluated in
an incremental classification setting, where tasks/classes arrive one-by-one at discrete time intervals. Multiple learning
epochs over the current task are permitted and the learner
can spend as much time as desired to learn each task. This
setting is appropriate for evaluating information retention,
because access to previous tasks is prohibited. However,
learning efficacy is not evaluated in this setting, because
models can easily learn each task from scratch and still be
successful [23]. We refer to this incremental classification
setting as offline continual learning.
Our work focuses on online continual learning, which
aims to evaluate learning efficacy in addition to information
retention. In online continual learning, there is a single
online stream of data. At every time step, a small batch of
data arrives. The model needs to immediately predict labels
for the incoming data as an online testing step. After the
prediction, this batch of data is added to the dataset. The
model needs to be updated before the next batch of data
arrives using a fixed budget of computation and memory;
this is an online training step. Testing and training are on
the fly. Moreover, as we are in a continual learning setting,
the data distribution changes over time. A successful online
test performance requires efficient learning and adaptation
in this non-stationary setting.
To study online continual visual learning, we construct a
new benchmark where the data distribution evolves naturally
over time. To do so, we leverage images with geolocation
tags and time stamps. We use a subset of YFCC100M [30]
with 39 million images captured over 9 years. Our task is
online continual geolocalization. We empirically evaluate
the natural distribution shift and validate that the benchmark

8281

