Vision-Language Transformer and Query Generation for Referring
Segmentation
Henghui Ding* Chang Liu* Suchen Wang Xudong Jiang
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{ding0093, liuc0058, wang.sc, exdjiang}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Referring segmentation targets to generate segmentation
mask for the target object referred by a given query expression in natural language [10, 16, 15, 3]. As the referring
segmentation involves both natural language processing
and computer vision, it is considered as one of the most
fundamental and challenging multi-modal tasks. With
the recent success of learning methods, a lot of deep* Equal contribution

Vision-Guided
Attention

"Small elephant on the left"

Query Vectors
Q1 "SMALL elephant on the LEFT"
Q2 "SMALL ELEPHANT on the left"
Q3 "small ELEPHANT on the LEFT"
...

In this work, we address the challenging task of referring
segmentation. The query expression in referring segmentation typically indicates the target object by describing
its relationship with others. Therefore, to find the target
one among all instances in the image, the model must
have a holistic understanding of the whole image. To
achieve this, we reformulate referring segmentation as a
direct attention problem: finding the region in the image
where the query language expression is most attended
to. We introduce transformer and multi-head attention to
build a network with an encoder-decoder attention mechanism architecture that “queries” the given image with
the language expression. Furthermore, we propose a
Query Generation Module, which produces multiple sets
of queries with different attention weights that represent
the diversified comprehensions of the language expression
from different aspects. At the same time, to find the best
way from these diversified comprehensions based on visual
clues, we further propose a Query Balance Module to
adaptively select the output features of these queries for
a better mask generation. Without bells and whistles, our
approach is light-weight and achieves new state-of-theart performance consistently on three referring segmentation datasets, RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and G-Ref. Our
code is available at https://github.com/henghuiding/VisionLanguage-Transformer.

Input:

Resp. 1 0.6
Resp. 2 0.7
Resp. 3 0.3
...
...
Decode

Query
Response & Balance
Mask

Figure 1. Our method detects multiple emphasis or understanding
ways for one language expression, and produces a query vector
for each of them. We use each vector to “query” the image,
generating a response to each query. Then the network selectively
aggregates these responses, in which queries that provide better
comprehensions are spotlighted.

learning-based works are proposed in this area and have
achieved remarkable performance. However, there are still
many challenges left in this task. The objects in images
of referring segmentation are correlated in a complicated
manner while the query expression frequently indicates the
target object by describing the relationships with others,
which requires a holistic understanding on the image and
language expression. Another challenge is caused by
the varieties of objects/images as well as the unrestricted
expression of languages, which brings a high degree of
randomness.
Firstly, to address the challenge of complicated correlations in the given image and language, we explore to
enhance the holistic understanding of multi-modal features
by building the network with global operations, in which
direct interactions are modeled among all elements (e.g.,
pixel-pixel, word-word, pixel-word). Currently, the Fully
Convolutional Network (FCN)-like framework [17, 5, 6, 4]
is widely used in referring segmentation methods [10, 22].
They usually perform convolution operations on the fused
(e.g., concatenated) vision-language features to generate
the target mask. However, the long-range dependencies
modeling in regular convolution operation is indirect, as

16321

