DOLG: Single-Stage Image Retrieval with Deep Orthogonal Fusion of
Local and Global Features
Min Yang∗ , Dongliang He∗,† , Miao Fan, Baorong Shi,
Xuetong Xue, Fu Li, Errui Ding, Jizhou Huang†
Baidu Inc., China
{yangmin09, hedongliang01, fanmiao, shibaorong}@baidu.com,
{xuexuetong, lifu, dingerrui, huangjizhou01}@baidu.com

Abstract

Stage 1: Retrieval

Query

DataBase

Query

Image Retrieval is a fundamental task of obtaining images similar to the query one from a database. A common image retrieval practice is to firstly retrieve candidate images via similarity search using global image features and then re-rank the candidates by leveraging their
local features. Previous learning-based studies mainly focus on either global or local image representation learning
to tackle the retrieval task. In this paper, we abandon the
two-stage paradigm and seek to design an effective singlestage solution by integrating local and global information
inside images into compact image representations. Specifically, we propose a Deep Orthogonal Local and Global
(DOLG) information fusion framework for end-to-end image retrieval. It attentively extracts representative local information with multi-atrous convolutions and self-attention
at first. Components orthogonal to the global image representation are then extracted from the local information.
At last, the orthogonal components are concatenated with
the global representation as a complementary, and then aggregation is performed to generate the final representation.
The whole framework is end-to-end differentiable and can
be trained with image-level labels. Extensive experimental
results validate the effectiveness of our solution and show
that our model achieves state-of-the-art image retrieval performances on Revisited Oxford and Paris datasets. 1

1. Introduction
Image retrieval is an important task in computer vision,
and its main purpose is to find out the images from a
large-scale database that are similar to a query one. It is
extensively studied by designing various handcrafted features [25, 6, 50]. Owing to the development of deep learn* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.
1 Codes: PaddlePaddle Implementation.

1st

DataBase

2nd

Orth

Stage 2: Re-Rank
Query
1st

2nd

(a) Existing Two-Stage Pipeline

1st

2nd

(b) Our Single-Stage Pipeline

Figure 1: Illustration of current two-stage and our singlestage image retrieval. Previous methods (a) firstly obtain
candidates similar to the query from the database via global
deep representation, and then local descriptors are extracted
for leveraged re-ranking. Our method (b) aggregates global
and local features via an orthogonal fusion to generate the
final compact descriptor, and then single-shot similarity
search is performed.

ing technologies, great progress has been achieved recently
[1, 29, 37, 9]. Representations (also named as descriptors)
of images, which are used to encode image contents and
measure their similarities, play a central role in this task. In
the literature of learning-based solutions, two types of image representations are widely explored. One is global feature [4, 3, 44, 1] which serves as high-level semantic image
signature and the other one is local feature [5, 36, 29, 18]
which can comprise discriminative geometry information
about specific image regions. Generally, the global feature
can be learned to be invariant to viewpoint and illumination,
while local features are more sensitive to local geometry
and textures. Therefore, previous state-of-the-art solutions

11772

