Deep Permutation Equivariant Structure from Motion
Dror Moran1 *
Haggai Maron2
1

Hodaya Koslowsky1 *
Meirav Galun1
2

Weizmann Institute of Science

Abstract
Existing deep methods produce highly accurate 3D reconstructions in stereo and multiview stereo settings, i.e.,
when cameras are both internally and externally calibrated.
Nevertheless, the challenge of simultaneous recovery of
camera poses and 3D scene structure in multiview settings
with deep networks is still outstanding. Inspired by projective factorization for Structure from Motion (SFM) and
by deep matrix completion techniques, we propose a neural network architecture that, given a set of point tracks in
multiple images of a static scene, recovers both the camera
parameters and a (sparse) scene structure by minimizing an
unsupervised reprojection loss. Our network architecture is
designed to respect the structure of the problem: the sought
output is equivariant to permutations of both cameras and
scene points. Notably, our method does not require initialization of camera parameters or 3D point locations. We
test our architecture in two setups: (1) single scene reconstruction and (2) learning from multiple scenes. Our experiments, conducted on a variety of datasets in both internally calibrated and uncalibrated settings, indicate that our
method accurately recovers pose and structure, on par with
classical state of the art methods. Additionally, we show
that a pre-trained network can be used to reconstruct novel
scenes using inexpensive fine-tuning with no loss of accuracy.

1. Introduction
Structure from motion (SFM), i.e., the problem of camera pose and 3D structure recovery from images of a stationary scene, is a fundamental problem that was traditionally
approached with tools from projective geometry and optimization [18, 51, 41]. The rise of deep neural networks has
led to a flux of new, network-based algorithms for pose esti*Equal contributors.
This research was supported in part by the U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation, grant No. 2018680 and by the D. Dan and Betty Kahn
Foundation.

Yoni Kasten1
Ronen Basri1
NVIDIA Research

mation and 3D reconstruction. Owing to their ability to encode suitable priors and to their effective optimization with
stochastic gradient descent, these algorithms were shown to
achieve state of the art results in a number of tasks including
binocular and multiview stereo, i.e., in reconstruction problems in which camera parameters are known [7, 22, 24, 66].
Nevertheless, despite few attempts (see Section 2), the challenge of simultaneous recovery of camera poses and 3D
scene structure in multiview settings with deep networks is
still outstanding.
This paper introduces a deep neural network that addresses SFM in its classical setting. The goal of SFM is,
given a collection of point tracks in multiple images of a
static scene, to compute the parameters of the cameras and
the 3D locations of the points. The quality of a reconstruction is typically evaluated by a reprojection error function, which measures how close the predicted locations of
the projected points are to the image positions of the input
tracks. Existing methods apply bundle adjustment (BA) either at the end or as part of the algorithm to minimize this
reprojection loss [51, 47, 25].
Our work is inspired by both projective factorization approaches to SFM (e.g., [8, 31, 33]) and by deep matrix
completion networks for, e.g., collaborative filtering applications [4, 16]. Projective factorization techniques seek to
express a matrix of track positions as a function of two matrices, a matrix of camera pose parameters and a matrix of
3D point positions. Deep matrix completion methods opt to
predict the missing values in an input matrix by learning a
function of its unknown factors. Key to deep matrix completion architectures is their equivariant architecture; i.e.,
reordering the rows or columns of the input matrix should
yield the same predictions, reordered accordingly. Analogously to convolutional networks for images, such an equivariant architecture is efficient, requiring fewer parameters
than standard MLP alternatives, and imposes an appropriate
inductive bias that promotes training with fewer samples.
Below we introduce an equivariant network architecture
for SFM (see Figure 1) that enables simultaneous recovery
of camera parameters and scene structure in both calibrated

5976

