In Defense of Scene Graphs for Image Captioning
Kien Nguyen* 1 , Subarna Tripathi* 2 , Bang Du1 , Tanaya Guha3 , and Truong Q. Nguyen1
1

University of California San Diego, USA
2
Intel Labs, USA
3
University of Warwick, UK

Abstract
The mainstream image captioning models rely on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) image features to generate captions via recurrent models. Recently, image scene
graphs have been used to augment captioning models so
as to leverage their structural semantics, such as object
entities, relationships and attributes. Several studies have
noted that the naive use of scene graphs from a blackbox scene graph generator harms image captioning performance and that scene graph-based captioning models
have to incur the overhead of explicit use of image features to generate decent captions. Addressing these challenges, we propose SG2Caps, a framework that utilizes
only the scene graph labels for competitive image captioning performance. The basic idea is to close the semantic gap between the two scene graphs - one derived from
the input image and the other from its caption. In order
to achieve this, we leverage the spatial location of objects
and the Human-Object-Interaction (HOI) labels as an additional HOI graph. SG2Caps outperforms existing scene
graph-only captioning models by a large margin, indicating scene graphs as a promising representation for image captioning. Direct utilization of scene graph labels
avoids expensive graph convolutions over high-dimensional
CNN features resulting in 49% fewer trainable parameters. Our code is available at: https://github.com/
Kien085/SG2Caps

1. Introduction
The mainstream image captioning models rely on convolutional image features and/or attention to salient regions and objects to generate captions via recurrent models [20, 1]. Recently, scene graph representations of images have been used to augment captioning models so as to
* Authors have equal contributions

leverage their structural semantics, such as object entities,
relationships and attributes [32, 30, 6]. The literature however has mixed opinion about the usefulness of scene graphs
in captioning. Few works have reported improvements in
caption generation using scene graphs [21, 30], while several others have highlighted that scene graphs alone yield
poor captioning results and can even harm captioning performance [10, 14]. In this paper, we identify the challenges
in effective utilization of scene graphs for image captioning,
and subsequently investigate how to best harness them for
this task.
Scene graph representation consisting of nodes and
edges can be derived from either (i) images where the nodes
correspond to the objects present in the scene, termed as
Visual Scene Graphs (VSG), or (ii) from a caption where
nouns and verbs take on the roles of nodes and edges in
a rule-based semantic parsing, termed as Textual Scene
Graphs (TSG). The literature of scene graph generation and
scene graphs for image captioning primarily refers to the
VSG representation.
To be able to leverage scene graphs for captioning, we
need paired VSG-caption annotations. This is currently unavailable. Hence, methods requiring explicit scene graphs
end up training the VSG generator and the caption generator
on disparate datasets [30, 6, 14]. The current practice is to
train VSG generators on the Visual Genome (VG) dataset,
train TSG to caption generation on COCO-captions dataset,
and finally transform the VG-trained VSGs to captions utilizing the later. We note two issues with this approach:
• The VG-trained VSGs are highly biased towards certain types of relationships (e.g., has, on); the relationship
distribution is significantly long-tailed, and even the topperforming VSG generators fail to learn meaningful relationships accurately [26]. This results in noisy VSGs,
which in turn degrades the quality of captions [14].
• There is an assumption in the existing approaches that
TSGs and VSGs are compatible. But, are VSGs and TSGs
actually compatible? TSGs, when used as inputs, can gen11407

