Is Pseudo-Lidar needed for Monocular 3D Object detection?
Dennis Park*

Rares, Ambrus, ∗
Vitor Guizilini
Toyota Research Institute

Jie Li

Adrien Gaidon

firstname.lastname@tri.global

Abstract
Recent progress in 3D object detection from single images leverages monocular depth estimation as a way to
produce 3D pointclouds, turning cameras into pseudo-lidar
sensors. These two-stage detectors improve with the accuracy of the intermediate depth estimation network, which
can itself be improved without manual labels via large-scale
self-supervised learning. However, they tend to suffer from
overfitting more than end-to-end methods, are more complex, and the gap with similar lidar-based detectors remains
significant. In this work, we propose an end-to-end, single
stage, monocular 3D object detector, DD3D, that can benefit from depth pre-training like pseudo-lidar methods, but
without their limitations. Our architecture is designed for
effective information transfer between depth estimation and
3D detection, allowing us to scale with the amount of unlabeled pre-training data. Our method achieves state-of-theart results on two challenging benchmarks, with 16.34%
and 9.28% AP for Cars and Pedestrians (respectively) on
the KITTI-3D benchmark, and 41.5% mAP on NuScenes.

1. Introduction
Detecting and accurately localizing objects in 3D space
is crucial for many applications, including robotics, autonomous driving, and augmented reality. Hence, monocular 3D detection is an active research area [42, 57, 39, 69],
owing to its potentially wide-ranging impact and the ubiquity of cameras. Leveraging exciting recent progress in
depth estimation [11, 13, 15, 16, 31], pseudo-lidar detectors [69, 40, 57] first use a pre-trained depth network to
compute an intermediate pointcloud representation, which
is then fed to a 3D detection network. The strength of
pseudo-lidar methods is that they monotonically improve
with depth estimation quality, e.g., thanks to large scale
training of the depth network on raw data.
* equal contribution

Code: https://github.com/TRI-ML/dd3d

Figure 1: We introduce a single-stage 3D object detector,
DD3D, that combines the best of both pseudo-lidar methods (scaling with depth pre-training) and end-to-end methods (simplicity and generalization performance). Our detector features a simple training protocol of depth pre-training
and detection fine-tuning, compared to pseudo-lidar methods that require an additional depth fine-tuning step and
tend to overfit to depth errors.

However, regressing depth from single images is inherently an ill-posed inverse problem. Consequently, errors
in depth estimation account for the major part of the gap
between pseudo-lidar and lidar-based detectors, a problem
compounded by generalization issues that are not fully understood yet [56]. Simpler end-to-end monocular 3D detectors [3, 39] seem like a promising alternative, although they
do not enjoy the same scalability benefits of unsupervised
pre-training due to their single stage nature.
In this work, we aim to get the best of both worlds: the
scalability of pseudo-lidar with raw data and the simplicity
and generalization performance of end-to-end 3d detectors.
To this end, our main contribution is a novel fully convolutional single-stage 3D detection architecture, DD3D (for
Dense Depth-pre-trained 3D Detector), that can effectively
leverage monocular depth estimation for pre-training (see
Figure 1). Using a large corpus of unlabeled raw data, we
show that DD3D scales similarly to pseudo-lidar methods,
and that depth pre-training improves upon pre-training on
large labeled 2D detection datasets like COCO [37], even
with the same amount of data.

3142

