Learning Compatible Embeddings
Qiang Meng

Chixiang Zhang Xiaoqiang Xu
Algorithm Research, AiBee Inc.

Feng Zhou

{qmeng, cxzhang, xiaoqiangxu, fzhou}@aibee.com

𝑓.

Abstract
Achieving backward compatibility when rolling out new
models can highly reduce costs or even bypass feature reencoding of existing gallery images for in-production visual retrieval systems. Previous related works usually leverage losses used in knowledge distillation which can cause
performance degradations or not guarantee compatibility.
To address these issues, we propose a general framework
called Learning Compatible Embeddings (LCE) which is
applicable for both cross model compatibility and compatible training in direct/forward/backward manners. Our
compatibility is achieved by aligning class centers between
models directly or via a transformation, and restricting
more compact intra-class distributions for the new model.
Experiments are conducted in extensive scenarios such as
changes of training dataset, loss functions, network architectures as well as feature dimensions, and demonstrate that
LCE efficiently enables model compatibility with marginal
sacrifices of accuracies. The code will be available at
https://github.com/IrvingMeng/LCE.

1. Introduction
Visual search or retrieval systems [36, 37] are widely
used in many real-world applications such as face recognition [42, 39, 33, 26, 27], person re-identification [40, 16,
34], car re-identification [19] and image retrieval [2, 12]. To
obtain steady improvement, models would be occasionally
upgraded by training on larger or cleaner datasets, adopting
more powerful network structures and training losses, or applying techniques like network architecture search [56, 50],
knowledge distillation [17] and network pruning [23, 11].
However, to harvest the benefits of new models, a process known as “backfilling” or “re-indexing” [38] is indispensable to re-encode all images in the gallery set to
recreate clusters. This process could be impractical to execute when there are limited computational resources for
re-encoding, or original images are legally forbidden to be
preserved without user authorization. Model compatibility
techniques, which can heavily reduce costs of or even by-

𝑓 .→-

𝑇.-

𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 1
𝒅𝒊𝒓𝒆𝒄𝒕

𝒂𝒓
𝒓𝒘
𝒇𝒐

𝒃𝒂

𝑇-.

𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 2
𝑓-

(a)

𝒐𝒓𝒊𝒈𝒊𝒏𝒂𝒍
𝒃𝒐𝒖𝒏𝒅𝒂𝒓𝒚

𝑓 -→.

𝒅

𝒄𝒌
𝒘𝒂
𝒓

𝑓.

𝑓-

𝒅

𝑓 -→.

(b)

Figure 1: An overview of model compatibility problems. (a)
Model compatibility matches model 1 and model 2 through three
optional directions. Features f 1 , f 2 from two models can make
a direct comparison, noted as direct compatible method. With
transformations T12 and T21 involved, we achieve either backward
compatible by comparing f 2→1 with f 1 , or forward compatible
if compare f 1→2 and f 2 . (b) Our compatibility is achieved by
aligning the class centers across models through a direct comparison (by setting T s to identity mappings) or via transformations,
and restricting more compact intra-class distributions for the new
model. Best viewed in color.

pass the process, therefore are of great practical values.
Because of the multiplicity of application scenarios in
visual search/retrieval fields, as well as compatibility directions to implement, model compatibility has never been employed via a general, unified set of patterns. Viewing in the
perspective of application scenarios, there are two types of
model compatibility methods. The first type is called cross
model compatibility (CMC) whose goal is to find compatible mappings between the previous and upgraded models,
where the upgraded models already exist. As model performance may degrade if compatibility is considered, CMC
serves well for the scenarios that model performances are
more valuable than compatibility. The second type is compatible training (CT) which aims at upgrading models with
compatibility constraints. When bringing up against the
scenarios where frequent iterations for online models are required, CT possesses an inherent feasibility to take charge.
The perspective of compatible directions categorizes
model compatibility into three types: backward, forward
and direct compatible methods (Fig. 1a). Direct compatible methods compare new features with old gallery sets di-

9939

