Learning Causal Representation for Training Cross-Domain Pose Estimator
via Generative Interventions
Xiheng Zhang1 , Yongkang Wong2 , Xiaofei Wu3 , Juwei Lu3 , Mohan Kankanhalli2 ,
Xiangdong Li1∗ , Weidong Geng1∗
1

State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Laboratory
Domains

Abstract
3D pose estimation has attracted increasing attention
with the availability of high-quality benchmark datasets.
However, prior works show that deep learning models tend
to learn spurious correlations, which fail to generalize beyond the specific dataset they are trained on. In this work,
we take a step towards training robust models for crossdomain pose estimation task, which brings together ideas
from causal representation learning and generative adversarial networks. Specifically, this paper introduces a novel
framework for causal representation learning which explicitly exploits the causal structure of the task. We consider changing domain as interventions on images under the
data-generation process and steer the generative model to
produce counterfactual features. This help the model learn
transferable and causal relations across different domains.
Our framework is able to learn with various types of unlabeled datasets. We demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed
method on both human and hand pose estimation task. The
experiment results show the proposed approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance on most datasets for both domain adaptation and domain generalization settings.

1. Introduction
3D pose estimation has been attracting increasing attention due to its numerous applications in human-computer
interaction, action recognition and privacy preservation application [9, 59, 68]. In recent years, the deep learning models have achieved tremendous improvement with advance in
model architecture [7, 17, 57], novel loss functions [24, 35],
and availability of quality datasets [6, 36, 21]. Despite its
success, existing methods still struggle to generalize beyond
the domain of training data, where a well-trained model is
unable to detect precise joints locations in unfamiliar sub∗ Corresponding authors

Contents
Counterfactual
Feature Generator

Intervene
3D Pose Estimator

Figure 1: Overview of the training process of robust pose
estimator with generative interventions. Given a set of domains and content, we train a generator that produce counterfactual features to intervene the training of an estimator.

jects or unseen views (i.e. cross-domain pose estimation).
The deficiency on cross-domain pose estimation can be
attributed to dataset biases [61] or shortcut learning [11],
which means that deep learning models are prone to learn
dataset-dependent spurious correlations based on statistical
associations [1, 2, 4, 20, 48]. This characteristic becomes
problematic when the correlations are not consistent across
domains. For 3D pose estimation task, an example of spurious correlation could be the connection between the appearance of clothes/skin and joints. Generally, this is not a
problem during the inference stage as long as the data follows the same distribution. However, the test samples could
comprise individuals with skin color or clothes that are different from the training dataset. Hence, the trained model’s
performance might not be as good as expected.
Prior works show that generalizing beyond training domain requires a model to learn not only the statistical associations between variables, but also the underlying causal
relations [52]. Causal relations reflect the fundamental datagenerating mechanism, which tends to be universal and invariant across different domains [49], and provides the most
transferable and confident information to unseen domains.
For example, composing a shot on photography involves
both content (e.g. person, object, etc.) and a specific domain

11270

