Fine-grained Semantics-aware Representation Enhancement for Self-supervised
Monocular Depth Estimation
Hyunyoung Jung
Seoul National University

Eunhyeok Park
POSTECH

Sungjoo Yoo
Seoul National University

gusdud1500@gmail.com

eh.park@postech.ac.kr

sungjoo.yoo@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Depth measurement is a critical task in various applications, including robotics, augmented reality, and selfdriving vehicles. It measures the distance from all or a part
of the pixels in the imaging device to target objects using active/passive sensors. Equipping such devices requires high
cost and continuous operation, which makes its use limited.
Monocular depth estimation estimates the depth of pixels
in a given 2D image without additional measurement. It
facilitates the understanding of 3D scene geometry from a
captured image, which closes the dimension gap between
the physical world and an image.
Because of its importance and cost benefits, there have
been lots of studies [53, 35, 33, 48, 67] that have improved
depth estimation accuracy, temporal consistency and depth
ranges. Owing to the success of the convolutional neural

[24]
[14]
Ours

Self-supervised monocular depth estimation has been
widely studied, owing to its practical importance and recent promising improvements. However, most works suffer
from limited supervision of photometric consistency, especially in weak texture regions and at object boundaries. To
overcome this weakness, we propose novel ideas to improve
self-supervised monocular depth estimation by leveraging
cross-domain information, especially scene semantics. We
focus on incorporating implicit semantic knowledge into geometric representation enhancement and suggest two ideas:
a metric learning approach that exploits the semanticsguided local geometry to optimize intermediate depth representations and a novel feature fusion module that judiciously utilizes cross-modality between two heterogeneous
feature representations. We comprehensively evaluate our
methods on the KITTI dataset and demonstrate that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods. The source
code is available at https://github.com/hyBlue/
FSRE-Depth.

Image

Abstract

Figure 1: Depth predictions and error maps of recent stateof-the-arts [14, 24]. Apart from ours, both lack accuracy in
low-texture regions and object boundaries, owing to weak
supervision using contemporary self-supervised training.
network, it has also been adapted to monocular depth estimation and has produced great improvements.
Many existing monocular depth estimation methods train
their networks with supervised depth labels computed via
synthetic data or estimated from depth sensor [30, 9, 28,
25]. Although such methods have provided significant improvements in depth estimation, they still have multiple
concerns related to the high cost of labeling and obtaining the depth labels on pixels, the limited available groundtruth depth data, the restricted depth range of sampled data,
and the noticeable noise in the depth values. To avoid
these shortcomings, self-supervised training methods have
recently been proposed.
Notably, the SfM-Learner [64] method utilizes the ensembles of consecutive frames in video sequences for joint
training depth and pose networks. It demonstrates comparable performance to extant supervised methods; however,
recent works [69, 39, 12, 2] based on SfM-Learner mostly
rely on photometric loss [54] and smoothness constraints;
hence, they suffer from limited supervision of weak texture

12642

