CPFN: Cascaded Primitive Fitting Networks for High-Resolution Point Clouds
Eric-Tuan Lê1∗ Minhyuk Sung2∗ Duygu Ceylan3 Radomir Mech3 Tamy Boubekeur3 Niloy J. Mitra1,3
1
3
University College London 2 KAIST
Adobe Research

Abstract
Representing human-made objects as a collection of
base primitives has a long history in computer vision and
reverse engineering. In the case of high-resolution point
cloud scans, the challenge is to be able to detect both
large primitives as well as those explaining the detailed
parts. While the classical RANSAC approach requires casespecific parameter tuning, state-of-the-art networks are limited by memory consumption of their backbone modules
such as PointNet++ [27], and hence fail to detect the finescale primitives. We present Cascaded Primitive Fitting
Networks (CPFN) that relies on an adaptive patch sampling network to assemble detection results of global and
local primitive detection networks. As a key enabler, we
present a merging formulation that dynamically aggregates
the primitives across global and local scales. Our evaluation demonstrates that CPFN improves the state-of-the-art
SPFN performance by 13 − 14% on high-resolution point
cloud datasets and specifically improves the detection of
fine-scale primitives by 20 − 22%. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/erictuanle/CPFN

1. Introduction
Representing 3D shapes with a compact set of atomic
primitives is a well-established idea that has been evolved
over the decades [2, 23]. While the idea has been mainly
exploited for machine perception in a way to parse objects,
most human-made objects are indeed modeled as a composition of geometric primitives. In CAD, modeling techniques such as Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) [18]
or building a binary tree of simple primitives, have been
conventional practices. Hence, for scanned data of humanmade objects, converting them into a form to reflect how
they were modeled is important not only for the perception
but also for enabling editing capabilities in downstream applications. The problem of precisely fitting primitives to
the input scan is, however, more challenging than coarsely
parsing and abstracting the shape.
For such a model fitting problem, RANSAC [7] is the de
∗ This work was partly done when E. Lê interned and M. Sung worked
at Adobe Research.

SPFN

CPFN

Figure 1. A side-by-side comparison between SPFN [20] and our
CPFN. Our cascaded networks are designed to accurately detect
and fit small primitives in a high-resolution point cloud.

facto standard technique in computer vision. The algorithm
of Schnabel et al. [31] or Li et al. [21] which iteratively runs
RANSAC to find fitting primitives has been implemented in
popular geometry processing libraries such as CGAL [24]
and applied to solve the primitive fitting problem with many
real scan data. However, such an unsupervised approach often suffers from the combinatorial complexity nature of the
problem. From an optimization perspective, different primitive configurations can potentially result in similarly small
fitting errors, although the iterative heuristic algorithm cannot take into account all the possible configurations. Furthermore, an undesired set of primitives can even result in
a smaller fitting error due to noise in the input. While the
RANSAC-based approach deals with the noise to some extent with some threshold parameters, the input-specific parameter tuning requires substantial manual effort.
To tackle the challenge, Li et al. [20] recently proposed a
supervised framework called SPFN that learns the best configuration of primitives for each 3D scan from a large collection of CAD data. Instead of directly regressing the primitive parameters, their network employs PointNet++ [27] as
an encoder of the input point cloud and predicts per-point
information, including association from a point to a primitive, primitive type, and surface normal. A subsequent differentiable module computes the best primitive parameters
minimizing the fitting error through an analytic formulation.

7457

