Towards Vivid and Diverse Image Colorization with Generative Color Prior
Yanze Wu,

Xintao Wang, Yu Li, Honglun Zhang, Xun Zhao,
Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG

Ying Shan

Results

Inputs

{yanzewu,xintaowang,ianyli,honlanzhang,emmaxunzhao,yingsshan}@tencent.com

Diverse colorization results

Controllable and smooth transitions

Figure 1: By leveraging the generative color prior and the delicate designs, our method is capable of generating vivid and
diverse colorization results without relying on external exemplars. Besides, our method could attain controllable and smooth
transitions by walking through the GAN latent space.

Abstract
Colorization has attracted increasing interest in recent
years. Classic reference-based methods usually rely on
external color images for plausible results. A large image database or online search engine is inevitably required
for retrieving such exemplars. Recent deep-learning-based
methods could automatically colorize images at a low cost.
However, unsatisfactory artifacts and incoherent colors are
always accompanied. In this work, we aim at recovering
vivid colors by leveraging the rich and diverse color priors
encapsulated in a pretrained Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN). Specifically, we first “retrieve” matched features (similar to exemplars) via a GAN encoder and then incorporate these features into the colorization process with

feature modulations. Thanks to the powerful generative
color prior and delicate designs, our method could produce vivid colors with a single forward pass. Moreover,
it is highly convenient to obtain diverse results by modifying GAN latent codes. Our method also inherits the merit
of interpretable controls of GANs and could attain controllable and smooth transitions by walking through GAN latent
space. Extensive experiments and user studies demonstrate
that our method achieves superior performance than previous works.

1. Introduction
Colorization, the task of restoring colors from blackand-white photos, has wide applications in various fields,
such as photography technologies, advertising or film in-

14377

