Geometry Uncertainty Projection Network for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Yan Lu1,†,∗ Xinzhu Ma1,∗ Lei Yang2 Tianzhu Zhang3
Yating Liu4 Qi Chu3,
Junjie Yan2 Wanli Ouyang1,
1
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Group 2 Sensetime Group Limited
3
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
4
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
{yan.lu1, xinzhu.ma, wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au {yanglei, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com
{tzzhang, qchu}@ustc.edu.cn

liuyat@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Geometry Projection is a powerful depth estimation
method in monocular 3D object detection. It estimates
depth dependent on heights, which introduces mathematical priors into the deep model. But projection process also
introduces the error amplification problem, in which the error of the estimated height will be amplified and reflected
greatly at the output depth. This property leads to uncontrollable depth inferences and also damages the training efficiency. In this paper, we propose a Geometry Uncertainty
Projection Network (GUP Net) to tackle the error amplification problem at both inference and training stages. Specifically, a GUP module is proposed to obtains the geometryguided uncertainty of the inferred depth, which not only
provides high reliable confidence for each depth but also
benefits depth learning. Furthermore, at the training stage,
we propose a Hierarchical Task Learning strategy to reduce
the instability caused by error amplification. This learning
algorithm monitors the learning situation of each task by a
proposed indicator and adaptively assigns the proper loss
weights for different tasks according to their pre-tasks situation. Based on that, each task starts learning only when
its pre-tasks are learned well, which can significantly improve the stability and efficiency of the training process.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method. The overall model can infer more reliable object depth than existing methods and outperforms
the state-of-the-art image-based monocular 3D detectors by
3.74% and 4.7% AP40 of the car and pedestrian categories
on the KITTI benchmark. The code and model will be released at https://github.com/SuperMHP/GUPNet.

† This work was done when Yan Lu was an intern at SenseTime.
* Equal contribution.

Corresponding authors.

𝑓

𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ

ℎ2𝑑
ℎ3𝑑

Figure 1. The main pipeline of our Geometry Uncertainty Projection module. The projection process is modeled in the probability
framework. The inference depths can be represented as a distribution so that can provide both accurate values and scores.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is an important component in autonomous driving and has received increasing attention
in recent years. Compared with the LiDAR/stereo-based
methods [32, 35, 37, 40, 41, 49, 57], monocular 3D object
detection is still a challenging task due to the lack of depth
cues, which makes monocular object-level depth estimation
naturally ill-posed. Therefore, the monocular 3D detector
cannot achieve satisfactory performance even some complex network structures [39] are applied. Recently, to alleviate this problem, some works [36, 47] attempt to introduce
geometry priors to help depth inference, of which a widely
used prior is the perspective projection model.
Existing methods with the projection model usually es-

3111

