Parametric Contrastive Learning
Jiequan Cui 1 Zhisheng Zhong 1 Shu Liu 2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Bei Yu 1,2 Jiaya Jia 1,2
2
SmartMore

{jqcui, zszhong21, byu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {liushuhust}@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
great success in various tasks, including image classification
[22, 43], object detection [31, 34] and semantic segmentation [55]. With neural network search [60, 33, 45, 13, 4],
performance of CNNs further boosts. Impressive progress
highly depends on large-scale and high-quality datasets,
such as ImageNet [40], MS COCO [32] and Places [59].
When dealing with real-world applications, generally we
face the long-tailed distribution problem – a few classes
contain many instances, while most classes contain only a
few instances. Learning in such an imbalanced setting is
challenging as the low-frequency classes can be easily overwhelmed by high-frequency ones. Without considering this
situation, CNNs will suffer from significant performance
degradation.

Acc (%)

In this paper, we propose Parametric Contrastive Learning (PaCo) to tackle long-tailed recognition. Based on theoretical analysis, we observe supervised contrastive loss
tends to bias on high-frequency classes and thus increases
the difficulty of imbalanced learning. We introduce a
set of parametric class-wise learnable centers to rebalance from an optimization perspective. Further, we analyze our PaCo loss under a balanced setting. Our analysis demonstrates that PaCo can adaptively enhance the
intensity of pushing samples of the same class close as
more samples are pulled together with their corresponding centers and benefit hard example learning. Experiments on long-tailed CIFAR, ImageNet, Places, and iNaturalist 2018 manifest the new state-of-the-art for longtailed recognition. On full ImageNet, models trained
with PaCo loss surpass supervised contrastive learning
across various ResNet backbones, e.g., our ResNet-200
achieves 81.8% top-1 accuracy.
Our code is available at https://github.com/dvlab-research/
Parametric-Contrastive-Learning.

60
PaCo
Balanced Softmax
Decouple
RIDE

58
56
54
52

5

10 15 20 25
Inference Time (ms)

30

Figure 1: Comparison with state-of-the-arts on ImageNetLT [35]. Inference time is calculated with a batch of 64 images on Nvidia GeForce 2080Ti GPU. The same experimental setting is adopted for comparison. ResNet-50, ResNeXt50, and ResNeXt101 are used for Balanced Softmax [38],
Decouple [28], and PaCo. For RIDE [49], various numbers
of expert with RIDEResNet and RIDEResNeXt are adopted.
PaCo significantly outperforms recent SOTA. Detailed numbers for RIDE is in the supplementary file.
Contrastive learning [9, 21, 10, 19, 7] is a major research topic due to its success in self-supervised representation learning. Khosla et al. [29] extend non-parametric
contrastive loss into non-parametric supervised contrastive
loss by leveraging label information, which trains representation in the first stage and learns the linear classifier with
the fixed backbone in the second stage. Though supervised
contrastive learning works well in a balanced setting, for imbalanced datasets, our theoretical analysis shows that highfrequency classes will have a higher lower bound of loss
and contribute much higher importance than low-frequency
classes when equipping it in training.
This phenomenon leads to model bias on high-frequency
classes and increases the difficulty of imbalanced learning.
As shown in Fig. 2, when the model is trained with supervised contrastive loss on ImageNet-LT, the gradient norm
varying from the most frequent class to the least one is
rather steep. In particular, the gradient norm dramatically
decreases for the top 200 most frequent classes.
Previous work [1, 25, 15, 20, 8, 41, 38, 28, 49, 14, 46,
14, 57] explored rebalancing in traditional supervised cross-

715

