Architecture Disentanglement for Deep Neural Networks
Jie Hu1 , Liujuan Cao1 ,* Tong Tong1 , Qixiang Ye2 , Shengchuan Zhang1 ,
Ke Li3 , Feiyue Huang3 , Ling Shao4 , and Rongrong Ji1,5,6 .
1
MAC Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, 4 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
5
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, 6 Peng Cheng Lab.

Abstract
Understanding the inner workings of deep neural networks (DNNs) is essential to provide trustworthy artificial
intelligence techniques for practical applications. Existing
studies typically involve linking semantic concepts to units
or layers of DNNs, but fail to explain the inference process.
In this paper, we introduce neural architecture disentanglement (NAD) to fill the gap. Specifically, NAD learns to disentangle a pre-trained DNN into sub-architectures according to independent tasks, forming information flows that
describe the inference processes. We investigate whether,
where, and how the disentanglement occurs through experiments conducted with handcrafted and automaticallysearched network architectures, on both object-based and
scene-based datasets. Based on the experimental results,
we present three new findings that provide fresh insights
into the inner logic of DNNs. First, DNNs can be divided into sub-architectures for independent tasks. Second,
deeper layers do not always correspond to higher semantics. Third, the connection type in a DNN affects how the
information flows across layers, leading to different disentanglement behaviors. With NAD, we further explain why
DNNs sometimes give wrong predictions. Experimental results show that misclassified images have a high probability of being assigned to task sub-architectures similar
to the correct ones. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/hujiecpp/NAD.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in using deep neural networks
(DNNs) is our inability to understand their inner workings,
which is crucial in many real-world applications, including healthcare, criminal justice, and administrative regulation [28]. Recent studies also show that DNNs are easily
fooled [25, 32, 19, 18] Thus, interpreting DNNs has at* Corresponding author: caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn

Input

Neural Architecture Disentanglement

…
Panda
Tabby

…
Unit
Layer

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed neural architecture
disentanglement (NAD). NAD aims to disentangle a pretrained DNN into sub-architectures, each of which is responsible for only one task. For example, the network in
this figure is disentangled into two sub-architectures, i.e.,
the red one and the blue one, for the task of classifying
‘Panda’ and ‘Tabby’. Note that the sub-architectures can
overlap with the same unit for different tasks.
tracted ever-increasing research attention in recent years.
Existing endeavors typically link semantics to units or layers of DNNs to determine the roles of these specific parts.
However, the hierarchical inference process is not effectively captured in this way, for two reasons. First, the
trained networks entangle information together, and one
unit can be responsible for multiple classes [23, 42]. Second, only knowing which unit or layer represents what class
is insufficient for understanding the reasoning process in
DNNs. The relationship between successive layers is not
explored. For example, if we want to explain the inference
process for ‘Airplane’, we know from previous works that
the bottom layer activates ‘Blue Sky’ and the top layer activates ‘Airplane’, but this still fails to explain how DNNs
infer from ‘Blue Sky’ to ‘Airplane’. Thus, if the network architectures could be disentangled into the sub-architectures
in terms of tasks, such as classifying ‘Airplane’, the above
concerns could be naturally addressed. For example, we
can explain that the edges and colors from bottom layers are

672

