Learning RAW-to-sRGB Mappings with Inaccurately Aligned Supervision
Zhilu Zhang1 , Haolin Wang1 , Ming Liu1 , Ruohao Wang1 , Jiawei Zhang2 , Wangmeng Zuo1,3 (
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou
{cszlzhang, Why cs, csmliu, rhwangHIT}@outlook.com {zhjw1988}@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning RAW-to-sRGB mapping has drawn increasing
attention in recent years, wherein an input raw image is
trained to imitate the target sRGB image captured by another camera. However, the severe color inconsistency
makes it very challenging to generate well-aligned training
pairs of input raw and target sRGB images. While learning
with inaccurately aligned supervision is prone to causing
pixel shift and producing blurry results. In this paper, we
circumvent such issue by presenting a joint learning model
for image alignment and RAW-to-sRGB mapping. To diminish the effect of color inconsistency in image alignment, we
introduce to use a global color mapping (GCM) module to
generate an initial sRGB image given the input raw image,
which can keep the spatial location of the pixels unchanged,
and the target sRGB image is utilized to guide GCM for
converting the color towards it. Then a pre-trained optical flow estimation network (e.g., PWC-Net) is deployed to
warp the target sRGB image to align with the GCM output.
To alleviate the effect of inaccurately aligned supervision,
the warped target sRGB image is leveraged to learn RAWto-sRGB mapping. When training is done, the GCM module
and optical flow network can be detached, thereby bringing
no extra computation cost for inference. Experiments show
that our method performs favorably against state-of-thearts on ZRR and SR-RAW datasets. With our joint learning
model, a light-weight backbone can achieve better quantitative and qualitative performance on ZRR dataset. Codes are
available at https://github.com/cszhilu1998/
RAW-to-sRGB.

1. Introduction
The image signal processing (ISP) pipeline refers to the
processing of raw sensor image for producing high quality display-referred sRGB image, and thus is pivotal for a
camera system. A representative ISP pipeline usually involves a sequence of steps including demosaicking, white
balance, color correction, tone mapping, denoising, sharpening, gamma correction and so on [40]. While hand-

)

wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

crafted ISP solutions are usually adopted in current camera systems, convolutional networks (CNNs) have exhibited
great potential in learning deep ISP model in an end-to-end
manner [22, 29, 45].
The end-to-end property of deep ISP makes it very competitive to learn RAW-to-sRGB mapping to generate high
quality image for mobile camera [22]. Albeit mobile camera has become the dominant sources of photos, it has a
smaller sensor size and limited aperture in comparison to
DSLR camera. By learning RAW-to-sRGB mapping to produce DSLR-like sRGB image from mobile raw image, deep
ISP model can thus offer an encouraging way to close the
gap between mobile camera and DSLR camera. Moreover,
in contrast to 8-bit sRGB image, raw image usually has
higher-bit (e.g., 10-14 bit) and may convey richer details.
Therefore, learning RAW-to-sRGB mapping is beneficial to
performance improvement even for other low level vision
tasks, e.g., image super-resolution [62], low light image denoising [8] and high dynamic range imaging (HDR) [6].
However, when preparing training data, input raw image and target sRGB image are usually taken using different
cameras (e.g., a smartphone and a DSLR) or with different
camera configurations (e.g., focal length). Consequently,
color inconsistency and spatial misalignment are usually inevitable. On the one hand, the color inconsistency makes
it very challenging to generate well-aligned training pairs
of input raw and target sRGB images. The input raw and
target sRGB images usually cannot be perfectly aligned by
existing methods [34, 49], resulting in mild alignment. On
the other hand, learning with inaccurately aligned supervision is prone to pixel shift and producing blurry results
(see Fig. 1(b)). To alleviate the adverse effect of inaccurate
alignment, AWNet [9] adopted global context block [5] at
the cost of increasing inference time, while Zhang et al. [62]
presented a contextual bilateral (CoBi) loss to search the
best matching patch for supervision. However, the patchbased alignment is unable to appropriately handle the spatially variant misalignment caused by depth discrepancy between objects. As a result, their method is still prone to
producing blurry results as shown in Fig. 1(f).
In order to circumvent inaccurately aligned supervision

4348

