DeepGaze IIE: Calibrated prediction in and out-of-domain
for state-of-the-art saliency modeling
Akis Linardos*
University of Barcelona

Matthias Kümmerer∗
University of Tübingen

Ori Press
University of Tübingen

linardos.akis@gmail.com

matthias.kuemmerer@bethgelab.org

ori.press@bethgelab.org

Matthias Bethge
University of Tübingen
matthias@bethgelab.org

Abstract
Since 2014 transfer learning has become the key driver
for the improvement of spatial saliency prediction—however,
with stagnant progress in the last 3-5 years. We conduct a
large-scale transfer learning study which tests different ImageNet backbones, always using the same read out architecture and learning protocol adopted from DeepGaze II. By replacing the VGG19 backbone of DeepGaze II with ResNet50
features we improve the performance on saliency prediction
from 78% to 85%. However, as we continue to test better ImageNet models as backbones—such as EfficientNetB5—we
observe no additional improvement on saliency prediction.
By analyzing the backbones further, we find that generalization to other datasets differs substantially, with models being
consistently overconfident in their fixation predictions. We
show that by combining multiple backbones in a principled
manner a good confidence calibration on unseen datasets
can be achieved. This new model “DeepGaze IIE” yields
a significant leap in benchmark performance in and out-ofdomain with a 15 percent point improvement over DeepGaze
II to 93% on MIT1003, marking a new state of the art on the
MIT/Tuebingen Saliency Benchmark in all available metrics
(AUC: 88.3%, sAUC: 79.4%, CC: 82.4%).

tionalized by measuring fixations locations. Accordingly, in
computer vision, saliency prediction currently refers to either
predicting fixation locations or detecting salient objects.
Early on, researchers found out that the locations of fixations are statistically influenced by features of the visual
stimuli that include both high-level properties such as people
[41] and low-level ones such as spatial contrast [33]. Soon
after the Feature Integration Theory emerged [38], Koch
and Ullmann outlined a computational mechanism to model
attention [21] which was implemented thirteen years later
by Itti et al [15].
The Itti-Koch model was the first to predict a saliency map
from any arbitrary image without the need to precompute
elementary features allowing for a wide range of applications.
This paved the way for many interesting saliency prediction
models [2, 20, 42] leading up to the present day where deep
learning models are dominating the field [39, 25, 28, 32, 16,
23] driven by large scale saliency datasets [19, 17, 1]. As
the saliency domain has substantially less data compared to
some of the more prominent computer vision tasks, transfer
learning has become the key driver for the improvement of

Ground Truth

DeepGaze II

DeepGaze IIE

1. Introduction
Saliency detection is involved in many sensory modalities.
It summarizes the associated mechanisms as the ability of
humans and animals to allocate their attention to the most
important subsets of the data. In vision, this means attending
to the elements of a visual input that stand out from their
neighbouring regions, and visual saliency is usually opera-

Figure 1. By leveraging the diversity of different backbones, our
new saliency model DeepGaze IIE very is able to predict human
fixation locations very accurately.

* indicates joint first authorship

12919

