Learnable Boundary Guided Adversarial Training
Jiequan Cui 1 Shu Liu 2 Liwei Wang 1 Jiaya Jia 1,2
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SmartMore
{jqcui, lwwang, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, liushuhust@gmail.com

70

Abstract

65

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved great success in
many tasks, especially with the surge of neural architecture
search [58, 24, 40, 11, 3]. However, with the concern of security of deep models, several methods [14, 51, 39, 36, 43,
57, 43, 17, 20, 37] have shown that deep models could be
vulnerable to adversarial attack. Data that is intentionally
created may easily fool strong classifiers.
In response to the vulnerability of deep neural networks,
adversarial defense has become an essential topic in computer vision. There are now a sizable body of work exploring different ways to get adversarial settings, including
defensive distillation [30], feature squeezing [53], randomization based methods [49, 13] and augmenting the training
1 https://github.com/fra31/auto-attack

60
55

Acc (%)

Previous adversarial training raises model robustness
under the compromise of accuracy on natural data. In this
paper, we reduce natural accuracy degradation. We use the
model logits from one clean model to guide learning of another one robust model, taking into consideration that logits
from the well trained clean model embed the most discriminative features of natural data, e.g., generalizable classifier boundary. Our solution is to constrain logits from the
robust model that takes adversarial examples as input and
makes it similar to those from the clean model fed with corresponding natural data. It lets the robust model inherit the
classifier boundary of the clean model. Moreover, we observe such boundary guidance can not only preserve high
natural accuracy but also benefit model robustness, which
gives new insights and facilitates progress for the adversarial community. Finally, extensive experiments on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and Tiny ImageNet testify to the effectiveness of
our method. We achieve new state-of-the-art robustness on
CIFAR-100 without additional real or synthetic data with
auto-attack benchmark 1 . Our code is available at https:
//github.com/dvlab-research/LBGAT.

50
45
40
35
30
25
Vanilla AT [27]

ALP [21]

TRADES [56]

LBGAT (Ours)

Methods
Natural Acc

Robust Acc

Figure 1: Model robustness on CIFAR-100 evaluated with
20 iterations PGD under white-box attack. “Natural Acc”
represents classification accuracy on natural (clean) data.
“Robust Acc” represents classification accuracy on adversarial data. Our method (LBGAT+TRADES with α = 0)
improves robustness with the least natural accuracy degradation.
with adversarial examples [56, 21, 27, 43], i.e., adversarial
training. However, training a robust model is still challenging. Recently, adversarial training with PGD attack [27]
becomes an effective defense strategy. However, when plotting results of recent work [56, 21, 27] in Fig. 1, it is still
noticeable that higher robustness is often accompanied with
more accuracy degradation on natural data classification.
Different from previous work that mainly pursues various ways to improve robustness, we meanwhile pursue
accuracy preservation on natural data. In this paper, we
propose a novel adversarial training scheme, which significantly improves classification accuracy on natural data. It
also achieves high robustness under black- and white-box
attack. We take advantage of logits from a clean model,
which is trained only on natural data, to guide the learning
of a robust model.
A conceptual illustration is shown in Fig. 2 to explain
our motivation. As shown in (a), when only trained on natural (clean) data, the learned model Mnatural separates natural data (plotted in yellow) well. But it may fail to classify perturbed data and misclassifies the dark circle into the

15721

