C 3 -SemiSeg: Contrastive Semi-supervised Segmentation
via Cross-set Learning and Dynamic Class-balancing
Yanning Zhou
CUHK

Hang Xu*
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Bin Gao
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
The semi-supervised semantic segmentation methods utilize the unlabeled data to increase the feature discriminative ability to alleviate the burden of the annotated data.
However, the dominant consistency learning diagram is
limited by a) the misalignment between features from labeled and unlabeled data; b) treating each image and region separately without considering crucial semantic dependencies among classes. In this work, we introduce
a novel C 3 -SemiSeg to improve consistency-based semisupervised learning by exploiting better feature alignment
under perturbations and enhancing the capability of discriminative feature cross images. Specifically, we first introduce a cross-set region-level data augmentation strategy to reduce the feature discrepancy between labeled data
and unlabeled data. Cross-set pixel-wise contrastive learning is further integrated into the pipeline to facilitate feature representation ability. To stabilize training from the
noisy label, we propose a dynamic confidence region selection strategy to focus on the high confidence region for
loss calculation. We validate the proposed approach on
Cityscapes and BDD100K dataset, which significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art semi-supervised semantic
segmentation methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental and challenging problem in the computer vision community and has
been studied for the long term. It aims to generate highresolution pixel-wise categories prediction given an image and can be applied to many applications such as autonomous driving [39, 51, 9] and medical image analy* Corresponding Author: xbjxh@live.com

Wei Zhang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Pheng-Ann Heng
CUHK

sis [36, 53]. Most of the methods enjoy the merit of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and improve it by
designing specific architectures as well as training strategies [26, 36, 5, 43]. However, these data-driven methods
depend on the large scale and the high quality of the annotated dataset, which becomes a burden to apply in the real
world. Regarding limited annotations, the network cannot
discern the various appearance within the category and is
easily over-fitted to the restricted samples, which results in
error prediction in some confusing categories.
Semi-supervised learning aims to utilize datasets that
have labels for only a fraction of their samples [18] by learning representation from both labeled and unlabeled data.
The trained network usually has better generalization ability
on unseen data than that trained with fully supervised setting. Adding consistency regularization is a common way
in semi-supervised learning [23, 38, 13]. It encourages the
network to generate similar predictions for the same unlabeled image with different augmentation by calculating
the difference between outputs as the loss function. Nevertheless, previous methods only facilitate the intra-image
feature consistency inside the unlabeled dataset. Although
both labeled data and unlabeled data are sampled i.i.d. from
the same data distribution, it is observed the empirical distribution of labeled data often deviates from the true samples distribution [44], which further leads to the misalignment in the feature space [27] and even hurts the performance [31]. Therefore, reducing the feature misalignment
and enhancing feature discriminative ability is crucial for
semi-supervised pixel-level recognition.
In this work, we introduce a novel C 3 -SemiSeg to alleviate those constraints of consistency-based semi-supervised
methods by exploiting better feature alignment under perturbations, and enhancing discriminative of the inter-class
features cross images from both labeled and unlabeled set.
Specifically, we adopt the mean teacher networks [38]

7036

