OpenForensics: Large-Scale Challenging Dataset
For Multi-Face Forgery Detection And Segmentation In-The-Wild
Trung-Nghia Le1 , Huy H. Nguyen2 , Junichi Yamagishi1,2 , and Isao Echizen1,2,3
1

National Institute of Informatics, 2 The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), 3 University of Tokyo

https://sites.google.com/view/ltnghia/research/openforensics/

Figure 1. Examples from our OpenForensics dataset (best viewed online in color with zoom-in). Can you spot the forged faces and identify
the manipulated areas in these images? The answers are in the supplementary material.

Abstract
The proliferation of deepfake media is raising concerns
among the public and relevant authorities. It has become
essential to develop countermeasures against forged faces
in social media. This paper presents a comprehensive study
on two new countermeasure tasks: multi-face forgery detection and segmentation in-the-wild. Localizing forged faces
among multiple human faces in unrestricted natural scenes
is far more challenging than the traditional deepfake recognition task. To promote these new tasks, we have created the
first large-scale dataset posing a high level of challenges
that is designed with face-wise rich annotations explicitly
for face forgery detection and segmentation, namely OpenForensics. With its rich annotations, our OpenForensics
dataset has great potentials for research in both deepfake
prevention and general human face detection. We have also
developed a suite of benchmarks for these tasks by conducting an extensive evaluation of state-of-the-art instance detection and segmentation methods on our newly constructed
dataset in various scenarios.

1. Introduction
Continuing advances in deep learning have led to impressive improvements in deepfake methods (i.e., deep learningbased face forgery), which can change the target person’s
identity [32, 1, 64, 42]. Emerging techniques such as autoencoder (AE) models and generative adversarial networks
(GANs) enable transferring one person’s face to another
person while retaining the original facial expression and
head pose [68, 67, 56, 66]. The realistic appearance synthesized with deepfake methods is drawing much attention

Figure 2. Face-wise multi-task ground truth in OpenForensics
dataset (best viewed online in color with zoom-in). From left to
right, original images followed by overlaid ground truth bounding
box and segmentation mask, forgery boundary, and general facial
landmarks.

in the fields of computer vision and graphics because of the
potential application of such methods in a wide range of areas [18, 26, 30, 79, 39]. Moreover, falsified AI-synthesized
images/videos have raised serious concerns about individual harassment and criminal deception [6, 62, 12]. To address threats posed by spoofing and impersonation attacks,
it is essential to develop countermeasures against face forgeries in digital media.
Conventional face forgery recognition methods [2, 54,
53] require the input of given face regions. Therefore, they
can process only one face at a time, and processing multiple
faces sequentially is time-consuming. Moreover, their performance greatly depends on the accuracy of the independent face detection method used. Given that these methods
have been evaluated only in laboratory environments using
images with a simple background and a single clear front
face [31, 78], they are not ready for deployment in the real
world, where the contexts are much more diverse and challenging than simple staged scenarios.
It has thus become essential to develop methods that can

10117

