Multimodal Co-Attention Transformer for Survival Prediction
in Gigapixel Whole Slide Images
Richard J. Chen1,2,3,4 , Ming Y. Lu1,3,4 , Wei-Hung Weng5 , Tiffany Y. Chen1,3,4 ,
Drew FK. Williamson1,3,4 , Trevor Manz1,2 , Maha Shady1,2,3,4 , Faisal Mahmood1,3,4
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School
3
Cancer Program, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT
4
Cancer Data Science Program, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
5
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT
1

2

richardchen@g.harvard.edu, faisalmahmood@bwh.harvard.edu

Abstract
Survival outcome prediction is a challenging weaklysupervised and ordinal regression task in computational
pathology that involves modeling complex interactions
within the tumor microenvironment in gigapixel whole slide
images (WSIs). Despite recent progress in formulating WSIs
as bags for multiple instance learning (MIL), representation
learning of entire WSIs remains an open and challenging
problem, especially in overcoming: 1) the computational
complexity of feature aggregation in large bags, and 2) the
data heterogeneity gap in incorporating biological priors
such as genomic measurements. In this work, we present a
Multimodal Co-Attention Transformer (MCAT) framework
that learns an interpretable, dense co-attention mapping
between WSIs and genomic features formulated in an embedding space. Inspired by approaches in Visual Question Answering (VQA) that can attribute how word embeddings attend to salient objects in an image when answering a question, MCAT learns how histology patches attend
to genes when predicting patient survival. In addition to
visualizing multimodal interactions, our co-attention transformation also reduces the space complexity of WSI bags,
which enables the adaptation of Transformer layers as a
general encoder backbone in MIL. We apply our proposed
method on five different cancer datasets (4,730 WSIs, 67
million patches). Our experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed method consistently achieves superior performance compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Though deep learning has revolutionized computer vision in many disciplines, gigapixel whole-slide imaging

(WSI) in computational pathology remains a complex computer vision domain with barriers that render current approaches infeasible for supervised learning tasks such as
cancer prognosis. In image classification of natural images,
the goal is usually to assign an image-level label to an image with approximate size 256 ⇥ 256 pixels, with the label clearly visible and well-represented in the image. In
pathology, WSIs break these assumptions as images exhibit
enormous heterogeneity and can be as large as 150,000 ⇥
150,000 pixels. Depending on the problem, labels for slidelevel classification may be: 1) localized in a small pixel region that occupies a tiny proportion of the total image (i.e. a needle-in-a-haystack problem such as differentiating normal tissue vs micro-metastases) [4, 3, 5, 45], or 2) spanning
the entire composition of a WSI and dependent on the interactions of its components (i.e. - a fine-grained visual recognition problem such as one that involves understanding the
complex milieu of stroma, tumor aggregates, immune cells
and other visual concepts) [68, 7, 47, 22, 40, 21, 6, 39, 15].
Due to the enormous gigapixel resolutions of WSIs,
many approaches adopt a two-stage multiple instance
learning-based (MIL) approach for tractable representation
learning of WSIs, in which: 1) instance-level feature representations are extracted from randomly sampled image
patches in the WSI, and then 2) global aggregation schemes
are applied to the bag of instances to obtain a WSI-level representation for subsequent supervision [23, 59, 11, 38, 69].
Though unable to model complex interactions between instances, MIL is able to solve many needle-in-a-haystack
problems in pathology, as the classification of normal tissue
vs micro-metastases depends on discriminating only binary
instance-level visual concepts [3, 35]. Survival outcome
prediction, however, is a challenging ordinal regression task

4015

