Boosting Weakly Supervised Object Detection via Learning Bounding Box
Adjusters
Bowen Dong1 Zitong Huang1 Yuelin Guo1 Qilong Wang2 Zhenxing Niu3 Wangmeng Zuo1,4B
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Tianjin University 3 Alibaba Damo Academay 4 Pazhou Lab
{cndongsky, zitonghuang99, zhenxingniu}@gmail.com

gyl2565309278@163.com

Abstract
Weakly-supervised object detection (WSOD) has
emerged as an inspiring recent topic to avoid expensive
instance-level object annotations. However, the bounding
boxes of most existing WSOD methods are mainly determined by precomputed proposals, thereby being limited in
precise object localization. In this paper, we defend the
problem setting for improving localization performance
by leveraging the bounding box regression knowledge
from a well-annotated auxiliary dataset. First, we use
the well-annotated auxiliary dataset to explore a series of
learnable bounding box adjusters (LBBAs) in a multi-stage
training manner, which is class-agnostic. Then, only LBBAs and a weakly-annotated dataset with non-overlapped
classes are used for training LBBA-boosted WSOD. As
such, our LBBAs are practically more convenient and
economical to implement while avoiding the leakage of
the auxiliary well-annotated dataset. In particular, we
formulate learning bounding box adjusters as a bi-level
optimization problem and suggest an EM-like multi-stage
training algorithm. Then, a multi-stage scheme is further
presented for LBBA-boosted WSOD. Additionally, a masking strategy is adopted to improve proposal classification.
Experimental results verify the effectiveness of our method.
Our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art
WSOD methods and knowledge transfer model with similar
problem setting. Code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/DongSky/lbba_boosted_wsod.

1. Introduction
Object detection [8, 7, 19, 16] has attracted considerable attention in computer vision community, and benefits a
wide range of applications. Along with the development
of powerful convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
large-scale well-annotated datasets, the performance of object detection networks has achieved remarkable improvement. Nevertheless, the success of object detection networks highly depends on precise but costly instance-level
bounding box annotations of abundant images. To allevi-

qlwang@tju.edu.cn

wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

ate this issue, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD)
aiming at learning effective detection models with imagelevel supervision has emerged as an inspiring recent topic.
Existing WSOD methods [3, 25, 34, 20] usually adopt
the multiple instance learning (MIL) framework based on
the precomputed proposals. And most efforts have been
given to improve proposal classification ability. However,
the bounding boxes of most existing methods are mainly
determined by precomputed proposals, thereby being limited in precise object localization. For single-phase WSOD
methods [3, 26, 25, 22, 13], the precomputed proposals classified to a specific class are directly taken as the detection results. Bounding box regression branches are introduced in [33, 20, 34] and multi-phase training are adopted
in [36, 2]. But they are usually supervised based on the
pseudo ground-truths by selecting precomputed proposals
with the highest scores. In terms of localization performance, there remains a huge gap between WSOD methods
and their fully-supervised counterparts.
Transfer learning has also been investigated to improve
the localization performance of WSOD. Lee et al. [12] presented a universal bounding box regressor (UBBR) trained
on a well-annotated auxiliary dataset for refining bounding boxes generated in WSOD. Instead, Uijlings et al. [28]
trained a universal detector on the well-annotated source
dataset, which is then transferred to WSOD as a generic proposal generator. However, [12] and [28] adopt the singlestage transfer strategy, which actually are not specified to
WSOD [3, 26, 12, 28] and suffer from imperfect annotations in source domain [17, 6, 28]. Going beyond [28],
Zhong et al. [37] trained and exploited the one-class universal detector (OCUD) in a progressive manner. In contrast, both the source well-annotated and target weakly annotated datasets are required in the whole training process
for OCUD [37]. When the source dataset is private and is of
large scale [24, 18], it is preferred to avoid the direct joint
use of the source and target datasets for WSOD with transfer learning. Instead, the owner of source datasets can first
extract knowledge from data and then distribute knowledge
instead of source datasets to the user for boosting WSOD.

2876

