LapsCore: Language-guided Person Search via Color Reasoning
Yushuang Wu123∗ Zizheng Yan123∗ Xiaoguang Han123†
Guanbin Li43 Changqing Zou5 Shuguang Cui123
1
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen 2 FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen 3 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
4
Sun Yat-sen University 5 HMI Lab, Huawei Technologies
{yushuangwu@link, zizhengyan@link, hanxiaoguang@, shuguangcui@}.cuhk.edu.cn
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

aaronzou1125@gmail.com

Image Database

Abstract
The key point of language-guided person search is to
construct the cross-modal association between visual and
textual input. Existing methods focus on designing multimodal attention mechanisms and novel cross-modal loss
functions to learn such association implicitly. We propose a
representation learning method for language-guided person
search based on color reasoning (LapsCore). It can explicitly build a fine-grained cross-modal association bidirectionally. Specifically, a pair of dual sub-tasks, image
colorization and text completion, is designed. In the former task, rich text information is learned to colorize gray
images, and the latter one requests the model to understand
the image and complete color word vacancies in the captions. The two sub-tasks enable models to learn correct
alignments between text phrases and image regions, so that
rich multimodal representations can be learned. Extensive
experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Language-guided person search has attracted considerable attention because of its promising application in intelligent surveillance. As shown in Figure 1, it aims to retrieve
the person from a large image database that best matches the
natural language description query. Compared with imagebased and attribute-based person ReID, language queries
are easier to obtain than image queries and provide more
comprehensive and accurate descriptions than attributes.
There exist two main challenges in the task of languageguided person search. First, it is difficult to compute the
visual-textual affinity and construct the image-text alignments, resulting from the cross-modal gap. Secondly, per∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Text-guided
Image Colorization

Query
A woman in a
red shirt with
a white collar
and a pair of
black pants.

Cross-Modal
Matching

Red
White
Black

Image-guided
Text Completion

A woman in a
[ ] shirt with
a [ ] collar
and a pair of
[ ] pants.

Figure 1: The task of language-guided person search is to
retrieve the person that best matches the given textual query
from a large image database.
son search is a fine-grained retrieval task: (i) Text provides
very detailed descriptions to the target person; (ii) Person
images have fine intra-class differences in appearance.
After the pioneering work [20] of language-guided person search, many efforts have been devoted to handling the
challenges of this task. [2, 39, 28, 36] design advanced
models to learn better representations of image and text. Attention mechanisms are developed in [20, 10, 24, 5] to build
the local image-text association. [19, 33, 39, 28] propose
novel loss functions to narrow the distance between visual
and textual features. However, all of these methods implicitly learn the cross-modal local association, which leaves
a rigorous test to the models’ learning capability. From
numerous experiments of language-guided person search,
we observe that colors play a significant role in retrieval.
Faced with personal images, human beings tend to accept
visual colors to extract the appearance information, and then
understand the clothes or ornaments related to these colors. Thus we are inspired to propose a novel representation learning method LapsCore, by solving color reasoning
sub-tasks, which guide the model to explicitly learn fine-

1624

