Auto-Parsing Network for Image Captioning and Visual Question Answering
Xu Yang1, *
1

Hanwang Zhang3

Jianfei Cai4

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
2

3

Chongyang Gao2,∗

Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
4
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University

xuyangaca@gmail.com

chongyang.gao.gr@dartmouth.edu
Jianfei.Cai@monash.edu

Abstract
We propose an Auto-Parsing Network (APN) to discover
and exploit the input data’s hidden tree structures for improving the effectiveness of the Transformer-based visionlanguage systems. Specifically, we impose a Probabilistic Graphical Model (PGM) parameterized by the attention operations on each self-attention layer to incorporate
sparse assumption. We use this PGM to softly segment an
input sequence into a few clusters where each cluster can
be treated as the parent of the inside entities. By stacking these PGM constrained self-attention layers, the clusters in a lower layer compose into a new sequence, and
the PGM in a higher layer will further segment this sequence. Iteratively, a sparse tree can be implicitly parsed,
and this tree’s hierarchical knowledge is incorporated into
the transformed embeddings, which can be used for solving
the target vision-language tasks. Specifically, we showcase
that our APN can strengthen Transformer based networks
in two major vision-language tasks: Captioning and Visual
Question Answering. Also, a PGM probability-based parsing algorithm is developed by which we can discover what
the hidden structure of input is during the inference.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, Transformer [57] based frameworks have
been prevalently applied into vision-language tasks and impressive improvements have been observed in image captioning [16,18,30,44], VQA [78], image grounding [38,75],
and visual reasoning [1, 50]. Researchers attribute the
progress to the various advantages of Transformer, like the
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.

hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

S3

S3
S4 S2

S2

S1

S5

S4

S1

S5

(a) Segmenting fully connected graph

(b) Hierarchical tree

Figure 1. (a) The different graph priors entailed in the classic
self-attention and our Probabilistic Graphical Model (PGM) constrained self-attention. Left: The classic self-attention pairs every two nodes in a graph and thus forms a fully connected graph.
Right: Constrained by PGM, five nodes are segmented into three
clusters. (b) By stacking our PGM constrained self-attention layers, a hierarchical tree can be automatically constructed. Hence
we call our network as Auto-Parsing Network (APN).

efficient parallel computing [57], the ability to approximate
any sequence-to-sequence function [79], and the exploitation of the fully connected graph prior [9] provided by selfattention as shown in the left part of Figure 1(a). Particularly, by the graph prior, although vision and language data
have quite different superficial forms, their structural commonalities can be automatically abstracted, embedded, and
transferred to narrow the domain gap.
However, the underlying structures of vision and language data are usually hierarchical and sparse, which are
different from fully connected graphs, e.g., a sentence or
an image can be parsed as constituent trees of words or objects, respectively [9, 15, 56]. Without sparse and hierarchical constraints, this system may be overwhelmed by the
trivial global dependencies and overlook the critical local
context [33, 66, 68]. Taking VQA as an example, the question in the last row of Figure 4 asks, “What number is the
hour hand on?” for an image containing both hour hand
and minute hand. A system with the fully connected graph

2197

