IDM: An Intermediate Domain Module for Domain Adaptive Person Re-ID
Yongxing Dai1
1

Jun Liu2

Yifan Sun3

Zekun Tong4

Institute of Digital Media (IDM), Peking University, Beijing, China
3

Megvii Technology

4

2

Chi Zhang3

Ling-Yu Duan1,5 *

Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore

National University of Singapore, Singapore

5

Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

{yongxingdai, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg, sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptive person re-identification
(UDA re-ID) aims at transferring the labeled source domain’s knowledge to improve the model’s discriminability
on the unlabeled target domain. From a novel perspective,
we argue that the bridging between the source and target
domains can be utilized to tackle the UDA re-ID task, and
we focus on explicitly modeling appropriate intermediate
domains to characterize this bridging. Specifically, we propose an Intermediate Domain Module (IDM) to generate
intermediate domains’ representations on-the-fly by mixing
the source and target domains’ hidden representations using two domain factors. Based on the “shortest geodesic
path” definition, i.e., the intermediate domains along the
shortest geodesic path between the two extreme domains
can play a better bridging role, we propose two properties
that these intermediate domains should satisfy. To ensure
these two properties to better characterize appropriate intermediate domains, we enforce the bridge losses on intermediate domains’ prediction space and feature space, and
enforce a diversity loss on the two domain factors. The
bridge losses aim at guiding the distribution of appropriate intermediate domains to keep the right distance to the
source and target domains. The diversity loss serves as
a regularization to prevent the generated intermediate domains from being over-fitting to either of the source and target domains. Our proposed method outperforms the stateof-the-arts by a large margin in all the common UDA reID tasks, and the mAP gain is up to 7.7% on the challenging MSMT17 benchmark. Code is available at https:
//github.com/SikaStar/IDM .

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) [1, 8, 53] aims to identify the person across the non-overlapped cameras. Though
fully supervised re-ID methods [41, 45, 3, 60] have achieved
* Corresponding Author.

Source domain

Intermediate domain

Target domain

Figure 1. Illustration of our main idea. Assuming that the source
and target domains are located in a manifold, there can be some intermediate domains along with the path between the two extreme
domains. By utilizing appropriate intermediate domains to bridge
the source and target, the source knowledge can be better transferred to the target domain. Different colors and shapes represent
different domains and different person identities respectively.

great progress in recent years, it takes much time and effort
to label the person images and thus can be difficult to be
well applied to some practical scenarios. To overcome this
problem, researchers have been focusing on studying unsupervised domain adaptive (UDA) re-ID [48, 13, 38, 2, 9],
whose goal is to transfer the knowledge from the labeled
source domain to improve the model’s discriminability on
the unlabeled target domain. UDA re-ID is a challenging
problem because the source and target domains can have
two extreme distributions, and there can be no overlap between the two domains’ label space. In this paper, we are
devoted to studying the problem of UDA re-ID.
Though many existing methods [48, 13, 16] have made
great progress in UDA re-ID, they have not explicitly considered the bridging between the two extreme domains, i.e.,
what information about the similarity/dissimilarity of the
two domains can be utilized to tackle the UDA re-ID task.
For example, GAN transferring methods [48, 10] use GANs
to translate images’ style across domains and then focus on
a single domain’s supervised feature learning. Fine-tuning
methods [38, 13, 9] only use the source domain to obtain the
pretrained model and then focus on the feature learning in
the target domain. Joint training methods [70, 16] just combine the source and target data together for training. From

11864

