Curious Representation Learning for Embodied Intelligence
Yilun Du
MIT

Chuang Gan
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Self-supervised representation learning has achieved remarkable success in recent years. By subverting the need
for supervised labels, such approaches are able to utilize the
numerous unlabeled images that exist on the Internet and in
photographic datasets. Yet to build truly intelligent agents,
we must construct representation learning algorithms that
can learn not only from datasets but also learn from environments. An agent in a natural environment will not typically
be fed curated data. Instead, it must explore its environment
to acquire the data it will learn from. We propose a framework, curious representation learning (CRL), which jointly
learns a reinforcement learning policy and a visual representation model. The policy is trained to maximize the error of
the representation learner, and in doing so is incentivized to
explore its environment. At the same time, the learned representation becomes stronger and stronger as the policy feeds it
ever harder data to learn from. Our learned representations
enable promising transfer to downstream navigation tasks,
performing better than or comparably to ImageNet pretraining without using any supervision at all. In addition, despite
being trained in simulation, our learned representations can
obtain interpretable results on real images. Code is available
at https://yilundu.github.io/crl/.

1. Introduction
Similar to biological agents, self-supervised agents learn
representations without explicit supervisory labels [38]. Impressively, these methods can surpass those based on supervised learning [12]. Yet the most successful approaches
also depart from biological learning in that they depend on a
curated dataset of observations to learn from.
In stark contrast, learning in biological vision involves
active physical exploration of an environment. Infants are
not endowed with existing visual experience, but must instead explore to obtain such experience from the surrounding
environment. By playing with toys, through actions such
as pushing, grasping, sucking, or prodding, infants are able
to obtain experiences of texture, material, and physics [19].

Phillip Isola
MIT

Reinforcement Learning
Curiosity-Driven Exploration

)

Imitation Learning
Learned
Visual
Representation

<latexit sha1_base64="l9ZhmQEFCunp9RwAEQItJ26mlG8=">AAAB7nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE0GOpF48V7Ac0oWy2k3TpZhN2N0Ip/RFePCji1d/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZemAmujet+O6WNza3tnfJuZW//4PCoenzS0WmuGLZZKlLVC6lGwSW2DTcCe5lCmoQCu+H4bu53n1BpnspHM8kwSGgsecQZNVbq+k0ex/5sUK25dXcBsk68gtSgQGtQ/fKHKcsTlIYJqnXfczMTTKkynAmcVfxcY0bZmMbYt1TSBHUwXZw7IxdWGZIoVbakIQv198SUJlpPktB2JtSM9Ko3F//z+rmJboMpl1luULLloigXxKRk/jsZcoXMiIkllClubyVsRBVlxiZUsSF4qy+vk85V3XPr3sN1rdEs4ijDGZzDJXhwAw24hxa0gcEYnuEV3pzMeXHenY9la8kpZk7hD5zPHyVHj24=</latexit>

Image Recognition

Curious Representation Learning (CRL)

Figure 1: When put in a new world, without an explicit task or
goal, we are still able to actively explore and interact with our
surroundings. Our framework, CRL, enables agents to learn visual
representations from interaction without any supervision, using
only curiosity-driven exploration where the agent seeks out observations that incur high error under the representation model. The
resultant representations enable agents to perform well in downstream reinforcement and imitation learning tasks, and further are
able to transfer to recognition of real images.

By crawling into new rooms, toddlers obtain experiences of
layout and geometry. This setup adds additional challenges
towards learning visual representations. Algorithms must
now selectively explore and determine which portion of the
environment will allow for the most useful increase in visual experience. Furthermore, algorithms must also adapt to
constant domain shift; at any time point, the only observed
visual experience is that of a particular room, or that of a
particular object being interacted with.
Given an interactive environment, and no prior data or
tasks, how may we obtain a good visual representations?
This is a challenging question and requires an agent to answer several subquestions. In particular, how can we learn
to effectively explore and perceive the surrounding world?
And, how can we integrate each different experience together
to obtain the best representation possible? In this paper, we
propose a unified framework towards solving these tasks.
One approach is to train a vision-based reinforcement
learning agent in the interactive environment. Intuitively, as
the agent learns to interact in its surrounding environment,
its underlying vision system must also learn to understand
the surrounding environment. A core difficulty, however, is
the noisy and sparse supervision that reinforcement learning
10408

