Exploring Robustness of Unsupervised Domain Adaptation in Semantic
Segmentation
Jinyu Yang1 , Chunyuan Li1 , Weizhi An1 , Hehuan Ma1 , Yuzhi Guo1 , Yu Rong2 , Peilin Zhao2 ,
and Junzhou Huang1
1
University Of Texas at Arlington, 2 Tencent AI Lab
{jinyu.yang, chunyuan.li, weizhi.an, hehuan.ma, yuzhi.guo}@mavs.uta.edu
yu.rong@hotmail.com, masonzhao@tencent.com, jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
Recent studies imply that deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples, i.e., inputs with a slight
but intentional perturbation are incorrectly classified by
the network. Such vulnerability makes it risky for some
security-related applications (e.g., semantic segmentation in
autonomous cars) and triggers tremendous concerns on the
model reliability. For the first time, we comprehensively evaluate the robustness of existing UDA methods and propose a
robust UDA approach. It is rooted in two observations: i)
the robustness of UDA methods in semantic segmentation
remains unexplored, which poses a security concern in this
field; and ii) although commonly used self-supervision (e.g.,
rotation and jigsaw) benefits model robustness in classification and recognition tasks, they fail to provide the critical
supervision signals that are essential in semantic segmentation. These observations motivate us to propose adversarial self-supervision UDA (or ASSUDA) that maximizes
the agreement between clean images and their adversarial
examples by a contrastive loss in the output space. Extensive
empirical studies on commonly used benchmarks demonstrate that ASSUDA is resistant to adversarial attacks.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to predict semantic labels
of each pixel in the given images, which plays an important
role in autonomous driving [19] and medical diagnosis [28].
However, pixel-wise labeling is extremely time-consuming
and labor-intensive. For instance, 90 minutes are required
to annotate a single image for the Cityscapes dataset [6].
Although synthetic datasets [29, 30] with freely available
labels provide an opportunity for model training, the model
trained on synthetic data suffers from dramatic performance
degradation when applying it directly to the real data of
interest.

Motivated by the success of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) in image classification, various UDA methods for
semantic segmentation are recently proposed. The key idea
of these methods is to learn domain-invariant representations
by minimizing marginal distribution distance between the
source and target domains [15], adapting structured output
space [38, 5], or reducing appearance discrepancy through
image-to-image translation [1, 51, 18]. Another alternative is
to explicitly explore the supervision signals from the target
domain through self-training. The key idea is to alternatively generate pseudo labels on target data and re-train the
model with these labels. Most of the existing state-of-the-art
UDA methods in semantic segmentation rely on this strategy and demonstrate significant performance improvement.
[54, 18, 48, 44, 31].
However, one of the critical issues of the aforementioned
UDA methods is that they are possibly vulnerable to adversarial attacks. In other words, the performance of a UDA
model may dramatically degrade under an unnoticeable perturbation. Unfortunately, the robustness of UDA methods
remains largely unexplored in the literature. With the increasing applications of UDA methods in security-related
areas, the lack of robustness of these methods leads to massive safety concerns. For instance, even small-magnitude
perturbations on traffic signs can potentially cause disastrous consequences to autonomous cars [9, 33], such as
life-threatening accidents.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) aims to learn more transferable and generalizable features for vision tasks (e.g., classification and recognition) [8, 10, 12, 4]. Key to SSL is the
design of pretext tasks, such as rotation prediction, selfie,
and jigsaw, to obtain self-derived supervisory signals on unlabeled data. Recent studies reveal that SSL is effective in
improving model robustness and uncertainty [13]. However,
commonly used pretext tasks are designed to capture the
global representation of a given image or an image patch.
Such pretext tasks fail to provide critical supervision sig-

9194

