Influence-Balanced Loss for Imbalanced Visual Classification
Seulki Park Jongin Lim Younghan Jeon Jin Young Choi
ASRI, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
{seulki.park, ljin0429, yh1992, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a balancing training method
to address problems in imbalanced data learning. To this
end, we derive a new loss used in the balancing training
phase that alleviates the influence of samples that cause an
overfitted decision boundary. The proposed loss efficiently
improves the performance of any type of imbalance learning methods. In experiments on multiple benchmark data
sets, we demonstrate the validity of our method and reveal that the proposed loss outperforms the state-of-the-art
cost-sensitive loss methods. Furthermore, since our loss is
not restricted to a specific task, model, or training method,
it can be easily used in combination with other recent resampling, meta-learning, and cost-sensitive learning methods for class-imbalance problems. Our code is made available at https://github.com/pseulki/IB-Loss.

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable success of deep neural networks
(DNNs) these days, many areas of computer vision suffer
from highly imbalanced datasets. Many real-world data exhibit skewed distributions [23, 16, 11, 24, 10], in which the
number of samples per class differs greatly. This imbalance
between classes can be problematic, since the model trained
on such imbalanced data tends to overfit the dominant (majority) classes [18, 14, 4]. That is, while the overall performance appears to be satisfactory, the model performs poorly
on minority classes. To overcome the class imbalance problem, extensive research has recently been conducted to improve the generalization performance by reducing the overwhelming influence of the dominant class on the model.
The research on imbalanced learning can be divided
into three approaches: data-level approach, cost-sensitive
re-weighting approach, and meta-learning approach. The
data-level approach aims to directly balance the training
data distributions via re-sampling (i.e., under-sampling or
over-sampling) [6, 32] or by generating synthetic samples
[28]. Meanwhile, the cost-sensitive re-weighting approach
aims to design new loss functions to re-weight samples by

considering their importance [33, 17, 22]. Finally, the metalearning approach enhances the performance of the datalevel and/or cost-sensitive re-weighting approach via metalearning [31, 25, 30]. Most recent data-level approaches
require a heavy computational burden. Moreover, undersampling can lose some valuable information, and oversampling or data generation can cause overfitting on certain
repetitive samples. The meta-learning approach requires additional unbiased data [31] or a meta-sampler [30], which is
computationally expensive in practice. Therefore, our work
focuses on the cost-sensitive re-weighting approach to design a new loss function that is simple but efficient.
The cost-sensitive re-weighting approach aims to assign
class penalties to shift the decision boundary in a way that
reduces the bias induced by the data imbalance. For this purpose, the most commonly adopted method is to re-weight
samples inversely to the number of training samples in
each class to assign more weights for the minority classes
[17, 33, 8]. These methods have focused on only globallevel class distribution and assign the same fixed weight to
all samples belonging to the same class. However, not all
samples in a dataset play an equal role in determining the
model parameters [7]. That is, some samples have greater
influences on forming a decision boundary. Hence, each
sample needs to be re-weighted differently according to its
impact on the model.
Recently, numerous studies have been conducted in
which each sample is considered to design sample-wise loss
functions [9, 22, 27]. Specifically, these methods downweight well-classified samples and assign more weights to
hard examples, which yield high errors. This re-weighting
might lead to the complete training when the high capacity
of DNNs is sufficient to finally memorize the whole training data [34, 3]. This implies that DNN is overfitted to hard
samples, which are located at the overlapping region between the majority and minority classes. In the imbalanced
data, most hard samples are majority samples that enforce
the decision boundary to be complex and shift to the minority region.
To address the aforementioned problem, in this paper,
we propose a loss-sensitive method to down-weight sam-

735

