Disentangled High Quality Salient Object Detection
Bo Li1 * Yijie Zhong Shouhong Ding1 Mofei Song2,3
1
Youtu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, China
2
The School of Computer Science and Engineering,
3
The Key Lab of Computer Network and Information Integration (Ministry of Education),
Southeast University, Nanjing, China
luckybird1994@gmail.com, libraboli@tencent.com, dun.haski@gmail.com,
ericshding@tencent.com, songmf@seu.edu.cn
Lv Tang

Abstract
Aiming at discovering and locating most distinctive objects from visual scenes, salient object detection (SOD)
plays an essential role in various computer vision systems.
Coming to the era of high resolution, SOD methods are
facing new challenges. The major limitation of previous
methods is that they try to identify the salient regions and
estimate the accurate objects boundaries simultaneously
with a single regression task at low-resolution. This practice ignores the inherent difference between the two difficult problems, resulting in poor detection quality. In this
paper, we propose a novel deep learning framework for
high-resolution SOD task, which disentangles the task into
a low-resolution saliency classification network (LRSCN)
and a high-resolution refinement network (HRRN). As a
pixel-wise classification task, LRSCN is designed to capture sufficient semantics at low-resolution to identify the
definite salient, background and uncertain image regions.
HRRN is a regression task, which aims at accurately refining the saliency value of pixels in the uncertain region
to preserve a clear object boundary at high-resolution with
limited GPU memory. It is worth noting that by introducing
uncertainty into the training process, our HRRN can well
address the high-resolution refinement task without using
any high-resolution training data. Extensive experiments
on high-resolution saliency datasets as well as some widely
used saliency benchmarks show that the proposed method
achieves superior performance compared to the state-ofthe-art methods.

* Corresponding author and equal contribution to first author. This
work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
61906036 and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2242021k30056).

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) is derived with the goal
of accurately detecting and segmenting the most distinctive
objects from visual scenes. As a preliminary step, it plays
an essential role in various visual systems, such as video object segmentation [43], light field image segmentation [39],
image-sentence matching [18], person re-identification [23]
and instance segmentation [64].
Recently, the rapid development of the commodity imaging and display device, has resulted in higher requirements
for the producing and editing of high-resolution (e.g., 720p,
1080p and 4K) images. Salient object detection as well as
many state-of-the-art computer vision tasks are facing various challenges when encountering high-resolution scenarios. A good high-resolution salient object detection method
should not only accurately detect the whole salient object
but also predict the precise boundaries of salient objects.
Despite the conventional Deep Neural Networks (DNNS)
based SOD models have achieved remarkable performance
at low-resolution (e.g., typical size 224 × 224, 384 × 384),
they often fail to generate high quality detection results for
high-resolution images. The major reason for this drawback
is that the most previous methods try to identify the salient
regions and estimate the accurate objects boundaries simultaneously in one step, which are two difficult and inherently
different problems for high-resolution salient object detection. To address the first problem, a network is required
to capture sufficient semantics by maintaining a larger receptive field. However, since the memory usage increases
dramatically along with the image resolution, it is impractical for these models to directly learn sufficient semantics
for high-resolution images. One plausible way is introducing downsample operations, but the structure details are inevitably lost during the downsampling, which however is
precisely the key to solving the second problem.
Unfortunately, most of the existing low-resolution SOD

3580

