3DeepCT: Learning Volumetric Scattering Tomography of Clouds
Yael Sde-Chen, Yoav Y. Schechner, Vadim Holodovsky
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
yael.sde.chen@gmail.com, yoav@ee.technion.ac.il, vholod@ef.technion.ac.il

Eshkol Eytan
Department of Earth and Planetary Science,
The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
eshkol.eytan@weizmann.ac.il

MODIS

Abstract
We present 3DeepCT, a deep neural network for computed tomography, which performs 3D reconstruction of
scattering volumes from multi-view images. The architecture is dictated by the stationary nature of atmospheric
cloud fields. The task of volumetric scattering tomography
aims at recovering a volume from its 2D projections. This
problem has been approached by diverse inverse methods
based on signal processing and physics models. However,
such techniques are typically iterative, exhibiting a high
computational load and a long convergence time. We show
that 3DeepCT outperforms physics-based inverse scattering methods, in accuracy, as well as offering orders of
magnitude improvement in computational run-time. We
further introduce a hybrid model that combines 3DeepCT
and physics-based analysis. The resultant hybrid technique
enjoys fast inference time and improved recovery performance.

1. Introduction
There is increasing effort to develop deep neural networks (DNNs) for reconstructing three dimensional (3D)
shapes or projections of opaque objects. These DNNs
use either explicit outer-shell or volumetric representations
[7, 11, 12, 13, 19, 24, 28, 35, 53, 58, 59, 67, 78, 79, 80, 82].
However, there is still a significant gap in advancing reconstruction of 3D heterogeneous volumetric translucent
fields, such as the atmosphere (Fig. 1). 3D heterogeneous
translucent objects are reconstructed, essentially, using tomographic data. Radiation that propagates through the
medium yields a set of multi-view two dimensional (2D)
radiometric images. Analysis retrieves from the data the
volumetric spatial distribution of material density in 3D.

6th of December 2019
190N; -560W; 550 × 415 km2

Images by the Terra satellite

Figure 1. Shallow cumulus cloud fields [76].

This is computed tomography (CT). It is used extensively in
biomedical imaging and earth sciences [3, 5, 23, 37, 57, 66]
DNNs advance medical CT [29, 34, 65, 72, 77]. Nevertheless, most CT modalities are based on a linear image
formation model. Linear models can be solved well using
established signal processing methods, including optimization of a convex functional, without requiring learning. It
may be argued that 3D tomography does not lend itself easily to current DNNs. The reason is that DNNs require big
training data, but it is extremely difficult to obtain sufficient
ground-truth data of volumetric heterogeneous translucent
objects.
Reconstructing such objects poses a serious challenge
which is worth tackling by DNNs. We believe this challenge and opportunity occur when these conditions are met.
(1) The tomographic model is very complex: nonlinear, not
unimodal. Then, methods of linear-CT analysis cannot apply. Moreover, optimization-based estimation is very slow,
unscalable and too dependent on initialization. (2) Scalability is critically needed to analyze huge 3D fields. (3)
While the imaging model is nonlinear, it is continuous: an
infinitesimal change of the medium continuously affects the
image data, and vice versa. (4) There is a physics-based
way to generate a large and diverse database. Under these

5671

