Prediction by Anticipation: An Action-Conditional Prediction Method based on
Interaction Learning
Ershad Banijamali1 , Mohsen Rohani1 , Elmira Amirloo1 , Jun Luo1 , Pascal Poupart2
1
Noah’s Ark Laboratory, Huawei, Markham, Canada
2
School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
{ershad.banijamali1,mohsen.rohani,elmira.amirloo,jun.luo1}@huawei.com, ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
In autonomous driving (AD), accurately predicting
changes in the environment can effectively improve safety
and comfort. Due to complex interactions among traffic
participants, however, it is very hard to achieve accurate
prediction for a long horizon. To address this challenge, we
propose prediction by anticipation, which views interaction
in terms of a latent probabilistic generative process wherein
some vehicles move partly in response to the anticipated
motion of other vehicles. Under this view, consecutive data
frames can be factorized into sequential samples from an
action-conditional distribution that effectively generalizes
to a wider range of actions and driving situations. Our proposed prediction model, variational Bayesian in nature, is
trained to maximize the evidence lower bound (ELBO) of the
log-likelihood of this conditional distribution. Evaluations
of our approach with prominent AD datasets NGSIM I-80
and Argoverse show significant improvement over current
state-of-the-art in both accuracy and generalization.

1. Introduction
Predicting the future state of a scene with moving objects
is a task that humans handle with ease. This is due to our
understanding about the dynamics of the objects in the scene
and the way they interact. Despite recent advancements
in machine learning and especially deep learning, teaching
machines such understanding remains challenging.
In this paper, we are interested in predicting the highdimensional observations, e.g. in pixel space, of a scene
with multiple interacting agents, where the observations are
ego-centric, i.e. the scene is observed from the standpoint
of one of the agents (ego-agent). Formally, we consider an
action-conditional prediction task, which is defined as finding the next observation from the scene given a sequence of
the past and current observations, o1:t , and the ego-agent’s
action (ego-action) at , i.e. optimizing p(ot+1 |o1:t , at ). In
particular we consider the prediction task in the challenging

framework of autonomous driving (AD), where there is a
large number of agents in the scene and they have complicated interactions with each other. The common approach in
the literature to tackle this problem is to optimize this conditional probability directly, e.g. [12]. However, since the
observations are heavily affected by the ego-actions, these
models often fail to generalize to larger set of actions than
the training set or to adapt to broader range of environments.
Nevertheless, in many applications, specially AD, such generalization is of great importance as handling many critical
scenarios require taking actions that are rarely seen in the
data collected from real-world driving.
In order to harness the effect of the action, we propose
a novel approach based on splitting the original problem
into two subproblems where this effect can be learned much
easier. In fact, we break the observation into two sets of
features: 1) ego-features, oego
t , which contains the features
related to the ego agent (e.g. its position). 2) environmentfeatures, oenv
t , which contains all other features than the
ego-features including other agents. The action has an effect
on both of these feature sets. Our approach is based on the
idea that sequences of data that include heavy interactions
come from a probabilistic generative process wherein some
reacting agents move partly in response to the anticipated
motion of some acting agents. Therefore, we decompose
p(ot+1 |o1:t , at ) into two steps: learning p(oego
t+1 |o1:t , at )
ego
and then learning p(oenv
|o
,
o
),
i.e.
we
first
learn how
t+1 1:t
t+1
the action changes the ego-features and then learn how the
environment reacts to this change. However, the effect of the
action on the ego-features is much easier to model and often
does not need to be learned and can be fixed using the domain
ego
knowledge. Then we can learn p(oenv
t+1 |o1:t , ot+1 ) from data,
which is much easier than learning p(ot+1 |o1:t , at ) since
we only have to learn to predict oenv
t+1 based on the effect of
action at on the ego-features oego
t+1 . Conditioning on at or
oego
is
equivalent
from
an
information
theoretic perspect+1
tive, but conditioning on oego
allows
the
model to reason
t+1
about interactions more easily since the ego effect is already

15621

