Unpaired Learning for Deep Image Deraining with Rain Direction Regularizer

1

Yang Liu 1 Ziyu Yue 1 Jinshan Pan2 Zhixun Su1
Dalian University of Technology 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
https://lewisyangliu.github.io/projects/UDRDR

Abstract
We present a simple yet effective unpaired learning based
image rain removal method from an unpaired set of synthetic images and real rainy images by exploring the properties of rain maps. The proposed algorithm mainly consists
of a semi-supervised learning part and a knowledge distillation part. The semi-supervised part estimates the rain
map and reconstructs the derained image based on the wellestablished layer separation principle. To facilitate rain removal, we develop a rain direction regularizer to constrain
the rain estimation network in the semi-supervised learning
part. With the estimated rain maps from the semi-supervised
learning part, we first synthesize a new paired set by adding
to rain-free images based on the superimposition model.
The real rainy images and the derained results constitute
another paired set. Then we develop an effective knowledge distillation method to explore such two paired sets so
that the deraining model in the semi-supervised learning
part is distilled. We propose two new rainy datasets, named
RainDirection and Real3000, to validate the effectiveness
of the proposed method. Both quantitative and qualitative
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves favorable results against state-of-the-art methods
in benchmark datasets and real-world images.

1. Introduction
Single image deraining aims to estimate a rain-free image from a rainy image. It is a classical image processing
problem, which has been an active research topic in the vision and graphics communities within the last decade. As
numerous real-world tasks (e.g., traffic detection and environmental monitoring) require high-quality images, and the
rainy environment usually leads to deprecated images, it is
of great interest to develop an effective algorithm to recover
rain-free images.
Rain is a complex atmospheric phenomenon. Images
with rain may lose color fidelity and suffer visual occlusions
as a result of rain streaks (drops) move through the background scene. Mathematically, the raining process can be
formulated by the following linear superimposition model:
O(x) = B(x) + R(x),

(1)

where O is the rainy image, B is the rain-free image, and

R is the rain map, which describes the distribution and motion of the rain. x denotes the pixel coordinate. As only O is
available, we need to recover B and R simultaneously. This
problem is highly ill-posed because many different pairs of
B and R give rise to the same O, e.g., a nearly all-zeros
matrix for R and a rainy image for B, where the networks
do not succeed in estimating the rain map due to the complicated distribution and motion of the rain.
To make image deraining problem well-posed, existing
methods usually make some assumptions on the rain map
and rain-free image. For example, the low rank representation model [1], the sparse representation model [14], Gaussian mixture model [11] have been proposed to model the
rain maps or rain-free images to help rain removal. Jiang
et al. [7] explore gradient operators based on the sparsity
prior for rain maps. Instead of making some assumptions
on the rain map and rain-free image, several methods focus on developing end-to-end trainable networks for image
deraining [2, 3, 30, 22, 19, 10]. To better explore the domain knowledge, several deep learning-based methods impose constraints on the rain map or/and derained images in
different perspectives, e.g., joint rain location detection in
[26], rain density label assigned in [29], rain kernels describing the repetitive local patterns of rain streaks in [21].
These methods usually need paired data to train deep neural networks. However, the pixel-wise content loss used in
these methods tends to smooth details, while GAN based
losses may generate fake structures. In [19, 13], Negative
SSIM loss is used to model the local structure similarity between the derained image and ground truth one. However,
the approach of only imposing constraints on the derained
images neglects the distribution and motion of rain streaks.
Thus, it is necessary to explore the properties of the rain
map for better rain removal.
We find that the rain map of the natural rainy images
usually has a linear shape with similar directions in a local
image patch. The rain map is usually of high contrast with
sharp edges as the pixels covered by rain present high intensity while the pixels without rain is close to zeros. Therefore
we propose a rain direction regularizer to model the properties of the rain map for the rain map estimation so that
consistent and sharp rain structures can be preserved. The

4753

