Product1M: Towards Weakly Supervised Instance-Level Product Retrieval
via Cross-Modal Pretraining
Xunlin Zhan1† , Yangxin Wu1† , Xiao Dong1 , Yunchao Wei2 , Minlong Lu3 , Yichi Zhang3 , Hang Xu4 , and
Xiaodan Liang1?
1

Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Beijing Jiaotong University, 3 Alibaba Group, 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{zhanxlin, wuyx29}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {dx.icandoit,wychao1987,chromexbjxh,xdliang328}@gmail.com, ymlml@zju.edu.cn,
yichi.zyc@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Nowadays, customer’s demands for E-commerce are
more diversified, which introduces more complications to
the product retrieval industry. Previous methods are either
subject to single-modal input or perform supervised imagelevel product retrieval, thus fail to accommodate real-life
scenarios where enormous weakly annotated multi-modal
data are present. In this paper, we investigate a more realistic setting that aims to perform weakly-supervised multimodal instance-level product retrieval among fine-grained
product categories. To promote the study of this challenging task, we contribute Product1M, one of the largest multimodal cosmetic datasets for real-world instance-level retrieval. Notably, Product1M contains over 1 million imagecaption pairs and consists of two sample types, i.e., singleproduct and multi-product samples, which encompass a
wide variety of cosmetics brands. In addition to the great
diversity, Product1M enjoys several appealing characteristics including fine-grained categories, complex combinations, and fuzzy correspondence that well mimic the realworld scenes. Moreover, we propose a novel model named
Cross-modal contrAstive Product Transformer for instancelevel prodUct REtrieval (CAPTURE), that excels in capturing the potential synergy between multi-modal inputs via
a hybrid-stream transformer in a self-supervised manner.
CAPTURE generates discriminative instance features via
masked multi-modal learning as well as cross-modal contrastive pretraining and it outperforms several SOTA crossmodal baselines. Extensive ablation studies well demonstrate the effectiveness and the generalization capacity of
our model. Dataset and codes are available at https:
//github.com/zhanxlin/Product1M .
† Equal contribution. ? Corresponding Author.

1. Introduction

(a) Image-level Retrieval

SK-II Fairy Water
Facial Cream Cleanser
Clear Lotion Fourpiece Set

sk2 Fairy Water Essence Zhou Xiaoer Counter SK-II Rejuvenating and
230ml Whitening and Anti- SK2 SKII Amino Acid
Repairing Essence
aging SKII Essence Water Foaming Cleanser 120g
Cream

(b) Multi-modal Instance-level Retrieval
Figure 1. Our proposed task performs instance-level retrieval
among multi-modal data.

The past two decades have witnessed the high enrichment of the commodity types and the diversification of online customer’s demand in E-commerce. On the one hand,
online merchandise has increasingly diversified categories
and a large proportion of them are exhibited as a product
portfolio where multiple instances of different products exist in one image. On the other hand, online customers or
merchants may want to retrieve the single product in a portfolio for price comparison [42] or online commodity recommendation [34]. Furthermore, with the ever-accelerating
accumulation of heterogeneous data generated by multimedia, it remains a problem how an algorithm can handle large-scale and weakly annotated data [45] to perform
multi-modal retrieval.
In this paper, we explore a realistic problem: how to perform instance-level1 fine-grained product retrieval given the
1 Instance-level product retrieval refers to the retrieval of all single products existed in a product portfolio image.

11782

