Unsupervised Depth Completion with Calibrated Backprojection Layers
Alex Wong
UCLA Vision Lab

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab

alexw@cs.ucla.edu

soatto@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose a deep neural network architecture to infer
dense depth from an image and a sparse point cloud. It
is trained using a video stream and corresponding synchronized sparse point cloud, as obtained from a LIDAR or other
range sensor, along with the intrinsic calibration parameters of the camera. At inference time, the calibration of the
camera, which can be different than the one used for training, is fed as an input to the network along with the sparse
point cloud and a single image. A Calibrated Backprojection Layer backprojects each pixel in the image to threedimensional space using the calibration matrix and a depth
feature descriptor. The resulting 3D positional encoding is
concatenated with the image descriptor and the previous
layer output to yield the input to the next layer of the encoder. A decoder, exploiting skip-connections, produces a
dense depth map. The resulting Calibrated Backprojection
Network, or KBNet, is trained without supervision by minimizing the photometric reprojection error. KBNet imputes
missing depth value based on the training set, rather than
on generic regularization. We test KBNet on public depth
completion benchmarks, where it outperforms the state of
the art by 30% indoor and 8% outdoor when the same camera is used for training and testing. When the test camera is
different, the improvement reaches 62%.

1. Introduction
Sensor platforms designed to enable interaction with
physical space often include optical as well as range sensors. From cars to phones, cameras are paired with active
sensors such as LIDARs, Sonars or Radars. We address the
case of a single camera and a single sensor that returns the
three-dimensional (3D) coordinates of a number of points
far fewer than the number of pixels in the RGB image. The
range sensor alone provides a sparse estimate of the Euclidean geometry of the surrounding environment, but often
insufficient for planning in applications such as autonomous
navigation or manipulation. We wish to leverage the complementarity of the optical and range modalities to provide

a dense depth map, whereby a range value1 is associated to
every pixel in the image (in the millions) as opposed to just
the LIDAR or radar returns (in the thousands).
Depth completion consists of mapping a single RGB image and a sparse 3D point cloud onto a dense depth map,
which requires inferring a depth value where missing. This
can be done by means of regularization, or inductively using
previously observed data for scenes other than the present.
We assume we have available a training set consisting of
monocular videos, corresponding sparse 3D point cloud,
and intrinsic calibration matrix of the camera used for capture,2 but without any manual annotation or ground-truth
dense depth i.e. unsupervised.
Our goal is to use the training set to learn a function that,
for a scene and camera not used for training, can map a
sparse point cloud registered to an image, along with the
matrix of intrinsic calibration parameters of the camera, and
produce a dense depth map associated with the test image.
We propose a novel deep neural network architecture that
leverages a sparse-to-dense (S2D) module and calibrated
backprojection (KB) layers. S2D is comprised of various
pooling and convolutional layers to yield a dense representation of the sparse points. A KB layer then maps camera
intrinsics, input image, and current depth estimate onto the
3D scene. This can be thought of as a form of spatial (Euclidean) positional encoding of the image. Unlike previous
architectures, camera intrinsics are an input to our model,
as opposed to a fixed set of parameters in the training loss.
This allows us more flexibility to transfer the trained model
to sensor platforms other than that used for training.
Our network is trained unsupervised with the standard
Photometric Euclidean Reprojection Loss (PERL) i.e. the
absolute difference between a reconstructed image and the
actual image measured at a time instant. We also penalize
the reconstruction error of the input sparse points and Total
1 The depth associated with the pixel is the Euclidean distance of the
closest point in the scene along the projection ray through that pixel and the
optical center. We assume the sensors to be calibrated and synchronized,
and in particular the intrinsic calibration matrix of the camera is known so
that pixel coordinates can be converted to Euclidean 3D coordinates.
2 Typically, range and optical sensors are calibrated mechanically and
pre-registered, so extrinsic calibration is not needed.

12747

