Refining Action Segmentation with Hierarchical Video Representations
Hyemin Ahn1 and Dongheui Lee1,2
1
German Aerospace Center (DLR) 2 Technical University of Munich
{hyemin.ahn, dongheui.lee}@dlr.de

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Hierarchical Action Segmentation Refiner (HASR), which can refine temporal action
segmentation results from various models by understanding the overall context of a given video in a hierarchical
way. When a backbone model for action segmentation estimates how the given video can be segmented, our model
extracts segment-level representations based on frame-level
features, and extracts a video-level representation based on
the segment-level representations. Based on these hierarchical representations, our model can refer to the overall
context of the entire video, and predict how the segment labels that are out of context should be corrected. Our HASR
can be plugged into various action segmentation models
(MS-TCN, SSTDA, ASRF), and improve the performance of
state-of-the-art models based on three challenging datasets
(GTEA, 50Salads, and Breakfast). For example, in 50Salads dataset, the segmental edit score improves from 67.9%
to 77.4% (MS-TCN), from 75.8% to 77.3% (SSTDA), from
79.3% to 81.0% (ASRF). In addition, our model can refine
the segmentation result from the unseen backbone model,
which was not referred to when training HASR. This generalization performance would make HASR be an effective
tool for boosting up the existing approaches for temporal
action segmentation. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/cotton-ahn/HASR_iccv2021.

1. Introduction
Enabling an intelligent agent to understand a human action from videos is crucial for various applications such as
interactive robots, surveillance, and activity analysis. Regarding this, one main line of research would be a video
action recognition [14, 1, 7], which predicts the action class
label for properly trimmed videos. On the other hand, there
exist researches for understanding untrimmed videos with
fine-grained class labels [19, 27, 21], so that agents can localize or segment human actions from long-term videos. In
this paper, we focus on a task of temporal action segmentation, which is to divide video frames into segments as well
as to predict action class labels for the segments.

Figure 1. An illustration of how the proposed Hierarchical Action
Segmentation Refiner (HASR) works. HASR refines the action
segmentation result from the backbone model, after understanding
the overall context of the entire video in a hierarchical way. This
example is obtained when HASR is applied to improve the performance of MS-TCN [5], given a video of making a hot-dog as an
input. It shows that the label of ‘stir’, which is not relevant to a
hot-dog, changes to the ‘background’ (no action) label.

Researches in temporal action segmentation have been
improved to successfully segment thousands of video
frames recorded with 15 fps [5, 3, 10]. However, we find
out that existing state-of-the-art models sometimes generate segmentation results including action labels that are out
of overall context. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the
label of ‘stir’ appears when the input video is about making
a hot-dog. We claim that this phenomenon happens since
existing approaches focus on frame-level feature information, but not on the overall context of the video.
In this paper, we propose a Hierarchical Action Segmentation Refiner (HASR), which can extract the hierarchical
video representations to understand the overall context, and
exploit them to refine the results from action segmentation
backbone models. Here, the action segmentation backbone
models refer to any existing approaches for a temporal action segmentation task, such as MS-TCN [5], SSTDA [3]
and ASRF [10]. Figure 1 shows an illustration of how

16302

