End-to-End Unsupervised Document Image Blind Denoising
Hamid R Motahari Nezhad1
Nigel P Duffy1
Marcin Plata2 *
Mehrdad J Gangeh1 *
1
2
Ernst & Young (EY) LLP USA
EY GDS (CS) Poland Sp. z o.o.
{Mehrdad.J.Gangeh,Hamid.Motahari,Nigel.P.Duffy}@ey.com

Abstract
Removing noise from scanned pages is a vital step before
their submission to optical character recognition (OCR)
system. Most available image denoising methods are supervised where the pairs of noisy/clean pages are required.
However, this assumption is rarely met in real settings. Besides, there is no single model that can remove various noise
types from documents. Here, we propose a unified end-toend unsupervised deep learning model, for the first time,
that can effectively remove multiple types of noise, including salt & pepper noise, blurred and/or faded text, as well
as watermarks from documents at various levels of intensity. We demonstrate that the proposed model significantly
improves the quality of scanned images and the OCR of the
pages on several test datasets.

1. Introduction
Millions of electronic documents, such as contracts and
invoices, are reviewed in the normal course of business in
the enterprise. A large percentage of them are scanned documents containing various types of noise, including salt &
pepper (S&P) noise, blurred or faded text, watermarks, etc.
Noise in documents highly degrades the performance of the
optical character recognition (OCR) and their subsequent
digitization and analysis. The first step toward automating
document analysis is to improve their quality using image
processing techniques, such as image denoising and restoration. Most of the literature, places attention on removing
noise from pictures [25] (e.g., natural scenes) not text documents. However, these techniques may not be directly applicable due to very different nature of text documents.
In the image restoration problem, a degradation function
and noise may both affect the quality of images [8]. Examples are deblurring, defading, and inpainting. If in a special
case, there is no degradation function, the problem would be
a pure image denoising problem (e.g., S&P noise removal).
The current state-of-the-art (SOTA) solutions for im* equal contribution

Marcin.Plata@gds.ey.com

age restoration problem are discriminative models based on
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), auto-encoders and
their variants such as REDNet (residual encoder decoder
network) [19, 7], DnCNN (denoising convolutional neural
networks) [29], and RDN (residual dense network) [30, 31].
These solutions can generally be formulated as follows:

XX 
arg min
L f (xji ; θ) = ŷij , yij
(1)
θ

j

i

where xji refers to a noisy patch extracted from the noisy
image xi , yij and ŷij are the target and predicted clean
patches, respectively, f and θ refer to the CNN and its parameters. The main shortcoming of this approach, however, is the requirement for the availability of clean target images/documents, which is hard to address in realworld documents. In the literature, the noisy/clean pairs
are usually prepared by adding some synthetic noise to
clean images/documents. However, the synthetic noise does
not completely model noise on real images/documents, and
therefore, the performance of the network trained on these
synthetic data is sub-optimal and highly degraded on real
noisy images/documents [12, 28].
To address the lack of noisy/clean pairs, noise-to-noise
(N2N) [15], noise-to-void (N2V) [13], and noise-to-self
(N2S) [3, 14] training strategies have been proposed. However, these solutions are based on the assumption that the
noise is additive zero-mean, and/or independent between
pixels [15, 13, 14]. This only covers a specific kind of
denoising problem and, therefore, not directly applicable
to general image restoration problems, including defading
and deblurring. Furthermore, in N2N approach, at least
two noisy instances of the same document page are needed,
which are not readily available in real settings.
There are several challenges in the design of an end-toend solution for document image clean-up: 1) Noisy/clean
pairs are not available, and therefore, the standard SOTA
solutions based on discriminative models can not be employed. 2) There are various artifacts at different intensity levels (intra-class variation) in documents. 3) We prefer to have a single model based on one architecture, and
one training strategy, i.e., a unified solution to address all

7888

