Occlusion-Aware Video Object Inpainting
Lei Ke1
Yu-Wing Tai2
Chi-Keung Tang1
1
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Kuaishou Technology
{lkeab,cktang}@cse.ust.hk, yuwing@gmail.com

Abstract
Conventional video inpainting is neither object-oriented
nor occlusion-aware, making it liable to obvious artifacts
when large occluded object regions are inpainted. This
paper presents occlusion-aware video object inpainting,
which recovers both the complete shape and appearance for
occluded objects in videos given their visible mask segmentation.
To facilitate this new research, we construct the first
large-scale video object inpainting benchmark YouTubeVOI to provide realistic occlusion scenarios with both occluded and visible object masks available. Our technical contribution VOIN jointly performs video object shape
completion and occluded texture generation. In particular, the shape completion module models long-range object coherence while the flow completion module recovers
accurate flow with sharp motion boundary, for propagating temporally-consistent texture to the same moving object across frames. For more realistic results, VOIN is optimized using both T-PatchGAN and a new spatio-temporal
attention-based multi-class discriminator.
Finally, we compare VOIN and strong baselines on
YouTube-VOI. Experimental results clearly demonstrate the
efficacy of our method including inpainting complex and dynamic objects. VOIN degrades gracefully with inaccurate
input visible mask.

1. Introduction
Conventional video inpainting infers missing pixel regions by distilling information from remaining unmasked
video regions. However, as shown in Figure 1, these models [1, 2, 3, 4] often fail to recover moving objects with large
occlusion by wrongly inpainting the occluded region with
irrelevant background colors and produce obvious artifacts.
This is due to their lack of object and occlusion awareness.
On the contrary, our human visual system possesses powerful amodal perception ability to reason the complete struc1 Project page is at https://lkeab.github.io/voin.
2 This research is supported in part by the Research Grant Council of
the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420 and Kuaishou Technology.

ture of moving objects under occlusion, including the appearance of the invisible regions in high fidelity [5, 6].
To overcome the above limitations, we make the first significant attempt on occlusion-aware video object inpainting,
which completes occluded video objects by recovering their
shape and appearance in motion. While there exist object
completion models, they are applicable only to single images [7] in highly limited scenarios such as car and indoor
furniture [8, 9]. These single-image models do not utilize
temporal coherence during mask and content generation,
thus leading to temporal artifacts and unsmooth transition
when directly applied to videos.
Training models for occlusion reasoning requires a large
number and variety of occluded video objects with amodal
mask annotations. One difficulty arises from the existing
amodal datasets, which come mostly in single images and
are small [11, 12], or cover very limited object classes [13].
Inspired by [7], our approach is trained in a self-supervised
manner with only modal annotations. To create realistic
data in large quantity, we contribute the first large-scale
video object inpainting benchmark with diverse occlusion
patterns and object classes for both training and evaluation. Specifically, we generate occlusion masks for video
objects by high-fidelity simulation of overlapping objects
in motion, thus taking into consideration object-like occlusion patterns, motion and deformation under various degrees of occlusion. Our new YouTube-VOI dataset based
on YouTube-VOS [14] contains 5,305 videos, a 65-category
label set including common objects such as people, animals and vehicles, with over 2 million occluded and visible
masks for moving video objects.
To infer invisible occluded object regions, we propose
the VOIN (Video Object Inpainting Network), a unified
multi-task framework for joint video object mask completion and object appearance recovery. Our object shape completion module learns to infer complete object shapes from
only visible mask regions and object semantics, while our
appearance recovery module inpaints occluded object regions with plausible content. To obtain pixel-level temporal
coherency, we design a novel occlusion-aware flow completion module to capture moving video object and propagate consistent video content across even temporally distant frames, by enforcing flow consistency during the in-

14468

