ViViT: A Video Vision Transformer
Anurag Arnab∗ Mostafa Dehghani∗ Georg Heigold Chen Sun
Google Research

Mario Lučić† Cordelia Schmid†

{aarnab, dehghani, heigold, chensun, lucic, cordelias}@google.com

Abstract
We present pure-transformer based models for video
classification, drawing upon the recent success of such models in image classification. Our model extracts spatiotemporal tokens from the input video, which are then encoded by a series of transformer layers. In order to handle the long sequences of tokens encountered in video, we
propose several, efficient variants of our model which factorise the spatial- and temporal-dimensions of the input. Although transformer-based models are known to only be effective when large training datasets are available, we show
how we can effectively regularise the model during training
and leverage pretrained image models to be able to train on
comparatively small datasets. We conduct thorough ablation studies, and achieve state-of-the-art results on multiple
video classification benchmarks including Kinetics 400 and
600, Epic Kitchens, Something-Something v2 and Moments
in Time, outperforming prior methods based on deep 3D
convolutional networks.

1. Introduction
Approaches based on deep convolutional neural networks have advanced the state-of-the-art across many standard datasets for vision problems since AlexNet [37]. At
the same time, the most prominent architecture of choice in
sequence-to-sequence modelling (e.g. in natural language
processing) is the transformer [67], which does not use convolutions, but is based on multi-headed self-attention. This
operation is particularly effective at modelling long-range
dependencies and allows the model to attend over all elements in the input sequence. This is in stark contrast to
convolutions where the corresponding “receptive field” is
limited, and grows linearly with the depth of the network.
The success of attention-based models in NLP has recently inspired approaches in computer vision to integrate
transformers into CNNs [74, 7], as well as some attempts to
replace convolutions completely [48, 3, 52]. However, it is
only very recently with the Vision Transformer (ViT) [17],
∗ Equal contribution
† Equal advising

that a pure-transformer based architecture has outperformed
its convolutional counterparts in image classification. Dosovitskiy et al. [17] closely followed the original transformer
architecture of [67], and noticed that its main benefits
were observed at large scale – as transformers lack some
of the inductive biases of convolutions (such as translational equivariance), they seem to require more data [17]
or stronger regularisation [63].
Inspired by ViT, and the fact that attention-based architectures are an intuitive choice for modelling longrange contextual relationships in video, we develop several transformer-based models for video classification. Currently, the most performant models are based on deep 3D
convolutional architectures [8, 19, 20] which were a natural extension of image classification CNNs [26, 59]. Recently, these models were augmented by incorporating selfattention into their later layers to better capture long-range
dependencies [74, 22, 78, 1].
As shown in Fig. 1, we propose pure-transformer models for video classification. The main operation performed
in this architecture is self-attention, and it is computed on
a sequence of spatio-temporal tokens that we extract from
the input video. To effectively process the large number of
spatio-temporal tokens that may be encountered in video,
we present several methods of factorising our model along
spatial and temporal dimensions to increase efficiency and
scalability. Furthermore, to train our model effectively on
smaller datasets, we show how to reguliarise our model during training and leverage pretrained image models.
We also note that convolutional models have been developed by the community for several years, and there are
thus many “best practices” associated with such models.
As pure-transformer models present different characteristics, we need to determine the best design choices for such
architectures. We conduct a thorough ablation analysis of
tokenisation strategies, model architecture and regularisation methods. Informed by this analysis, we achieve stateof-the-art results on multiple standard video classification
benchmarks, including Kinetics 400 and 600 [34], Epic
Kitchens 100 [13], Something-Something v2 [25] and Moments in Time [44].

6836

