A Hierarchical Variational Neural Uncertainty Model
for Stochastic Video Prediction
Moitreya Chatterjee1
Narendra Ahuja1
Anoop Cherian2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Champaign, IL 61820, USA
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02139
metro.smiles@gmail.com n-ahuja@illinois.edu cherian@merl.com
1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Extrapolating the present into the future is a task essential
to predictive reasoning and planning. When artificial intelligence systems are deployed to work side-by-side with humans, it is critical that they reason about their visual context
and generate plausible futures so that they can anticipate the
potential needs of humans or catastrophic risks and be better
equipped. Such a visual future generation framework could
also benefit applications such as video surveillance [57], human action recognition and forecasting [49, 55] as well as
simulation of real-world scenarios to train robot learning
algorithms, including autonomous driving [28]. However,
such applications have a high element of stochasticity, which
makes this prediction task challenging.

Seen Frames
t=4
t=5

Predicted Frames
t=6
t=7
t=8

t=9

t=23

t=24

0.02

0.06

0.05

0.03

GT

Predicting the future frames of a video is a challenging
task, in part due to the underlying stochastic real-world
phenomena. Prior approaches to solve this task typically
estimate a latent prior characterizing this stochasticity, however do not account for the predictive uncertainty of the
(deep learning) model. Such approaches often derive the
training signal from the mean-squared error (MSE) between
the generated frame and the ground truth, which can lead
to sub-optimal training, especially when the predictive uncertainty is high. Towards this end, we introduce Neural
Uncertainty Quantifier (NUQ) - a stochastic quantification
of the model’s predictive uncertainty, and use it to weigh
the MSE loss. We propose a hierarchical, variational framework to derive NUQ in a principled manner using a deep,
Bayesian graphical model. Our experiments on three benchmark stochastic video prediction datasets show that our
proposed framework trains more effectively compared to the
state-of-the-art models (especially when the training sets are
small), while demonstrating better video generation quality
and diversity against several evaluation metrics.

t=3

Scaled Uncertainty

0.02

0.08

Ours

Denton and Fergus

Castrejon et al.

Figure 1. Qualitative results vis-á-vis state-of-the-art video prediction baselines using the proposed NUQ framework on the BAIR
Push dataset [15], trained using only 2,000 samples (rather than
the full 40K samples). Regions with high motion are shown by a
red box. Also shown is an estimate of the per-frame scaled uncertainty estimated by our model. Note that the robotic arm changes
direction at t = 8, which is reflected in the predicted uncertainty.

The resurgence of deep neural networks, especially the advent of generative adversarial networks [20], has enabled significant progress in the development of frameworks for generating visual data, such as images [30]. While, temporallyevolving extensions of such image generation techniques
have shown benefits in artificially producing video sequences
for deterministic visual contexts [54, 56, 19, 37, 29], they
usually fail to model real-world sequences that are often
highly stochastic. Several recent works in video generation,
thus design modules to factor in data stochasticity while
making predictions [39, 2, 13, 8]. Specifically, such methods assume a latent stochastic prior, from which random
samples are drawn, in order to generate future frames. In
Babaeizadeh et al. [2], this stochastic prior is assumed to
follow a fixed normal distribution, which is sampled at every
time step, while Denton and Fergus [13], learn this prior
from data. The latter’s key insight is to use a variational
posterior to guide the learning of the prior to produce the
sufficient statistics of the normal distribution governing the
prior. Such stochastic methods typically employ a deterministic decoder (a neural network) that combines an embedding

9751

