Mining Contextual Information Beyond Image for Semantic Segmentation
Zhenchao Jin1 ,* Tao Gong1 , Dongdong Yu2 , Qi Chu1†,
Jian Wang2 , Changhu Wang2 , Jie Shao2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 ByteDance
{blwx@mail., gt950513@mail., qchu@}ustc.edu.cn
{yudongdong, wangjian.pierre, wangchanghu, Shaojie.mail}@bytedance.com,

Abstract
This paper studies the context aggregation problem in semantic image segmentation. The existing researches focus
on improving the pixel representations by aggregating the
contextual information within individual images. Though
impressive, these methods neglect the significance of the
representations of the pixels of the corresponding class beyond the input image. To address this, this paper proposes
to mine the contextual information beyond individual images to further augment the pixel representations. We first
set up a feature memory module, which is updated dynamically during training, to store the dataset-level representations of various categories. Then, we learn class probability distribution of each pixel representation under the
supervision of the ground-truth segmentation. At last, the
representation of each pixel is augmented by aggregating
the dataset-level representations based on the corresponding class probability distribution. Furthermore, by utilizing
the stored dataset-level representations, we also propose
a representation consistent learning strategy to make the
classification head better address intra-class compactness
and inter-class dispersion. The proposed method could be
effortlessly incorporated into existing segmentation frameworks (e.g., FCN, PSPNet, OCRNet and DeepLabV3) and
brings consistent performance improvements. Mining contextual information beyond image allows us to report stateof-the-art performance on various benchmarks: ADE20K,
LIP, Cityscapes and COCO-Stuff 1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a long-standing challenging
task in computer vision, aiming to assign semantic labels to
each pixel in an image accurately. This task is of broad in* This work was performed while Zhenchao Jin worked as an intern at
ByteDance.
† Corresponding author.
1 Our code will be available at https://github.com/CharlesPikachu/
mcibi.

current input image

original output

output

Augment

…

feature memory module

historical input images

Figure 1. Mining contextual information beyond image (MCIBI).
The feature memory module stores the dataset-level representations of various classes. The dotted line denotes that the current
input image will be added into the historical input images after
each iteration during training.

terest for potential application of autonomous driving, medical diagnosing, robot sensing, to name a few. In recent
years, deep neural networks [21, 36] have been the dominant solutions [1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 15, 39, 50], where the encoderdecoder architecture proposed in FCN [32] is the cornerstone of these methods. Specifically, these studies include
adopting graphical models or cascade structure to further refine the segmentation results [4, 10, 10, 53], designing novel
backbone networks [38,44,49] to extract more effective feature representations, aggregating reasonable contextual information to augment pixel representations [5, 39, 50] that
is also the interest of this paper, and so on.
Since there exist co-occurrent visual patterns, modeling
context is universal and essential for semantic image segmentation. Prior to this paper, the context of a pixel typically refers to a set of other pixels in the input image, e.g.,
the surrounding pixels. Specifically, PSPNet [50] utilizes
pyramid spatial pooling to aggregate contextual information. DeepLab [5, 6, 8] exploits the contextual information
by introducing the atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP).
OCRNet [45] proposes to improve the representation of
each pixel by weighted aggregating the object region representations. Several recent works [15, 22, 39, 46] first calculate the relations between a pixel and its contextual pixels,

7231

