Space-Time Crop & Attend:
Improving Cross-modal Video Representation Learning.
Mandela Patrick*, Po-Yao Huang⇤ , Ishan Misra, Florian Metze, Andrea Vedaldi
Facebook AI Research
mandelapatrick,berniehuang,imisra,fmetze,vedaldi@fb.com

Yuki M. Asano⇤ , João Henriques
Oxford University
yuki, joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

StiCA

The quality of the image representations obtained from
self-supervised learning depends strongly on the type of
data augmentations used in the learning formulation. Recent papers have ported these methods from still images
to videos and found that leveraging both audio and video
signals yields strong gains; however, they did not find that
spatial augmentations such as cropping, which are very important for still images, work as well for videos. In this
paper, we improve these formulations in two ways unique
to the spatio-temporal aspect of videos. First, for space, we
show that spatial augmentations such as cropping do work
well for videos too, but that previous implementations, due
to the high processing and memory cost, could not do this
at a scale sufficient for it to work well. To address this issue, we first introduce Feature Crop, a method to simulate
such augmentations much more efficiently directly in feature space. Second, we show that as opposed to naı̈ve average pooling, the use of transformer-based attention improves performance significantly, and is well suited for processing feature crops. Combining both of our discoveries
into a new method, Space-Time Crop & Attend (STiCA)
we achieve state-of-the-art performance across multiple
video-representation learning benchmarks. In particular,
we achieve new state-of-the-art accuracies of 67.0% on
HMDB-51 and 93.1% on UCF-101 when pre-training on
Kinetics-400. Code and pretrained models are available1 .

1. Introduction
Visual representations have evolved significantly in the
last two decades. The first generation of representations
* Equal contribution.
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/GDT

HMDB-51 Accuracy

Abstract

AVID

GDT
Two RGB Crops

60

AVTS
55

Default

XDC

50

SeLaVi
45

0

50

100

Epochs

150

>200

Figure 1: HMDB-51 accuracy vs epoch. Our method,
STiCA, combines space-time crops in feature space with
self-attention of time in latent space. This yields significant
benefits not only in performance but also in speed compared
to cropping in input space using two RGB crops, or simply
using the default cross-modal only loss. Compared to recent
state-of-the-art cross-modal self-supervised learning methods (XDC [6], GDT [106], AVID-CMA [97], SeLaVi [9])
pre-trained on Kinetics-400 [69] STiCA is able to achieve
significantly better results in fewer epochs.

comprises algorithms such as SIFT [87] and HOG [30] that
were designed manually. The second generation comprises
representations learned from data by using deep neural networks and manual supervision [31, 59, 76]. We are now
transitioning to the third generation, where representations
are learned from data without using any manual annotations
by means of self-supervision. Current self-supervised rep-

10560

