Pyramid R-CNN:
Towards Better Performance and Adaptability for 3D Object Detection
Jiageng Mao 1

Minzhe Niu 2

Haoyue Bai 3

Xiaodan Liang 4†

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a key component of perception
systems for robotics and autonomous driving, aiming at
detecting vehicles, pedestrians, and other objects with 3D
point clouds as input. In this paper, we propose a general two-stage 3D detection framework, named Pyramid RCNN, which can be applied on multiple 3D backbones to
enhance the detection adaptability and performance.
Among the existing 3D detection frameworks, two-stage
detection models [39, 30, 27, 5, 28] surpass most single1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3 HKUST 4 Sun Yat-Sen University
† Corresponding author: xdliang328@gmail.com

Chunjing Xu 2

Points in objects
Points gathered by RoIs of Pyramid R-CNN

percentage

We present a flexible and high-performance framework,
named Pyramid R-CNN, for two-stage 3D object detection
from point clouds. Current approaches generally rely on
the points or voxels of interest for RoI feature extraction
on the second stage, but cannot effectively handle the sparsity and non-uniform distribution of those points, and this
may result in failures in detecting objects that are far away.
To resolve the problems, we propose a novel second-stage
module, named pyramid RoI head, to adaptively learn the
features from the sparse points of interest. The pyramid RoI
head consists of three key components. Firstly, we propose
the RoI-grid Pyramid, which mitigates the sparsity problem
by extensively collecting points of interest for each RoI in
a pyramid manner. Secondly, we propose RoI-grid Attention, a new operation that can encode richer information
from sparse points by incorporating conventional attentionbased and graph-based point operators into a unified formulation. Thirdly, we propose the Density-Aware Radius
Prediction (DARP) module, which can adapt to different
point density levels by dynamically adjusting the focusing
range of RoIs. Combining the three components, our pyramid RoI head is robust to the sparse and imbalanced circumstances, and can be applied upon various 3D backbones to consistently boost the detection performance. Extensive experiments show that Pyramid R-CNN outperforms
the state-of-the-art 3D detection models by a large margin
on both the KITTI dataset and the Waymo Open dataset.

8%
7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0% 0

Hang Xu 2

50

100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
the number of points

Figure 1. Statistical results on the KITTI dataset. Blue bars denote the distribution of the number of object points. Orange bars
denote the distribution of the number of points gathered by RoIs
in Pyramid R-CNN. Our approach can mitigate the sparsity and
imbalanced distribution problems of point clouds.

stage 3D detectors [45, 37, 14, 38, 29] with remarkable margins owing to the RoI refinement stage. Different from the
2D counterparts [9, 8, 26, 11, 2] which apply RoIPool [8]
or RoIAlign [11] to crop dense feature maps on the second stage, the 3D detection models generally perform various RoI feature extraction operations on the Points of Interest. For example, Point R-CNN [29] utilizes a pointbased backbone to generate 3D proposals, treats the points
near the proposals as Points of Interest and applies Region
Pooling on those sparse points for box refinement; Part-A2
Net [30] utilizes a voxel-based backbone for proposal generation, uses the upsampled voxel points as Points of Interest, and applies sparse convolutions on those voxel points
for each RoI; PV-RCNN [27] encodes the whole scene into
a set of keypoints, and utilizes keypoints as Points of Interest for RoI-grid Pooling. Those Points of Interest originate
from raw point clouds and contain rich fine-grained information, which is required for the RoI refinement stage.
However, the Points of Interest inevitably suffer from the
sparsity and non-uniform distribution characteristics of input point clouds. As is demonstrated by the statistical results on the KITTI dataset [7] in Figure 1: 1) Point clouds
can be quite sparse in certain objects. More than 7% of total
objects have less than 10 points, and their visualized shapes
are mostly incomplete. Thus it is hard to identify their categories without enough context information. 2) The distribution of object points is extremely imbalanced. The number
of object points ranges from less than 10 to more than 500
on KITTI, and current RoI operations cannot handle the im-

2723

