4D Cloud Scattering Tomography
Roi Ronen, Yoav Y. Schechner
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical & Computer Eng.
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Eshkol Eytan
Department of Earth & Planetary Sciences
The Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel

ronen.roi@gmail.com

eshkol.eytan@weizmann.ac.il

yoav@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We derive computed tomography (CT) of a time-varying
volumetric scattering object, using a small number of moving cameras. We focus on passive tomography of dynamic
clouds, as clouds have a major effect on the Earth’s climate. State of the art scattering CT assumes a static object.
Existing 4D CT methods rely on a linear image formation
model and often on significant priors. In this paper, the angular and temporal sampling rates needed for a proper recovery are discussed. Spatiotemporal CT is achieved using
gradient-based optimization, which accounts for the correlation time of the dynamic object content. We demonstrate
this in physics-based simulations and on experimental realworld data.

1. Introduction
Computed tomography (CT) aims to recover the inner
structure of three dimensional (3D) volumetric heterogeneous objects [15, 16]. CT has extensive use in many domains. These include medicine [14, 41], sensing of atmospheric pollution [2], geophysics [49] and fluid dynamics [27, 51, 52]. CT requires multi-view imaging [3, 22].
In nearly all CT approaches, the object is considered static
during the multi-view acquisition. However, often the object changes while views are acquired sequentially [8, 53].
Thus, effort has been invested to generalize 3D CT to fourdimensional (4D) spatiotemporal CT, particularly in the
computer vision and graphics communities [42, 52, 53].
This effort has focused on linear-CT modalities. Linear
CT is computationally easier to handle, thus common for
decades, mainly in medical imaging [19]. Medical CT often exploits the periodic temporal nature of organ dynamics,
to synchronize sequential acquisitions [41].
This paper deals with a more complicated model: scattering CT. It is important to treat this case for scientific, societal and practical reasons. The climate is strongly affected

orbit
orbit

orbit

𝑡1

𝑡4

𝑡7

Time

Figure 1. Multiple moving sensors image a time-varying object
(cloud) from multiple-views. Tomography seeks the inner content.

by interaction with clouds [13]. To reduce major errors in
climate predictions, this interaction requires a much finer
understanding of cloud physics. Current models are based
on remote sensing data that is analyzed under the assumption that the atmosphere and clouds are made of very broad
and uniform layers. This leads to errors in climate understanding. To overcome this problem, 3D scattering CT has
been suggested as a way to study clouds [29, 30, 46].
Scattering CT of clouds requires high resolution multiview images from space. There are spaceborne and highaltitude systems that may provide such data, such as AirMSPI [6], MAIA [4], HARP [38], AirHARP [35] and the
planned CloudCT formation [43]. These systems are so expensive, that it is unrealistic to deploy them in large numbers to simultaneously image the same clouds from many
angles. Therefore, in practice, platforms move above the
clouds: a sequence of images is taken, in order to span
and sample a wide angular breadth (Fig. 1), but the cloud
evolves meanwhile. Hence there are important reasons to
derive 4D scattering CT of clouds.
We pose conditions for performing this task. These relate
to temporal sampling and angular breadth, in relation to the
correlation time of the evolving object. Then, we generalize prior 3D scattering CT, to spatiotemporal recovery using
data taken by moving cameras. We present an optimizationbased method to reach this. The method is demonstrated
both in rigorous simulations and on real data.

5520

