Graph-based Asynchronous Event Processing for Rapid Object Recognition
Yijin Li, Han Zhou, Bangbang Yang, Ye Zhang, Zhaopeng Cui, Hujun Bao, Guofeng Zhang*
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University†

Abstract
Different from traditional video cameras, event cameras capture asynchronous events stream in which each
event encodes pixel location, trigger time, and the polarity of the brightness changes. In this paper, we introduce
a novel graph-based framework for event cameras, namely
SlideGCN. Unlike some recent graph-based methods that
use groups of events as input, our approach can efficiently
process data event-by-event, unlock the low latency nature
of events data while still maintaining the graph’s structure
internally. For fast graph construction, we develop a radius search algorithm, which better exploits the partial regular structure of event cloud against k-d tree based generic
methods. Experiments show that our method reduces the
computational complexity up to 100 times with respect to
current graph-based methods while keeping state-of-the-art
performance on object recognition. Moreover, we verify the
superiority of event-wise processing with our method. When
the state becomes stable, we can give a prediction with high
confidence, thus making an early recognition.

1. Introduction
Rapid object recognition is essential for a variety of applications, such as autonomous driving and flying drones.
For instance, when an autonomous vehicle is driving at high
speed, the low latency is desirable to identify obstacles or
moving objects once they appear. Due to its low frame rate,
the standard video camera is not ideal for this task. Fastspeed video cameras can have more than 1000 frames per
second, while they are normally very expensive and the information is also highly redundant. As a result, event cameras [3, 28, 16] attracts more attention recently due to their
high temporal resolution and low latency (both in the order of microseconds) as well as high dynamic range without motion blur. Compared with video cameras that output
* Corresponding author: Guofeng Zhang.
† Emails: {eugenelyj, hanzhou, ybbbbt, yezhang509, zhpcui, baohujun,

zhangguofeng}@zju.edu.cn. The authors except Zhaopeng Cui are also
affiliated with ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision. This work was
partially supported by NSF of China (No. 61822310 and 61932003).

images with a specific frame rate, event cameras are eventdriven. When a certain brightness change occurs on a pixel,
the event camera will trigger an individual event. In this
way, they naturally discard redundant information by only
measuring brightness.
However, since the output of an event camera is a
sparse asynchronous events stream, existing efficient methods [15, 37] which typically work on frames can not be
directly applied for event cameras. As a result, most
works [11, 8, 33] transform such events stream to regular 2D event frames or 3D voxel grids before processing.
However, these data representation transformations discard
the sparsity of events data and quantify event timestamps,
which are likely to obscure the natural invariance of the
data Another type of approach is directly tailored to the
sparse and asynchronous nature of event-based data. Timesurface-based methods [17, 36] and Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) [27, 19, 1] are two dominant classes of methods for event-by-event processing. Despite keeping low
latency, both methods have limited accuracy in high-level
tasks, mainly due to their sensitivity to tuning and difficulty
in the training procedure, respectively. To fully utilize the
spatial-temporal sparsity of event data, some recent methods [41, 34, 4, 22] introduce a compact graph representation that interprets an event sequence as a graph on event
cloud and employs graph convolutional networks. Although
these graph-based methods, e.g., [4, 22], reach state-of-theart performance, they rely on integrating events over a certain number of events or events within a period. They gather
the information contained in groups of events at the cost of
discarding the low latency nature of events data.
Based on all these observations, in this paper, we propose a novel graph-based recursive algorithm with a sliding
window strategy that can process the stream event-by-event
efficiently while maintaining high accuracy. However, it is
non-trivial to apply the sliding window strategy for graphbased and event-wise processing. The naive sliding window strategy is inefficient because it needs to process all
the nodes in the graph even with a minor change, although
many nodes’ features don’t change. Moreover, graph construction is prerequisite for graph neural networks, and
the radius search is normally adopted [4, 22] to determine

934

