Real-Time Video Inference on Edge Devices via Adaptive Model Streaming
Mehrdad Khani, Pouya Hamadanian, Arash Nasr-Esfahany, Mohammad Alizadeh
MIT CSAIL
{khani,pouyah,arashne,alizadeh}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Real-time video inference on edge devices like mobile
phones and drones is challenging due to the high computation cost of Deep Neural Networks. We present Adaptive
Model Streaming (AMS), a new approach to improving the
performance of efficient lightweight models for video inference on edge devices. AMS uses a remote server to continually train and adapt a small model running on the edge device, boosting its performance on the live video using online
knowledge distillation from a large, state-of-the-art model.
We discuss the challenges of over-the-network model adaptation for video inference and present several techniques to
reduce communication the cost of this approach: avoiding
excessive overfitting, updating a small fraction of important
model parameters, and adaptive sampling of training frames
at edge devices. On the task of video semantic segmentation, our experimental results show 0.4–17.8 percent mean
Intersection-over-Union improvement compared to a pretrained model across several video datasets. Our prototype
can perform video segmentation at 30 frames-per-second
with 40 milliseconds camera-to-label latency on a Samsung
Galaxy S10+ mobile phone, using less than 300 Kbps uplink
and downlink bandwidth on the device.

1. Introduction
Real-time video inference is a core component for many
applications, such as augmented reality, drone-based sensing,
robotic vision, and autonomous driving. These applications
use Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) for inference tasks like
object detection [52], semantic segmentation [7], and pose
estimation [6]. However, state-of-the-art DNN models are
too expensive to run on low-powered edge devices (e.g., mobile phones, drones, consumer robots [57, 58]), and cannot
run in real-time even on accelerators such as Coral Edge
TPU and NVIDIA Jetson [12, 59, 38].
A promising approach to improve inference efficiency is
to specialize a lightweight model for a specific video and task.
The basic idea is to use distillation [30] to transfer knowledge
from a large “teacher” model to a small “student” model. For

Figure 1: Semantic segmentation results on real-world outdoor
videos: rows from top to bottom represent No Customization,
One-Time, Remote+Tracking, Just-In-Time, and AMS. Uplink
and downlink bandwidth usage are reported below each variant.
AMS provides better accuracy with limited bandwidth and reduces
artifacts (e.g., see the car/person detected in error by the no/onetime customized models and remote tracking in the second column).

example, Noscope [33] trains a student model to detect a few
object classes on specific videos offline. Just-In-Time [46]
extends the idea to live, dynamic videos by training the
student model online, specializing it to video frames as they
arrive. These approaches provide significant speedups for
scenarios that perform inference on powerful machines (e.g.,
server-class GPUs), but they are impractical for on-device
inference at the edge. The offline approach isn’t desirable
since videos can vary significantly from device to device
(e.g., different locations, lighting conditions, etc.), and over
time for the same device (e.g., a drone flying over different
areas). On the other hand, training the student model online
on edge devices is computationally infeasible.
In this paper we propose Adaptive Model Streaming
(AMS), a new approach to real-time video inference on
edge devices that offloads knowledge distillation to a remote
server communicating with the edge device over the network.
AMS continually adapts a small student model running on
the edge device to boost its accuracy for the specific video in
real time. The edge device periodically sends sample video

4572

