Always Be Dreaming: A New Approach for
Data-Free Class-Incremental Learning
James Smith1 *, Yen-Chang Hsu2 , Jonathan Balloch1 , Yilin Shen2 , Hongxia Jin2 , Zsolt Kira1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Samsung Research America

Abstract
Modern computer vision applications suffer from catastrophic forgetting when incrementally learning new concepts over time. The most successful approaches to alleviate this forgetting require extensive replay of previously seen data, which is problematic when memory constraints or data legality concerns exist. In this work,
we consider the high-impact problem of Data-Free ClassIncremental Learning (DFCIL), where an incremental
learning agent must learn new concepts over time without storing generators or training data from past tasks.
One approach for DFCIL is to replay synthetic images
produced by inverting a frozen copy of the learner’s classification model, but we show this approach fails for
common class-incremental benchmarks when using standard distillation strategies. We diagnose the cause of
this failure and propose a novel incremental distillation strategy for DFCIL, contributing a modified crossentropy training and importance-weighted feature distillation, and show that our method results in up to a 25.1% increase in final task accuracy (absolute difference) compared
to SOTA DFCIL methods for common class-incremental
benchmarks. Our method even outperforms several standard replay based methods which store a coreset of images. Our code is available at https://github.com/
GT-RIPL/AlwaysBeDreaming-DFCIL

1. Introduction
A shortcoming of modern computer vision settings is
that they often assume offline training with a large dataset
encompassing all objects to be encountered during deployment. In practice, many applications require a model
be continuously updated after new environments/situations
are encountered. This is the class-incremental learning
paradigm (also known as a subset of continual or lifelong
learning), with the loss of knowledge over sequences of
learning tasks referred to as catastrophic forgetting. Suc* Correspondence to: James Smith jamessealesmith@gatech.edu

cessful incremental learning approaches have an unfortunate commonality: they require extensive memory for
replay of previously seen or modeled data to avoid the
catastrophic forgetting problem. This is concerning for
many computer vision applications because 1) Many computer vision applications are on-device and therefore memory constrained [15, 35, 52], and 2) Many computer vision applications learn from data which cannot be legally
stored [5, 10, 62]. This leads us to ask: How can computer
vision systems incrementally incorporate new information
without storing data? We refer to this setting as Data-Free
Class-Incremental Learning (DFCIL) (also known as DataFree Continual Learning [60]).
An intuitive approach for DFCIL is to simultaneously
train a generative model to be sampled for replay [25,
26, 49, 58]. Unfortunately, training a generative model is
much more computationally and memory intensive compared to a classification model. Additionally, it is not clear
whether generating images from the data distribution will
violate data legality concerns because using a generative
model increases the chance of memorizing potentially sensitive data [42]. Instead, we explore the concept of modelinversion image synthesis, where we can invert the already
provided inference network to obtain images with similar
activations in the network to the training data. This idea
is inviting because it requires no additional networks to be
trained (it only requires the existing inference network) and
is less susceptible to data privacy concerns.
The closest existing work for the DFCIL problem is
DeepInversion [60], which optimizes random noise into
images for knowledge distillation using a frozen teacher
network. DeepInversion is designed for standard studentteacher knowledge distillation and achieves state-of-the-art
performance for this task. Unfortunately, the authors report
that when trying class-incremental learning for tasks where
the old images and new images are similar (such as tasks
from the same dataset, a standard benchmarking practice
for class-incremental learning), their method performs “statistically equivalent or slightly worse compared to Learning
without Forgetting (LwF)”, with LwF [34] being their most
competitive existing baseline.

9374

