AA-RMVSNet: Adaptive Aggregation Recurrent Multi-view Stereo Network
Zizhuang Wei, Qingtian Zhu, Chen Min, Yisong Chen and Guoping Wang*
Peking University
{weizizhuang,wgp}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel recurrent multi-view
stereo network based on long short-term memory (LSTM)
with adaptive aggregation, namely AA-RMVSNet. We firstly
introduce an intra-view aggregation module to adaptively
extract image features by using context-aware convolution
and multi-scale aggregation, which efficiently improves the
performance on challenging regions, such as thin objects
and large low-textured surfaces. To overcome the difficulty of varying occlusion in complex scenes, we propose
an inter-view cost volume aggregation module for adaptive pixel-wise view aggregation, which is able to preserve better-matched pairs among all views. The two proposed adaptive aggregation modules are lightweight, effective and complementary regarding improving the accuracy and completeness of 3D reconstruction. Instead
of conventional 3D CNNs, we utilize a hybrid network
with recurrent structure for cost volume regularization,
which allows high-resolution reconstruction and finer hypothetical plane sweep. The proposed network is trained
end-to-end and achieves excellent performance on various
datasets. It ranks 1st among all submissions on Tanks
and Temples benchmark and achieves competitive results
on DTU dataset, which exhibits strong generalizability and
robustness. Implementation of our method is available at
https://github.com/QT-Zhu/AA-RMVSNet.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to obtain 3D dense models of real-world scenes from multiple images, which is one
of the core techniques in a variety of applications including
virtual reality, autonomous driving and heritage conservation. While traditional MVS methods [5, 9, 10, 26, 4] utilize hand-crafted matching metrics to measure multi-view
consistency, recent deep-learning-based methods [33, 34,
21, 37, 31] achieve superior accuracy and completeness
on many MVS benchmarks [3, 16, 35, 27] compared with
* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of multi-view 3D reconstruction of Scan 77
in DTU dataset [3] using the proposed AA-RMVSNet. (a) The
reference image; (b) adaptive sampling locations in our intra-view
AA approach; (c) the depth map estimated by AA-RMVSNet after
filtering; (d) the recovered dense 3D model.

the previous state-of-the-arts, through introducing convolutional neural network (CNN) which makes feature extraction and cost volume regularization more powerful. However, some challenging problems still remain to be solved to
further improve reconstruction quality.
First, general features extracted by 2D CNN in regular
pixel grids with fixed receptive fields often have difficulties
in handling thin structures or textureless surfaces, which
limits the robustness and completeness of 3D reconstruction. Recent MVSNet-based attempts [36, 31, 32] introduce
multi-scale information to improve depth estimation. However, context-aware features have not been leveraged well
enough for varying richness of texture on different regions.
Second, few works consider pixel-wise visibility issues
during multi-view matching cost aggregation, which inevitably deteriorates the final reconstruction quality, especially under severe occlusion. In order to select wellcaptured views for each pixel, Vis-MVSNet [37] uses

6187

