Pixel Contrastive-Consistent Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Yuanyi Zhong1 *, Bodi Yuan2 , Hong Wu2 , Zhiqiang Yuan2 , Jian Peng1 , Yu-Xiong Wang1
1

2

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yuanyiz2, jianpeng, yxw}@illinois.edu

X, The Moonshot Factory

{bodiyuan, wuh, zyuan}@google.com

Abstract
Image Space

We present a novel semi-supervised semantic segmentation method which jointly achieves two desiderata of segmentation model regularities: the label-space consistency
property between image augmentations and the featurespace contrastive property among different pixels. We leverage the pixel-level ℓ2 loss and the pixel contrastive loss
for the two purposes respectively. To address the computational efficiency issue and the false negative noise issue
involved in the pixel contrastive loss, we further introduce
and investigate several negative sampling techniques. Extensive experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our method (PC2 Seg) with the DeepLab-v3+ architecture, in several challenging semi-supervised settings
derived from the VOC, Cityscapes, and COCO datasets.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning based solutions [3,4,45] to semantic segmentation typically require large-scale pixel-wise annotated datasets [11, 15, 32] (i.e., the high-data regime).
When the deep models are trained with limited labeled
data (i.e., the low-data regime), however, their performance
drops drastically due to over-fitting. The performance
drop in the low-data regime and the high annotation cost
associated with dense pixel labeling have motivated the
community to study semi-supervised segmentation methods
[17,26,37,56,57]. In the semi-supervised setting, a model is
trained with the help of an additional large-scale unlabeled
dataset. A successful semi-supervised method is useful in
practice – only a portion of the production data needs to be
densely annotated to deliver a satisfactory model.
As shown in Fig. 1, our key insight is that there are two
desired regularity properties which a semi-supervised segmentation model should possess. The first one is the consistency property in the label space. The output segmentation
mask of the model should be invariant (or equivariant) to
* Work partly done during an internship at X, The Moonshot Factory.

Repel
Attract
Feature Space

Repel
2

Label Space

≈

Fig. 1: Two desired properties of a semi-supervised segmentation model and our corresponding techniques to simultaneously achieve such properties: (1) Consistency in
the label space – the predicted mask should be invariant to
augmentations. We thus leverage the pixel-wise ℓ2 loss between two views of the same unlabeled image. (2) Contrastiveness in the feature space – the features should be
able to distinguish similar pixel pairs from dissimilar pairs.
To this end, we introduce the pixel contrastive loss that pulls
positive pixel pairs closer and pushes negative pairs away.
the transformations of the input. When an input image goes
through two different color augmentations, the segmentation mask should stay the same, since the object semantics
and locations are unchanged. The second property is the
contrastive property in the feature space. By “contrastive,”
we mean that the intermediate features of the model should
have the discriminative power to group visually similar pixels together while distinguishing them from visually dissimilar pixels. Such a contrastive property will enable the
model to classify pixels into correct semantic categories.
State-of-the-art semi-supervised segmentation methods,
in fact, benefit from using the aforementioned label-space
consistency property on the unlabeled images, in the forms
of invariance under data augmentations [17, 57], invariance under feature perturbations [37], consistency of different network branches [26], and model self-consistency
[56]. However, the explicit application of the feature-space

7273

