AdvDrop: Adversarial Attack to DNNs by Dropping Information
Ranjie Duan1,2 Yuefeng Chen2 Dantong Niu3 Yun Yang1 † A. K. Qin1 † Yuan He2
1
Swinburne University of Technology, Australia 2 Alibaba Group, China
3
University of California, Berkeley, USA

Abstract
Human can easily recognize visual objects with lost information: even losing most details with only contour reserved, e.g. cartoon. However, in terms of visual perception
of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), the ability for recognizing abstract objects (visual objects with lost information) is
still a challenge. In this work, we investigate this issue from
an adversarial viewpoint: will the performance of DNNs
decrease even for the images only losing a little information? Towards this end, we propose a novel adversarial attack, named AdvDrop, which crafts adversarial examples
by dropping existing information of images. Previously,
most adversarial attacks add extra disturbing information
on clean images explicitly. Opposite to previous works, our
proposed work explores the adversarial robustness of DNN
models in a novel perspective by dropping imperceptible details to craft adversarial examples. We demonstrate the effectiveness of AdvDrop by extensive experiments, and show
that this new type of adversarial examples is more difficult
to be defended by current defense systems.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated their
outstanding performance across many applications such as
computer vision [24] and natural language processing [47].
Though DNNs have great achievement in these tasks, especially in computer vision, they are known to be vulnerable
to adversarial examples. Adversarial examples of DNNs
were first discovered by Szegedy et al. [42], which are
crafted by adding malicious perturbation on clean images to
generate undesirable consequences. Various methods have
been proposed to generate adversarial examples [20, 32, 7].
Typically, the generated adversarial perturbation is bounded
by a small norm ball, which guarantees the resultant images
“look like” benign images.
Interestingly, Ilyas et al. [27] empirically demonstrated
Work done when Ranjie Duan interns at Alibaba Group, China
Code is available at https://github.com/RjDuan/AdvDrop
† Correspondence to: A. K. Qin & Yun Yang

Figure 1: Adv. images generated by PGD and AdvDrop.
Compared to the clean images, the adversarial images generated by AdvDrop have fewer details composed of fewer
colors, with the decreasing in size (by 15% and 7%).
that adversarial perturbation can be non-robust features for
DNNs. That is to say, regarding adversarial perturbation,
they are meaningful features for DNNs, but meaningless
and imperceptible for humans. So we wonder, whether
it is possible to craft adversarial examples in an opposite
paradigm? Rather crafting adversarial examples by adding
adversarial perturbation (or non-robust features) on clean
images, we drop certain features from clean images that are
imperceptible to humans but essential for DNNs which further lead to DNNs failing to recognize the resultant images.
Towards this end, we propose a novel adversarial attack
named AdvDrop, which crafts adversarial images by dropping less perceptible details from clean images. For example, as shown in Figure 1, both adversarial images generated by PGD [32] and AdvDrop look indistinguishable from
the clean images at first glance. However, when you look
closely, PGD generates extra details (composed of more
colors) at the cost of extra storage (larger image size). In
contrast, the proposed AdvDrop drops existing details such
as subtle texture-like information from clean images, and
the local patch is composed of less colors compared with
the other images. As the figure indicates, the lost brittle de17506

