SemiHand: Semi-supervised Hand Pose Estimation with Consistency
Linlin Yang1,2 , Shicheng Chen1 , Angela Yao1
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
University of Bonn, Germany

Abstract
We present SemiHand, a semi-supervised framework for
3D hand pose estimation from monocular images. We pretrain the model on labelled synthetic data and fine-tune it
on unlabelled real-world data by pseudo-labeling with consistency training. By design, we introduce data augmentation of differing difficulties, consistency regularizer, label
correction and sample selection for RGB-based 3D hand
pose estimation. In particular, by approximating the hand
masks from hand poses, we propose a cross-modal consistency and leverage semantic predictions to guide the predicted poses. Meanwhile, we introduce pose registration as
label correction to guarantee the biomechanical feasibility
of hand bone lengths. Experiments show that our method
achieves a favorable improvement on real-world datasets
after fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
A key challenge of monocular 3D hand pose estimation
is getting sufficient high-quality ground-truth poses. Labelling real-world data to an accurate enough degree often
requires dedicated interfaces and or multi-view camera rigs.
This makes it non-trivial to gather “in-the-wild” data that is
much sought-after for actual application deployment.
Synthesizing training data is considered an easy alternative to get accurate labels and has been incorporated into
many learning-based frameworks. Yet there exists a significant domain gap between synthetic and real-world images so the performance of models trained on synthetic data
deteriorates significantly when applied to real-world data.
The favoured approach for reducing the domain gap is a
mix-and-train strategy [12], i.e. mixing multiple real-world
datasets together with synthetic data for training. Such a
strategy depends largely however on the quantity and quality of the labelled samples in the combined datasets.
What if we tried to learn only from labelled synthetic
data and fully unlabelled real-world data? We target exactly
this scenario and present the first framework for domainseparated semi-supervised learning for 3D hand pose es-

Figure 1: Pseudo-labelling of SemiHand. Our pseudo-label with
confidence is generated based on the prediction from original
(blue pose), the prediction from perturbation (green pose) and the
corrected prediction (red pose).

timation. A classic approach in semi-supervised learning
is to generate pseudo-labels [16] for the unlabelled data,
usually via a classifier learned from the labelled portion of
the data [16, 25]. The utility of pseudo-labels is highly
variable. Used naively, these labels are even detrimental to learning because of confirmation bias [1], i.e. , the
classifier over-fits to the pseudo-labels which tend to be
noisy and or inaccurate, so additional corrections are necessary [1, 11, 43, 38]. Additionally, consistency training
with unlabelled data [25, 1, 34] can increase the reliability
of pseudo-labels.
We integrate these concepts and introduce SemiHand, a
framework that considers spatial consistency and biomechanical feasibility for semi-supervised hand pose estimation. We propose two consistency losses to encourage the
predictions to be consistent with perturbations and other
modalities. As our labelled and unlabelled data come from
different domains, i.e. synthetic vs real RGB images, there
is the added challenge of domain adaptation to the unlabelled data. To bridge the domain gap, we propose a crossmodal consistency and leverage semantic predictions [19]
from an auxiliary task to provide guidance for the predicted
poses. Meanwhile, we regard predictions on real-world data
as noisy labels; further training the network from these predictions directly may actually be detrimental due to their inaccuracy. To mitigate the impact of this confirmation bias,
we introduce label correction and sample selection based on
the feasibility so that we train with only corrected pseudolabels with high-confidence. We show our pseudo-labelling

11364

