Robust Watermarking for Deep Neural Networks
via Bi-level Optimization
Peng Yang, Yingjie Lao, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{pengyang5612, laoyingjie, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become state-ofthe-art in many application domains. The increasing
complexity and cost for building these models demand
means for protecting their intellectual property (IP).
This paper presents a novel DNN framework that optimizes the robustness of the embedded watermarks. Our
method is originated from DNN fault attacks. Different
from prior end-to-end DNN watermarking approaches,
we only modify a tiny subset of weights to embed the
watermark, which also facilities better control of the
model behaviors and enables larger rooms for optimizing the robustness of the watermarks.
In this paper, built upon the above concept, we propose a bi-level optimization framework where the inner loop phase optimizes the example-level problem to
generate robust exemplars, while the outer loop phase
proposes a masked adaptive optimization to achieve the
robustness of the projected DNN models. Our method
alternates the learning of the protected models and watermark exemplars across all phases, where watermark
exemplars are not just data samples that could be optimized and adjusted instead. We verify the performance of the proposed methods over a wide range of
datasets and DNN architectures. Various transformation attacks including fine-tuning, pruning and overwriting are used to evaluate the robustness.

1. Introduction
Along with the unprecedented progress of deep neural network (DNN), both the networks and application
tasks have become increasingly sophisticated, making
the models costly to build. As a result, DNN models are considered as valuable assets, which demand a
means for projecting the intellectual property (IP) of
model builders. To address this, several DNN water-

marking or fingerprinting approaches have been proposed recently [1, 30, 19, 18, 26, 27, 9, 6, 7, 16, 32, 11,
28, 5, 13]. Conceptually, watermarking is achieved by
injecting certain behavior into the model whose presence can be easily verified later, typically, by using several key samples. In the black-box setting, watermarking will associate desired predictions to the key samples
that are different from naturally trained models (e.g.,
by using backdoor) to reduce the false positive rate
(i.e., probability of the presence of the watermarking
in a naturally trained model) [1, 30, 19, 26, 10]. While
in the white-box setting that demands full access to
the model including latent feature maps for extracting
the watermark, the desired behavior can be embedded
into the internal structure or latent space of a DNN
model [27, 9, 7].
In contrast to these prior DNN watermarking methods that rely on end-to-end retraining or fine-tuning of
the key samples with desired labels, we propose a novel
framework that only requires to modify an extremely
small amount of parameters for embedding a watermarking. In other words, instead of only constraining the selection of key samples, we further constrain
the parameter modifications in the watermarking process. We consider the black-box setting, i.e., watermark extraction can be performed by remote querying using the model prediction API. By leveraging
techniques from fault attacks [20, 4, 22, 14, 31, 29],
we first search for parameters that have large magnitudes of gradients with respect to key samples while
close to zero-valued gradients with respect to natural inputs. Only modifying these weights enables us
to freely improve the robustness of the watermarks
without affecting the normal behavior with respect
to natural inputs. We then formulate the robust
optimization and active learning to enhance the robustness of the model behavior with respect to key

14841

