Learning specialized activation functions with the Piecewise Linear Unit
Yucong Zhou
Huawei
zhouyucong1@huawei.com

Zezhou Zhu
Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications

Zhao Zhong
Huawei
zorro.zhongzhao@huawei.com

zhuzezhou@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
The choice of activation functions is crucial for modern
deep neural networks. Popular hand-designed activation
functions like Rectiﬁed Linear Unit(ReLU) and its variants
show promising performance in various tasks and models. Swish, the automatically discovered activation function, has been proposed and outperforms ReLU on many
challenging datasets. However, it has two main drawbacks. First, the tree-based search space is highly discrete and restricted, which is difﬁcult for searching. Second, the sample-based searching method is inefﬁcient, making it infeasible to ﬁnd specialized activation functions for
each dataset or neural architecture. To tackle these drawbacks, we propose a new activation function called Piecewise Linear Unit(PWLU), which incorporates a carefully
designed formulation and learning method. It can learn
specialized activation functions and achieves SOTA performance on large-scale datasets like ImageNet and COCO.
For example, on ImageNet classiﬁcation dataset, PWLU improves 0.9%/0.53%/1.0%/1.7%/1.0% top-1 accuracy over
Swish for ResNet-18/ResNet-50/MobileNet-V2/MobileNetV3/EfﬁcientNet-B0. PWLU is also easy to implement and
efﬁcient at inference, which can be widely applied in realworld applications.

1. Introduction
Activation functions are fundamental components for
modern deep neural networks, which affect both the expressiveness and the optimization of models. As a crucial design
choice, the combination of Rectiﬁed Linear Units(ReLU)[7,
15, 25] with deep neural networks shows six times faster in
convergence compared to tanh nonlinearties[18]. With nonsaturating gradients, ReLU mitigates the vanishing gradient problem and shows robust performance across different
tasks and neural architectures.
Beyond ReLU, many new activation functions have
been proposed like Leaky ReLU[23], PReLU[10], ELU[4],
SELU[16], etc. These human-designed activation functions
are either ﬁxed or have a few learnable parameters. All

ResNet-18
2.5
2

1.5
1
0.5

EfficientNet-B0

ResNet-50

0
-0.5

MobileNet-V3

APL
PAU

MobileNet-V2

PReLU
F-ReLU

Swish
PWLU

Figure 1. Comparing improvements over ReLU on ImageNet
dataset. We run experiments on ﬁve different architectures for each
activation function and show the improvements over ReLU baseline. The proposed PWLU consistently outperforms other methods
across architectures.

these variants are similar in shape, and their gains are not
consistent across tasks which limits their applications[26].
Besides human-designed activation functions, automatic
searched activations function, Swish[26], show better performance across tasks. Swish adopts a tree-structured
search space based on unary and binary functions, which
is searched by reinforcement learning. Although showing
improvements over ReLU, Swish also has its limitations.
First, the tree-structured search space is highly discrete and
restricted. A slight change in one composing unit may result
in an entirely different activation function, making it difﬁcult to search. Second, the sample-based searching method
typically requires evaluating hundreds to thousands of candidate activation functions, which is computationally expensive. It is infeasible to use such an inefﬁcient searching process to ﬁnd specialized activation functions for each
dataset or architecture. Instead, the searched Swish is used
for most conditions. There are also methods like APL[1]
and PAU[24] that use universal approximators as activation

12095

