Contrast and Order Representations for Video Self-supervised Learning
Kai Hu1,3 , Jie Shao2,3 , Yuan Liu3 , Bhiksha Raj1 , Marios Savvides1 , Zhiqiang Shen1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Fudan University, 3 ByteDance
{kaihu, bhiksha, zhiqians, marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu
shaojie@fudan.edu.cn, liuyuan merry@connect.hku.hk

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of learning self-supervised
representations on videos. In contrast to image modality that
only requires appearance information on objects or scenes,
video needs to further explore the relations between multiple
frames/clips along the temporal dimension. However, the recent proposed contrastive-based self-supervised frameworks
do not grasp such relations explicitly since they simply utilize two augmented clips from the same video and compare
their distance without referring to their temporal relation.
To address this, we present a contrast-and-order representation (CORP) framework for learning self-supervised video
representations that can automatically capture both the appearance information within each frame and temporal information across different frames. In particular, given two video
clips, our model first predicts whether they come from the
same input video, and then predict the temporal ordering of
the clips if they come from the same video. We also propose
a novel decoupling attention method to learn symmetric
similarity (contrast) and anti-symmetric patterns (order).
Such design involves neither extra parameters nor computation, but can speed up the learning process and improve
accuracy compared to the vanilla multi-head attention. We
extensively validate the representation ability of our learned
video features for the downstream action recognition task on
Kinetics-400 and Something-something V2. Our method outperforms previous state-of-the-arts by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
In recent years, self-supervised learning methods have become increasingly popular for a number of problems, including masked language models in natural language processing
[7], and jigsaw solving [35], rotation prediction [15], contrastive learning [20, 5], etc. For vision tasks, to ameliorate
the dependence on large amounts of manually annotated data
required by fully-supervised learning methods. Among the
self-supervised methods in visual tasks, contrastive learning
[20, 5] has shown great potential on image tasks; the transfer-

Kinetics: playing guitar

Kinetics: riding camel

Kinetics: getting a haircut

Something-something: push something from right to left

start

time axis

Something-something: pull something from left to right

Figure 1. Motivation of this work. Some videos can be recognized
by the simple appearance information in a single frame, e.g., “playing guitar”,“ riding camel”, and “getting a haircut” categories in the
Kinetics dataset. Some videos of actions have similar appearance,
and require complex temporal-level relation understanding. For
example, if we play a video of the action “push something from
right to left” in reverse, it will not be “push something from left to
right”, but “pull something from left to right”.

ability of the learned model often even exceeds supervised
models for many popular image downstream tasks like detection [38], segmentation [31] and key point estimation [21].
The challenges of labeling are greater for videos, as opposed to static images, since videos include a time dimension, making them more expensive to collect and annotate.
Consequently, there is greater need for powerful and practical self-supervised learning algorithms to analyze videos.
Recently, [19] and [37] have applied contrastive learning
methods to the task of learning representations of videos. In
these frameworks, their objective mainly aims to pull representations of two augmented clips from the same video
closer in the embedding space, while those from clips origi-

7939

