Towards Understanding the Generative Capability of
Adversarially Robust Classifiers
Yao Zhu1 ,* Jiacheng Ma2 , Jiacheng Sun2†, Zewei Chen2 , Rongxin Jiang1 , Yaowu Chen1 , Zhenguo Li2
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Recently, some works found an interesting phenomenon
that adversarially robust classifiers can generate good images comparable to generative models. We investigate
this phenomenon from an energy perspective and provide
a novel explanation. We reformulate adversarial example
generation, adversarial training, and image generation in
terms of an energy function. We find that adversarial training contributes to obtaining an energy function that is flat
and has low energy around the real data, which is the key
for generative capability. Based on our new understanding,
we further propose a better adversarial training method,
Joint Energy Adversarial Training (JEAT), which can generate high-quality images and achieve new state-of-the-art
robustness under a wide range of attacks. The Inception
Score of the images (CIFAR-10) generated by JEAT is 8.80,
much better than original robust classifiers (7.50). In particular, we find that the robustness of JEAT is better than
other hybrid models.

1. Introduction
Adversarial training can improve the robustness of a
classifier against adversarial perturbations imperceptible to
humans. Unlike a normal classifier, an adversarially robust
classifier can generate good images by gradient descending
the cross-entropy loss from random noises. Recently, some
works discovered this phenomenon, and the quality of generated images is even comparable to GANs [21, 7]. The
generative capability of an adversarially robust model from
a classification task is interesting and surprising. However,
it is unclear why an adversarially trained classifier can generate natural images. As image generation is a crucial topic,
understanding the generative capability of adversarially robust classifiers could be inspiring and can give hints to many
* This work was done when he was a research intern in Huawei Noah’s
Ark Lab. Email: ee zhuy@zju.edu.cn.
† Corresponding to: Jiacheng Sun (sunjiacheng1@huawei.com)

other generative methods.
In this paper, we aim to understand the generative capability of an adversarially trained classifier and further improve the quality of generated images from the energy perspective. For Energy-Based Model (EBM) [10], it first generates low energy samples from random noises, then increases the energy of generated samples by updating model
parameters. In this way, EBM can obtain a good energy
function that is smooth and has low energy near the real
data, as illustrates in Fig. 1(a). Thus, EBM can generate
good images by sampling with Langevin Dynamics with the
good energy function [5].
We show that adversarially trained classifiers can also
obtain such a good energy function, which is flat and has
low energy near the real data. This implies the generative
capability of the adversarially robust classifier. For a classifier, we can define energy functions on the output logits.
We reformulate the original adversarial training and image
generation in terms of energy functions. In fact, the adversarial examples are high-energy samples near the real data,
and adversarial training is trying to decrease the energy of
these examples by updating model parameters. This procedure can also help us to learn a flat energy function with low
energy near the real data, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Moreover, based on our understanding, we find another interesting phenomenon that a normal classifier is able to generate
images if we add random noise to images during training.
Though injecting noises to training data can generate highenergy samples, the perturbation direction may not be efficient compared with the adversarial attack. Thus, larger
noise is needed in training for generating high-energy samples.
The cross-entropy loss can be expressed as the difference between Eθ (x, y) and Eθ (x). We show that Eθ (x, y),
which is flat and has lower energy around the real data,
plays a key role in the conditional generation task. However, making the energy Eθ (x, y) flat and low near the real
data is just a by-product of original adversarial training.
Thus we propose Joint Energy Adversarial Training (JEAT)

7728

