StarEnhancer: Learning Real-Time and Style-Aware Image Enhancement
Yuda Song 1 Hui Qian 1 Xin Du 2 *
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{syd,qianhui,duxin}@zju.edu.cn

(a) Prior works

Abstract

The development of smartphone cameras has dramatically lowered the barriers to take photos, but amateurs still
lack the skills to get high-quality photos. To this end, a
variety of image post-processing techniques have been proposed to bridge the gap. Generally, these techniques tend
to improve the quality of image detail, which is broadly objective. However, the quality of a photo depends not only
on the image detail but also on whether the photo meets
people’s aesthetics, which is entirely subjective. Therefore,
various deep learning-based approaches [7, 15, 22] are proposed to retouch photos to make these photos more aesthetically pleasing. But only a few works [12, 25] have realized the difference between image enhancement and other
low-level vision tasks. In our opinion, a practical image
enhancement method should not employ a generic image
restoration network but aim to be real-time and style-aware.
It is straightforward that different users have different
aesthetic preferences, so the target image’s tonal style is
* Corresponding author.

2

FCN

A

FCN
FCN

Retouched

1. Introduction

1
Raw

Image enhancement is a subjective process whose targets vary with user preferences. In this paper, we propose
a deep learning-based image enhancement method covering multiple tonal styles using only a single model dubbed
StarEnhancer. It can transform an image from one tonal
style to another, even if that style is unseen. With a simple
one-time setting, users can customize the model to make the
enhanced images more in line with their aesthetics. To make
the method more practical, we propose a well-designed enhancer that can process a 4K-resolution image over 200
FPS but surpasses the contemporaneous single style image
enhancement methods in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS.
Finally, our proposed enhancement method has good interactability, which allows the user to fine-tune the enhanced
image using intuitive options.

FCN

B

(b) StarEnhancer

3

A
CNN

2

B

OPS

1

C

Figure 1: Comparison between prior works and our proposed method. (a) Prior works need to train multiple models to learn the mappings between source styles and target
styles. (b) StarEnhancer offers the capability to transform
images from one style to another using a single model.
not constant [19, 25, 28]. And different cameras have different camera response functions (CRFs) and image signal processing (ISP) pipeline [1, 14], which means that the
tonal style of the input image is also not constant. Meanwhile, users may want to transform the retouched images
into their preferred style, whereas the unretouched images
are not available. Therefore, we consider that a practical image enhancement method requires the capacity to transform
images between multiple tonal styles. Finally, because user
preferences are challenging to quantify precisely, the intuitive manual adjustment options are appealing [16, 29].
The current common image restoration strategy is to
train a fully convolutional network (FCN) [33] to reconstruct the images fed into the network. However, the computational complexity of the FCN grows quadratically with
the spatial dimensions of the input images [18]. And the
FCN-based network is more difficult to train and may introduce artifacts [12], especially when employing generative adversarial networks (GANs) [3, 7, 13]. Besides, the
FCN’s receptive field does not change with the input image’s size, which may lead to a visible dissimilarity between
the enhanced images of the same image in different resolutions [12]. In contrast, color transform-based image en-

4126

