The Way to my Heart is through Contrastive Learning:
Remote Photoplethysmography from Unlabelled Video
John Gideon* Simon Stent*
Toyota Research Institute
Cambridge, MA, USA
{john.gideon, simon.stent}@tri.global

Input video

Abstract
The ability to reliably estimate physiological signals
from video is a powerful tool in low-cost, pre-clinical health
monitoring. In this work we propose a new approach to
remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) – the measurement
of blood volume changes from observations of a person’s
face or skin. Similar to current state-of-the-art methods
for rPPG, we apply neural networks to learn deep representations with invariance to nuisance image variation. In
contrast to such methods, we employ a fully self-supervised
training approach, which has no reliance on expensive
ground truth physiological training data. Our proposed
method uses contrastive learning with a weak prior over the
frequency and temporal smoothness of the target signal of
interest. We evaluate our approach on four rPPG datasets,
showing that comparable or better results can be achieved
compared to recent supervised deep learning methods but
without using any annotation. In addition, we incorporate a
learned saliency resampling module into both our unsupervised approach and supervised baseline. We show that by
allowing the model to learn where to sample the input image, we can reduce the need for hand-engineered features
while providing some interpretability into the model’s behavior and possible failure modes. We release code for our
complete training and evaluation pipeline to encourage reproducible progress in this exciting new direction.1

1. Introduction
Understanding the physiological state of a person is important in many application areas, from health and fitness
through to human resource management and human machine interaction. Conventional approaches to estimate such
information, such as electrocardiograms (ECG) or photo* Equal contribution
1 https://github.com/ToyotaResearchInstitute/

RemotePPG

Inferred PPG
signal and
heart rate

Predicted

Self-supervised rPPG model

Interpretable
saliency video
and resampled
input video

Ground truth

Figure 1. From a video of a person’s face alone, our model learns
to estimate the person’s cardiac activity in the form of a photoplethysmographic (PPG) signal (left) observed through temporal patterns in the video, as well as a saliency signal (right)
which shows where in the video the model’s estimated activity
is strongest (in this case, the center of the forehead). We show
through extensive experiments on video datasets with physiological ground truth that our approach can match and sometimes even
improve upon existing end-to-end supervised methods, while providing both interpretability into the model behavior and incurring
zero annotation cost to train. The figure above shows a real output
from our model trained on the UBFC [3] dataset. We note that the
phase offset between predicted and ground truth PPG signals may
be due to synchronization issues between the video and ground
truth itself - a detail discussed further in Sec. 3.4.

plethysmograms (PPG), require interaction with the subject
and are troublesome to setup, limiting their usefulness and
scalability. In recent years, research utilizing advances from
the field of computer vision and machine learning has explored and improved upon methods for passively monitoring physiological information from videos of subjects.
In this work we introduce a new method for remote photoplethysmography (rPPG), or imaging PPG, a technique
in which changes in transmitted or reflected light from the
body due to volumetric changes in blood flow are measured
at a distance using a standard imaging device. This differs

3995

