Diagonal Attention and Style-based GAN for Content-Style Disentanglement in
Image Generation and Translation
Gihyun Kwon1
Jong Chul Ye1,2
Department of Bio and Brain Engineering1 , Graduate School of AI2 , KAIST
{cyclomon,jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1: Full-resolution images synthesized with different diagonal attention (DAT) content codes and AdaIN style codes.
(Left) Generated 1024×1024 images by our method trained using CelebA-HQ. (Right) Generated 512×512 images by our
method trained using AFHQ. (a) A source image generated from arbitrary content and style codes. Samples generated by (b)
varying style codes with fixed content codes, (c) varying content codes with fixed style codes, and (d) varying both codes.
We can see that content code controls the spatial content such as directions, whereas style codes affects the styles like gender,
hair color, etc.

Abstract
One of the important research topics in image generative models is to disentangle the spatial contents and styles
for their separate control. Although StyleGAN can generate
content feature vectors from random noises, the resulting
spatial content control is primarily intended for minor spatial variations, and the disentanglement of global content
and styles is by no means complete. Inspired by a mathematical understanding of normalization and attention, here
we present a novel hierarchical adaptive Diagonal spatial
ATtention (DAT) layers to separately manipulate the spatial
contents from styles in a hierarchical manner. Using DAT
and AdaIN, our method enables coarse-to-fine level disen-

tanglement of spatial contents and styles. In addition, our
generator can be easily integrated into the GAN inversion
framework so that the content and style of translated images
from multi-domain image translation tasks can be flexibly
controlled. By using various datasets, we confirm that the
proposed method not only outperforms the existing models
in disentanglement scores, but also provides more flexible
control over spatial features in the generated images.

1. Introduction
Recent development of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [11] has enabled the generation of highquality images that are indistinguishable to the human eye.
13980

