Defocus Map Estimation and Deblurring from a Single Dual-Pixel Image
Neal Wadhwa2
Shumian Xin1 *
Pratul P. Srinivasan2
Jiawen Chen3
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Tianfan Xue2
Jonathan T. Barron2
Ioannis Gkioulekas1
Rahul Garg2
2
3
Google Research
Adobe Inc.

1. Introduction
Modern DSLR and mirrorless cameras feature largeaperture lenses that allow collecting more light, but also introduce defocus blur, meaning that objects in images appear
blurred by an amount proportional to their distance from
the focal plane. A simple way to reduce defocus blur is to
stop down, i.e., shrink the aperture. However, this also reduces the amount of light reaching the sensor, making the
image noisier. Moreover, stopping down is impossible on
fixed-aperture cameras, such as those in most smartphones.
More sophisticated techniques fall into two categories. First
are techniques that add extra hardware (e.g., coded apertures [46], specialized lenses [47, 15]), and thus are impractical to deploy at large scale or across already available cameras. Second are focus stacking techniques [76] that capture
multiple images at different focus distances, and fuse them
into an all-in-focus image. These techniques require long
capture times, and thus are applicable only to static scenes.
Ideally, defocus blur removal should be done using data
* Work primarily done when Shumian Xin was an intern at Google.

Right

We present a method that takes as input a single dualpixel image, and simultaneously estimates the image’s defocus map—the amount of defocus blur at each pixel—and
recovers an all-in-focus image. Our method is inspired from
recent works that leverage the dual-pixel sensors available
in many consumer cameras to assist with autofocus, and use
them for recovery of defocus maps or all-in-focus images.
These prior works have solved the two recovery problems
independently of each other, and often require large labeled
datasets for supervised training. By contrast, we show that
it is beneficial to treat these two closely-connected problems simultaneously. To this end, we set up an optimization
problem that, by carefully modeling the optics of dual-pixel
images, jointly solves both problems. We use data captured
with a consumer smartphone camera to demonstrate that,
after a one-time calibration step, our approach improves
upon prior works for both defocus map estimation and blur
removal, despite being entirely unsupervised.

Left

Abstract

Input dual pixel images

Calibrated blur kernels
Far

Near

Recovered all-in-focus image

Recovered defocus map

Figure 1: Given left and right dual-pixel (DP) images and
corresponding spatially-varying blur kernels, our method
jointly estimates an all-in-focus image and defocus map.
from a single capture. Unfortunately, in conventional cameras, this task is fundamentally ill-posed: a captured image
may have no high-frequency content because either the latent all-in-focus image lacks such frequencies, or they are
removed by defocus blur. Knowing the defocus map, i.e.,
the spatially-varying amount of defocus blur, can help simplify blur removal. However, determining the defocus map
from a single image is closely-related to monocular depth
estimation, which is a challenging problem in its own right.
Even if the defocus map were known, recovering an allin-focus image is still an ill-posed problem, as it requires
hallucinating the missing high frequency content.
Dual-pixel (DP) sensors are a recent innovation that
makes it easier to solve both the defocus map estimation
and defocus blur removal problems, with data from a single capture. Camera manufacturers have introduced such
sensors to many DSLR and smartphone cameras to improve
autofocus [2, 36]. Each pixel on a DP sensor is split into two
halves, each capturing light from half of the main lens’ aperture, yielding two sub-images per exposure (Fig. 1). These
can be thought of as a two-sample lightfield [61], and their
sum is equivalent to the image captured by a regular sensor.

2228

