Latent Transformations via NeuralODEs
for GAN-based Image Editing
Valentin Khrulkov1 * Leyla Mirvakhabova2 *
Ivan Oseledets2 Artem Babenko1,3
Yandex1
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)2
National Research University Higher School of Economics3
khrulkov.v@gmail.com, {leyla.mirvakhabova,i.oseledets}@skoltech.ru, artem.babenko@phystech.edu
Abstract
Recent advances in high-fidelity semantic image editing
heavily rely on the presumably disentangled latent spaces
of the state-of-the-art generative models, such as StyleGAN. Specifically, recent works show that it is possible to
achieve decent controllability of attributes in face images
via linear shifts along with latent directions. Several recent
methods address the discovery of such directions, implicitly assuming that the state-of-the-art GANs learn the latent
spaces with inherently linearly separable attribute distributions and semantic vector arithmetic properties.
In our work, we show that nonlinear latent code manipulations realized as flows of a trainable Neural ODE are
beneficial for many practical non-face image domains with
more complex non-textured factors of variation. In particular, we investigate a large number of datasets with known
attributes and demonstrate that certain attribute manipulations are challenging to obtain with linear shifts only.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13] have significantly advanced techniques for image processing and
controllable generation, such as semantic image-to-image
translation [15, 9, 22, 34, 35] and image editing via manipulating the internal GAN activations [5, 10] or generator parameters [4, 8]. Moreover, since the GAN latent spaces are known to possess semantically meaningful vector space arithmetic, a plethora of recent works explore these spaces to discover the interpretable directions
[27, 29, 11, 16, 26, 31, 14, 25]. The directions identified by
these methods are then used to manipulate user-specified

image attributes, which is shown to be particularly successful for face images [29].
While a large number of methods exploring the latent
spaces of pretrained GANs have recently been developed,
most of them learn linear latent controls, and more complex nonlinear latent transformations are hardly addressed.
We conjecture that this limitation could arise because most
of the latent editing literature is biased to the human face
datasets, where linear transformations are sufficient for decent editing quality [29].
In this work, we demonstrate that in the general case,
the linear latent shifts cannot be used universally for all domains and attributes, and more complex nonlinear transformations are needed. To this end, we analyze how different
attribute values are distributed in the latent spaces of GANs
trained on several synthetic and real datasets with known attribute labels. Our analysis shows that for non-face images,
many attributes cannot be controlled by linear shifts. To
mitigate this issue, we propose an alternative parametrization of the latent transformation based on the recent Neural
ODE work [7]. Our parametrization allows for gradientbased optimization and can be used within existing methods
for latent space exploration [29]. Through extensive experiments, we show that the proposed nonlinear transformations
are much more appealing for the purposes of controllable
generation. In particular, we show that nonlinear transformations are more beneficial for edits requiring global content changes, such as changing appearance of a scene.
To sum up, our contributions are the following:
• We analyze the distributions of different attribute values in the GAN latent spaces and show that linear latent controls are typically not sufficient beyond the human face domain.
• We propose a Neural ODE-based parametrization of

* Equal contribution

114428

