DocFormer: End-to-End Transformer for Document Understanding
Srikar Appalaraju
AWS AI

Bhavan Jasani
AWS AI

Bhargava Urala Kota
AWS AI

Yusheng Xie
AWS AI

srikara@amazon.com

bjasani@amazon.com

bharkota@amazon.com

yushx@amazon.com

R. Manmatha
AWS AI
manmatha@amazon.com

Abstract
We present DocFormer - a multi-modal transformer
based architecture for the task of Visual Document Understanding (VDU). VDU is a challenging problem which
aims to understand documents in their varied formats
(forms, receipts etc.) and layouts. In addition, DocFormer
is pre-trained in an unsupervised fashion using carefully
designed tasks which encourage multi-modal interaction.
DocFormer uses text, vision and spatial features and combines them using a novel multi-modal self-attention layer.
DocFormer also shares learned spatial embeddings across
modalities which makes it easy for the model to correlate
text to visual tokens and vice versa. DocFormer is evaluated on 4 different datasets each with strong baselines.
DocFormer achieves state-of-the-art results on all of them,
sometimes beating models 4x its size (in no. of parameters).

1. Introduction
The task of Visual Document Understanding (VDU)
aims at understanding digital documents either born as
PDF’s or as images. VDU focuses on varied document related tasks like entity grouping, sequence labeling, document classification. While modern OCR engines [33] have
become good at predicting text from documents, VDU often requires understanding both the structure and layout of
documents. The use of text or even text and spatial features
alone is not sufficient for this purpose. For the best results,
one needs to exploit the text, spatial features and the image.
One way to exploit all these features is using transformer
models [4, 14, 51]. Transformers have recently been used
for VDU [25, 54, 55]. These models differ in how the unsupervised pre-training is done, the way self-attention is modified for the VDU domain or how they fuse modalities (text
and/or image and spatial). There have been text only [14],
text plus spatial features only [25, 54] approaches for VDU.
However, the holy-grail is to fuse all three modalities (text,

Figure 1: Snippet of a Document: Various VDU tasks on this
document may include labeling each text token into fixed classes
or grouping tokens into a semantic class and finding relationships
between tokens e.g. (“DATE PREPARED”  Key and “1/29/74”
 Value) or classifying the document into different categories.
Note a document could have “other” text e.g. “C-5” which the
model should ignore or classify as “other” depending on the task.

visual and spatial features). This is desirable since there is
some information in text that visual features miss out (language semantics), and there is some information in visual
features that text misses out (text font and visual layout for
example).
Multi-modal training in general is difficult since one has
to map a piece of text to an arbitrary span of visual content. For example in Figure 1, “ITEM 1” needs to be
mapped to the visual region. Said a different way, text describes semantic high-level concept(s) e.g. the word “person” whereas visual features map to the pixels (of a person)
in the image. It is not easy to enforce feature correlation
across modalities from text ←
→ image. We term this issue as
−
cross-modality feature correlation and reference it later to
show how DocFormer presents an approach to address this.
DocFormer follows the now common, pre-training and
fine-tuning strategy. DocFormer incorporates a novel multimodal self-attention with shared spatial embeddings in an
encoder only transformer architecture. In addition, we pro-

993

