RMSMP: A Novel Deep Neural Network Quantization Framework with
Row-wise Mixed Schemes and Multiple Precisions
Sung-En Chang∗1 , Yanyu Li∗1 , Mengshu Sun∗1 , *Weiwen Jiang2 , Sijia Liu3 , Yanzhi Wang1 , Xue Lin1
1
Northeastern University, 2 George Mason University, 3 Michigan State University
{chang.sun, li.yanyu, sun.meng, yanz.wang, xue.lin}@northeastern.edu,
wjiang8@gmu.edu, liusiji5@msu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
With tremendous success of the deep learning or deep
neural networks (DNNs), there exist urgent needs for deployments of inference models onto edge-computing plat* Equal contribution.

...
Filter 1

Filter 2

Filter 3
Filter 4
(a) Weight Tensor

Filter 1
Filter 2
Filter 3
Filter 4

...
...
...
...

Filter M 1
Filter M

...
...

...

This work proposes a novel Deep Neural Network (DNN)
quantization framework, namely RMSMP, with a Row-wise
Mixed-Scheme and Multi-Precision approach. Specifically,
this is the first effort to assign mixed quantization schemes
and multiple precisions within layers – among rows of the
DNN weight matrix, for simplified operations in hardware
inference, while preserving accuracy. Furthermore, this paper makes a different observation from the prior work that
the quantization error does not necessarily exhibit the layerwise sensitivity, and actually can be mitigated as long as a
certain portion of the weights in every layer are in higher
precisions. This observation enables layer-wise uniformality in the hardware implementation towards guaranteed inference acceleration, while still enjoying row-wise flexibility of mixed schemes and multiple precisions to boost accuracy. The candidates of schemes and precisions are derived practically and effectively with a highly hardwareinformative strategy to reduce the problem search space.
With the offline determined ratio of different quantization
schemes and precisions for all the layers, the RMSMP quantization algorithm uses Hessian and variance based method
to effectively assign schemes and precisions for each row.
The proposed RMSMP is tested for the image classification
and natural language processing (BERT) applications, and
achieves the best accuracy performance among state-ofthe-arts under the same equivalent precisions. The RMSMP
is implemented on FPGA devices, achieving 3.65× speedup
in the end-to-end inference time for ResNet-18 on ImageNet,
comparing with the 4-bit Fixed-point baseline.

forms/devices. As a major type of model compression technique, the DNN quantization becomes an essential method
to reduce the computation, memory, and storage requirements in on-device inference, especially for platforms with
capability of customized architecture design, such as FPGA
devices and ASIC chips. Generally speaking, DNN quantization learns DNN models in low bit-width representation
with accuracy performance close to that of the full-precision
models, while accelerating inference speed.
Various quantization schemes have been investigated
including binary [5, 6, 26, 22], ternary[20, 15, 39],
Fixed-point (Fixed) [38, 4, 12, 16, 3, 11], Power-ofTwo (PoT) [24, 37, 19, 36], Additive Power-of-Two
(APoT) [21], etc. Those schemes have diverse accuracy and
hardware performance. Binary and ternary significantly reduce computation by eliminating multiplication operations,
but experience relatively large accuracy loss (> 2% in general). Low bit-width Fixed quantization has better accuracy

Filter M 1

Filter M

8-bit Fixed-Point
4-bit Fixed-Point
4-bit PoT

(b) Weight Matrix

Figure 1. The proposed DNN quantization framework with
row-wise mixed schemes and multiple precisions, which assigns quantization scheme and precision to filters of the weight
tensor (or rows of the weight matrix). It features (i) layer-wise
uniformality to fulfill the requirement of practical hardware implementation, (ii) row-wise flexibility for mixed schemes and multiple precisions, (iii) hardware-informative selection of candidate
schemes and precisions (bit-widths) for significantly reducing the
algorithm search space, and (iv) superior accuracy performance
among the state-of-the-arts.

5251

