Seminar Learning for Click-Level Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Hongjun Chen1 , Jinbao Wang1 , Hong Cai Chen1 , Xiantong Zhen2 ,
Feng Zheng1∗ , Rongrong Ji3 , Ling Shao4
1
Southern University of Science and Technology 2 University of Amsterdam
3
Xiamen University 4 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Annotation burden has become one of the biggest barriers to semantic segmentation. Approaches based on clicklevel annotations have therefore attracted increasing attention due to their superior trade-off between supervision and
annotation cost. In this paper, we propose seminar learning, a new learning paradigm for semantic segmentation
with click-level supervision. The fundamental rationale of
seminar learning is to leverage the knowledge from different networks to compensate for insufficient information provided in click-level annotations. Mimicking a seminar, our
seminar learning involves a teacher-student and a studentstudent module, where a student can learn from both skillful teachers and other students. The teacher-student module uses a teacher network based on the exponential moving average to guide the training of the student network.
In the student-student module, heterogeneous pseudo-labels
are proposed to bridge the transfer of knowledge among
students to enhance each other’s performance. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of seminar learning, which achieves the new state-of-the-art performance of
72.51% (mIOU), surpassing previous methods by a large
margin of up to 16.88% on the Pascal VOC 2012 dataset.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task, where
each pixel of an image is labeled into a predefined set
of classes. In the field of computer vision, it has made
great progress in many applications, such as automatic
driving, scene understanding, and medical diagnosis [30]
[48]. Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have achieved remarkable success in a variety of semantic segmentation tasks [9, 30]. However, they require large
amounts of pixel-level annotations for training. The acquisition process of pixel-level annotations is extremely time∗ Corresponding author:

Feng Zheng (Email: f.zheng@ieee.org). This
work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant No. 61972188.

LowDimensional
Continuity

(a)

(b)

Teacher-Student Module

Student-Student Module

Teacher

Student

Student

Student

Final Segmentation Result

(c)

Figure 1. Weakly supervised segmentation with the click-level annotations. (a) A generic model trained only with click-level annotations overfits to the labels and cannot recognize the whole object.
(b) Previous works (e.g. regularized loss) apply low-dimensional
continuity information to the training, also failing to correctly segment the object. (c) With seminar learning, our teacher-student
module enables the network to generalize to the whole object, as
indicated by the arrows. Meanwhile, by integrating diverse information from the two networks, the student-student module can
smooth the boundary area in the marked boxes.

consuming and labor-intensive.
In order to alleviate the burden of annotations, weakly
supervised semantic segmentation has become increasingly
popular, as it only requires coarse annotations, such as boxlevel [12], image-level [33], scribble-level [24], or clicklevel [4] supervision. Among these, click-level supervision
only annotates one pixel for each object in an image. Further, it not only provides valuable location information, but
is also one of the cheapest form of weakly supervision [4].
It has high research potential in terms of the trade-off between information and time costs.
As commonly known, it is challenging to achieve satisfactory performance with limited supervision information
during model training. For instance, with click-level pat-

6920

