Regularizing Nighttime Weirdness: Efficient Self-supervised Monocular Depth
Estimation in the Dark
Kun Wang1 *, Zhenyu Zhang2,1 *, Zhiqiang Yan1 , Xiang Li1 , Baobei Xu3 , Jun Li1† and Jian Yang1†
1

PCA Lab‡, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
3
Tencent YouTu Lab
Hikvision Research Institute

{kunwang, yanzq, xiang.li.implus, junli, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
zhangjesse@foxmail.com, 21625177@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation aims at predicting depth
from a single image or video. Recently, self-supervised
methods draw much attention since they are free of depth
annotations and achieve impressive performance on several daytime benchmarks. However, they produce weird
outputs in more challenging nighttime scenarios because of
low visibility and varying illuminations, which bring weak
textures and break brightness-consistency assumption, respectively. To address these problems, in this paper we propose a novel framework with several improvements: (1) we
introduce Priors-Based Regularization to learn distribution
knowledge from unpaired depth maps and prevent model
from being incorrectly trained; (2) we leverage MappingConsistent Image Enhancement module to enhance image
visibility and contrast while maintaining brightness consistency; and (3) we present Statistics-Based Mask strategy to tune the number of removed pixels within textureless regions, using dynamic statistics. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of each component. Meanwhile, our framework achieves remarkable improvements
and state-of-the-art results on two nighttime datasets. Code
is available at https://github.com/w2kun/RNW .

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is a fundamental topic in
computer vision as it has wide range of applications in augmented reality [35], robotics [11] and autonomous driving
[34], etc. It often needs dense depth maps to learn the map* Contributes equally
† Corresponding authors
‡ PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-

Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab
of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Sci & Tech.

Figure 1. Depth from nuScenes (left) and RobotCar (right). (a) Input images: cyan dashed box indicates an textureless patch caused
by the low visibility (e.g., dark), and two red borders illustrate the
varying lights between t and t + 1 frames. (b) shows that low visibility and varying lights result in big holes and non-smoothness in
the depth maps using MonoDepth2 [15], respectively. (c) demonstrates depth predictions of our framework.

ping from color images to the depth maps in supervised settings [12, 47, 50]. However, high-quality depth data are
costly collected in a broad range of environments by using expensive depth sensors (e.g. LiDAR and TOF). Hence,
many efforts have been made to develop self-supervised approaches [14, 54, 24, 52], which train a depth network to
estimate depth maps by exploring geometry cues in videos,
i.e., reconstructing a target view (or frame) from another
view, instead of utilizing high-quality depth data. Furthermore, their performances are comparable to the supervised
methods in well-lit environments, such as KITTI [13] and
Cityscapes [10]. Unfortunately, there are a very few works
to handle with more challenging nighttime scenarios. Thus
we focus on nighttime self-supervised depth estimation.
Actually, the nighttime scenario includes two important
problems, low visibility and varying illuminations, result-

16055

