DisUnknown: Distilling Unknown Factors for Disentanglement Learning
Sitao Xiang1,2 , Yuming Gu1,2 , Pengda Xiang1,2 , Menglei Chai3 , Hao Li2 , Yajie Zhao2 , Mingming He* 2
1
University of Southern California, 2 USC Institute for Creative Technologies, 3 Snap Inc.
sitaoxia@usc.edu, {ygu, pxiang}@ict.usc.edu, mchai@snap.com, hao@hao-li.com,
{zhao, he}@ict.usc.edu

Abstract
Disentangling data into interpretable and independent
factors is critical for controllable generation tasks. With
the availability of labeled data, supervision can help enforce the separation of specific factors as expected. However, it is often expensive or even impossible to label every
single factor to achieve fully-supervised disentanglement.
In this paper, we adopt a general setting where all factors
that are hard to label or identify are encapsulated as a single unknown factor. Under this setting, we propose a flexible weakly-supervised multi-factor disentanglement framework DisUnknown, which Distills Unknown factors for enabling multi-conditional generation regarding both labeled
and unknown factors. Specifically, a two-stage training
approach is adopted to first disentangle the unknown factor with an effective and robust training method, and then
train the final generator with the proper disentanglement
of all labeled factors utilizing the unknown distillation. To
demonstrate the generalization capacity and scalability of
our method, we evaluate it on multiple benchmark datasets
qualitatively and quantitatively and further apply it to various real-world applications on complicated datasets.

1. Introduction
Disentanglement learning is the task of breaking down
the tangled high-dimensional data variation into interpretable factors. In the desired disentangled representation,
each dimension corresponds to a distinct factor of variables,
such that when one factor changes, the others remain unaffected [3]. Disentanglement learning thus enables various
downstream tasks such as transfer learning and few-shot
learning, as well as challenging controllable image synthesis applications (e.g. [47, 14]).
With the availability of fully-labeled data, supervised
disentanglement has seen much progress [29, 38, 15, 1, 14].
However, ground-truth labels are not always accessible,
* Corresponding author.

while even human labeling could be prohibitively expensive or inconsistent. Thus, fully-supervised approaches often have a hard time generalizing to common scenarios
where labels are only partially available or even entirely
missing. In light of this, unsupervised disentanglement approaches [10, 20, 27, 50, 42] have been proposed to address
these challenges. However, most of them rely on the strong
assumption that the target data is well-structured enough
to be cleanly decoupled into explanatory and recoverable
factors. And more importantly, there is no guarantee that
these factors could be explicitly controlled with respect to
the true intended semantics in specific manipulation scenarios. Therefore, weakly-supervised disentanglement, a nice
mix of the best of both worlds, has recently become popular for more flexible learning [29, 45, 8, 17]. Unfortunately,
although state-of-the-art performance is achieved on certain
two-factor class-content disentanglement tasks [8, 17], most
existing methods in this category are still unable to extract
factor-aware latent representation, which is essential for
manipulating individual factors especially when multiple
ones are presented. In conclusion, no solution seems completely satisfactory yet on multi-factor disentanglement, due
to the limited generalizability and insufficient performance.
In this paper, we propose a weakly-supervised multifactor disentanglement learning framework, which handles
arbitrary numbers of factors through explicit and nearorthogonal latent representation. Given that challenging
factors that are hard to label or interpret exist in most tasks,
the key idea to our approach is a general setting of N -factor
disentanglement with N − 1 factors labeled and a single
factor unknown, where all the remaining task-irrelevant or
difficult-to-label factors are flexibly encapsulated as one unknown factor. We find such a setting highly effective and
practical in real scenarios. Take face motion retargeting as
an example, facial expression could be a good candidate for
the unknown factor since it is much more difficult to precisely label than others such as the identity and the pose.
Thanks to its flexibility, our method naturally adapts to various tasks with varying domains (e.g. cartoon and real photos), data types (e.g. images, skeletons, and landmarks), in-

14810

