Space-Time-Separable Graph Convolutional Network for Pose Forecasting
Theodoros Soﬁanos† , Alessio Sampieri† , Luca Franco and Fabio Galasso
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
Abstract

1. Introduction
Forecasting future human poses is the task of modelling
the complex structured-sequence of joint spatio-temporal
† indicates equal contribution

STS-GCN
Layer1

Layer2

Layer3

Layer4

ENCODER

Input Pose History

Future Predicted Pose

TCN
x4

DECODER

Human pose forecasting is a complex structured-data
sequence-modelling task, which has received increasing attention, also due to numerous potential applications. Research has mainly addressed the temporal dimension as
time series and the interaction of human body joints with
a kinematic tree or by a graph. This has decoupled the two
aspects and leveraged progress from the relevant ﬁelds, but
it has also limited the understanding of the complex structural joint spatio-temporal dynamics of the human pose.
Here we propose a novel Space-Time-Separable Graph
Convolutional Network (STS-GCN) for pose forecasting.
For the ﬁrst time, STS-GCN models the human pose dynamics only with a graph convolutional network (GCN), including the temporal evolution and the spatial joint interaction
within a single-graph framework, which allows the crosstalk of motion and spatial correlations. Concurrently, STSGCN is the ﬁrst space-time-separable GCN: the space-time
graph connectivity is factored into space and time afﬁnity matrices, which bottlenecks the space-time cross-talk,
while enabling full joint-joint and time-time correlations.
Both afﬁnity matrices are learnt end-to-end, which results in
connections substantially deviating from the standard kinematic tree and the linear-time time series.
In experimental evaluation on three complex, recent and
large-scale benchmarks, Human3.6M [24], AMASS [34]
and 3DPW [48], STS-GCN outperforms the state-of-the-art,
surpassing the current best technique [35] by over 32% in
average at the most difﬁcult long-term predictions, while
only requiring 1.7% of its parameters. We explain the results qualitatively and illustrate the graph interactions by
the factored joint-joint and time-time learnt graph connections. Our source code is available at:
https://github.com/FraLuca/STSGCN

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed pipeline. Given a sequence of observed 3D poses, the novel STS-GCN encodes
the spatio-temporal body dynamics. The encoded representation serves to predict future poses by means of a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN). STS-GCN allows the
spatial and temporal interaction of joints, cf. green-orange
linkage on the Vitruvian man and dashed blue lines connecting joints in time, which are both learnt. But it bottlenecks
their cross-talk by a new GCN design with factored spacetime adjacency matrices. (Vector image: please zoom in.)

dynamics of the human body. This has received increasing attention due to its manifold applications to autonomous
driving [38], healthcare [44], teleoperations [39] and collaborative robots [28, 45], where e.g. anticipating the human
motion avoids crashes and helps the robots plan the future.
Research has so far addressed modelling space and time
in separate frameworks. Time has generally been modelled with convolutions in the temporal dimension [10],
with recurrent neural networks (RNN [35, 36, 49, 11],
GRU [53, 1] and LSTM [52]) or with Transformer Networks [9]. Space and the interaction of joints has instead
been recently modelled by Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCN) [35], mostly connecting body joints along a kine-

11209

