Anticipative Video Transformer
Rohit Girdhar†
†
Facebook AI Research

Kristen Grauman†‡
‡
University of Texas, Austin

http://facebookresearch.github.io/AVT

Abstract
We propose Anticipative Video Transformer (AVT), an
end-to-end attention-based video modeling architecture
that attends to the previously observed video in order to
anticipate future actions. We train the model jointly to predict the next action in a video sequence, while also learning frame feature encoders that are predictive of successive future frames’ features. Compared to existing temporal aggregation strategies, AVT has the advantage of both
maintaining the sequential progression of observed actions
while still capturing long-range dependencies—both critical for the anticipation task. Through extensive experiments, we show that AVT obtains the best reported performance on four popular action anticipation benchmarks:
EpicKitchens-55, EpicKitchens-100, EGTEA Gaze+, and
50-Salads; and it wins first place in the EpicKitchens-100
CVPR’21 challenge.

1. Introduction
Predicting future human actions is an important task for
AI systems. Consider an autonomous vehicle at a stop sign
that needs to predict whether a pedestrian will cross the
street or not. Making this determination requires modeling
complex visual signals—the past actions of the pedestrian,
such as speed and direction of walking, or usage of devices
that may hinder his awareness of the surroundings—and using those to predict what he may do next. Similarly, imagine an augmented reality (AR) device that observes a user’s
activity from a wearable camera, e.g. as they cook a new
dish or assemble a piece of furniture, and needs to anticipate his next steps to provide timely assistance. In many
such applications, it is insufficient to recognize what is happening in the video. Rather, the vision system must also
anticipate the likely actions that are to follow. Hence, there
is a growing interest in formalizing the activity anticipation
task [24, 45, 49, 64, 73, 82] along with development of multiple challenge benchmarks to support it [13, 14, 49, 55, 82].
Compared to traditional action recognition, anticipation
tends to be significantly more challenging. First of all, it re-

Temporal Attention
(/ line width)
Spatial Attention

Input Frames

Head

wash
tomato

…
…

Head

turn-off
tap

Backbone

time

Figure 1: Anticipating future actions using AVT involves encoding video frames with a spatial-attention backbone, followed
by a temporal-attention head that attends only to frames before the
current one to predict future actions. In this example, it spontaneously learns to attend to hands and objects without being supervised to do so. Moreover, it attends to frames most relevant
to predict the next action. For example, to predict ‘wash tomato’
it attends equally to all previous frames as they determine if any
more tomatoes need to be washed, whereas for ‘turn-off tap’ it focuses most on the current frame for cues whether the person might
be done. Please see § 5.3 for details and additional results.

quires going beyond classifying current spatiotemporal visual patterns into a single action category—a task nicely
suited to today’s well-honed discriminative models—to instead predict the multi-modal distribution of future activities. Moreover, while action recognition can often side-step
temporal reasoning by leveraging instantaneous contextual
cues [31], anticipation inherently requires modeling the progression of past actions to predict the future. For instance,
the presence of a plate of food with a fork may be sufficient
to indicate the action of eating, whereas anticipating that
same action would require recognizing and reasoning over
the sequence of actions that precede it, such as chopping,
cooking, serving, etc. Indeed, recent work [23, 77] finds
that modeling long temporal context is often critical for
anticipation, unlike action recognition where frame-level
modeling is often enough [43, 50, 81]. These challenges are
also borne out in practice. For example, accuracy for one of
today’s top performing video models [77] drops from 42%
to 17% when treating recognition versus anticipation on the

13505

