Rethinking Counting and Localization in Crowds:
A Purely Point-Based Framework
Qingyu Song1∗ Changan Wang1∗ Zhengkai Jiang1 Yabiao Wang1
Ying Tai1 Chengjie Wang1 Jilin Li1 Feiyue Huang1† Yang Wu2
1
Tencent Youtu Lab, 2 Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG
qingyusong@zju.edu.cn, {changanwang, zhengkjiang, caseywang}@tencent.com
{yingtai, jasoncjwang, jerolinli, garyhuang, dylanywu}@tencent.com

Abstract

Target

Prediction

Density Map

Density Map

Bounding Boxes

Bounding Boxes

Localizing individuals in crowds is more in accordance
with the practical demands of subsequent high-level crowd
analysis tasks than simply counting. However, existing
localization based methods relying on intermediate representations (i.e., density maps or pseudo boxes) serving
as learning targets are counter-intuitive and error-prone.
In this paper, we propose a purely point-based framework
for joint crowd counting and individual localization. For
this framework, instead of merely reporting the absolute
counting error at image level, we propose a new metric,
called density Normalized Average Precision (nAP), to provide more comprehensive and more precise performance
evaluation. Moreover, we design an intuitive solution under this framework, which is called Point to Point Network
(P2PNet). P2PNet discards superfluous steps and directly
predicts a set of point proposals to represent heads in an
image, being consistent with the human annotation results.
By thorough analysis, we reveal the key step towards implementing such a novel idea is to assign optimal learning targets for these proposals. Therefore, we propose to
conduct this crucial association in an one-to-one matching manner using the Hungarian algorithm. The P2PNet
not only significantly surpasses state-of-the-art methods on
popular counting benchmarks, but also achieves promising localization accuracy. The codes will be available at:
TencentYoutuResearch/CrowdCounting-P2PNet.

Figure 1. Illustrations for the comparison of our pipeline with existing methods, in which the predictions are marked in Red while
the ground truths are marked as Green. Top flow: The dominated
density map learning based methods fail to provide the exact locations of individuals. Middle flow: The estimated inaccurate
ground truth bounding boxes make the detection based methods
error-prone, such as the missing detections as indicated, especially
for the NMS-like process. Bottom flow: Our pipeline directly predicts a set of points to represent the locations of individuals, which
is simple, intuitive and competitive as demonstrated, bypassing
those error-prone steps. Best viewed in color.

1. Introduction

analysis tasks, such as crowd tracking, activity recognition,
abnormality detection, flow/behavior prediction, etc.

Among all the related concrete tasks of crowd analysis,
crowd counting is a fundamental pillar, aiming to estimate
the number of individuals in a crowd. However, simply giving a single number is obviously far from being able to support the practical demands of subsequent higher-level crowd
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Ground Truth (Points)

Target Generation
Model Training

Points (Ours)

In fact, there is an obvious tendency in this field for
more challenging fine-grained estimation (i.e., the locations
of individuals) beyond simply counting. Specifically, some
approaches cast crowd counting as a head detection problem, but leaving more efforts on labor-intensive annotation
for tiny-scale heads. Other approaches [26, 30] attempted
to generate the pseudo bounding boxes of heads with only

3365

