Unsupervised Segmentation incorporating Shape Prior
via Generative Adversarial Networks
Dahye Kim and Byung-Woo Hong
Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
dahye@image.cau.ac.kr, hong@cau.ac.kr

Abstract
We present an image segmentation algorithm that is developed in an unsupervised deep learning framework. The
delineation of object boundaries often fails due to the nuisance factors such as illumination changes and occlusions.
Thus, we initially propose an unsupervised image decomposition algorithm to obtain an intrinsic representation that
is robust with respect to undesirable bias fields based on a
multiplicative image model. The obtained intrinsic image is
subsequently provided to an unsupervised segmentation procedure that is developed based on a piecewise smooth model.
The segmentation model is further designed to incorporate a
geometric constraint imposed in the generative adversarial
network framework where the discrepancy between the distribution of partitioning functions and the distribution of prior
shapes is minimized. We demonstrate the effectiveness and
robustness of the proposed algorithm in particular with bias
fields and occlusions using simple yet illustrative synthetic
examples and a benchmark dataset for image segmentation.

1. Introduction
The image segmentation problem plays a significant role
in providing both the appearance (such as texture or brightness) and geometry of objects by partitioning the domain
of image into mutually disjoint regions. It is often considered as a basis for a higher level of visual understanding
of image contents. Various classical image segmentation
algorithms have been developed based on the variational
framework [10, 42, 11, 55, 13, 9, 45, 46] where an objective functional that defines a discrepancy between model
and observation is optimized in a solution space of partitioning function. The variation of observation from the defined
model is typically computed based on a single measurement leading to an unsupervised algorithm. Albeit a number of successful unsupervised variational algorithms have
been developed using normalized cuts in graph representa-

tions [24, 52], markov random field models [44, 60], density
estimations in a feature space [22, 23], level set embedding
functions [43, 13] and hierarchical methods in multi-scale
representations [24, 2], their associated limitations that stem
from the complexity of statistical properties in characterizing regions of interest naturally lead to the development
of supervised algorithms using a large number of training
images. The development of supervised image segmentation algorithms based on the resurgent neural networks in
particular with locally characteristic convolutional kernels
has been making a significant improvement over the classical unsupervised approaches [16, 49, 37, 41, 61, 4, 19]
where convolutional neural networks predict the probability
of indication for region of interest. However, the supervised
algorithms generally require extensive manual annotations
that are rarely available and often result in coarse-grained. It
is also often insufficient to generalize an effective segmentation model with respect to both appearance and geometry
albeit data-driven supervision due to the inherited complexity from the variations in lighting conditions and physical
properties of objects. The difficulties in coping with high
dimensional distributions with huge variations lead to the
development of segmentation algorithms by unsupervised
learning schemes using abundant training examples with
partial or crude labels [33, 26, 6, 20, 7, 1, 58]. In particular,
the successful application of generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [27, 47, 50, 3] has been extended to an image segmentation problem [20, 7, 6] where the distribution of composite
images formed by the foreground of the object of interest
and its realistic background is desired to be learned. However, the distribution for both appearance and geometry of
object turns out difficult to be learned due to its enormous
dimensionality and variations despite a relatively large number of coarse-grained labels. Thus, it is desired to improve
the learnability [8] of a characteristic distribution for segmentation in a generative learning scheme, which motivates
to simplify a generative model to learn. In this work, we
present an unsupervised segmentation algorithm that learns
an embedding function for a bipartitioning model based on
the statistical homogeneity of appearance and incorporates

7324

