Interacting Two-Hand 3D Pose and Shape Reconstruction
from Single Color Image
Baowen Zhang1,2
Yangang Wang3
Xiaoming Deng1,2∗
Yinda Zhang4∗
5,6
1,2
1,2
Ping Tan
Cuixia Ma
Hongan Wang
1
2
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Southeast University 4 Google 5 Simon Fraser University 6 Alibaba

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel deep learning framework to reconstruct 3D hand poses and shapes of two
interacting hands from a single color image. Previous
methods designed for single hand cannot be easily applied for the two hand scenario because of the heavy
inter-hand occlusion and larger solution space. In order to address the occlusion and similar appearance between hands that may confuse the network, we design a
hand pose-aware attention module to extract features associated to each individual hand respectively. We then leverage the two hand context presented in interaction to propose a context-aware cascaded refinement that improves
the hand pose and shape accuracy of each hand conditioned on the context between interacting hands. Extensive experiments on the main benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method predicts accurate 3D hand pose and
shape from single color image, and achieves the state-ofthe-art performance. Code is available in project webpage
https://baowenz.github.io/Intershape/.

1. Introduction
3D hand pose and shape reconstruction plays an important role in many applications, such as AR/VR [8] and
robotics [9]. While most of the previous hand pose and
shape reconstruction works [3, 41] are proposed for single hand, we study the problem of hand reconstruction for
two interacting hand from single color image, as it is more
desirable to express delicate body language [39] and perform complex tasks [18, 25, 36]. However, the prior art
on this topic is barely missing. Existing methods usually
rely on depth sensor [19], multi-view camera system [8] or
optimization over tracked motion sequence [19, 8], which
however are either relative expensive, energy consuming,
or sensitive to the tracking quality and initialization. Com∗ indicates corresponding author

Input image

Mesh overlay

Different views

Figure 1. Illustration of interacting hand shape reconstruction from
single color image. Our method can get high-quality reconstruction under heavy interhand occlusions.

paratively, single color camera setup is more cost and computation friendly, and it is also widely available. Therefore,
we focus on conducting interacting two-hand reconstruction
from single color image (See Fig. 1).
Reusing similar hand reconstruction techniques designed
for single hand for the two-hand scenario is non-trivial.
First, compared to the case with a single complete hand,
two hands are usually heavily occluded and tightly contacting with each other due to the interaction, which are
much harder to parse. Two hands also share similar textures, which can easily confuse the network to extract feature from correct regions in the image. Second, the ill-pose
nature of the problem is exacerbated with the degree of the
freedom of the solution space doubled. The model is errorprone and may produce two hands in unreasonable pose and
shape that people would rarely or be infeasible to present.
Recently, Moon et al. [18] propose a large-scale interacting hand dataset named InterHand2.6M, and present an
interacting hand pose estimation method. However, less

11354

