Towards Complete Scene and Regular Shape for Distortion Rectiﬁcation by
Curve-Aware Extrapolation
Kang Liao Chunyu Lin* Yunchao Wei Feng Li Shangrong Yang Yao Zhao
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
{kang liao, cylin}@bjtu.edu.cn, wychao1987@gmail.com, {l1feng, sr yang, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn

ROP

Abstract
The wide-angle lens gains increasing attention since it
can capture a wide ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) scene. However, the
obtained image is contaminated with radial distortion, making the scene not realistic. Previous distortion rectiﬁcation
methods rectify the image in a rectangle or invagination,
failing to display the complete content and regular shape simultaneously. In this paper, we rethink the representation of
rectiﬁcation results and present a Rectiﬁcation OutPainting
(ROP) method, aiming to extrapolate the coherent semantics to the blank area and create a wider FoV beyond the
original wide-angle lens. To address the speciﬁc challenges
such as the variable painting region and curve boundary,
a rectiﬁcation module is designed to rectify the image with
geometry supervision, and the extrapolated results are generated using a dual conditional expansion strategy. In terms
of the spatially discounted correlation, a curve-aware correlation measurement is proposed to focus on the generated
region to enforce the local consistency. To our knowledge,
we are the ﬁrst to tackle the challenging rectiﬁcation via
outpainting, and our curve-aware strategy can reach a rectiﬁcation construction with complete content and regular
shape. Extensive experiments well demonstrate the superiority of our ROP over other state-of-the-art solutions.

1. Introduction
A wide-angle lens that can capture the wide ﬁeld-ofview (FoV) scene, gains increasing applications in recent
years. Humans have the natural ability to rectify and understand the distorted scene induced by a wide-angle lens.
For computer vision, accomplishing this task requires recovering the realistic geometric distribution based on handcrafted features [6, 8, 29, 14, 1, 26] or deep features
[23, 39, 18, 35, 17, 16, 5]. The existing distortion rectiﬁcation methods generate the rectiﬁed image as rectangle
* Corresponding author

Rectified Image
(Invagination)

Outpainting
Manner

Shape
Reference

Wide-Angle
Image

Extrapolated
Image

Increased
22% FoV

Rectified Image
(Rectangle)

Figure 1. Motivation of the presented Rectiﬁcation OutPainting
(ROP) method. ROP aims to combine the advantages of two traditional rectiﬁcation constructions: complete content and regular
shape, while gaining wider ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) beyond the original wide-angle lens. Note that the structure of the rectangle rectiﬁed image is used as a shape reference for outpainting.

or invagination, both of which have the limitations to display the complete content and regular shape simultaneously.
For instance, the rectangle construction displays the rectiﬁed scene in a regular shape, but it discards the content in
the image boundary. Such a representation cannot provide
the complete scene and weakens the advantage of the wideangle lens. Although the invagination construction covers
complete contents, it introduces an irregular shape with a
visually narrow FoV. These two representations have their
strengths and weaknesses. It would be appealing and meaningful if we contribute a representation combined with the
complete content and regular shape in the meantime.
Given an incomplete image, the goal of the image extrapolation is to hallucinate plausible visual contents outside the original boundaries [25, 31, 33, 37, 9, 34]. Different with the actively studied inpainting [40, 41, 38, 12,
36, 13, 42, 43, 44], outpainting receives less attention and
is more challenging due to its one-side constraint. In this
paper, we rethink the traditional construction of distortion

14569

