Airbert: In-domain Pretraining for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Pierre-Louis Guhur1 , Makarand Tapaswi2 , Shizhe Chen1 , Ivan Laptev1 , Cordelia Schmid1
1
Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, Paris, France
2
IIIT Hyderabad, India
pierre-louis.guhur@inria.fr

https://airbert-vln.github.io

Abstract

Problem

How to follow navigation instructions in environments with new objects?

Solution

Build a large-scale dataset with navigation instructions from BnB listings

Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) aims to enable
embodied agents to navigate in realistic environments using natural language instructions. Given the scarcity of
domain-specific training data and the high diversity of image and language inputs, the generalization of VLN agents
to unseen environments remains challenging. Recent methods explore pretraining to improve generalization, however,
the use of generic image-caption datasets or existing smallscale VLN environments is suboptimal and results in limited
improvements. In this work, we introduce BnB1 , a largescale and diverse in-domain VLN dataset. We first collect image-caption (IC) pairs from hundreds of thousands
of listings from online rental marketplaces. Using IC pairs
we next propose automatic strategies to generate millions
of VLN path-instruction (PI) pairs. We further propose a
shuffling loss that improves the learning of temporal order inside PI pairs. We use BnB to pretrain our Airbert2
model that can be adapted to discriminative and generative settings and show that it outperforms state of the art for
Room-to-Room (R2R) navigation and Remote Referring Expression (REVERIE) benchmarks. Moreover, our in-domain
pretraining significantly increases performance on a challenging few-shot VLN evaluation, where we train the model
only on VLN instructions from a few houses.

1. Introduction
In vision-and-language navigation (VLN), an agent is
asked to navigate in home environments following natural
language instructions [3, 5]. This task is attractive to many
real-world applications such as domestic robotics and personal assistants. However, given the high diversity of VLN
data across environments and the difficulty of the manual
collection and annotation of VLN training data at scale, the
1 Bed and Breakfast
2 Airbert is an Old Irish word meaning practice, here referring to model
pretraining on pretext tasks similar to VLN.

Fully equipped kitchen

Living room space with
ample seating
Walk around the kitchen. Walk
into the living room. Turn right
and stop next to the fireplace.

Figure 1: VLN tasks are evaluated on unseen environments at test
time. Top: None of the training houses contain a Christmas theme
making this test environment particularly challenging. Bottom:
We build a large-scale, visually diverse, and in-domain dataset by
creating path-instruction pairs close to a VLN-like setup and show
the benefits of self-supervised pretraining.

performance of current methods remains limited, especially
for previously unseen environments [48].
Our work is motivated by significant improvements in
vision and language pretraining [2, 9, 23, 24, 25, 38], where
deep transformer models [42] are trained via self-supervised
proxy tasks [10] using large-scale, automatically harvested
image-text datasets [32, 36]. Such pretraining enables
learning transferable multi-modal representations achieving
state-of-the-art performance in various vision and language
tasks. Similarly, with the goal of learning an embodied
agent that generalizes, recent works [13, 16, 22, 28] have
explored different pretraining approaches for VLN tasks.
In [13, 16], annotated path-instruction pairs are augmented with a speaker model that generates instructions
for random unseen paths. However, as these paths originate from a small set of 61 houses used during training,
they are limited in visual diversity. The limited pretraining

1634

