End-to-end robust joint unsupervised image alignment and clustering
Xiangrui Zeng†
Computational Biology
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Gregory Howe†
Machine Learning
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Min Xu∗
Computational Biology
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

xiangruz@andrew.cmu.edu

gregory.s.howe@gmail.com

mxu1@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Computing dense pixel-to-pixel image correspondences
is a fundamental task of computer vision. Often, the objective is to align image pairs from the same semantic category for manipulation or segmentation purposes. Despite
achieving superior performance, existing deep learning
alignment methods cannot cluster images; consequently,
clustering and pairing images needed to be a separate laborious and expensive step.
Given a dataset with diverse semantic categories, we
propose a multi-task model, Jim-Net, that can directly
learn to cluster and align images without any pixel-level
or image-level annotations. We design a pair-matching
alignment unsupervised training algorithm that selectively
matches and aligns image pairs from the clustering branch.
Our unsupervised Jim-Net achieves comparable accuracy
with state-of-the-art supervised methods on benchmark 2D
image alignment dataset PF-PASCAL. Specifically, we apply Jim-Net to cryo-electron tomography, a revolutionary
3D microscopy imaging technique of native subcellular
structures. After extensive evaluation on seven datasets, we
demonstrate that Jim-Net enables systematic discovery and
recovery of representative macromolecular structures in
situ, which is essential for revealing molecular mechanisms
underlying cellular functions. To our knowledge, Jim-Net
is the first end-to-end model that can simultaneously align
and cluster images, which significantly improves the performance as compared to performing each task alone.

1. Introduction
Image alignment that establishes dense pixel-to-pixel
correspondences between images is a fundamental research
area in computer vision [86]. Various algorithms have been
widely applied to important fields such as face recognition [25, 105], medical diagnosis [85, 21], remote sensing
[100, 60], and structural biology [74, 37]. These have suc∗ Corresponding author. † Equal contribution.

cessfully led to technological advances including Google
street view [5], and historic scientific discoveries including
the first image of a black hole [13] and atomic resolution
macromolecular structures [9, 106].
Since 2017, end-to-end deep learning methods emerged
for image alignment tasks and achieved superior performance in terms of both accuracy and efficiency, especially
for the common scenario of image pairs with large transformation variations [91, 101]. In most cases, the objective of
image alignment is to align image pairs of the same semantic category for feature localization [54, 90], image manipulation [34, 4] or image segmentation purposes [81, 94, 46].
Nevertheless, the majority of image datasets contain diverse
semantic categories [35, 28, 87]. Existing supervised and
unsupervised deep learning image alignment approaches
only perform alignment and cannot predict the categorical
class of input images. As a result, they still need to categorize the images as a separate step, either by manual grouping, which is tedious and time-consuming, or by computational methods, which may be prone to errors [44] due to
the large pose variations of objects (Figure 1).
Unsupervised categorization (clustering) has been extensively studied in machine learning settings where the
ground-truth categorical labels needed for supervised training are hard to acquire. The accuracy of traditional image
clustering algorithms is usually low because of their limited ability in learning representations of high-dimensional
visual features [31]. Recently, end-to-end deep image clustering methods have achieved similar performance to supervised classification [15, 39, 96, 72] and demonstrated their
ability to extract meaningful semantic features. As mentioned above, most image datasets contain multiple semantic categories but the majority of image alignment applications require categorical information of images. Therefore,
it is critical to have a model that can simultaneously cluster
and align images. Such a model will enable learning from
scratch the clustering and alignment of images from a completely unlabeled dataset with diverse semantic categories.
In particular, we motivate the importance of this prob-

3854

