Structure-transformed Texture-enhanced Network for Person Image Synthesis
Munan Xu1 , Yuanqi Chen1 , Shan Liu2 , Thomas H. Li3 , Ge Li1
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
2
Tencent America 3 Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University

Abstract
Pose-guided virtual try-on task aims to modify the fashion item based on pose transfer task. These two tasks
that belong to person image synthesis have strong correlations and similarities. However, existing methods treat
them as two individual tasks and do not explore correlations between them. Moreover, these two tasks are challenging due to large misalignment and occlusions, thus
most of these methods are prone to generate unclear human body structure and blurry fine-grained textures. In this
paper, we devise a structure-transformed texture-enhanced
network to generate high-quality person images and construct the relationships between two tasks. It consists of
two modules: structure-transformed renderer and textureenhanced stylizer. The structure-transformed renderer is
introduced to transform the source person structure to the
target one, while the texture-enhanced stylizer is served to
enhance detailed textures and controllably inject the fashion style founded on the structural transformation. With the
two modules, our model can generate photorealistic person images in diverse poses and even with various fashion styles. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art results on two tasks.

1. Introduction
Person image synthesis has drawn a great deal of attention, due to various applications in the movie industry, e-commerce, person re-identification, etc. There are
two critical tasks in person image synthesis: pose transfer [17, 22, 15, 40, 20, 23] and pose-guided virtual try-on
[39, 5, 11, 27]. As shown in Figure 1, pose transfer task
aims to transfer person images from one pose to other poses,
and pose-guided virtual try-on task is to modify the clothing item based on pose transference. These two tasks have
strong correlations and similarities, yet existing methods
do not explore their correlations. Especially most methods
of pose-guided virtual try-on [39, 11, 27] only implicitly
model the pose transformation via learning the concatenation of the target pose or human parsing map and the source

Pose Transfer

Fashion style modification

Person structural transformation

+

Target pose

Source image

Pose-guided Virtual Try-on

Figure 1: The correlations between two tasks. Pose transfer
corresponds to a person’s structural transformation between
the source and the target images, while pose-guided virtual
try-on aims to modify the fashion styles based on this transformation.
image. This implicit transformation is likely to result in
blurry and implausible issues when dealing with large misalignment among different poses, which affects the quality
of generated results.
The key to obtaining high-quality results for these two
tasks is to generate sharp human body structure and finegrained textures (e.g., patterns of clothes and hairs). For the
structure generation, the target human body structure can be
obtained via a transformation from the source one, such as
from the back to the front structure in the Figure 1. Transformation simulation is the primary concern of pose transfer
task. Previous methods exploit flow-based warping, obtaining this transformation with promising results [8, 15, 20].
However, due to the challenge of accurate flow computation and precise warping operation, it may cause artifacts
around the structure [28, 24]. In addition to structure generation, most existing methods adopt perceptual-related constraints (e.g., perceptual loss [14] and adversarial loss [7]) to
guide the texture generation and ameliorate the visual quality of the results. However, these losses tend to optimize
high-level perception, which does not only focus on textures
but also includes other components such as style information. Therefore, the texture generation cannot be supervised
effectively in the optimization process. For example, finegrained region reconstruction can be further improved [30].

13859

