Spatio-Temporal Dynamic Inference Network for Group Activity Recognition
Hangjie Yuan1 Dong Ni1,2 * Mang Wang3
1
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, China
{hj.yuan,dni}@zju.edu.cn, wangmang.wm@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Group activity recognition aims to understand the activity performed by a group of people. In order to solve
it, modeling complex spatio-temporal interactions is the
key. Previous methods are limited in reasoning on a predefined graph, which ignores the inherent person-specific interaction context. Moreover, they adopt inference schemes
that are computationally expensive and easily result in
the over-smoothing problem. In this paper, we manage
to achieve spatio-temporal person-specific inferences by
proposing Dynamic Inference Network (DIN), which composes of Dynamic Relation (DR) module and Dynamic Walk
(DW) module. We firstly propose to initialize interaction
fields on a primary spatio-temporal graph. Within each
interaction field, we apply DR to predict the relation matrix and DW to predict the dynamic walk offsets in a jointprocessing manner, thus forming a person-specific interaction graph. By updating features on the specific graph, a
person can possess a global-level interaction field with a
local initialization. Experiments indicate both modules’ effectiveness. Moreover, DIN1 achieves significant improvement compared to previous state-of-the-art methods on two
popular datasets under the same setting, while costing much
less computation overhead of the reasoning module.

1. Introduction
Group activity recognition (GAR) aims to infer an overall activity performed by a group of people in the scene
[9, 22, 4, 45, 32, 43, 15, 48]. It has aroused research
interests due to various applications, including surveillance/sports video analysis, social scene understanding, etc.
The critical problem that lies in GAR is to infer a grouplevel activity representation given a video clip, which asks
for elaborately designed reasoning modules.
* Corresponding author.
1 Codes are available at https://github.com/JacobYuan7/

DIN_GAR.

Figure 1. Examples of right set and right pass group activity.
The red bounding box annotated with a star is the person performing the key action for the activity. The grey arrow denotes the key
interaction linking the starred person and the semantically important person, which is always not aligned in the spatial or temporal
domain. The person indices do not start from 1 because we only
illustrate part of the images.

Recently proposed reasoning modules mainly incorporate spatio-temporal interactive factors to get a refined activity representation. Modeling of agents’ interactions has
been widely studied. The mostly adopted methods are recurrent neural networks [1, 49], the attention mechanism
[41, 19] and graph neural networks (GNNs) [38, 13, 44].
GNNs have been a frequently adopted method in GAR
[32, 43, 46, 31], which performs message passing on a constructed semantic graph and achieves competitive results on
publicly available benchmarks.
However, previous methods using GNNs stick to a
paradigm that models the interaction between individuals
on a predefined graph as shown in Figure 2. It is a feasible way but bears several drawbacks: i) Those who interact
with a given person should be person-specific but not predefined. Like in Figure 1, a person will interact with people
depending on their own context: the 8th person in the left
video interacts with the 9th person who is about to spike
the ball; the 10th person in the right video interacts with the
9th person who is about to set the ball. A predefined graph
can not suit every person’s inference. ii) Previous predefined graph models infer interactions on a fully-connected
[43] or criss-cross [46, 31] graph which is shown in Figure

7476

