Frequency Domain Image Translation:
More Photo-realistic, Better Identity-preserving
Mu Cai1
1

Hong Zhang2

Huijuan Huang3

University of Wisconsin-Madison
4
Beihang University

{mucai,sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu

Qichuan Geng4
2

SenseTime Group Ltd.
5
Tsinghua University

fykalviny@gmail.com

zhaokefirst@buaa.edu.cn

Yixuan Li1

Gao Huang5
3

Kwai Inc.

huanghuijuan@kuaishou.com

gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-to-image translation has been revolutionized with
GAN-based methods. However, existing methods lack the
ability to preserve the identity of the source domain. As a
result, synthesized images can often over-adapt to the reference domain, losing important structural characteristics
and suffering from suboptimal visual quality. To solve these
challenges, we propose a novel frequency domain image
translation (FDIT) framework, exploiting frequency information for enhancing the image generation process. Our
key idea is to decompose the image into low-frequency and
high-frequency components, where the high-frequency feature captures object structure akin to the identity. Our training objective facilitates the preservation of frequency information in both pixel space and Fourier spectral space. We
broadly evaluate FDIT across five large-scale datasets and
multiple tasks including image translation and GAN inversion. Extensive experiments and ablations show that FDIT
effectively preserves the identity of the source image, and
produces photo-realistic images. FDIT establishes stateof-the-art performance, reducing the average FID score by
5.6% compared to the previous best method.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation [67, 9, 4, 56, 53] has attracted great research attention in computer vision, which
is tasked to synthesize new images based on the source
and reference images (see Figure 1). This task has been
revolutionized since the introduction of GAN-based methods [28, 66]. In particular, a plethora of literature attempts
to decompose the image representation into a content space
and a style space [11, 45, 37, 26]. To translate a source image, its content representation is combined with a different
style representation from the reference domain.
Despite exciting progress, existing solutions suffer from

SwapAE
Source
Reference
FDIT
Figure 1: Image translation results of the Flicker mountains
dataset. From left column to right: we show the source images,
reference images, the generated images using Swapping Autoencoder [45] and FDIT (ours), respectively. SwapAE over-adapt to
the reference image. FDIT better preserves the composition and
identity with respect to the source image.

two notable challenges. First, there is no explicit mechanism that allows preserving the identity, and as a result, the
synthesized image can over-adapt to the reference domain
and lose the original identity characteristics. This can be
observed in Figure 1, where Swapping Autoencoder [45]

13930

