HiT: Hierarchical Transformer with Momentum Contrast for Video-Text
Retrieval
Song Liu1 , Haoqi Fan2 , Shengsheng Qian3,4∗, Yiru Chen5 , Wenkui Ding5 , Zhongyuan Wang5
1
Peking University, 2 FAIR
3
National Lab of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Kuaishou Technology
slpku@pku.edu.cn, haoqifan@fb.com, shengsheng.qian@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{chenyiru, dingwenkui, wangzhongyuan}@kuaishou.com

Semantic-level
Contrastive Matching

Abstract
Video-Text Retrieval has been a hot research topic with
the growth of multimedia data on the internet. Transformer
for video-text learning has attracted increasing attention
due to its promising performance. However, existing crossmodal transformer approaches typically suffer from two
major limitations: 1) Exploitation of the transformer architecture where different layers have different feature characteristics is limited; 2) End-to-end training mechanism limits
negative sample interactions in a mini-batch. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach named Hierarchical Transformer (HiT) for video-text retrieval. HiT performs Hierarchical Cross-modal Contrastive Matching in both featurelevel and semantic-level, achieving multi-view and comprehensive retrieval results. Moreover, inspired by MoCo, we
propose Momentum Cross-modal Contrast for cross-modal
learning to enable large-scale negative sample interactions
on-the-fly, which contributes to the generation of more precise and discriminative representations. Experimental results on the three major Video-Text Retrieval benchmark
datasets demonstrate the advantages of our method.

1. Introduction
Cross-modal Retrieval [58, 10, 13, 67, 8, 3, 35, 9, 11,
46, 59, 60, 25, 57, 29, 42] has attracted the increasing attention with the aim to search the semantic similar samples
from different modalities. Specially, the explosive growth
of video contents on the internet has brought great challenges to accurate video-text retrieval. In this paper, we
focus on the learning of video-text retrieval and also hope
to inspire other cross-modal tasks.
∗ Corresponding author

Similarity

Feature-level
Contrastive Matching

CLS

…
Semantic-Level

CLS

Video Encoder
CLS

…
Feature-Level

…
Semantic-Level
Text Encoder

CLS

…
Word-Level

Figure 1. Hierarchical Cross-modal Contrastive Matching consists
of Feature-level and Semantic-level Contrastive Matching. Notably, Momentum Cross-modal Contrast is not shown in this figure.

Recent works [49, 70, 13, 39, 12] have shown that transformer can learn high level video representations, which
capture semantically meaningful and temporally long-range
structures for videos. Notably, existing approaches for
cross-modal learning can be roughly categorized as twostream, single-stream and dual stream architectures. Twostream architecture, as shown in Figure 2-(a), utilizes a
vision transformer and a text transformer to learn visual
and textual representations independently, then introduces
a multi-modal transformer [32, 70, 50] to achieve crossmodal information exchange. Singe-stream architecture
[28, 27, 47, 19], as shown in Figure 2-(b), fuses visual and
textual representations at the initial stage of the transformer
model. However, these two architectures are not suitable
for large-scale cross-modal retrieval tasks, due to the re-

11915

