Generative Layout Modeling using Constraint Graphs
Wamiq Para1
1
KAUST

Paul Guerrero2 Tom Kelly3 Leonidas Guibas4 Peter Wonka1
2
Adobe Research 3 University of Leeds 4 Stanford University

{wamiq.para, peter.wonka}@kaust.edu.sa

guerrero@adobe.com

twakelly@gmail.com

guibas@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose a new generative model for layout generation.
We generate layouts in three steps. First, we generate the
layout elements as nodes in a layout graph. Second, we
compute constraints between layout elements as edges in
the layout graph. Third, we solve for the final layout using
constrained optimization. For the first two steps, we build
on recent transformer architectures. The layout optimization implements the constraints efficiently. We show three
practical contributions compared to the state of the art: our
work requires no user input, produces higher quality layouts,
and enables many novel capabilities for conditional layout
generation.

Living Bedroom Kitchen Bathroom Office Balcony Hallway Other
room

1. Introduction
We study the problem of topologically and spatially consistent layout generation. This problem arises in image layout synthesis, floor plan synthesis, furniture layout generation, street layout planning, and part-based object creation,
to name a few. Generated content must meet stringent criteria both globally, in terms of its overall topological structure,
as well as locally, in terms of its spatial detail. While our
work applies to layouts in general, we focus our discussion
on two types of layouts: floorplans and furniture layouts.
When assessing layouts, we must consider the global
structure which is largely topological in nature, such as connectivity between individual elements or inter-element hop
distance. We are also concerned with spatial detail, such as
the geometric realization of the elements and their relative
positioning, both local and non-local. Realism of such generated content is often assessed by comparing distributions of
their properties, both topological and spatial, against those
from real-world statistics.
Techniques to generate realistic content have made rapid
progress in recent years due to the emergence of generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [13, 71, 24, 57], variational
autoencoders (VAEs) [27, 53], flow models [48, 63, 53], and
autoregressive models [8]. However, satisfying both topological and spatial properties still remains an open challenge.

Figure 1. We present a method for layout generation. Our approach
can generate multiple types of layouts, such as the floor plans
in the top row, where rooms are colored by type, and furniture
layouts in the bottom row, where furniture pieces are colored by
type. Layouts are represented as graphs, where nodes correspond
to layout elements and edges to relationships between elements.
In the top row, nodes represent rooms (illustrated with room-type
icons), and edges relate rooms connected by doors (dotted lines).
Unlike previous methods, our method does not require any input
guidance and generates higher-quality layouts.

Recently, three papers targeting this challenging problem
in the floor plan setting were published [61, 16, 38]. While
these papers often produce good looking floor plans, they
require several simplifications to tackle this difficult problem:
1) RPLAN [61] and Graph2Plan [16] require the outline
of the floorplan to be given. 2) HouseGAN [38] does not
generate the connectivity between rooms that would be given
by doors, and RPLAN places doors using a manually defined
heuristic that is not learned from data. 3) HouseGAN and
Graph2Plan require the number of rooms, the room types
and their topology to be given as input in the form of an
adjacency graph. 4) All three methods require a heuristic

6690

