Revealing the Reciprocal Relations between Self-Supervised
Stereo and Monocular Depth Estimation
Zhi Chen 1 , Xiaoqing Ye 2 , Wei Yang 1∗ , Zhenbo Xu 1 , Xiao Tan 2 ,
Zhikang Zou 2 , Errui Ding 2 , Xinming Zhang 1 ∗ , Liusheng Huang 1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., China
∗

Corresponding Authors.

E-mail:

qubit@ustc.edu.cn, xinming@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Current self-supervised depth estimation algorithms
mainly focus on either stereo or monocular only, neglecting the reciprocal relations between them. In this paper, we
propose a simple yet effective framework to improve both
stereo and monocular depth estimation by leveraging the
underlying complementary knowledge of the two tasks. Our
approach consists of three stages. In the first stage, the proposed stereo matching network termed StereoNet is trained
on image pairs in a self-supervised manner. Second, we
introduce an occlusion-aware distillation (OA Distillation)
module, which leverages the predicted depths from StereoNet in non-occluded regions to train our monocular depth
estimation network named SingleNet. At last, we design an
occlusion-aware fusion module (OA Fusion), which generates more reliable depths by fusing estimated depths from
StereoNet and SingleNet given the occlusion map. Furthermore, we also take the fused depths as pseudo labels
to supervise StereoNet in turn, which brings StereoNet’s
performance to a new height. Extensive experiments on
KITTI dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
framework. We achieve new SOTA performance on both
stereo and monocular depth estimation tasks.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from either stereo image pairs or
monocular images is a fundamental problem in computer
vision. It has been extensively studied due to its wide applications in robotic manipulation[37], augmented reality
[35, 27] and autonomous driving [26, 43]. Current supervised depth estimation methods [4, 13], though tremendous
progress has been achieved, require costly dense groundtruth data for training. Alternatively, self-supervised methods are getting increasing attention in recent years[10, 40,
3], which only requires stereo or monocular raw images.

Figure 1. Characteristics of stereo and monocular models. In the
upper part, we paste a car ‘instance’ to both left image Il and right
image Ir , respectively. Dl (stereo) and Dl (mono) are left disparity maps generated from the stereo and monocular models, where
the brighter color means bigger disparity. In the lower left, we
move the car in left image a distance to the right, and the estimated
disparity of the car becomes larger, as shown in D0 l (stereo). In
the lower right, we shrink the car, and see the corresponding disparity becomes smaller, as shown in D00 l (mono).

Recent SOTA self-supervised methods mainly focus on
one of monocular or stereo depth estimation problems, neglecting the reciprocal relations between them. On the one
hand, stereo matching approaches aim at learning structural
information by comparing the similarity of local left and
right patches to obtain the optimal disparity and seeking a
globally smooth disparity map. Thus for left boundaries and
occlusions where only a single view can be seen, unsupervised stereo matching methods often fail to learn reliable
depth. On the other hand, monocular depth estimation is an
inherently ill-posed problem and it mainly relies on the ap-

15529

