Cloud Transformers: A Universal Approach To Point Cloud Processing Tasks
Kirill Mazur1
Victor Lempitsky1, 2 *
1
Samsung AI Center Moscow 2 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)

semantic segmentation

Abstract
We present a new versatile building block for deep point
cloud processing architectures that is equally suited for
diverse tasks. This building block combines the ideas of
spatial transformers and multi-view convolutional networks
with the efficiency of standard convolutional layers in two
and three-dimensional dense grids. The new block operates via multiple parallel heads, whereas each head differentiably rasterizes feature representations of individual
points into a low-dimensional space, and then uses dense
convolution to propagate information across points. The
results of the processing of individual heads are then combined together resulting in the update of point features.
Using the new block, we build architectures for both discriminative (point cloud segmentation, point cloud classification) and generative (point cloud inpainting and imagebased point cloud reconstruction) tasks. The resulting architectures achieve state-of-the-art performance for these
tasks, demonstrating the versatility of the new block for
point cloud processing.

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider recognition and generation
tasks for point clouds, such as semantic segmentation or
image-based reconstruction. Most state-of-the-art architectures for point cloud processing are derived from convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) [20] and are inspired by
the success of ConvNets in image processing tasks. Such
ConvNet adaptations are based on direct rasterization of
point clouds onto regular grids followed by convolutional
pipelines [38, 8], as well as on generalizations of the convolutional operators to irregularly sampled data [25, 50] or
non-rectangular grids [18, 16].
In this work, we propose a new building block (a cloud
transform block) for point cloud processing architectures
that combines the ideas of ConvNets and Transformers [48]
(Figure 3). Similarly to the (self)-attention layers within
transformers, our cloud transform blocks take unordered
* VL is currently with Yandex and Skoltech.

shape completion

Input (partial)

Chair

Pillow

Toilet

Completed cloud

image-based 3D reconstruction

classification ( + object segmentation)

Input

Prediction

Input

Prediction

Figure 1: Sample outputs of cloud transformers across four diverse cloud processing tasks including recognition tasks (left) and
generation tasks (right).

sets of vectors as inputs, and process such input using multiple parallel heads. For an input set element, each head computes two- or three-dimensional key and a higher dimensional value, and then uses the computed keys to rasterize
the respective values onto a regular grid. A two- or threedimensional convolution is then used to propagate the information across elements. The results of parallel heads are
then probed at key locations and are recombined together,
producing an update to element features.
We show that multiple cloud transform blocks can be
stacked sequentially and trained end-to-end, as long as special care is taken when implementing forward and backward pass through the rasterization operations. We then design cloud transformer architectures that concatenate multiple cloud transform blocks together with task-specific 3D
convolutional layers. Specifically, we design a cloud transformer for semantic segmentation (which we evaluate on
the S3DIS benchmark [1]), classification (which we evaluate on the ScanObjectNN benchmark [47]), point cloud
inpainting (which we evaluate on ShapeNet-based benchmark [58]), and a cloud transformer for image-based geometric reconstruction (which we evaluate on a recently
introduced ShapeNet-based benchmark [42]). In the evaluation, the designed cloud transformers achieve state-ofthe-art accuracy for semantic segmentation and point cloud
completion tasks and considerably outperform state-of-theart for image-based reconstruction and point cloud classification (Figure 1). We note that such versatility is rare
among previously introduced point cloud processing archi-

10715

