Safety-aware Motion Prediction with Unseen Vehicles for Autonomous Driving
Xuanchi Ren1 * Tao Yang2 * Li Erran Li3
1
2
HKUST
Xi’an Jiaotong University

Abstract
Motion prediction of vehicles is critical but challenging
due to the uncertainties in complex environments and the
limited visibility caused by occlusions and limited sensor
ranges. In this paper, we study a new task, safety-aware motion prediction with unseen vehicles for autonomous driving. Unlike the existing trajectory prediction task for seen
vehicles, we aim at predicting an occupancy map that indicates the earliest time when each location can be occupied
by either seen and unseen vehicles. The ability to predict
unseen vehicles is critical for safety in autonomous driving. To tackle this challenging task, we propose a safetyaware deep learning model with three new loss functions
to predict the earliest occupancy map. Experiments on
the large-scale autonomous driving nuScenes dataset show
that our proposed model significantly outperforms the stateof-the-art baselines on the safety-aware motion prediction
task. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is the
first one that can predict the existence of unseen vehicles
in most cases. Project page at https://github.com/
xrenaa/Safety-Aware-Motion-Prediction.

1. Introduction
Every year, there are more than 1 million deaths related
to car accidents, and up to 94% of accidents are resulted
from human errors [42]. Autonomous driving systems can
potentially save hundreds of thousands of lives [4]. Critical
to autonomous driving is motion prediction, which predicts
surrounding traffic participants [55].
Prior work on motion prediction can be broadly classified into two approaches. The first approach predicts the
future trajectories of agents. Both discriminative models
[17, 49, 30, 34, 52] and generative models [57, 14, 33,
35, 11, 46] are proposed. The second approach formulates this problem as an occupancy map prediction problem [18, 23, 37, 31, 39]. These prior work rarely model
safety explicitly and have difficulty predicting unseen vehicles.
* Equal contribution

Alexandre Alahi4 Qifeng Chen1
3
4
Alexa AI, Amazon
EPFL

Occlusion

X

Possible
Prediction

Collision Point

GT

≈

Planned
Trajectory

X
Ego
Vehicle
Unseen
Vehicle
Seen
Vehicle

Critical Region

Figure 1. Our goal is to predict how early a vehicle or even unseen
vehicles will occupy the space, referred to as safety-aware motion
prediction. An unseen vehicle due to the occlusion or limited sensor ranges is the one that can not be observed by the ego vehicle in
the past. Ignoring the future motion of unseen vehicles can lead to
collisions. In this figure, the possible prediction (in gray) can help
the planner to filter out the risky planned trajectories that may lead
to collisions. Safe planning should leave a larger margin for the
ego vehicle to respond.

In real-world driving scenarios, unseen vehicles are very
common due to occlusions and the limited range of sensors.
An unseen vehicle refers to a vehicle that has not appeared
at present or in history but will come into view and influence
planning decisions. An example of an unseen vehicle is
illustrated in Figure 1. Missing the prediction of unseen
vehicles threatens the safety of planning decisions and even
causes collisions.
To achieve safety-first autonomous driving, we analyze
the possible consequences of later/earlier prediction, i.e.,
predicting vehicles’ arrival (occupancy) time at a certain location later/earlier than the ground truth, in a specific driving scenario. As shown in Figure 1, the ground truth (GT)
for the surrounding vehicle (blue car) is plotted in a blue
dotted line. Due to uncertainty, it is hard to make a perfect
prediction. In this case, it is safer to make a prediction earlier than the GT, i.e., the predicted arrival/occupancy time
at any location is earlier than GT. When we make an earlier prediction (gray line) than GT, there is a collision with

15731

