Towards Mixed-Precision Quantization of Neural Networks via Constrained
Optimization
∗

Weihan Chen1,2 Peisong Wang1 Jian Cheng1
1
NLPR & AIRIA, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
chenweihan2018@ia.ac.cn, {peisong.wang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Quantization is a widely used technique to compress
and accelerate deep neural networks. However, conventional quantization methods use the same bit-width for all
(or most of) the layers, which often suffer significant accuracy degradation in the ultra-low precision regime and
ignore the fact that emergent hardware accelerators begin to support mixed-precision computation. Consequently,
we present a novel and principled framework to solve the
mixed-precision quantization problem in this paper. Briefly
speaking, we first formulate the mixed-precision quantization as a discrete constrained optimization problem. Then,
to make the optimization tractable, we approximate the objective function with second-order Taylor expansion and
propose an efficient approach to compute its Hessian matrix. Finally, based on the above simplification, we show
that the original problem can be reformulated as a MultipleChoice Knapsack Problem (MCKP) and propose a greedy
search algorithm to solve it efficiently. Compared with existing mixed-precision quantization works, our method is derived in a principled way and much more computationally
efficient. Moreover, extensive experiments conducted on the
ImageNet dataset and various kinds of network architectures also demonstrate its superiority over existing uniform
and mixed-precision quantization approaches.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have been leading new state-of-the-art in almost
every computer vision tasks, ranging from image classification [18, 31, 14], segmentation [25, 4, 1], and object detection [28, 21, 23]. However, such performance boosts often come at the cost of increased computational complex∗ Corresponding Author

ity and storage overhead. In many real-time applications,
storage consumption and latency are crucial, which on the
other hand, have posed great challenges to the deployment
of these networks. Under this circumstance, a variety of
methods have been proposed, including low-rank decomposition [39, 9], knowledge distillation [15, 29], low-precision
quantization [16, 3], filter pruning [20, 24], etc, to achieve
CNNs compression and acceleration.
Among these approaches, quantization becomes one of
the most hardware-friendly one by approximating realvalued weights and activations with lower bit-width fixedpoint representations. Meanwhile, network inference can be
performed using cheaper fixed-point multiple-accumulation
(MAC) operations. As a result, we can significantly reduce
the storage overhead and inference latency of CNNs.
Most of the existing quantization methods [3, 41, 38,
7, 22, 19, 27, 42, 40] use the same bit-width for all (or
most of) the layers. Such a uniform bit-width assignment
can be suboptimal from two aspects. First, different layers
have different redundancy and contribute differently to the
final performance. Therefore, uniformly quantizing a network to ultra-low precision often leads to significant accuracy degradation. Second, emergent hardware accelerators,
such as BISMO [34] and BitFusion [30], begin to support
mixed-precision computation for greater flexibility. Consequently, to achieve a better trade-off between accuracy and
efficiency, there is a rising demand to apply mixed-precision
quantization by finding the optimal bit-width for each layer.
However, mixed-precision quantization is difficult for
two reasons. First, the search space of choosing bit-width
assignment is huge. For a network with N layers and M
candidate bit-widths in each layer, an exhaustive combinatorial search has exponential time complexity (O(M N )).
Second, to evaluate the performance of each bit-width assignment truly, we need to finetune the quantized network
until it converges, which may take days for the large-scale
dataset. Therefore, a large bulk of mixed-precision quanti-

5350

