Context Decoupling Augmentation for Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation

†

†

Yukun Su1,2 , Ruizhou Sun1,2 , Guosheng Lin3 , and Qingyao Wu1,2
1

School of Software and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
suyukun666@gmail.com, ruizhousun@foxmail.com, gslin@ntu.edu.sg, qyw@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Data augmentation is vital for deep learning neural networks. By providing massive training samples, it helps to
improve the generalization ability of the model. Weakly
supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) is a challenging problem that has been deeply studied in recent years,
conventional data augmentation approaches for WSSS usually employ geometrical transformations, random cropping and color jittering. However, merely increasing the
same contextual semantic data does not bring much gain
to the networks to distinguish the objects, e.g., the correct
image-level classification of “aeroplane” may be not only
due to the recognition of the object itself, but also its cooccurrence context like “sky”, which will cause the model
to focus less on the object features. To this end, we present
a Context Decoupling Augmentation (CDA) method, to
change the inherent context in which the objects appear
and thus drive the network to remove the dependence between object instances and contextual information. To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 and COCO datasets with
several alternative network architectures demonstrate that
CDA can boost various popular WSSS methods to the new
state-of-the-art by a large margin. Code is available at
https://github.com/suyukun666/CDA

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a foundation in the computer
vision field, which aims to predict the pixel-wise classification of the images and it enjoys a wide range of applications. Recently, benefiting from the deep neural net† Corresponding authors.

...

Conventional
Augmentation

Rotation

Raw image

CDA

Color jittering

...

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference between conventional augmentation approaches and our method. Classical data augmentation consists of generating images obtained by basic geometrical
transformations or color changes of original training images. Context Decoupling Augmentation (CDA) aims to randomly paste the
given object instances into the scenes, so as to decouple the inherent context position of the original objects in the image.

works, modern semantic segmentation models [7, 8, 31, 33]
have achieved remarkable progress with massive humanannotated labeled data. However, collecting pixel-level
labels is very time-consuming and labor-intensive, which
shifts much research attention to weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS). There exist various types of weak
supervision for semantic segmentation like using bounding
boxes [10, 24], scribbles [30, 40], points [4], and imagelevel labels [21, 2, 1, 43, 50]. Among them, image-level
class labels have been widely used since they demand the
least annotation efforts and are already provided in existing
large-scale image datasets.
In this paper, we focus on augmentation for WSSS with

7004

