Video Geo-Localization Employing Geo-Temporal Feature Learning
and GPS Trajectory Smoothing
Krishna Regmi and Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
krishna.regmi7@gmail.com, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of video geolocalization by proposing a Geo-Temporal Feature Learning (GTFL) Network to simultaneously learn the discriminative features for the query video frames and the gallery
images for estimating the geo-spatial trajectory of a query
video. Based on a transformer encoder architecture, our
GTFL model encodes query and gallery data separately,
via two dedicated branches. The proposed GPS Loss and
Clip Triplet Loss exploit the geographical and temporal
proximity between the frames and the clips to jointly learn
the query and the gallery features. We also propose a
deep learning approach to trajectory smoothing by predicting the outliers in the estimated GPS positions and
learning the offsets to smooth the trajectory. We build
a large dataset from four different regions of USA; New
York, San Francisco, Berkeley and Bay Area using BDD
driving videos as query, and by collecting corresponding
Google StreetView (GSV) Images for gallery. Extensive
evaluations of proposed method on this new dataset are provided . Code and dataset details is publicly available at
https://github.com/kregmi/VTE.

1. Introduction
Image based geo-localization has attracted a lot of interest in computer vision community, where a query image is matched with geo-tagged reference images in the
gallery, and the GPS location of the best matching reference image is assigned to the query image. Existing works
in image geo-localization solve the same-view (ground to
ground) [26, 35, 44], as well as the cross-view (ground to
aerial) [2, 4, 12, 14, 17, 24, 25, 27, 32, 39] image matching problems by learning robust features for the query and
the gallery set. With the increase in video data, there has
never been more urgency of geo-localizing the video clips,
where GPS trajectory corresponding to a query video is
determined. In this work, we explore the task of video
geo-localization for the same-view data, where both query

Figure 1: Sample geo-spatial trajectories for a subset of video
clips from San Francisco Area of BDD dataset [42]. The ground
truth trajectories are shown in green and their estimated geotrajectories obtained by the proposed method are shown in red.

videos and gallery images are from the ground views. More
specifically, given a query video recorded from a moving
camera, we want to determine the GPS coordinates of each
frame in the video.
One possible way to solve this problem is to treat each
frame in the video independently and apply frame-based
matching methods to determine the GPS location of each
frame. Earlier works in video geo-localization [9, 37] are
based on classical computer vision methods, where first the
SIFT descriptors [19] are computed for each frame in the
clip as well as for the images in the gallery set (reference
database). Then, for each frame in the query video the best
matching reference image is computed and its corresponding GPS location is assigned to the query frame and the predicted GPS trajectory is obtained by connecting the frame
GPS locations. Vaca-Castano et al. [37] use Bayesian Filtering to enforce temporal consistency on the estimated positions in order to obtain smooth trajectory. Recent works
[11, 13, 45] use 2D CNN networks to obtain frame-level
features instead of SIFT features for query frames and the
gallery images, and follow the same approach for image
matching. The features for each frame in the clip are expressed independent to each other, thus predicted GPS locations may not be smooth enough to represent a realistic
trajectory of the moving camera since no temporal closeness between the frames is exploited directly while learning

12126

