You Don’t Only Look Once:
Constructing Spatial-Temporal Memory
for Integrated 3D Object Detection and Tracking
Jiaming Sun1,2∗

Yiming Xie1∗ Siyu Zhang2 Linghao Chen1
Hujun Bao1 Xiaowei Zhou1†
1

Zhejiang University

Abstract
Humans are able to continuously detect and track surrounding objects by constructing a spatial-temporal memory
of the objects when looking around. In contrast, 3D object detectors in existing tracking-by-detection systems often
search for objects in every new video frame from scratch,
without fully leveraging memory from previous detection
results. In this work, we propose a novel system for integrated 3D object detection and tracking, which uses a
dynamic object occupancy map and previous object states
as spatial-temporal memory to assist object detection in future frames. This memory, together with the ego-motion
from back-end odometry, guides the detector to achieve more
efficient object proposal generation and more accurate object state estimation. The experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed system and its performance on
the ScanNet and KITTI datasets. Moreover, the proposed
system produces stable bounding boxes and pose trajectories over time, while being able to handle occluded and
truncated objects. Code is available at the project page:
https://zju3dv.github.io/UDOLO.

1. Introduction
Humans start to develop the spatial working memory
in an early age [38, 50], resulting in the awareness of the
spatial object arrangement of their surroundings as part of
the mental “World Model” [20]. With this memory serving
as prior knowledge of 3D object locations, together with an
estimation of the ego-motion of the eyes, we would anticipate
objects to appear in certain regions in the field of view when
we look around. This ability enables humans to continuously
locate, track and recognize objects in the 3D space, even
under severe occlusion or truncation.
However, 3D object detection in most of the existing
∗ The first two authors contributed equally. The authors are affiliated
with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG and ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D
Vision. † Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

2

Guofeng Zhang1

SenseTime Research

input data

object future states

Detector

RPN

R-CNN

data association

state fusion

final 3D Box
prediction

Feedback design (ours)
Detection and tracking pipeline

object occupancy map

Figure 1. The spatial-temporal memory in UDOLO is represented by the object occupancy map and the object future states.
The system is able to feedback this memory into the detection
pipeline as strong prior to produce better object detection results.
Red arrows represent the information flow of the feedback.

tracking-by-detection systems still processes each input image from a video stream individually and searches for objects
in every new frame from scratch. Then, object tracking is
usually performed as a post-processing step to associate the
detected bounding boxes with the previously observed tracklets, followed by a recursive filter or optimization to improve
the accuracy and temporal stability of the estimated object
states. Although this late integration of temporal information
would improve the results, the object detection module is
still performed on a per-frame basis without using the memory of the objects in the surrounding scene, which is not only
counter-intuitive but also very inefficient.
We argue that the key to making full use of temporal information is not only to track objects and smooth object states,
but more importantly to feed the temporally-accumulated
memory of object states back to the detection module, yielding an integrated detection and tracking system. To this
end, we propose a novel system named UDOLO that enables the object detector to take the spatial-temporal memory
as a strong prior for more efficient and accurate 3D object
detection and tracking, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
13185

