3D Human Texture Estimation from a Single Image with Transformers
Xiangyu Xu
Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
xiangyu.xu@ntu.edu.sg, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose a Transformer-based framework for 3D human texture estimation from a single image. The proposed
Transformer is able to effectively exploit the global information of the input image, overcoming the limitations of
existing methods that are solely based on convolutional
neural networks. In addition, we also propose a maskfusion strategy to combine the advantages of the RGBbased and texture-flow-based models. We further introduce a part-style loss to help reconstruct high-fidelity colors without introducing unpleasant artifacts. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method against state-of-the-art 3D human texture estimation approaches both quantitatively and qualitatively. The
project page is at https://www.mmlab-ntu.com/
project/texformer.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the problem of estimating 3D human texture from a monocular image. This is an important
problem that plays a key role in single-image 3D human
reconstruction and has wide applications in virtual and augmented reality, film industry, gaming, and biometrics.
Most of existing methods for this problem [13, 23, 29,
44, 47, 53] use deep convolution neural networks (CNNs)
to predict 3D human texture (i.e., a UV map) from the input
image (Figure 1(a)). While these methods have achieved
impressive results, their network architectures suffer from
an inherent shortcoming: convolution layers are by design
local operations and inefficient in processing global information that is crucial in 3D human texture estimation. More
specifically, the input and output in this task do not have
strictly-aligned spatial correspondences and may even have
totally different shapes as shown in Figure 1(a). This is in
sharp contrast to 2D computer vision tasks such as image
super-resolution [51] and image-to-image translation [21]
where the input and output are well aligned.
We believe that one should not simply follow the common practice of using only CNNs for the 3D task in this

Image

Rendered
human

Output

Query



CNN

Correlation

UV map

Rendered
human

(a) Existing method

Key

Attention

Value

(b) Attention mechanism of Transformer

Figure 1. We propose a Transformer for 3D human texture estimation from a single image. Compared with the existing method [44]
that solely relies on CNNs (a), the proposed Transformer uses the
attention mechanism to more effectively exploit global information (b), which leads to higher-quality 3D human texture estimation. See the text for more detailed explanations.

work, and global operations should be introduced for better 3D human texture reconstruction. Note that some recent
approaches [47, 53] attempt to address this issue with fullyconnected layers (or MLPs), which however often leads to
loss of fine spatial information. Moreover, this information
loss cannot be easily remedied by skip connections [38] due
to the misalignment of the different-layer features. A successful solution should be able to more effectively distribute
features of the input into suitable locations in the UV space
while preserving fine spatial information.
Towards this end, we propose a Transformer-based
framework for 3D human texture estimation from a single
image. The Transformer allows processing information of
the input in a global manner, which is in particular suitable
for our task. At the core of the Transformer is an attention
module that involves three basic components: Query, Key,
and Value. For the Query, we use a pre-computed color
map that has the same shape as the output UV map. Each
pixel in the query map corresponds to a vertex on 3D human mesh [31]. The Value is the input image that has all the
source pixels. For the Key, we use a 2D part-segmentation
map obtained with an off-the-shelf model [16], which implies the mapping from the image to the UV space [34, 53].

13849

