How to Design a Three-Stage Architecture for
Audio-Visual Active Speaker Detection in the Wild
Okan Köpüklü1 , Maja Taseska2 , Gerhard Rigoll1
1

Technical University of Munich
2
Microsoft Corporation

Abstract
Successful active speaker detection requires a threestage pipeline: (i) audio-visual encoding for all speakers
in the clip, (ii) inter-speaker relation modeling between
a reference speaker and the background speakers within
each frame, and (iii) temporal modeling for the reference
speaker. Each stage of this pipeline plays an important role
for the final performance of the created architecture. Based
on a series of controlled experiments, this work presents
several practical guidelines for audio-visual active speaker
detection. Correspondingly, we present a new architecture
called ASDNet, which achieves a new state-of-the-art on the
AVA-ActiveSpeaker dataset with a mAP of 93.5% outperforming the second best with a large margin of 4.7%. Our
code and pretrained models are publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
Fusion of audio and video modalities has been shown
to provide promising solutions to long-standing challenging
problems. These include among others, speaker diarization
[16], biometrics [7], and action recognition [15, 38]. Similar to other tasks, Audiovisual Active Speaker Detection
(AV-ASD) has also long been studied in literature [9,10]. A
particularly challenging flavor of this problem is AV-ASD in
the wild, where speech is to be detected and assigned to one
of possibly multiple active speakers at each instant in time.
Clearly, fusing the complementary discriminative information from audio and video modalities is crucial: visual-only
approaches can easily be mistaken by other face/mouth motions such as eating, yawning or emotional expressions.
Audio-only approaches, although able to perform source
clustering and separation [18, 46], aren’t sufficiently robust
to count the number of speakers and assign speech to the
correct source. This is especially challenging with a single
microphone input in acoustically adverse conditions, typically encountered in practice.
1 https://github.com/okankop/ASDNet

Figure 1. Audio-visual active speaker detection pipeline. The task
is to determine if the reference speaker at frame t is speaking or
not-speaking. The pipeline starts with audio-visual encoding of
each speaker in the clip. Secondly, inter-speaker relation modeling is applied within each frame. Finally, temporal modeling is
used to capture long-term relationships in natural conversations.
Examples are from AVA-ActiveSpeaker dataset [42].

Recently, the AVA-ActiveSpeaker dataset [42] provided
the first large-scale standard benchmark for audio-visual active speaker detection in the wild. Recent research [1, 32]
indicates that active speaker detection in the wild requires
(i) integration of audio-visual information for each speaker,
(ii) contextual information that captures inter-speaker relationships, and (iii) temporal modeling to exploit long term
relationships in natural conversation. In this paper, we con-

1193

