ProFlip: Targeted Trojan Attack with Progressive Bit Flips
Huili Chen
Email:

Cheng Fu
Jishen Zhao
Farinaz Koushanfar
University of California, San Diego
{huc044, cfu, jzhao, farinaz}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The security of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is of
great importance due to their employment in various safetycritical applications. DNNs are shown to be vulnerable
against the Trojan attack that manipulates model parameters via poisoned training and gets activated by the predefined trigger during inference. In this work, we present
ProFlip, the first targeted Trojan attack framework that can
divert the prediction of the DNN to the target class by progressively identifying and flipping a small set of bits in
model parameters. At its core, ProFlip consists of three
key phases: (i) Determining significant neurons in the last
layer; (ii) Generating an effective trigger pattern for the target class; (iii) Identifying a sequence of susceptible bits of
DNN parameters stored in the main memory (e.g., DRAM).
After model deployment, the adversary can insert the Trojan by flipping the critical bits found by ProFlip using bit
flip techniques such as Row Hammer or laser beams. As
the result, the altered DNN predicts the target class when
the trigger pattern is present in any inputs. We perform extensive evaluations of ProFlip on CIFAR10, SVHN, and ImageNet datasets with ResNet-18 and VGG-16 architectures.
Empirical results show that, to reach an attack success rate
(ASR) of over 94%, ProFlip requires only 12 bit flips out
of 88 million parameter bits for ResNet-18 with CIFAR-10,
and 15 bit flips for ResNet-18 with ImageNet. Compared to
the SOTA, ProFlip reduces the number of required bits flips
by 28× ∼ 34× while reaching the same or higher ASR.

training-time attack that tampers with model weights by injecting incorrectly labeled data into the training set [7, 28].
Neural Trojan [25, 15, 24] is a targeted attack that manipulates both the model parameters and the inputs (i.e., adding
the trigger). In this work, we focus on Trojan attacks and
aim to design an efficient approach for Trojan insertion
without poisoned training.
A typical neural Trojan attack has two essential subroutines: trigger generation and Trojan insertion [15, 24]. The
trigger is a specific pattern in the input space that controls
Trojan activation (e.g., a white square at the image corner).
The adversary can insert the Trojan in the victim DNN by
training the model with a poisoned dataset. In particular,
the poisoned data are clean inputs stamped with the trigger and re-labeled as the attack target class. Trojan attacks
have two goals: effectiveness and stealthiness. Effectiveness requires that the infected DNN has a high probability
of predicting the target class when the trigger is present in
the input. Stealthiness requires the Trojaned model to produce correct outputs on clean data.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have empowered a
paradigm shift in various real-world applications due to
their unprecedented performance on complex tasks. The deployment of DNNs in safety-critical fields such as biomedical diagnosis, autonomous vehicles, and intelligent transportation [23, 26, 38] renders model security crucial. Prior
works have demonstrated the vulnerability of DNNs against
a diverse set of attacks. For instance, adversarial samples
are strategically crafted inputs that look normal to human
beings while they can mislead the model to produce wrong
outputs during inference [13, 20, 43]. Data poisoning is a

Figure 1: Demonstration of the proposed ProFlip attack.
The top part shows normal inference of a clean model
whose weights are subject to bit flip attacks. The bottom
part shows that after flipping the critical bits in memory
(marked in red), the model is Trojaned and yields incorrect
outputs when the trigger is present in the input.
Existing Trojan attacks assume that the adversary is the
model developer (e.g., cloud server) who has sufficient
computing power for DNN training. The victims are endusers that obtain the pre-trained models from the third-party

7718

