Self-Supervised Vessel Segmentation via Adversarial Learning
Yuxin Ma1 , Yang Hua2 , Hanming Deng1 , Tao Song1 , Hao Wang3 , Zhengui Xue1 ,
Heng Cao4 , Ruhui Ma1 , Haibing Guan1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Queen’s University Belfast
3
Louisiana State University 4 Shanghai General Hospital

Abstract
Vessel segmentation is critically essential for diagnosing
a series of diseases, e.g., coronary artery disease and retinal disease. However, annotating vessel segmentation maps
of medical images is notoriously challenging due to the tiny
and complex vessel structures, leading to insufficient available annotated datasets for existing supervised methods and
domain adaptation methods. The subtle structures and confusing background of medical images further suppress the
efficacy of unsupervised methods. In this paper, we propose
a self-supervised vessel segmentation method via adversarial learning. Our method learns vessel representations by
training an attention-guided generator and a segmentation
generator to simultaneously synthesize fake vessels and segment vessels out of coronary angiograms. To support the
research, we also build the first X-ray angiography coronary vessel segmentation dataset, named XCAD. We evaluate our method extensively on multiple vessel segmentation
datasets, including the XCAD dataset, the DRIVE dataset,
and the STARE dataset. The experimental results show
our method suppresses unsupervised methods significantly
and achieves competitive performance compared with supervised methods and traditional methods.

1. Introduction
As the most common heart disease, coronary artery disease is one of the leading causes of death in the world.
Atherosclerosis in the coronary artery hinders blood from
normally flowing into the heart, eventually leading to a heart
attack. Among various imaging modalities, X-ray angiography is taken as a gold standard for coronary artery disease
diagnosis. As X-ray angiography can quickly display small
vessel branches with a high resolution, it has been widely
utilized in medical diagnosis for determining the presence,
location, degree, and scope of coronary artery stenosis. It is
crucial but challenging to accurately estimate subtle vessel
structures from coronary angiograms. To minimize the ion-

izing radiation exposure of patients and medical personnel,
low-power X-ray is used during X-ray coronary angiography, usually leading to noisy and low-contrast coronary angiograms. As a result, it is difficult to distinguish vessels
from the background artifacts1 that share similar appearances with vessel structures.
During X-ray coronary angiogram acquisition, a special
cardiac catheter is utilized to inject a contrast agent into the
coronary artery. With the contrast agent taking effect, blood
vessels gradually emerge, leaving a sequence of coronary
angiography images under the X-ray. In such a coronary angiography sequence, the first frame with no contrast agent
injected is the mask frame. No vessel is shown in the mask
frame. On the contrary, the frame with a fully injected contrast agent is known as the contrast frame. Note that in
this paper, we use the coronary angiogram to indicate the
contrast frame in particular. Vessels are shown in coronary
angiograms. Our objective is to segment vessels out of the
coronary angiograms.
Existing vessel segmentation methods can be classified
into four main categories: traditional methods [17, 23], supervised methods [8, 25], domain adaptation methods [3,
31], and unsupervised methods [4, 15]. Traditional methods are typically based on predefined rules that require significant expertise and manual model tuning, leading to limited model expressiveness and generality. Supervised methods require a massive amount of annotated data for training, though public large-scale annotated vessel datasets are
practically unavailable. The complex vessel structure consists of numerous tiny branches that easily fade into the
image background artifacts, making the manual annotation
process extremely laborious and time-consuming, even for
professional medical experts. The effectiveness of domain
adaptation methods is largely dependent on the quality of
annotated source domain dataset and constrained by the gap
between the source domain and target domain. Existing unsupervised segmentation methods for natural images, such
1 Note that this paper uses artifacts to represent the factors (e.g., diaphragm, catheter, and bones) making segmentation difficult.

7536

