CondLaneNet: a Top-to-down Lane Detection Framework Based on Conditional
Convolution
Lizhe Liu1
Xiaohao Chen1
Siyu Zhu1
Ping Tan12
1
2
Alibaba Group
Simon Fraser University

Abstract
Modern deep-learning-based lane detection methods are
successful in most scenarios but struggling for lane lines
with complex topologies. In this work, we propose CondLaneNet, a novel top-to-down lane detection framework
that detects the lane instances first and then dynamically
predicts the line shape for each instance. Aiming to resolve lane instance-level discrimination problem, we introduce a conditional lane detection strategy based on conditional convolution and row-wise formulation. Further, we
design the Recurrent Instance Module(RIM) to overcome
the problem of detecting lane lines with complex topologies such as dense lines and fork lines. Benefit from the
end-to-end pipeline which requires little post-process, our
method has real-time efficiency. We extensively evaluate
our method on three benchmarks of lane detection. Results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on all three benchmark datasets. Moreover, our
method has the coexistence of accuracy and efficiency,
e.g. a 78.14 F1 score and 220 FPS on CULane. Our
code is available at https://github.com/aliyun/
conditional-lane-detection.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence technology is increasingly being used in the driving field, which is conducive to autonomous driving and the Advanced Driver Assistance System(ADAS). As a basic problem in autonomous driving,
lane detection plays a vital role in applications such as vehicle real-time positioning, driving route planning, lanekeeping assist, and adaptive cruise control.
Traditional lane detection methods usually rely on handcrafted operators to extract features [24, 43, 13, 17, 15, 1,
16, 33], and then fit the line shape through post-processing
such as Hough transform [24, 43] and Random Sampling
Consensus (RANSAC) [17, 15]. However, traditional methods faile in maintaining robustness in real scene since
the hand-crafted models cannot cope with the diversity
of lane lines in different scenarios [27]. Recently, most

Figure 1. Scenes of lane lines with complex topologies. It is challenging to cope with the scenes such as the dense lines(the first
row) and the fork lines(the second row). Different instances are
represented by different colors in this figure.

studies about lane detection have focused on deep learning [34]. Early deep-learning-based methods detect lane
lines through segmentation [28, 27]. Recently, various
methods such as anchor-based methods [32, 2, 39], rowwise detection methods [30, 29, 41], and parametric prediction methods [31, 25] have been proposed and continue
to refresh the accuracy and efficiency. Although deeplearning-based lane detection methods have made great
progress [42], there are still many challenges.
A common problem for lane detection is instance-level
discrimination. Most lane detection methods [27, 28, 19,
32, 12, 21, 29, 2, 30, 41, 39] predict lane points first and
then aggregate the points into lines. But assigning different points to different lane instances [34] is still a common
challenge. A simple solution is to label the lane lines into
classes of a fixed number (e.g. labeled as 0, 1, 2, 3 if the
maximum lane number is 4) and make a multi-class classification [28, 30, 41, 3]. But the limitation is that only
a predefined, fixed number of lanes can be detected [27].
To overcome this limitation, the post-clustering strategy is
investigated [27, 19]. However, this strategy is struggling
for some cases such as dense lines. Another approach is
anchor-based methods [25, 22, 39]. But it is not flexible to
predict the line shape due to the fixed shape of the anchor.
Another challenge is the detection of lane lines with
complex topologies, such as fork lines which have the same
starting point, and dense lines which are parallel with close
starting points. Such cases are common in driving scenarios, e.g. fork lines usually appear when the number of lanes

3773

