CrossDet: Crossline Representation for Object Detection
Heqian Qiu, Hongliang Li ∗, Qingbo Wu ∗, Jianhua Cui,
Zichen Song, Lanxiao Wang, Minjian Zhang
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
hqqiu@std.uestc.edu.cn, hlli@uestc.edu.cn, qbwu@uestc.edu.cn, 202021011501@std.uestc.edu.cn,
szc.uestc@gmail.com, lanxiao.wang@std.uestc.edu.cn, 202011012218@std.uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection aims to accurately locate and classify
objects in an image, which requires precise object representations. Existing methods usually use rectangular anchor
boxes or a set of points to represent objects. However, these
methods either introduce background noise or miss the continuous appearance information inside the object, and thus
cause incorrect detection results. In this paper, we propose
a novel anchor-free object detection network, called CrossDet, which uses a set of growing cross lines along horizontal and vertical axes as object representations. An object
can be flexibly represented as cross lines in different combinations. It not only can effectively reduce the interference
of noise, but also take into account the continuous object
information, which is useful to enhance the discriminability of object features and find the object boundaries. Based
on the learned cross lines, we propose a crossline extraction module to adaptively capture features of cross lines.
Furthermore, we design a decoupled regression mechanism
to regress the localization along the horizontal and vertical directions respectively, which helps to decrease the optimization difficulty because the optimization space is limited to a specific direction. Our method achieves consistently improvement on the PASCAL VOC and MS-COCO
datasets. The experiment results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Code can be available at:
https://github.com/QiuHeqian/CrossDet.

1. Introduction
Object detection usually relies on object representation
to predict the location and category of objects in an image. Thus, a suitable object representation is key to the
success of object detection. Existing popular object detectors mainly base on two classes of object representations: anchor-based representation and point-based repre∗ Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Different object representations for object detection. (a)
uses rectangular anchor boxes as object representation [12]. (b)
and (c) use single center point [27] and a set of keypoints [30] as
object representation. The red/green boxes are assembled by the
red/green dots. (d) denotes our crossline representation by yellow
lines. Green boxes indicate the correct predict. Red boxes indicate
false predictions.

sentation.
Anchor-based representation methods [1, 3, 8, 13, 15, 18,
21, 23, 26] usually place a set of bounding boxes with predefined size anchors as their basic object representations,
and then regress and classify them based on extracted features by one or several times. However, to ensure a good
recall rate, these methods require to manually design the
hyper-parameters of anchors for new scenarios with different object sizes or aspect ratios. In addition, these methods [1, 3, 8, 23, 26] often extract the whole features inside
anchor. When there are two objects overlapped, it is easy to
be confused because both of them contain the similar features of overlapping areas. For example, the sofa is mistakenly classified the dog in overlapping areas as shown in

3195

