Neural Architecture Search for Joint Human Parsing and Pose Estimation
Dan Zeng1 Yuhang Huang†1 Qian Bao2 Junjie Zhang1 Chi Su3 Wu Liu*2
1
Shanghai University 2 AI Research of JD.com 3 Kingsoft Cloud
dzeng@shu.edu.cn, huangyuhang@shu.edu.cn, baoqian@jd.com
junjie zhang@shu.edu.cn, suchi@kingsoft.com, liuwu1@jd.com

Abstract
Human parsing and pose estimation are crucial for the
understanding of human behaviors. Since these tasks are
closely related, employing one unified model to perform two
tasks simultaneously allows them to benefit from each other.
However, since human parsing is a pixel-wise classification
process while pose estimation is usually a regression task,
it is non-trivial to extract discriminative features for both
tasks while modeling their correlation in the joint learning
fashion. Recent studies have shown that Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has the ability to allocate efficient feature connections for specific tasks automatically. With the
spirit of NAS, we propose to search for an efficient network
architecture (NPPNet) to tackle two tasks at the same time.
On the one hand, to extract task-specific features for the
two tasks and lay the foundation for the further searching
of feature interaction, we propose to search their encoderdecoder architectures, respectively. On the other hand, to
ensure two tasks fully communicate with each other, we
propose to embed NAS units in both multi-scale feature interaction and high-level feature fusion to establish optimal
connections between two tasks. Experimental results on
both parsing and pose estimation benchmark datasets have
demonstrated that the searched model achieves state-of-theart performances on both tasks. 1

1. Introduction
Human parsing and pose estimation are two key tasks for
analyzing human behaviors. Human parsing aims to segment the human body into different semantic regions, while
pose estimation is to locate the keypoints of the human body
and analyze structural information. Visually speaking, these
two tasks are closely related. On the one hand, keypoints are
often included within the different semantic regions, indicates that the semantic information from human parsing can
help locate these points for accurate pose estimation. On the
†This work is done when Yuhang Huang is an intern at AI Research
of JD.com.
* Wu Liu is the corresponding author.
1 The code will be public at https://github.com/GuHuangAI/NPP.

Input

JPPNet [21] MuLA [31]

Ours

GT

Figure 1. The illustration of our motivation. As we can see, manually designed frameworks [21,31] can not improve pose estimation
and human parsing simultaneously. There is an obvious inconsistency between the two tasks, which suggests it is challenging for
manually designed modules to extract task-specific features and
enhance their correlation, e.g., in MuLA [31], some keypoints are
not surrounded by the corresponding semantic parts. This motivates us to search for a better network architecture that allows two
tasks to fully benefit from each other.

other hand, the group of keypoints naturally possesses rich
structural information, which can guide the generation of
semantic parts.
With the advanced learning ability of the deep neural
network, it becomes a general practice to deploy convolutional neural networks (CNN) to tackle these two tasks
[28, 40]. The majority of existing models share a similar
basic encoder-decoder architecture with different learning
objectives. For human parsing, they [26, 36, 44] aim at
mapping the up-sampled output to pixel-wise annotations,
while the ground-truth of pose estimation [6, 30, 42] corresponds to the heatmaps of sparse keypoints. Given the
correlation between two tasks, there are recent developments [21, 31, 41, 46] that attempt to perform joint inference via neural networks from the multi-task learning perspective. These models conduct the representation learning
through one shared [21] or two separate encoder-decoder
structure [31,46], and design the hand-crafted modules [31]
to interact high-level features extracted for two tasks.
However, designing the suitable network architecture
and optimal feature interaction for joint learning is challenging. On the one hand, though the two tasks are visually related, they still possess their own characteristics. The
general solutions for pose estimation focus on aggregating information into small joint areas while human parsing
needs to explore the pixel-wise context information. There-

11385

