Naturalistic Physical Adversarial Patch for Object Detectors
Yu-Chih-Tuan Hu1,2
Bo-Han Kung1
Daniel Stanley Tan1
Jun-Cheng Chen1
Kai-Lung Hua2
Wen-Huang Cheng3
1
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica
2
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology 3 National Yangming Jiaotong University

Abstract
Most prior works on physical adversarial attacks mainly
focus on the attack performance but seldom enforce any
restrictions over the appearance of the generated adversarial patches. This leads to conspicuous and attentiongrabbing patterns for the generated patches which can be
easily identified by humans. To address this issue, we propose a method to craft physical adversarial patches for object detectors by leveraging the learned image manifold of
a pretrained generative adversarial network (GAN) (e.g.,
BigGAN and StyleGAN) upon real-world images. Through
sampling the optimal image from the GAN, our method can
generate natural looking adversarial patches while maintaining high attack performance. With extensive experiments on both digital and physical domains and several
independent subjective surveys, the results show that our
proposed method produces significantly more realistic and
natural looking patches than several state-of-the-art baselines while achieving competitive attack performance. 1

1. Introduction
With the advancement of deep learning technologies,
modern computer vision models can achieve comparable or
even surpassing human performance on tasks such as face
detection [10] and face recognition [10]. Although these
technologies bring convenience to humans by automating
daily routine tasks, they also significantly hurt our privacy
since malicious people could easily utilize them to automatically collect private and sensitive personal information. To
address this issue, some researchers propose to protect people from these threats by leveraging the adversarial examples which can be used to fool deep learning systems by
adding small or imperceptible perturbations to system inputs. Adversarial attacks for deep learning systems can be
categorized by two settings: (1) digital attacks, where deep
1 Code is available at:
https://github.com/aiiu-lab/
Naturalistic-Adversarial-Patch

Figure 1. It shows the crafted adversarial patch generated by the
proposed approach along with others by recent methods (a) [47]
(b) [45] (c) [42] (d) [19] (e) ours. Our patch is more natural looking and less conspicuous than others so it is harder to human observers to identify it.

learning models takes the digital attack images as inputs and
(2) physical attacks, where the models take attack inputs
that are retaken by a camera.
In this work, we focus on the second category due to its
practical use in the real-world setting against the surveillance of various indoor and outdoor cameras around the
world. Adversarial patch is one of most effective physical adversarial examples for this purpose. There are several
works developed in this direction, including [19,42,45,47].
To the best of our knowledge, most of prior works on physical adversarial attacks mainly focus on the attack performance, and increasing adversarial strength of the perturbation is one of the most effective and direct ways for them.
However, this usually leads to conspicuous and attentiongrabbing patterns for the generated patches, which can be
easily identified by human observers. To address this issue,
we propose a method to craft physical adversarial patches
for object detectors by leveraging the learned image manifold of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (e.g., BigGAN [5] and StyleGAN [23, 24]) pretrained on real-world
images. Through sampling images from GANs that minimizes detection score of a target object (e.g., person), our

7848

