Learning Canonical View Representation for 3D Shape Recognition with
Arbitrary Views
Xin Wei1* , Yifei Gong2* , Fudong Wang2 , Xing Sun2 , Jian Sun1
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, 2 Tencent Youtu Lab
wxmath@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {yifeigong,winfredsun}@tencent.com
fudong-wang@whu.edu.cn, jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on recognizing 3D shapes from
arbitrary views, i.e., arbitrary numbers and positions of
viewpoints. It is a challenging and realistic setting for viewbased 3D shape recognition. We propose a canonical view
representation to tackle this challenge. We first transform
the original features of arbitrary views to a fixed number
of view features, dubbed canonical view representation, by
aligning the arbitrary view features to a set of learnable
reference view features using optimal transport. In this way,
each 3D shape with arbitrary views is represented by a fixed
number of canonical view features, which are further aggregated to generate a rich and robust 3D shape representation for shape recognition. We also propose a canonical
view feature separation constraint to enforce that the view
features in canonical view representation can be embedded
into scattered points in a Euclidean space. Experiments on
the ModelNet40, ScanObjectNN, and RGBD datasets show
that our method achieves competitive results under the fixed
viewpoint settings, and significantly outperforms the applicable methods under the arbitrary view setting.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D world is a fundamental problem
in computer vision. One of its central challenges is how
to represent and recognize objects in the 3D space. Recently, many view-based methods [7, 13, 14, 15, 20, 22,
23, 33, 34, 38, 40, 42, 43] were proposed to recognize 3D
shape with multi-view 2D images based on the aggregation
of features learned by deep neural networks. Leveraging
advances in 2D image descriptors (e.g. [18]) and massive
image databases [10], they are among the state-of-the-art
methods for 3D shape recognition.
However, most of these methods [7, 13, 14, 15, 20, 23,
33, 34, 38, 40, 42, 43] focus on settings with a pre-defined
∗ Equal contribution.

(a) Fixed Views

(b) Arbitrary Views
(c)

View features
of shape 1

Reference
View Features

View features
of shape 2

Figure 1. This paper addresses 3D shape recognition with arbitrary
views as shown in (b), which is more challenging and realistic
than the fixed-viewpoint setting in (a). As shown in (c), given
an arbitrary number of unaligned view images, our method learns
canonical view features of a 3D shape aligned to a fixed number
of learnable reference view features using optimal transport.

camera setup where the same set of viewpoints are used
for every object, e.g., Fig. 1(a). In practical applications,
3D objects are often observed from arbitrary views without knowing their precise camera positions. In this work,
we aim to tackle 3D shape recognition with arbitrary views.
The setting can be defined as follows. (i) Views are taken
from arbitrary viewpoints for each object. (ii) Objects have
varying numbers of observation views, e.g., Fig. 1(b).
Compared with the fixed-viewpoint setup, 3D shape
recognition faces new challenges brought by the unaligned
inputs from arbitrary views. It is difficult to robustly aggregate features of structurally unaligned views. Moreover,
representations learned from a typical neural network are
also mutually-unaligned in the feature space, where feature
aggregation could result in a loss of discriminability.
To tackle these challenges, an intuitive motivation is
to recover the inherent alignment for the arbitrary views.
Specifically, if we find a link between the unaligned features
from arbitrary views and a set of virtual reference views
for observing an object, we can transform the features into

407

