FuseFormer: Fusing Fine-Grained Information
in Transformers for Video Inpainting
Rui Liu†∗ Hanming Deng‡∗ Yangyi Huang‡§∗ Xiaoyu Shi† Lewei Lu‡
Wenxiu Sun‡♯ Xiaogang Wang† Jifeng Dai‡ Hongsheng Li†#
†
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong ‡ SenseTime Research
§
Zhejiang University ♯ Tetras.AI # School of CST, Xidian University
{ruiliu@link, xiaoyushi@link, xgwang@ee, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk
{denghanming, huangyangyi, luotto, daijifeng}@sensetime.com
Abstract
Transformer, as a strong and flexible architecture for
modelling long-range relations, has been widely explored
in vision tasks. However, when used in video inpainting
that requires fine-grained representation, existed method
still suffers from yielding blurry edges in detail due to the
hard patch splitting. Here we aim to tackle this problem
by proposing FuseFormer, a Transformer model designed
for video inpainting via fine-grained feature fusion based
on novel Soft Split and Soft Composition operations. The
soft split divides feature map into many patches with given
overlapping interval. On the contrary, the soft composition operates by stitching different patches into a whole feature map where pixels in overlapping regions are summed
up. These two modules are first used in tokenization before Transformer layers and de-tokenization after Transformer layers, for effective mapping between tokens and
features. Therefore, sub-patch level information interaction
is enabled for more effective feature propagation between
neighboring patches, resulting in synthesizing vivid content for hole regions in videos. Moreover, in FuseFormer,
we elaborately insert the soft composition and soft split into the feed-forward network, enabling the 1D linear layers
to have the capability of modelling 2D structure. And, the
sub-patch level feature fusion ability is further enhanced.
In both quantitative and qualitative evaluations, our proposed FuseFormer surpasses state-of-the-art methods. We
also conduct detailed analysis to examine its superiority. Code and pretrained models are available at https:
//github.com/ruiliu-ai/FuseFormer.

∗ The first three authors contribute equally to this work.

Figure 1. Illustration of different patch split/composition strategies
for Transformer model. The top row shows hard split/composition,
based on which the trained model generates rough inpainting results. The bottom row shows soft split/composition, based on
which the trained model generates smooth results due to interaction of features between neighbor patches. Double arrow indicates
the corresponding overlapped regions between adjacent patches.

1. Introduction
Transformer has recently gained increasing attention in
various vision tasks such as classification [8, 42], object detection [28, 47] and image generation [18, 16]. Interestingly, Transformer is suitable to video inpainting, a vision task
that depends on the information propagation between flowing pixels across frames to fill the spatiotemporal holes with
plausible and coherent content in a video clip.
Spatial Temporal Transformer Net (STTN) [43] is the pioneer work for investigating the use of Transformer in video
inpainting. However, its multi-scale variant of self-attention
intertwined with fully convolutional networks makes it hard
to exploit rich experience from other Transformer models
due to large structural differences. On the other hand, re-

14040

