Social NCE: Contrastive Learning of Socially-aware Motion Representations
Yuejiang Liu, Qi Yan, Alexandre Alahi
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Learning socially-aware motion representations is at
the core of recent advances in multi-agent problems, such
as human motion forecasting and robot navigation in
crowds. Despite promising progress, existing representations learned with neural networks still struggle to generalize in closed-loop predictions (e.g., output colliding trajectories). This issue largely arises from the non-i.i.d. nature
of sequential prediction in conjunction with ill-distributed
training data. Intuitively, if the training data only comes
from human behaviors in safe spaces, i.e., from “positive”
examples, it is difficult for learning algorithms to capture
the notion of “negative” examples like collisions. In this
work, we aim to address this issue by explicitly modeling
negative examples through self-supervision: (i) we introduce a social contrastive loss that regularizes the extracted
motion representation by discerning the ground-truth positive events from synthetic negative ones; (ii) we construct
informative negative samples based on our prior knowledge of rare but dangerous circumstances. Our method
substantially reduces the collision rates of recent trajectory
forecasting, behavioral cloning and reinforcement learning algorithms, outperforming state-of-the-art methods on
several benchmarks. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/vita-epfl/social-nce.

1. Introduction
Humans have an instinctive ability to anticipate the future motions of other people while navigating in crowded
spaces. This ability allows us to not only keep a comfortable distance from others but also identify potential dangers
or discomforts ahead of time. However, building predictive
models capable of doing so is challenging. Recent works
have proposed a plethora of neural network-based models
[6, 27, 41, 43, 47, 57, 84, 90, 96] to learn socially-aware
motion representations for multi-agent problems such as
trajectory forecasting [3, 33, 54, 85] and robot navigation
[15, 18, 19]. Yet existing methods still output unacceptable solutions (e.g., collisions) from time to time in closedloop predictions, which raises significant safety concerns
for real-world deployment.

History
Future
Ground truth

Collision

Discomfort

Figure 1: Illustration of social contrastive learning. Our method
promotes the robustness of neural motion models by means of contrastive representation learning combined with negative data augmentation in the multi-agent context.

One key difficulty in learning robust motion representation stems from the common shortage of critical data. Very
often, the training data is only collected from human behaviors in safe scenarios. The lack of near-accident examples poses a significant challenge to the discovery of social norms from data. As a consequence, prediction errors made by the learned model may accumulate over time,
gradually create a discrepancy between the training and test
state distributions, and eventually cause catastrophic errors
[22, 25, 81].
Previous methods attempt to mitigate this issue through
interactive data collections, such as expert queries [26, 53,
60, 82, 92] and additional experiments [12, 40, 48, 77, 97].
Unfortunately, these methods are not only costly and tedious but often impractical for forecasting problems, since
human behaviors can hardly be intervened at scale for data
collection. These shortcomings motivate us to explore an
alternative approach: given a fixed training dataset, can we
learn a robust motion representation by exploiting our prior
knowledge through self-supervision?
To this end, we propose a social contrastive learning
method built with negative data augmentation (Figure 1).
Our main idea is to promote robust representations by learning from the opposites [74]. Intuitively, an effective way
to elucidate the social norms that give rise to the “positive” examples is to explicitly portray the opposite “nega-

15118

