Contrastive Attention Maps for Self-supervised Co-localization
Minsong Ki1

Youngjung Uh2,3

Junsuk Choe4 * Hyeran Byun1,3

1

Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University
Department of Applied Information Engineering, Yonsei University
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sogang University
2

Abstract
The goal of unsupervised co-localization is to locate the
object in a scene under the assumptions that 1) the dataset
consists of only one superclass, e.g., birds, and 2) there
are no human-annotated labels in the dataset. The most
recent method achieves impressive co-localization performance by employing self-supervised representation learning approaches such as predicting rotation. In this paper, we introduce a new contrastive objective directly on
the attention maps to enhance co-localization performance.
Our contrastive loss function exploits rich information of
location, which induces the model to activate the extent
of the object effectively. In addition, we propose a pixelwise attention pooling that selectively aggregates the feature map regarding their magnitudes across channels. Our
methods are simple and shown effective by extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluation, achieving state-of-theart co-localization performances by large margins on four
datasets: CUB-200-2011, Stanford Cars, FGVC-Aircraft,
and Stanford Dogs. Our code will be publicly available online for the research community.

Contrastive
Attention

Pretext labels

Attention
Pooling

Prediction

𝒇(x)

𝒇(x’)

(90 degree)

𝑻(‧)

x

x’

x
Figure 1: Contrastive learning framework for image colocalization. An encoder embeds two views of one image
into feature maps which become attention maps by channelwise pooling. Then we train the encoder by contrastive objective on the attention maps, which preserve signals from
different locations, and by classification objective on the
feature maps for the pretext task.

1. Introduction
Object localization aims to capture the location of the
target object in a given image. Over the past decade, deep
learning approaches have become mainstream in object localization. These methods typically train a convolutional
neural network (CNN) with human-annotated locations in
the form of bounding boxes [24, 29, 30]. This has shown
great performance but has the downside that the location
annotations on all images are too expensive.
To alleviate this, object localization with weaker supervision, such as image-level class labels [43] or dataset-level
superclass label [2, 37], has drawn a lot of attention recently.
* Work done as a research scientist at NAVER AI Lab.

In general, the former is called weakly-supervised object localization (WSOL), whereas we refer to the latter as image
co-localization. This paper focuses on the problem of image co-localization, which aims to locate common objects
in a dataset consisting of only one superclass.
Existing image co-localization methods can be divided
into two categories: multiple instance learning (MIL) and
self-supervised representation learning (SSL). MIL-based
methods [17, 33] firstly generate candidate boxes and then
identify if each box contains the target object using handcrafted features. These approaches require high computational costs for inference, making it difficult to operate in
real-time.

2803

