Tune it the Right Way: Unsupervised Validation of Domain Adaptation
via Soft Neighborhood Density
Kuniaki Saito1 , Donghyun Kim1 , Piotr Teterwak1 , Stan Sclaroff1 , Trevor Darrell2 , and Kate Saenko1,3
1
Boston University, 2 University of California, Berkeley, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
[keisaito,donhk,piotrt,sclaroff,saenko]@bu.edu, trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods can
dramatically improve generalization on unlabeled target
domains. However, optimal hyper-parameter selection is
critical to achieving high accuracy and avoiding negative
transfer. Supervised hyper-parameter validation is not possible without labeled target data, which raises the question: How can we validate unsupervised adaptation techniques in a realistic way? We first empirically analyze existing criteria and demonstrate that they are not very effective for tuning hyper-parameters. Intuitively, a welltrained source classifier should embed target samples of
the same class nearby, forming dense neighborhoods in
feature space. Based on this assumption, we propose
a novel unsupervised validation criterion that measures
the density of soft neighborhoods by computing the entropy of the similarity distribution between points. Our
criterion is simpler than competing validation methods,
yet more effective; it can tune hyper-parameters and the
number of training iterations in both image classification
and semantic segmentation models. The code used for
the paper will be available at https://github.com/
VisionLearningGroup/SND.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks can learn highly discriminative
representations for visual recognition tasks [11, 39, 19, 29,
14], but do not generalize well to out-of-domain data [47].
To improve performance on a new target domain, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to transfer representations from a label-rich source domain without additional
supervision. Recent UDA methods primarily achieve this
through unsupervised learning on the target domain, e.g., by
minimizing the feature distribution shift between source and
target domains [12, 21, 41], classifier confusion [17], clustering [34], and pseudo-label based methods [56]. Promising adaptation results have been demonstrated on image
classification [22, 55, 8, 52, 43], semantic segmentation [16]

Figure 1: In unsupervised domain adaptation, validation is a
significant and unsolved issue. Performance can be sensitive to
hyper-parameters, yet no reliable validation criteria have been presented. In this work, we provide a new criterion, SND, to select
proper hyper-parameters for model validation in UDA. The example shows validation of the ADVENT [50] segmentation model.

and object detection [9] tasks.
However, adaptation methods can be highly sensitive to
hyper-parameters and the number of training iterations. For
example, the adversarial alignment approach is popular in
semantic segmentation [16, 44, 50], but can fail badly without careful tuning of the loss trade-off weight as shown
in Fig. 1. In addition, many methods have other kinds of
hyper-parameters, e.g., defining the concentration of clusters [34], the confidence threshold on target samples [56],
etc. Therefore validation of hyper-parameters is an important problem in UDA, yet it has been largely overlooked. In
UDA, we assume not to have access to labeled target data,
thus, hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) should be done
without using target labels. In this paper, we would like to
pose a question crucial to making domain adaptation more
practical: How can we reliably validate adaptation methods
in an unsupervised way?
Unsupervised validation is very challenging in practice,
thus many methods do HPO in an ineffective, or even unfair, way. Evaluating accuracy (risk) in the source domain
is popular [12, 41, 5, 40, 22, 5, 17, 51, 53], but this will not

9184

