Variational Attention: Propagating Domain-Specific Knowledge for
Multi-Domain Learning in Crowd Counting
Binghui Chen*, Zhaoyi Yan∗1 , Ke Li, Pengyu Li, Biao Wang, Wangmeng Zuo1†, Lei Zhang2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
chenbinghui@bupt.cn, yanzhaoyi@outlook.com, like1990@bupt.edu.cn, lipengyu007@gmail.com
wangbiao225@foxmail.com,wmzuo@hit.edu.cn,cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In crowd counting, due to the problem of laborious labelling, it is perceived intractability of collecting a new
large-scale dataset which has plentiful images with large
diversity in density, scene, etc. Thus, for learning a general
model, training with data from multiple different datasets
might be a remedy and be of great value. In this paper, we
resort to the multi-domain joint learning and propose a simple but effective Domain-specific Knowledge Propagating
Network (DKPNet) for unbiasedly learning the knowledge
from multiple diverse data domains at the same time. It is
mainly achieved by proposing the novel Variational Attention(VA) technique for explicitly modeling the attention distributions for different domains. And as an extension to VA,
Intrinsic Variational Attention(InVA) is proposed to handle
the problems of over-lapped domains and sub-domains. Extensive experiments have been conducted to validate the superiority of our DKPNet over several popular datasets, including ShanghaiTech A/B, UCF-QNRF and NWPU.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting is a challenging problem since it suffers
from multiple actual issues behind data distributions, such
as high variability in scales, density, occlusions, perspective
distortions, background scenarios, etc. A direct solution to
mitigate these issues is to collect a large-scale dataset with
abundant data variations like ImageNet[7], so as to encourage the learned model to be more robust and general. However, collecting such a large-scale dataset with rich diversity
for crowd-counting training is intractable due to the difficulty in human-labeling. Specifically, in crowd counting,
due to the limitation of various conditions, images collected
by a research group might only contain certain types of variations and are limited in numbers. For example, as shown in
Fig.1, one can observe that there are large variations in data
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1: Data distribution comparison between ShanghaiTech
[64], UCF-QNRF [15] and NWPU [54]. ShanghaiTech A is
mainly composed of congested images, QNRF is of highlycongested samples and have more background scenarios, NWPU
covers a much larger variety of data distributions due to density,
perspective, background, etc, while ShanghaiTech B prefers low
density and ordinary street-based scenes.

distributions across different datasets. Images in ShanghaiTech A(SHA)[64] tend to show congested crowds, and
those in UCF-QNRF(QNRF)[15] are more likely to depict
highly-congested crowds and have more background scenarios, and those in NWPU[54] have much more diversities in scales, density, background, etc. In contrast, samples
within ShanghaiTech B(SHB)[64] just prefer low density
crowds and the ordinary street-based scenes. Considering
the aforementioned facts, in order to learn a general and
robust estimating model for correct density prediction, this
paper resorts to multi-domain learning which aims to solve
the same or similar problem with multiple datasets across
different domains1 simultaneously by utilizing all the data
these domains provide. In other words, multi-domain learning gives chances of using relatively abundant data variations coming from different datasets for learning a general
and robust density estimating model.
However, in crowd counting, an interesting phenomenon
can be observed when jointly training with multiple different datasets. As shown in Tab.1, if under the supervision of
the 3-joint of SHA, SHB and QNRF, the deep model prefers
to only improve the performances on SHA and QNRF,
while sacrificing that on SHB (5% performance drop ). Actually, this kind of phenomenon (i.e. biased/partial learning)
1 Commonly, a domain often refers to a data set where samples follow
the similar or same underlying data distribution[57].

16065

