ISD: Self-Supervised Learning by Iterative Similarity Distillation
Ajinkya Tejankar1, * Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani1, * Vipin Pillai1
1 University of Maryland, Baltimore County

Abstract
Recently, contrastive learning has achieved great results
in self-supervised learning, where the main idea is to pull
two augmentations of an image (positive pairs) closer compared to other random images (negative pairs). We argue
that not all negative images are equally negative. Hence,
we introduce a self-supervised learning algorithm where we
use a soft similarity for the negative images rather than a
binary distinction between positive and negative pairs. We
iteratively distill a slowly evolving teacher model to the student model by capturing the similarity of a query image to
some random images and transferring that knowledge to
the student. Specifically, our method should handle unbalanced and unlabeled data better than existing contrastive
learning methods, because the randomly chosen negative
set might include many samples that are semantically similar to the query image. In this case, our method labels them
as highly similar while standard contrastive methods label
them as negatives. Our method achieves comparable results
to the state-of-the-art models. Our code is available here:
https://github.com/UMBCvision/ISD.

1. Introduction
We can view the recent crop of SSL methods as iterative self-distillation where there is a teacher and a student.
Both teacher and student improve simultaneously while the
teacher is evolving more slowly (running average) compared to the student: (1) In the case of contrastive methods
e.g. MoCo [20], we classify images to positive and negative pairs in the binary form. (2) In the case of clustering
methods (DC-v2 [8], SwAV [8], SeLA [50]), the student
predicts the quantized representations from the teacher. (3)
In the case of BYOL [18], the student simply regresses the
teacher’s embeddings vector. Here, we introduce a novel
method using similarity based distillation to transfer the
knowledge from the teacher to the student. We argue that
our method is more regularized compared to prior work and
* Equal contribution

2 University of Bern

Paolo Favaro2

Hamed Pirsiavash1,3

3 University of California, Davis

improves the quality of the features in transfer learning.
In the standard contrastive setting, e.g., MoCo [20], there
is a binary distinction between positive and negative pairs,
but in practice, many negative pairs may be from the same
category as the positive one. Thus, forcing the model to
classify them as negative is misleading. This can be more
important when the unlabeled training data is unbalanced,
for example, when a large portion of images are from a
small number of categories. Such scenario can happen in
applications like self-driving cars, where most of the data is
just repetitive data captured from a high-way scene with a
couple of cars in it. In such cases, the standard contrastive
learning methods will try to learn features to distinguish two
instances of the most frequent category that are in a negative
pair, which may not be helpful for the down-stream task of
understanding rare cases.
We are interested in relaxing the binary classification of
contrastive learning with soft labeling, where the teacher
network calculates the similarity of the query image with respect to a set of anchor points in the memory bank, converts
that into a probability distribution over neighboring examples, and then transfers that knowledge to the student, so
that the student also mimics the same neighborhood similarity. In the experiments, we show that our method is competitive with SOTA self-supervised methods on ImageNet and
show an improved accuracy when trained on unbalanced,
unlabeled data (for which we use a subset of ImageNet).
Our method is different from BYOL [18] in that we
are comparing the query image with other random images
rather than only with a different augmentation of the same
query image. We believe our method can be seen as a more
relaxed version of BYOL. Instead of imposing that the embedding of the query image should not change at all due
to an augmentation (as done in BYOL), we are allowing
the embedding to vary as long as its neighborhood similarity does not change. In other words, the augmentation
should not change the similarity of the image compared to
its neighboring images. This relaxation lets self-supervised
learning focus on what matters most in learning rich features rather than forcing an unnecessary constraint of no
change at all, which is difficult to achieve.

9609

