GRF: Learning a General Radiance Field for 3D Representation and Rendering
Alex Trevithick
UC San Diego, University of Oxford

Bo Yang
vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

atrevithick@ucsd.edu

bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
We present a simple yet powerful neural network that implicitly represents and renders 3D objects and scenes only
from 2D observations. The network models 3D geometries
as a general radiance field, which takes a set of 2D images
with camera poses and intrinsics as input, constructs an internal representation for each point of the 3D space, and
then renders the corresponding appearance and geometry
of that point viewed from an arbitrary position. The key to
our approach is to learn local features for each pixel in 2D
images and to then project these features to 3D points, thus
yielding general and rich point representations. We additionally integrate an attention mechanism to aggregate pixel
features from multiple 2D views, such that visual occlusions
are implicitly taken into account. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method can generate high- quality and
realistic novel views for novel objects, unseen categories
and challenging real- world scenes.

1. Introduction
Understanding the precise 3D structure of a real- world
environment and realistically re- rendering it from free viewpoints is a key enabler for many critical tasks, ranging
from robotic manipulation to augmented reality. Classic
approaches to recover the 3D geometry mainly include the
structure from motion (SfM) [34] and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [3] pipelines. However, they
can only reconstruct sparse and discrete 3D point clouds
which are unable to contain geometric details.
The recent advances in deep neural networks have
yielded rapid progress in 3D modeling. Most of them focus on the explicit 3D shape representations such as voxel
grids [7], point clouds [10], and triangle meshes [50]. However, these representations are discrete and sparse, limiting
the recovered 3D structures to extremely low spatial resolution. In addition, these networks usually require large- scale
3D shapes for supervision, resulting in the trained models
over- fitting particular datasets and lacking generalization to
novel geometries.

Seen
Categories

GRF
Unseen
Categories

Novel View Rendering

Figure 1: A single model of our GRF infers high- quality
novel views for new objects of seen and unseen categories,
demonstrating its strong capability for 3D representation
and rendering.
Encoding geometries into multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs) [27, 35] recently emerges as a promising direction
in 3D reconstruction from 2D images. Its key advantage is
the ability to model 3D structures continuously instead of
discretely, achieving unlimited spatial resolution in theory.
However, many of these methods require 3D geometry
for supervision to learn the 3D shapes from images. By
introducing a recurrent neural network based renderer,
SRNs [45] is among the early work to learn implicit
surface representations only from 2D images, but it renders
over- smoothed images without details. Alternatively, by
leveraging the volume rendering to synthesize new views
with 2D supervision, the very recent NeRF [29] directly
encodes the 3D structure into a radiance field via MLPs,
achieving an unprecedented level of fidelity.
Nevertheless, NeRF has two major limitations: 1) since
3D content is encoded into the weights of an MLP, the
trained network (i.e., a learned radiance field) can only represent a single structure, and is unable to generalize across
novel geometries; and 2) because the shape and appearance
of each spatial 3D location along a light ray is only optimized by individual pixel RGBs, the learned representations of that location do not have rich geometric patterns,
resulting in less photo- realistic rendered images.
In this paper, we propose a general radiance field (GRF),
a simple yet powerful neural network that builds upon NeRF
[29], overcoming these two limitations. Our GRF takes a

15182

