Enhanced Boundary Learning for Glass-like Object Segmentation
Hao He1,2∗, Xiangtai Li3∗ , Guangliang Cheng4 ,6 , Jianping Shi4 ,
Yunhai Tong3 , Gaofeng Meng1,2,5 , Véronique Prinet1 , LuBin Weng1 ,
1
2

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), Peking University
4

SenseTime Group Research 5 Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HK Institute of Science & Innovation, CAS 6 Shanghai AI Lab
Email:

hehao2019@ia.ac.cn, lxtpku@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Glass-like objects such as windows, bottles, and mirrors
exist widely in the real world. Sensing these objects has
many applications, including robot navigation and grasping. However, this task is very challenging due to the arbitrary scenes behind glass-like objects. This paper aims
to solve the glass-like object segmentation problem via enhanced boundary learning. In particular, we first propose a
novel refined differential module that outputs finer boundary cues. We then introduce an edge-aware point-based
graph convolution network module to model the global
shape along the boundary. We use these two modules to design a decoder that generates accurate and clean segmentation results, especially on the object contours. Both modules are lightweight and effective: they can be embedded
into various segmentation models. In extensive experiments
on three recent glass-like object segmentation datasets, including Trans10k, MSD, and GDD, our approach establishes new state-of-the-art results. We also illustrate the
strong generalization properties of our method on three
generic segmentation datasets, including Cityscapes, BDD,
and COCO Stuff. Code and models will be available for
further research.

1. Introduction
Glass-like objects widely exist in the real world: bottles,
windows, and mirrors are made of glass. They are mostly
transparent, often amorphous solid. Sensing these objects
is useful for many applications. For example, robots need
to avoid fragile objects (e.g., glasses, vases, and mirrors)
during their navigation. These objects differ from others in
that: (1) they do not have a fixed pattern, their shape often
vary, (2) because of their transparent nature, they are mostly
∗ Equal Contribution. Corresponding to: LuBin Weng, Guangliang
Cheng

Image

Ground Truth Boundary

Ground Truth Mask

Point Rend Boundary

Translab Boundary

EBLNet Boundary

Point Rend Result

Translab Result

EBLNet Result

Figure 1: Illustration of glass-like object segmentation. Row one
gives the input image and ground truth. Row two shows the comparison results on the boundary. Row three compares the final segmentation results. Our method (EBLNet) works the best among
them [24, 55].

confounded with the surrounding background, the appearance of their inner region varying according to the scene, (3)
not all glass regions are salient, sometimes there are some
occlusions or reflections on it. These problems make such
glass-like object segmentation a difficult task. Current stateof-the-art semantic segmentation models [66, 7, 13] and
salient object detection methods [35, 63] are significantly
challenged. Similarly, though previous works on boundary
detection [56, 62, 11] achieve remarkable results on traditional benchmarks [47, 1], they can not work well on glasslike object scenarios due to the confounding appearance of
the object’s inner and outer parts. Fig. 1 illustrates a complex example for glass segmentation.
To address the above issues, the very first step is to

15859

