RPVNet: A Deep and Efficient Range-Point-Voxel Fusion Network for LiDAR
Point Cloud Segmentation
Jianyun Xu1 * Ruixiang Zhang1,2 * Jian Dou1 Yushi Zhu1
Jie Sun1 Shiliang Pu1†
1
Hikvision Research Institute 2 Zhejiang University
{xujianyun, zhangruixiang7, doujian, zhuyushi, sunjie, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Point clouds can be represented in many forms (views),
typically, point-based sets, voxel-based cells or rangebased images(i.e., panoramic view). The point-based view
is geometrically accurate, but it is disordered, which makes
it difficult to find local neighbors efficiently. The voxelbased view is regular, but sparse, and computation grows
cubicly when voxel resolution increases. The range-based
view is regular and generally dense, however spherical projection makes physical dimensions distorted. Both voxeland range-based views suffer from quantization loss, especially for voxels when facing large-scale scenes. In order to
utilize different view’s advantages and alleviate their own
shortcomings in fine-grained segmentation task, we propose
a novel range-point-voxel fusion network, namely RPVNet.
In this network, we devise a deep fusion framework with
multiple and mutual information interactions among these
three views, and propose a gated fusion module (termed as
GFM), which can adaptively merge the three features based
on concurrent inputs. Moreover, the proposed RPV interaction mechanism is highly efficient, and we summarize it to
a more general formulation. By leveraging this efficient interaction and relatively lower voxel resolution, our method
is also proved to be more efficient. Finally, we evaluated
the proposed model on two large-scale datasets, i.e., SemanticKITTI and nuScenes, and it shows state-of-the-art
performance on both of them. Note that, our method currently ranks 1st on SemanticKITTI leaderboard without any
extra tricks.

1. Introduction
3D computer vision is receiving more and more attention due to its wide range of applications, such as AR/VR,
* Equal contribution. The first two authors are listed in the alphabetical
order. † Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (Grant No.2020AAA010400X).

(a) Point-based: disordered

(b) Voxel-based: sparse, quantization loss

(c) Range-based: physical dimensions distorted

Figure 1. All three views have shortcomings. (a) point-based: the
points are irregular, which makes finding the neighbors of a point
inefficient. (b) voxel-based: voxelization brings quantization loss,
and the computation grows cubicly when resolution increases. (c)
range-based: range-image distorts physical dimensions because of
spherical projection.

robotics and autonomous driving. In this paper, we aim
to improve the performance of semantic segmentation in
driving scenario, so as to provide high-quality point-wise
perception of the entire 3D scene. Collected by the Light
Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensors, 3D data usually
comes in the format of point clouds. And there are several
common forms (views) to represent it along with some specific preprocesses.
Conventionally, researchers rasterize the point cloud into
voxel cells, as depicted in Figure 1(b), and process them
using 3D volumetric convolutions [11, 28]. With voxels de-

16024

