Searching for Two-Stream Models in Multivariate Space for Video Recognition
Xinyu Gong†‡ *, Heng Wang† , Zheng Shou† , Matt Feiszli † , Zhangyang Wang‡ , Zhicheng Yan††
†
Facebook AI, ‡ The University of Texas at Austin
79

Conventional video models rely on a single stream to
capture the complex spatial-temporal features. Recent work
on two-stream video models, such as SlowFast network and
AssembleNet, prescribe separate streams to learn complementary features, and achieve stronger performance. However, manually designing both streams as well as the inbetween fusion blocks is a daunting task, requiring to explore a tremendously large design space. Such manual exploration is time-consuming and often ends up with suboptimal architectures when computational resources are
limited and the exploration is insufficient. In this work, we
present a pragmatic neural architecture search approach,
which is able to search for two-stream video models in giant
spaces efficiently. We design a multivariate search space,
including 6 search variables to capture a wide variety of
choices in designing two-stream models. Furthermore, we
propose a progressive search procedure, by searching for
the architecture of individual streams, fusion blocks and
attention blocks one after the other. We demonstrate twostream models with significantly better performance can be
automatically discovered in our design space. Our searched
two-stream models, namely Auto-TSNet, consistently outperform other models on standard benchmarks. On Kinetics, compared with the SlowFast model, our Auto-TSNet-L
model reduces FLOPS by nearly 11× while achieving the
same accuracy 78.9%. On Something-Something-V2, AutoTSNet-M improves the accuracy by at least 2% over other
methods which use less than 50 GFLOPS per video.

1. Introduction
Video recognition requires to learn both spatial and temporal features, which is arguably more challenging than
image recognition. Many efforts have been made to extend single-stream image architectures for video recognition, such as C3D [32], I3D [2], S3D [45], R(2+1)D [34],
TSN [37], and TSM [16]. However, such single-stream
models often underperform two-stream models where each
* Work done during an internship at Facebook AI.
† Correspondence to Zhicheng Yan <zyan3@fb.com>.

Video Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Abstract

78
77
76
Auto-TSNet (Ours)

75

TSM

74

SlowFast
X3D

73

VoV3D

72

A3D-SF
EfficientNet-3D

71
65

650
GFLOPs per video

6500

Figure 1: Results on Kinetics-400. Comparing the FLOPs
and accuracy with state-of-the-art models, our Auto-TSNet
models achieve better accuracy-to-complexity trade-off.
For a fair comparison, we report the FLOPs for each video
at inference time, taking into account the different number
of views used by each method.
stream takes a separate input and learns spatial-temporal
representations that are complementary to each other [29, 9,
6]. In the pioneering two-stream ConvNet [29], a separate
temporal stream is added which takes multi-frame optical
flow as input to better learn temporal information. Recently,
SlowFast network [9] adds a fast pathway, which operates
at a high frame rate, and captures temporal information at a
finer granularity.
Compared with the single-stream model, the number
of design choices grows exponentially for the two-stream
models as we need to take into account the additional complexity from the second stream, the feature fusion between
the streams. Prior hand-crafted two-stream models mitigate such challenges by largely reusing existing singlestream architectures, and only explore a limited number of
customized design choices for each stream. For example,
in two-stream ConvNet [29], the second temporal stream
shares the same architecture as the spatial stream, which
doubles the overall computational cost of the model. In
the SlowFast network [9], the fast pathway only differs
from the slow pathway by using 1D temporal convolutions
and uniformly reducing the feature channels to balance the
accuracy-to-complexity (ATC) trade-off. We hypothesize

8033

