Stochastic Transformer Networks with Linear Competing Units: Application to
end-to-end SL Translation
Andreas Voskou* 1 , Konstantinos P. Panousis1 , Dimitrios Kosmopoulos2 ,
Dimitris N. Metaxas3 , and Sotirios Chatzis1
1

Cyprus University of Technology, 2 University of Patras, 3 Rutgers University, New Jersey

Abstract
Automating sign language translation (SLT) is a challenging real-world application. Despite its societal importance, though, research progress in the field remains rather
poor. Crucially, existing methods that yield viable performance necessitate the availability of laborious to obtain
gloss sequence groundtruth. In this paper, we attenuate
this need, by introducing an end-to-end SLT model that does
not entail explicit use of glosses; the model only needs text
groundtruth. This is in stark contrast to existing end-toend models that use gloss sequence groundtruth, either in
the form of a modality that is recognized at an intermediate model stage, or in the form of a parallel output process,
jointly trained with the SLT model. Our approach constitutes a Transformer network with a novel type of layers that
combines: (i) local winner-takes-all (LWTA) layers with
stochastic winner sampling, instead of conventional ReLU
layers, (ii) stochastic weights with posterior distributions
estimated via variational inference, and (iii) a weight compression technique at inference time that exploits estimated
posterior variance to perform massive, almost lossless compression. We demonstrate that our approach can reach the
currently best reported BLEU-4 score on the PHOENIX
2014T benchmark, but without making use of glosses for
model training, and with a memory footprint reduced by
more than 70%.

1. Introduction
The Sign Languages (SLs) are the native languages of
the Deaf and therefore they are the main communication
means within the Deaf communities. The SLs are rich visual languages, that convey information through multiple
modalities, which are of complementary nature. Specifically, SLs utilize both manual (hand shape, movement and
* ai.voskou@edu.cut.ac.cy

pose), as well as non-manual modalities (e.g., facial expressions, lip movements, head movements, shoulders and
torso), to convey salient meanings [30].
Exploiting the latest advances in computer vision and
machine learning to facilitate the communication of SLspeakers with SL non-speakers is an endeavor of high potential impact to the livelihoods of the Deaf. Automating
the process of converting SL video to written language is
the goal of SLT (e.g., [3, 5, 4, 37, 25, 27]). This has proven
to be a hard task for computer vision algorithms, as a natural consequence of the syntax, of the complex entailed gestures, and of the multitude of concurrent modalities that are
combined to convey a unique meaning.
Due to these challenges, the computer vision community
has traditionally focused on recognizing sequences of sign
glosses. These are natural language words that attempt to
encode the meaning of SL signs, forming a minimal dictionary of indicative lexical items. Thus, the combination
of glosses pertaining to some SL video does not constitute
translation in natural language; yet, it can help a non-SL
speaker get a feeling of what the SL speaker is talking about.
The process of pinpointing glosses in SL videos is usually
referred to as sign language recognition (SLR). This distinction is important, as the grammar and the structure of
sign and spoken languages are very different. These differences are reflected in the outcome of SLR, whereby there
is no simple way of associating recognized glosses to actual words/phrases in natural language. This renders SLR
outcomes of limited usefulness in real-world applications.
In an effort to alleviate the limited usefulness of SLR
while, at the same time, improving the translation quality of
SLT systems, several researchers have recently considered
methods that combine SLR with SLT [3, 5, 37, 4]. Specifically, existing methods choose among two alternatives: (i)
perform SLR and then translate the sequence of detected
glosses into natural language (S2G2T); and (ii) train a multitask Deep learning model that jointly performs SLR and

11946

