Learning Icosahedral Spherical Probability Map Based on
Bingham Mixture Model for Vanishing Point Estimation
Haoang Li1, * Kai Chen1, * Pyojin Kim2 Kuk-Jin Yoon3 Zhe Liu4 Kyungdon Joo5,† Yun-Hui Liu1,†
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3

KAIST, South Korea

4

2

Sookmyung Women’s University, South Korea

University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

5

UNIST, South Korea

Abstract
Existing vanishing point (VP) estimation methods rely
on pre-extracted image lines and/or prior knowledge of the
number of VPs. However, in practice, this information may
be insufficient or unavailable. To solve this problem, we
propose a network that treats a perspective image as input
and predicts a spherical probability map of VP. Based on
this map, we can detect all the VPs. Our method is reliable
thanks to four technical novelties. First, we leverage the
icosahedral spherical representation to express our probability map. This representation provides uniform pixel distribution, and thus facilitates estimating arbitrary positions
of VPs. Second, we design a loss function that enforces
the antipodal symmetry and sparsity of our spherical probability map to prevent over-fitting. Third, we generate the
ground truth probability map that reasonably expresses the
locations and uncertainties of VPs. This map unnecessarily peaks at noisy annotated VPs, and also exhibits various
anisotropic dispersions. Fourth, given a predicted probability map, we detect VPs by fitting a Bingham mixture model.
This strategy can robustly handle close VPs and provide the
confidence level of VP useful for practical applications. Experiments showed that our method achieves the best compromise between generality, accuracy, and efficiency, compared with state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Vanishing point (VP) is the intersection of two image
lines whose corresponding 3D lines are parallel. VP has
various applications such as scene understanding [12], camera orientation estimation [14] and 3D reconstruction [13].
While VP estimation has been widely studied, existing approaches have two main limitations. First, numerous methods [25, 24, 22, 33, 1, 18] rely on pre-extracted image lines,
but they are sensitive to the number and quality of lines. For
example, given a small number of lines, a method may ne* Haoang Li and Kai Chen contributed equally to this work.
† Kyungdon Joo and Yun-Hui Liu are corresponding authors.

Outlier

Missed

Missed

(a) Ground Truth (b) Result of [22] (c) Result of [33] (d) Result of [25]
Input Image

One Pixel

Probability

Predicted
Map

Detected DD

Ground Truth
VP
Network

Ground Truth
DD

Camera
Center

(e) Our Input Image

(f) Our Output Map and DDs

Figure 1. (a) Four ground truth VPs are associated with red, green,
blue and yellow line clusters, respectively (we have filtered out
short lines). (b) [22] neglects a VP associated with dotted cyan
lines due to insufficient lines. (c) [33] mistakenly detects a VP associated with solid cyan outliers. (d) [25] neglects a VP associated
with dotted cyan lines due to the assumption of three orthogonal
VPs. (e, f) We reformulate VP estimation as DD computation.
Given a perspective image, our network predicts a spherical probability map of DD. Based on this map, we can detect all the DDs.

glect some VPs (see Figs. 1(a) and 1(b)). Moreover, given
several lines corrupted by outliers, e.g., shadow boundaries,
a method may mistakenly detect VPs (see Figs. 1(a) and
1(c)). Second, many methods [4, 39, 25, 24, 41] rely on
prior knowledge of the number of VPs. They typically assume three orthogonal VPs in Manhattan world [9], and
thus neglect partial VPs or result in redundant detection in
non-Manhattan scenes [30, 38] (see Figs. 1(a) and 1(d)).
While recent approaches [15, 22, 23, 18] can automatically
determine the number of VPs, they rely on image lines.
To overcome the above limitations, we propose the first
VP estimation method that is independent of image lines
and also can automatically determine the number of VPs.
Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1(e), the connection between
a VP and camera center is aligned to a dominant direction
(DD). Compared with VP that may be extremely far from

5661

