Conformer: Local Features Coupling Global Representations
for Visual Recognition
Zhiliang Peng1

Wei Huang1 Shanzhi Gu3 Lingxi Xie2 Yaowei Wang3
Jianbin Jiao1 Qixiang Ye1,3 *
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Huawei Inc.
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

{pengzhiliang19, huangwei19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
198808xc@gmail.com

Abstract
Within Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), the convolution operations are good at extracting local features
but experience difficulty to capture global representations.
Within visual transformer, the cascaded self-attention modules can capture long-distance feature dependencies but unfortunately deteriorate local feature details. In this paper,
we propose a hybrid network structure, termed Conformer,
to take advantage of convolutional operations and selfattention mechanisms for enhanced representation learning. Conformer roots in the Feature Coupling Unit (FCU),
which fuses local features and global representations under
different resolutions in an interactive fashion. Conformer
adopts a concurrent structure so that local features and
global representations are retained to the maximum extent.
Experiments show that Conformer, under the comparable
parameter complexity, outperforms the visual transformer
(DeiT-B) by 2.3% on ImageNet. On MSCOCO, it outperforms ResNet-101 by 3.7% and 3.6% mAPs for object detection and instance segmentation, respectively, demonstrating
the great potential to be a general backbone network. Code
is available at github.com/pengzhiliang/Conformer.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [29, 37, 40, 19,
48, 22] have significantly advanced computer vision tasks
such as image classification, object detection, and instance
segmentation. This largely attributes to the convolution operation, which collects local features in a hierarchical fashion as powerful image representations. Despite of the advantage upon local feature extraction, CNNs experience difficulty to capture global representations, e.g., long-distance
* Corresponding author

{gushzh, wangyw}@pcl.ac.cn

{jiaojb, qxye}@ucas.ac.cn

relationships among visual elements, which are often critical for high-level computer visual tasks. An intuitive solution is enlarging the receptive field, which however could
require more intensive yet damaging pooling operations.
Recently, the transformer architecture [42] has been introduced to visual tasks [16, 47, 41, 51, 8, 9, 3, 55, 28].
The ViT method [16] constructs a sequence of tokens by
splitting each image to patches with positional embeddings and applies cascaded transformer blocks to extract
parameterized vectors as visual representations. Thanks
to the self-attention mechanism and Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP) structure, the visual transformer reflects complex
spatial transforms and long-distance feature dependencies,
which constitute global representations. Unfortunately, visual transformers are observed ignoring local feature details
which decreases the discriminability between background
and foreground, Figs. 1(c) and (g). Improved visual transformers [16, 51] have proposed a tokenization module or
leveraged CNN feature maps as input tokens to capture feature neighboring information. Nevertheless, the problem
about how to precisely embed local features and global representations to each other remains.
In this paper, we propose a dual network structure,
termed Conformer, with the aim to couple CNN-based local features with transformer-based global representations
for enhanced representation learning. Conformer consists
of a CNN branch and a transformer branch which respectively follow the design of ResNet [19] and ViT [16]. The
two branches form a comprehensive combination of local
convolution blocks, self-attention modules, and MLP units.
During training, the cross entropy losses are used to supervise both the CNN and transformer branches to couple
CNN-style and transformer-style features.
Considering the feature misalignment between CNN and
transformer features, the Feature Coupling Unit (FCU) is
designed as the bridge. On the one hand, to fuse the two-

367

