NAS-OoD: Neural Architecture Search for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Haoyue Bai
The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology

Fengwei Zhou
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Lanqing Hong
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

zhoufengwei@huawei.com

honglanqing@huawei.com

hbaiaa@cse.ust.hk

Nanyang Ye *
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn

S.-H. Gary Chan
The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology

Zhenguo Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
li.zhenguo@huawei.com

gchan@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Recent advances on Out-of-Distribution (OoD) generalization reveal the robustness of deep learning models
against distribution shifts. However, existing works focus
on OoD algorithms, such as invariant risk minimization,
domain generalization, or stable learning, without considering the influence of deep model architectures on OoD generalization, which may lead to sub-optimal performance.
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods search for architecture based on its performance on the training data,
which may result in poor generalization for OoD tasks. In
this work, we propose robust Neural Architecture Search for
OoD generalization (NAS-OoD), which optimizes the architecture with respect to its performance on generated OoD
data by gradient descent. Specifically, a data generator is
learned to synthesize OoD data by maximizing losses computed by different neural architectures, while the goal for
architecture search is to find the optimal architecture parameters that minimize the synthetic OoD data losses. The
data generator and the neural architecture are jointly optimized in an end-to-end manner, and the minimax training
process effectively discovers robust architectures that generalize well for different distribution shifts. Extensive experimental results show that NAS-OoD achieves superior
performance on various OoD generalization benchmarks
with deep models having a much fewer number of parameters. In addition, on a real industry dataset, the proposed
NAS-OoD method reduces the error rate by more than 70%
compared with the state-of-the-art method, demonstrating
the proposed method’s practicality for real applications.

* Nanyang Ye is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. NAS-OoD performs significantly better than existing
OoD generalization baselines in terms of test accuracy and network parameter numbers. The upper left points are better than
lower right ones because they have higher test accuracy and lower
parameter numbers.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have encountered significant performance drop in Out-of-Distribution (OoD) scenarios [4,
26], where test data come from a distribution different from
that of the training data. With their growing use in realworld applications in which mismatches of test and training data distributions are often observed [25], extensive efforts have been devoted to improving generalization ability [30, 3, 20, 5]. Risk regularization methods [3, 1, 41]
aim to learn invariant representations across different training environments by imposing different invariant risk regularization. Domain generalization methods [30, 31, 9, 48]
learn models from multiple domains such that they can generalize well to unseen domains. Stable learning [27, 28, 20]
focuses on identifying stable and causal features for predictions. Existing works, however, seldom consider the effects

8320

