VLGrammar: Grounded Grammar Induction of Vision and Language
Yining Hong1 , Qing Li1 , Song-Chun Zhu2,3,4 , Siyuan Huang1
1
University of California, Los Angeles
2
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence, 3 Tsinghua University, 4 Peking University

Abstract
chair

Cognitive grammar suggests that the acquisition of language grammar is grounded within visual structures. While
grammar is an essential representation of natural language,
it also exists ubiquitously in vision to represent the hierarchical part-whole structure. In this work, we study
grounded grammar induction of vision and language in a
joint learning framework. Specifically, we present VLGrammar, a method that uses compound probabilistic contextfree grammars (compound PCFGs) to induce the language
grammar and the image grammar simultaneously. We propose a novel contrastive learning framework to guide the
joint learning of both modules. To provide a benchmark for
the grounded grammar induction task, we collect a largescale dataset, PART I T, which contains human-written sentences that describe part-level semantics for 3D objects.
Experiments on the PART I T dataset show that VLGrammar outperforms all baselines in image grammar induction
and language grammar induction. The learned VLGrammar naturally benefits related downstream tasks. Specifically, it improves the image unsupervised clustering accuracy by 30%, and performs well in image retrieval and
text retrieval. Notably, the induced grammar shows superior
generalizability by easily generalizing to unseen categories.
Code and pre-trained models are released at https://
github.com/evelinehong/VLGrammar.

1. Introduction
Natural and man-made dynamical systems tend to have
a nested multi-scale organization, which might be a general
property of all physical and biological systems. According
to [37], building complex stable systems requires the reuse of stable sub-systems that can be assembled to build
larger systems. Therefore, exploring the low-dimensional
structures in sensory data is critical for understanding the
world and helping the design, interpretation, and generalization of artificial intelligent systems. Similarly, inducing
the underlying structures and grammars from raw sensory
inputs, e.g., vision and language [11, 51, 39, 23, 38, 5, 40,

support
system
seating
area

arms
arm
vertical
bars

S

leg base
arm
horizontal
bars

front
legs

back
legs

This is a chair with an irregular back, a square seat, two
arms with vertical bars and horizontal bars, and curved legs.

DT This

VP is a chair with an irregular back, a square seat...

VBZ is

NP a chair with an irregular back, a...
...

NP

a chair

NP

an irregular back,

NP

a square seat,

NP

two arms

NP a square seat, two arms...
NP two arms with vertical bars and...

PP With vertical bars and horizontal bars, ...
...

Figure 1: An example of a sentence parse tree aligned with an
image parse tree. The arrow lines represent production rules of
the image grammar and the language grammar. The dashed lines
represent alignment between the constituents of two modalities.

54, 48, 32, 14, 26, 15], has been a long-standing challenge
in the field of artificial intelligence (AI).
With the development of unsupervised learning techniques, the unsupervised grammar induction for natural
language [33, 34, 21, 20] has recently made satisfying
progress. These works formulate the grammar induction of
language as a self-contained system that relies solely on textual corpora. Following this trend, [35, 53] propose the visually grounded grammar induction. They empirically show
that if the constituents in a sentence’s parse tree are well
aligned with the image that the sentence describes, the induced grammar will be more accurate.
Visually grounded grammar induction takes one step further towards cognitive grammar [24, 25], a concept from

1665

