CLEAR: Clean-up Sample-Targeted Backdoor in Neural Networks
Liuwan Zhu1 , Rui Ning1 , Chunsheng Xin1 , Chonggang Wang2 , and Hongyi Wu 1
1

2
1

Old Dominion University, USA
InterDigital Communications, Inc., USA

{lzhu001,rning,cxin,h1wu}@odu.edu, 2 chonggang.wang@interdigital.com

Abstract
The data poisoning attack has raised serious security
concerns on the safety of deep neural networks, since it
can lead to neural backdoor that misclassifies certain inputs
crafted by an attacker. In particular, the sample-targeted
backdoor attack is a new challenge. It targets at one or
a few specific samples, called target samples, to misclassify them to a target class. Without a trigger planted in the
backdoor model, the existing backdoor detection schemes
fail to detect the sample-targeted backdoor as they depend
on reverse-engineering the trigger or strong features of the
trigger. In this paper, we propose a novel scheme to detect and mitigate sample-targeted backdoor attacks. We
discover and demonstrate a unique property of the sampletargeted backdoor, which forces a boundary change such
that small “pockets” are formed around the target sample. Based on this observation, we propose a novel defense
mechanism to pinpoint a malicious pocket by “wrapping”
them into a tight convex hull in the feature space. We design an effective algorithm to search for such a convex hull
and remove the backdoor by fine-tuning the model using
the identified malicious samples with the corrected label according to the convex hull. The experiments show that the
proposed approach is highly efficient for detecting and mitigating a wide range of sample-targeted backdoor attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) play a critical role in a
wide range of applications, such as image classification [6],
facial recognition [23] and autonomous driving [37]. Despite these advances, DNNs are data-driven, depending on
the size and quality of the training data, and computation
resource for model training. They are also empirical, requiring extensive expertise to design a good model architecture. Therefore, it is often infeasible for general users
to train their own models on a large scale. Instead, users

typically outsource model training to third parties known
as Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) [25] or reuse
a public model from an online model zoo storage website,
e.g., Caffe Model Zoo [15] or Tensorflow Model Zoo [1].
However, this raises a fundamental question: can we
trust a model provided by someone else? DNNs are commonly considered as black-boxes and lack interpretability
and transparency to humans. Moreover, it is not feasible to test their behavior exhaustively. These properties
can be exploited by attackers to plant a backdoor to the
model provided to the user. This can be done through
stealthily injecting poisoned data into the training dataset
by an attacker, when the model trainer collects training data
from the web, which is in fact one type of data poison attack [17, 28, 38, 2]. Alternatively, the model trainer itself can change the training data to intentionally plant a
backdoor. The backdoor attack can be largely categorized
into two types, sample-targeted and trigger-based, depending on if a predefined trigger is adopted to activate the
backdoor. In trigger-based backdoor attacks, a backdoor is
planted during training using a “trigger” stamped on samples [9, 21, 36, 26], which is a predefined special pattern
such as a small white block as illustrated in Figure 1(a).
After training, the backdoor model behaves normally with
clean samples but misclassifies an input into the target category if the trigger is embedded in the input sample.
In contrast, instead of adopting a predefined trigger, the
sample-targeted backdoor attack targets at one or a few specific samples, called as target samples, to misclassify them
to a target class. The most straightforward method of injecting a sample-targeted backdoor is to simply flip the label of
the target sample (see Figure 1(d), which is an image of a
car but labeled as “cat”). Such a sample is included in the
training set to create a sample-targeted backdoor [34]. In
the Feature Collision attack [28] and its variations [38, 2],
the attacker perturbs a small number of samples in the target
class (e.g., with the label of “cat”) without changing their labels, to minimize their feature distance to the target sample

16453

