Collaborative Optimization and Aggregation for Decentralized Domain
Generalization and Adaptation
Guile Wu and Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary University of London
{guile.wu, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Contemporary domain generalization (DG) and multisource unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods
mostly collect data from multiple domains together for joint
optimization. However, this centralized training paradigm
poses a threat to data privacy and is not applicable when
data are non-shared across domains. In this work, we
propose a new approach called Collaborative Optimization and Aggregation (COPA), which aims at optimizing a
generalized target model for decentralized DG and UDA,
where data from different domains are non-shared and private. Our base model consists of a domain-invariant feature extractor and an ensemble of domain-specific classifiers. In an iterative learning process, we optimize a local
model for each domain, and then centrally aggregate local feature extractors and assemble domain-specific classifiers to construct a generalized global model, without sharing data from different domains. To improve generalization of feature extractors, we employ hybrid batch-instance
normalization and collaboration of frozen classifiers. For
better decentralized UDA, we further introduce a prediction agreement mechanism to overcome local disparities towards central model aggregation. Extensive experiments on
five DG and UDA benchmark datasets show that COPA is
capable of achieving comparable performance against the
state-of-the-art DG and UDA methods without the need for
centralized data collection in model training.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have advanced significantly over
the past decade and achieved promising performance for
many visual recognition tasks. However, due to the presence of data bias [33] between training and test data
(a.k.a. domain shift [28]), models elaborately optimized
with labeled training data from some source domains usually suffer from significant performance degradation on new
target domains. To resolve this problem, domain general-

ization (DG) [52, 40, 15] and unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [35, 38, 26] have been intensively studied,
which aim at generalizing models learned on source domains to new target domains.
Traditionally, DG and UDA can use a single source domain for generalization learning by adversarial data augmentation or domain alignment [37, 25]. But real-world
data are usually collected from different domains under different conditions (e.g., style and environment), so recent
studies focus more on multi-source DG [15] and UDA [26],
yielding better generalization performance. In this work,
we also focus on multi-source DG and UDA. Contemporary
multi-source DG [31, 47, 50] and UDA [2, 26, 51] share
the assumption that training data are collected from multiple domains to jointly optimize a generalized model. While
DG focuses on direct deployment on unseen new target domains, UDA utilizes unlabeled data from target domains to
further reduce domain discrepancy. However, this centralized model learning paradigm is not applicable when source
data from different domains cannot be shared for joint
training, due to either data privacy or storage/transmission
limitations. To address this problem, several recent studies [27, 7] resort to federated learning [21, 12] for developing decentralized UDA by federated adversarial training [27] or knowledge distillation [7]. However, these methods rely heavily on unlabeled target domain data for learning a global model and fail to resolve the more challenging
decentralized DG problem.
In this work, we study the problems of decentralized
DG and UDA, which aim at optimizing a generalized target model via decentralized learning with non-shared data
from multiple domains. To this end, we propose a new
approach called Collaborative OPtimization and Aggregation (COPA). Fig. 1 illustrates our approach. For decentralized DG (steps 1, 3 and 5): In each source domain
(step 1), we optimize a local model, which consists of
a domain-invariant feature extractor and an ensemble of
domain-specific classifiers, using non-shared and private local training data. Next (step 3), we centrally aggregate local feature extractors as a global domain-invariant feature

6484

