Spatial-Temporal Consistency Network for Low-Latency Trajectory Forecasting
Shijie Li, Yanying Zhou, Jinhui Yi, and Juergen Gall
University of Bonn

Abstract
Trajectory forecasting is a crucial step for autonomous
vehicles and mobile robots in order to navigate and interact safely. In order to handle the spatial interactions
between objects, graph-based approaches have been proposed. These methods, however, model motion on a frameto-frame basis and do not provide a strong temporal model.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a compact model
called Spatial-Temporal Consistency Network (STC-Net). In
STC-Net, dilated temporal convolutions are introduced to
model long-range dependencies along each trajectory for
better temporal modeling while graph convolutions are employed to model the spatial interaction among different trajectories. Furthermore, we propose a feature-wise convolution to generate the predicted trajectories in one pass and refine the forecast trajectories together with the reconstructed
observed trajectories. We demonstrate that STC-Net generates spatially and temporally consistent trajectories and
outperforms other graph-based methods. Since STC-Net requires only 0.7k parameters and forecasts the future with a
latency of only 1.3ms, it advances the state-of-the-art and
satisfies the requirements for realistic applications.

1. Introduction
Intelligent agents like autonomous vehicles and mobile
robots navigate and interact in spaces that are shared with
humans. The safety of the humans is therefore of the highest priority. To this end, agents are required to understand
and forecast the trajectories of surrounding pedestrians or
vehicles such that they can make the right decisions and for
instance navigate safely and smoothly through a crowd. Trajectory forecasting, however, is challenging due to the complex behavior and interactions of humans in crowds. Furthermore, the available resources will always be a limiting
factor as the agents are equipped with energy-efficient hardware. Hence, there is a need for compact forecasting models with a very low latency. In practice, a low latency is
required for most applications since there is otherwise not
enough time to adjust the motion and any millisecond can
save lives.

(a) Social-STGCNN [24]

(b) Ours

Figure 1: State-of-the-art graph-based approaches like [24]
do not model the temporal motion of the trajectories well,
which results in shaky and unrealistic trajectories (dashed
yellow) as shown in (a). In this figure, red denotes the observed trajectory and blue the ground-truth future trajectory.
Our approach addresses this issue and forecasts spatially and
temporally consistent trajectories (b).
Over the last years, several approaches have been proposed for trajectory forecasting. RNN-based methods [1,
20, 36] utilize a recurrent model to model the trajectory of
each pedestrian in the scene and their interactions are taken
into account by a pooling operation. GAN-based methods [13, 17, 29] enable RNN-based methods to produce
multiple socially plausible trajectories. Graph-based methods [15, 34, 24] model spatial relations as a graph and utilize graph convolutions. These methods, however, have in
common that they use recurrent neural networks to generate
the future trajectories, which results in a relatively high latency. To address this issue, Social-STGCNN [24] proposed
a CNN for time-extrapolation. As a result, Social-STGCNN
achieves a very low latency of 2ms. This, however, comes at
the cost that the forecast trajectories are noisy and not temporally consistent as shown in Fig. 1a.
In this work, we therefore address this issue and present
an approach that generates spatially and temporally consistent trajectories with a latency of less than 2ms. To achieve
this, the proposed Spatial-Temporal Consistency Network
(STC-Net), which is shown in Fig. 2, utilizes graph convolutions for spatial modeling and dilated temporal convolutions
for temporal modeling. Our network generates trajectories
that are consistent over the past and the future. This consistency is implicitly enforced by reconstructing the past,
jointly refining the reconstructed past and forecast future,
and computing the loss over the entire trajectory. In order

1940

