Efficient Large Scale Inlier Voting for Geometric Vision Problems
Dror Aiger

Simon Lynen

Jan Hosang

Bernhard Zeisl

aigerd@google.com

slynen@google.com

hosang@google.com

bzeisl@google.com

Google Research

Abstract
Outlier rejection and, equivalently, inlier set optimization is a key ingredient in numerous applications in computer vision such as filtering point-matches in camera
pose estimation or plane and normal estimation in point
clouds. Several approaches exist, yet at large scale we
face a combinatorial explosion of possible solutions and
state-of-the-art methods like RANSAC, Hough transform,
or Branch&Bound require a minimum inlier ratio or prior
knowledge to remain practical. In fact, for problems such
as camera posing in very large scenes these approaches become useless as they have exponential runtime growth.
To approach the problem, we present an efficient and
general algorithm for outlier rejection based on “intersecting” k-dimensional surfaces in Rd . We provide a recipe
for formulating a variety of geometric problems as finding a point in Rd which maximizes the number of nearby
surfaces (and thus inliers). The resulting algorithm has
linear worst-case complexity with a better runtime dependency on the requested proximity of a query to its result than
competing algorithms, while not requiring domain specific
bounds. This is achieved by introducing a space decomposition scheme that bounds the number of computations by
successively rounding and grouping surfaces. Our recipe
and open-source code1 enables anybody to derive such fast
approaches to new problems across a wide range of domains. We demonstrate the approach on several camera
posing problems with a large number of matches and low
inlier ratio, achieving state-of-the-art results at significantly
lower processing times.

1. Introduction
Whether geometric verification of point matches for absolute pose, homography estimation or normal estimation
in point clouds, outlier rejection is a key ingredient in numerous applications in computer vision. RANSAC [8] is a
1 https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/large_scale_voting

common choice for the task as it has good quality/runtime
tradeoffs for many practical problems. RANSAC however
does not provide an optimality guarantee, requires a lower
bound on the inlier ratio and its runtime increases exponentially with the outlier ratio, making it unusable for problems
with few inliers. In contrast Branch&Bound methods [3, 6]
are guaranteed to find the optimal solution, yet their worstcase runtime equals exhaustive search in parameter space.
Their practical use depends on the quality of the bounds
which are problem specific and notoriously hard to find.
We propose an alternative approach that exhibits a linear
runtime independent of the inlier ratio and that does not require a lower bound on the fraction of inliers. We base our
work on the efficient and general algorithm for solving geometric incidence problems proposed by a subset of the authors in [1]. In a nutshell the authors show that voting [23]
is equivalent to finding a point in Rd which is close to as
many surfaces (and thus inliers) as possible among a given
set of k-surfaces in Rd . While in [1] we proves theoretical bounds for approximate incidences, we show a general
scheme to formulate approximate incidences of surfaces in
a unified algorithm and apply it to several inlier maximization problems. We obtain a globally optimal solution (up to
a prescribed resolution ε) considerably faster. Our contributions:
– We introduce the concept of general voting for outlier
removal and its relation to our previous work on approximate incidences in [1] to a wider computer vision
audience and demonstrate its use for camera posing,
ray intersection, and geometric model fitting.
– All approaches have linear complexity and are therefore applicable to very large problems that are infeasible with RANSAC [8]. The worst case complexity (and performance in practice) is always better than
other methods (voting [11] and B&B [14]) for sufficiently large inputs.
– We demonstrate the scalability and versatility using
a generalization of [23, 21] where we remove the requirement of calibrated cameras and known gravity direction, but instead solve for these unknowns.
– We compare to the state-of-the-art [6] for 6 degree-of13243

