BlockPlanner: City Block Generation with Vectorized Graph Representation
Linning Xu1⇤, Yuanbo Xiangli1⇤, Anyi Rao1 , Nanxuan Zhao1,3 , Bo Dai2 , Ziwei Liu2 , Dahua Lin1,3,4
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
3
Centre of Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{xl020,xy019,ra018,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk nanxuanzhao@gmail.com {bo.dai,ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
(a) City Block

(b) BlockPlanner

Block 373

(c) 3D Block Model

Block 201

…

…

Block 307
Block 385
One & Two Family

Commercial & Office

Open Space & Outdoor

Multi-Family Walk-Up

Industrial & Manufacturing

Parking Facilities

Multi-Family Elevator

Transportation & Utility

Vacant Land & Others

Mixed Resi. & Comm.

Public Facilities & Institutions

Block 2025

Land Use Category

Figure 1: City block forms the basic urban fabric of a city. We illustrate (a) sample blocks taken from Manhattan, NYC.
Colors are assigned according to land use categories. We propose (b) BlockPlanner, a novel system for generating realistic
and diverse (c) 3D city blocks from scratch with valid land use categories. The cores of BlockPlanner are: a vectorized city
block representation, a graph-based VAE, and a series of losses to prevent geometric violations.

Abstract
City modeling is the foundation for computational urban planning, navigation, and entertainment. In this work,
we present the first generative model of city blocks named
BlockPlanner, and showcase its ability to synthesize valid
city blocks with varying land lots configurations. We propose a novel vectorized city block representation utilizing a
ring topology and a two-tier graph to capture the global and
local structures of a city block. Each land lot is abstracted
into a vector representation covering both its 3D geometry and land use semantics. Such vectorized representation
enables us to deploy a lightweight network to capture the
underlying distribution of land lots configurations in a city
block. To enforce intrinsic spatial constraints of a valid city
block, a set of effective loss functions are imposed to shape
rational results. We contribute a pilot city block dataset to
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our representation and framework over the state-of-the-art. Notably,
our BlockPlanner is also able to edit and manipulate city
blocks, enabling several useful applications, e.g., topology
refinement and footprint generation.

1. Introduction
The surging demand for city modeling [24, 19] appears
in many fields, including urban planning [29, 10, 4], au⇤ Equal contribution.

tonomous driving simulation [12], and game design [5, 1,
2], attracting lots of research attention in the last decades.
As the fundamental component of urban areas, city blocks
provide the order and structure to a city, forming the basic
unit of a city’s urban fabric, illustrated in Fig. 1. However,
conventional procedural modeling methods adopt heuristic
rules to approximate the subdivision of city blocks [29, 32],
which may fail to reflect the realistic and dynamic structures. Consequently, we want to learn city block generation
from resourceful urban planning data that captures both the
3D geometry and their land use compositions.
A more relevant problem to ours is indoor floorplan generation. Series of works [27, 15, 36] have recently been
inspired by the huge success in rasterized image synthesis [21, 8, 30]. For example, HouseGAN [27] adopts a generative adversarial network (GAN) to produce diverse house
layouts given a relation graph. The model predicts a binary
mask for each room, indicating its position and size relative
to the house. However, these solutions cannot be directly
adapted to city block generation for the following reasons.
First of all, the rasterized representation is not expressive for city blocks. As city blocks bear intricate structural
details and regularities, representing land lot instances as
binary masks significantly impair their geometrical traits,
as well as the relative position between land lots. Additionally, once rasterized, small land lots are likely to be dropped
15077

