SACoD: Sensor Algorithm Co-Design Towards Efficient CNN-powered
Intelligent PhlatCam
1

2

1

1

1

Yonggan Fu , Yang Zhang , Yue Wang , Zhihan Lu , Vivek Boominathan ,
1
1
Ashok Veeraraghavan , Yingyan Lin
1
2
Rice University MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
There has been a booming demand for integrating Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) powered functionalities into Internet-of-Thing (IoT) devices to enable ubiquitous intelligent “IoT cameras”. However, more extensive
applications of such IoT systems are still limited by two
challenges. First, some applications, especially medicineand wearable-related ones, impose stringent requirements
on the camera form factor. Second, powerful CNNs often require considerable storage and energy cost, whereas
IoT devices often suffer from limited resources. PhlatCam,
with its form factor potentially reduced by orders of magnitude, has emerged as a promising solution to the first aforementioned challenge, while the second one remains a bottleneck. Existing compression techniques, which can potentially tackle the second challenge, are far from realizing the full potential in storage and energy reduction, because they mostly focus on the CNN algorithm itself. To this
end, this work proposes SACoD, a Sensor Algorithm CoDesign framework to develop more efficient CNN-powered
PhlatCam. In particular, the mask coded in the PhlatCam sensor and the backend CNN model are jointly optimized in terms of both model parameters and architectures via differential neural architecture search. Extensive
experiments including both simulation and physical measurement on manufactured masks show that the proposed
SACoD framework achieves aggressive model compression
and energy savings while maintaining or even boosting the
task accuracy, when benchmarking over two state-of-theart (SOTA) designs with six datasets across four different
vision tasks including classification, segmentation, image
translation, and face recognition. Our codes are available
at: https://github.com/RICE-EIC/SACoD.

1. Introduction
Recent CNN breakthroughs trigger a growing demand
for intelligent IoT devices, such as wearables and biology

devices (e.g., swallowed endoscopes). However, two major challenges are hampering more extensive applications
of CNN-powered IoT devices. First, some applications, especially medicine- and biology-related ones, impose strict
requirements on the form factor, especially the thickness,
which are often too stringent for existing lens-based imaging systems. Second, powerful CNNs often come at a considerable cost, whereas IoT devices are subject to limited
resources [23, 21, 26, 43, 38].
For the first challenge, lensless imaging systems [3, 32,
1, 2, 4] have emerged as a promising rescue. For example, PhlatCam [4] replaces the focal lenses with a set of
phase masks, which encodes the incoming light instead of
directly focusing it. The encoded information can be either
computationally decoded to reconstruct the images or processed specifically for different applications. Such lensless
imaging systems can be made much smaller and thinner, because the phase masks are smaller than the focal lens, and
they can be placed much closer to the sensors and fabricated
with much lower costs. For the second challenge, many recent works focus on designing CNNs with improved hardware efficiency, i.e., by applying generic neural architecture
search (NAS) to find efficient CNNs.
As such, a naive way to address the two aforementioned
challenges simultaneously is to introduce lensless cameras
as the signal acquisition frontend and then apply NAS to optimize the backend CNN. However, such approaches would
result in disjoint optimization that can be far from optimal.
A generic NAS would treat the camera as given, and only
optimize the CNN. Likewise, existing phase mask designs
for lensless cameras treat the CNNs as given, and only optimize the masks. Such disjoint optimization fails to (1) take
advantage of the masks’ potential computational capacity,
with which the NAS optimization can be fundamentally improved, and (2) perform an end-to-end optimization.
[4] shows that, under some assumptions, the phase
masks in PhlatCam essentially perform 2D convolutions on
the incoming lights, and the convolution kernel is encoded
in the masks. Moreover, unlike other convolutional layers,

5168

