Viewing Graph Solvability via Cycle Consistency
Federica Arrigoni1 , Andrea Fusiello2 , Elisa Ricci1,3 and Tomas Pajdla4
1

University of Trento

2

University of Udine

3

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

4

CIIRC CTU in Prague

federica.arrigoni@unitn.it, andrea.fusiello@uniud.it, e.ricci@unitn.it, pajdla@cvut.cz

Abstract
In structure-from-motion the viewing graph is a graph
where vertices correspond to cameras and edges represent
fundamental matrices. We provide a new formulation and
an algorithm for establishing whether a viewing graph is
solvable, i.e. it uniquely determines a set of projective cameras. Known theoretical conditions either do not fully characterize the solvability of all viewing graphs, or are exceedingly hard to compute for they involve solving a system
of polynomial equations with a large number of unknowns.
The main result of this paper is a method for reducing the
number of unknowns by exploiting the cycle consistency. We
advance the understanding of the solvability by (i) finishing the classification of all previously undecided minimal
graphs up to 9 nodes, (ii) extending the practical solvability
testing up to minimal graphs with up to 90 nodes, and (iii)
definitely answering an open research question by showing
that the finite solvability is not equivalent to the solvability.
Finally, we present an experiment on real data showing that
unsolvable graphs are appearing in practical situations.

1. Introduction
Solving structure-from-motion is important, e.g., for 3D reconstruction from images [33, 34, 29], image matching [26]
and visual odometry and localization [22, 1, 28, 35]. The
basic problem in structure-from-motion is to determine
which image sets can be reconstructed. This can be done,
e.g., by analyzing the viewing graph.
The viewing graph [19] (also known as the epipolar
graph) of a set of images is a graph where vertices correspond to cameras/images and edges correspond to fundamental matrices. In other terms, an edge is present between two vertices if and only if the fundamental matrix
between such image pair is available, meaning that there exist enough corresponding points. In most practical scenarios such graph is not complete due to the fact that different
cameras may view different portions of the scene.
A relevant question is whether a viewing graph is solvable, i.e., if it uniquely determines a projective configura-

Figure 1: Viewing graphs with eight vertices that were left undecided in [37] and that we determined to be solvable.

tion of cameras, up to a single projective transformation.
In other terms, for a non-solvable viewing graph there exist
multiple transformations that can be applied to the cameras
without affecting the fundamental matrices. An equivalent
definition of solvability is given in [19], stating that a graph
is solvable if and only if the available fundamental matrices
uniquely determine the remaining ones, i.e., the input graph
can be transformed into the complete graph.
The solvability is closely related to 3D reconstruction
(see Tab. 1), since viewing graphs are used by a class of
projective structure-from-motion methods [30, 16] that recover the projective cameras starting from multiple fundamental matrices. The solvability of a viewing graph should
be assessed before addressing the reconstruction, since if a
problem is non-solvable, then no method based on fundamental matrices only will provide a useful reconstruction.
Considering calibrated cameras, i.e. using the essential matrices instead of the fundamental ones, the solvable
graphs are exactly those that are parallel rigid [24, 38]. The
topic of parallel rigidity (also known as bearing rigidity) has
been extensively studied in the literature (see [3] for a recent
survey). Here we focus on the uncalibrated scenario, which
has been much less understood.
Related Work. In [19], the solvability of graphs with at
most six vertices is characterized, and some insights about
how to analyze larger graphs are provided. A constructive
method to actually complete such view graphs is discussed
in [20]. Rudi et al. [27] studied conditions under which a
viewing graph can be solved using a linear method. Further
analysis is available in [36], where it is shown that some
solvable graphs can be constructed starting from a triangle
and adding vertices of degree two one at a time.
In a recent paper [37], some necessary conditions for

5540

