PointBA: Towards Backdoor Attacks in 3D Point Cloud
Yue Zhao1†
Zhirui Chen1 *
Xinke Li1 *
Zekun Tong1 Yabang Zhao1 Andrew Lim2 Joey Tianyi Zhou3
1
National University of Singapore 2 Southwest Jiaotong University
3
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR
{xinke.li, zhiruichen, yuezhao, zekuntong, zhaoyabang}@u.nus.edu
i@limandrew.org

joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com

Abstract
3D deep learning has been increasingly more popular
for a variety of tasks including many safety-critical applications. However, recently several works raise the security
issues of 3D deep models. Although most of them consider
adversarial attacks, we identify that backdoor attack is indeed a more serious threat to 3D deep learning systems
but remains unexplored. We present the backdoor attacks
in 3D point cloud with a unified framework that exploits
the unique properties of 3D data and networks. In particular, we design two attack approaches on point cloud:
the poison-label backdoor attack (PointPBA) and the cleanlabel backdoor attack (PointCBA). The first one is straightforward and effective in practice, while the latter is more
sophisticated assuming there are certain data inspections.
The attack algorithms are mainly motivated and developed
by 1) the recent discovery of 3D adversarial samples suggesting the vulnerability of deep models under spatial transformation; 2) the proposed feature disentanglement technique that manipulates the feature of the data through optimization methods and its potential to embed a new task. Extensive experiments show the efficacy of the PointPBA with
over 95% success rate across various 3D datasets and models, and the more stealthy PointCBA with around 50% success rate. Our proposed backdoor attack in 3D point cloud
is expected to perform as a baseline for improving the robustness of 3D deep models.

1. Introduction
3D deep learning has been developed rapidly in the past
few years, which makes it the prime option for various realworld deployments, such as autonomous driving [7], scene
reconstruction [25] and medical data analysis [34], in which
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Activation of backdoored models with the interaction
trigger and orientation trigger. Original point cloud data will be
classified correctly, however, with a certain trigger like an interaction object (e.g., a small ball) nearby or a small change of orientation (rotation perpendicular to the horizontal plane), the point
cloud data will be classified as the target label.

life safety issues are usually involved. As more and more
attentions have been paid to this field, recently researchers
have started to acknowledge and account for the security
problems of 3D deep learning systems. For example, a few
works have investigated the adversarial attack in the 3D domain [46, 44, 51].
Compared to the adversarial attack, an insidious threat to
the deep learning system called backdoor attack, or Neural
Trojan [23, 6, 11] is even more damaging. The backdoor
attack injects a small proportion of poisoned data in training and activates malicious functionality by implanting a
specified trigger to the test data during inference. This attack could happen when using a publicly available dataset
or a pretrained model that is potentially from untrustworthy sources. Indeed, it is reported that industry practitioners
worry about data poisoning much more than other threats
such as adversarial attack [15].
The backdoor attack in 3D could be a huge potential
threat. On the one hand, real-world 3D point cloud data
usually comes with the noise caused by the nature of the col-

16492

