Detection and Continual Learning of Novel Face Presentation Attacks
Mohammad Rostami1 , Leonidas Spinoulas1 , Mohamed Hussein1,2 , Joe Mathai1 , Wael Abd-Almageed1
1
USC Information Sciences Institute, Los Angeles, CA, 90292 USA
2
Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt
{mrostami,lspinoulas,mehussein,jmathai,wamageed}@isi.edu

Abstract
Advances in deep learning, combined with availability
of large datasets, have led to impressive improvements in
face presentation attack detection research. However, stateof-the-art face antispoofing systems are still vulnerable to
novel types of attacks that are never seen during training.
Moreover, even if such attacks are correctly detected, these
systems lack the ability to adapt to newly encountered attacks. The post-training ability of continually detecting new
types of attacks and self-adaptation to identify these attack
types, after the initial detection phase, is highly appealing.
In this paper, we enable a deep neural network to detect
anomalies in the observed input data points as potential new
types of attacks by suppressing the confidence-level of the
network outside the training samples’ distribution. We then
use experience replay to update the model to incorporate
knowledge about new types of attacks without forgetting the
past learned attack types. Experimental results are provided
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
on two benchmark datasets as well as a newly introduced
dataset which exhibits a large variety of attack types.1

1. Introduction
Smartphones with facial authentication features have
made biometric systems remarkably common in our everyday lives. This is in addition to less prevalent and more
traditional, yet critical, applications of biometric systems,
such as automatic passport control and access control to highsecurity facilities. As services based on biometric recognition technologies gain popularity, presentation attack detection (PAD) is becoming a more crucial requirement for these
systems. In parallel, attackers continually attempt to gain
unauthorized access by designing new attack types, which
makes developing defense mechanisms against presentation
attacks more challenging. The goal of a PAD algorithm is
to classify whether the presented input to the system is a
1 Code is available at github.com/mrostami1366.

bona-fide presentation (BF) or a presentation attack (PA),
so that access is denied for PAs. While recognition systems
for all biometric modalities, such as fingerprint and iris, are
vulnerable to presentation attacks, the face modality poses
a higher risk and extra challenges due to the easy access to
high resolution face images of most people, e.g., through
social media, and due to the relatively easier fabrication of
face PAs. In this paper we exclusively focus on face PAD.
Similar to most sub-fields in computer vision, advances in
deep learning, which is inspired by the nervous system [17],
have led to significant face PAD improvements on benchmark datasets using convolutional neural network-based
(CNN) end-to-end representation learning and classification [1, 7, 12, 20, 39, 42, 36, 4, 41]. Following the standard
pipeline of supervised learning for deep learning, a large,
labeled training dataset, which consists of known attacks and
bona-fide data points, is collected, and then used to train a
deep network with a suitable architecture [10, 17, 5].
The vulnerability of using the aforementioned pipeline
for PAD is that attackers can continually generate new types
of PAs that are unknown to the system, i.e., absent in the
training dataset. Since deep networks suffer from overconfidence in their predictions [14], the system may not be able to
identify novel attack types, generated at inference time after
the initial training. Even if the unknown attack types can be
identified, the standard deep learning pipeline necessitates
collecting a sufficient number of samples of new attack types
and augmenting the training dataset. The model then needs
to be retrained from scratch (or fine-tuned) on the augmented
dataset [26]. However, collecting labeled data is time consuming, model retraining is computationally inefficient, and
both usually involve human intervention [24]. As a result, it
is highly desirable to enable biometric recognition systems
to identify novel attack types on-the-fly, during deployment,
and then to autonomously adapt their classifications models
for recognizing these new attack types in the future.
We develop an algorithm for continual detection of emerging novel types of face PAs. Our objective is to enable the
system to identify novel PAs. The model then is updated
to learn new attack types such that it does not forget the

14851

