Practical Relative Order Attack in Deep Ranking
Mo Zhou1 Le Wang1∗ Zhenxing Niu2 Qilin Zhang3 Yinghui Xu2 Nanning Zheng1 Gang Hua4
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Alibaba Group 3 HERE Technologies 4 Wormpex AI Research
{cdluminate,zhenxingniu,samqzhang,ganghua}@gmail.com lewang@xjtu.edu.cn renji.xyh@taobao.com nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies unveil the vulnerabilities of deep ranking
models, where an imperceptible perturbation can trigger
dramatic changes in the ranking result. While previous
attempts focus on manipulating absolute ranks of certain
candidates, the possibility of adjusting their relative order
remains under-explored. In this paper, we formulate a new
adversarial attack against deep ranking systems, i.e., the Order Attack, which covertly alters the relative order among a
selected set of candidates according to an attacker-specified
permutation, with limited interference to other unrelated
candidates. Specifically, it is formulated as a triplet-style
loss imposing an inequality chain reflecting the specified
permutation. However, direct optimization of such white-box
objective is infeasible in a real-world attack scenario due
to various black-box limitations. To cope with them, we
propose a Short-range Ranking Correlation metric as a surrogate objective for black-box Order Attack to approximate
the white-box method. The Order Attack is evaluated on
the Fashion-MNIST and Stanford-Online-Products datasets
under both white-box and black-box threat models. The
black-box attack is also successfully implemented on a major
e-commerce platform. Comprehensive experimental evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods,
revealing a new type of ranking model vulnerability.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the widespread applications of deep neural networks [26, 21] in the learning-to-rank tasks [51, 41], deep
ranking algorithms have witnessed significant progress, but
unfortunately they have also inherited the long-standing adversarial vulnerabilities [46] of neural networks. Considering the “search by image” application for example, an
imperceptible adversarial perturbation to the query image
is sufficient to intentionally alter the ranking results of candidate images. Typically, such adversarial examples can be
designed to cause the ranking model to “misrank” [32, 29]
(i.e., rank items incorrectly), or purposefully raise or lower
the ranks of selected candidates [59].

Since “misranking” can be interpreted as deliberately
lowering the ranks of well-matching candidates, previous
attacks on ranking models unanimously focus on changing
the absolute ranks of a set of candidates, while neglecting
the manipulation of relative order among them. However, an
altered relative order can be disruptive in some applications,
such as impacting sales on e-commerce platforms powered
by content-based image retrieval [44], where potential customers attempt to find merchandise via image search.
As shown in Fig. 1, an attacker may want to adversarially perturb the query image and thus change the relative
order among products A, B, C, D, and E into A ≺ E ≺
D ≺ C ≺ B in the search-by-image result. The sales of a
product closely correlates to its Click-Through Rate (CTR),
while the CTR can be significantly influenced by its ranking
position [10, 38] (which also decides the product pagination
on the client side). Hence, subtle changes in the relative
order of searches can be sufficient to alter CTR and impact
the actual and relative sales among A to E.
Such vulnerability in a commercial platform may be exploited in a malfeasant business competition among the topranked products, e.g., via promoting fraudulent web pages
containing adversarial example product images generated in
advance. Specifically, the attack of changing relative order
does not aim to incur significant changes in the absolute
ranks of the selected candidates (e.g., moving from list bottom to top), but it intentionally changes the relative order of
them subtly without introducing conspicuous abnormality.
Whereas such goal cannot be implemented by absolute rank
attacks such as [59], the relative order vulnerability may
justify and motivate a more robust and fair ranking model.
Specifically, we propose the Order Attack (OA), a new adversarial attack problem in deep ranking. Given a query
image q ∈ [0, 1]D , a set of selected candidates C =
{c1 , c2 , . . . , ck }, and a predefined permutation vector p =
[p1 , p2 , . . . , pk ], Order Attack aims to find an imperceptible
perturbation r (∥r∥∞ ⩽ ε and q̃ = q + r ∈ [0, 1]D ), so that
q̃ as the adversarial query can convert the relative order of
the selected candidates into cp1 ≺ cp2 ≺ · · · ≺ cpk . For
example, a successful OA with p = [1, 5, 4, 3, 2] will result
in c1 ≺ c5 ≺ c4 ≺ c3 ≺ c2 , as shown in Fig. 1.

* Corresponding author.

16413

