Meta Gradient Adversarial Attack
Zheng Yuan1,2 , Jie Zhang1,2 , Yunpei Jia1,2 , Chuanqi Tan3 , Tao Xue3 , Shiguang Shan1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Tencent
{zheng.yuan, yunpei.jia}@vipl.ict.ac.cn; {zhangjie,sgshan}@ict.ac.cn;
{jamestan,emmaxue}@tencent.com

Abstract
In recent years, research on adversarial attacks has become a hot spot. Although current literature on the transferbased adversarial attack has achieved promising results for
improving the transferability to unseen black-box models, it
still leaves a long way to go. Inspired by the idea of metalearning, this paper proposes a novel architecture called
Meta Gradient Adversarial Attack (MGAA), which is plugand-play and can be integrated with any existing gradientbased attack method for improving the cross-model transferability. Specifically, we randomly sample multiple models from a model zoo to compose different tasks and iteratively simulate a white-box attack and a black-box attack
in each task. By narrowing the gap between the gradient
directions in white-box and black-box attacks, the transferability of adversarial examples on the black-box setting can
be improved. Extensive experiments on the CIFAR10 and
ImageNet datasets show that our architecture outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods for both black-box and whitebox attack settings.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of neural networks in recent years, the reliability of neural networks has gradually attracted more and more attention. The neural networks are exceedingly sensitive to adversarial examples,
i.e., the imperceptible perturbation on the input can easily fool the model, leading to unexpected mistakes. For
example, when employing face recognition technology for
payment, a slight perturbation on the face image may trick
the face recognition model into recognizing as someone
else. Since attack and defense are two complementary aspects, the researches on adversarial attacks can ultimately
improve the robustness of the model, thereby making the
model more reliable.
In recent years, many methods have been proposed to
improve the success rate of attacks against white-box mod-

els, such as FGSM [15], C&W [2], PGD [31], BIM [21],
DeepFool [32], etc. Based on the access to model parameters, these methods can make the model misclassify the
input images by only adding human-imperceptible perturbations, which is named as the white-box attack. However, in reality, a more practical scenario is that the attacker
cannot obtain any information of the target model, that is,
the black-box attack. Therefore, some methods turn to utilize the transferability of adversarial examples to conduct
black-box attacks, such as MIM [8], DIM [50], TIM [9], NISI [27], etc. Although most of these methods have achieved
promising results under the scenario of black-box attacks,
the transferability of adversarial examples is still limited
due to the discrepancy between the white-box models and
unseen black-box models.
Inspired by the philosophy of meta-learning, we propose
a novel architecture named Meta Gradient Adversarial Attack (MGAA), which is plug-and-play and can be incorporated with any gradient-based adversarial attack method.
The main idea of MGAA is to generate the adversarial examples by iteratively simulating white-box and black-box
attacks to improve the transferability. Specifically, as shown
in Fig. 1, in each iteration, multiple models are randomly
sampled from the model zoo to compose a task, which can
be divided into the meta-train and the meta-test step. The
meta-train step first uses an ensemble of multiple models
to simulate white-box attacks to obtain temporary adversarial examples, which are then used as a basis by the metatest step to obtain the perturbation by simulating a blackbox attack scenario. Finally, the perturbation obtained during the meta-test step is added to the adversarial examples
generated in the previous iteration. In Section 3.3, more
theoretical analyses demonstrate that our proposed architecture can gradually narrow the gap of gradient directions
between white-box attack and black-box attack settings,
thus improving the transferability of generated adversarial
examples. Different from vanilla meta-learning methods,
which enhance the generalization through model training,
our proposed MGAA directly utilizes the gradient informa-

7748

