Learning Meta-class Memory for Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Zhonghua Wu1,2 Xiangxi Shi3 Guosheng Lin* 1,2 Jianfei Cai4
1
S-lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University
4
Dept of Data Science and AI, Monash University
zhonghua001@e.ntu.edu.sg

shixia@oregonstate.edu

gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Previous SOTA

Abstract
Currently, the state-of-the-art methods treat few-shot
semantic segmentation task as a conditional foregroundbackground segmentation problem, assuming each class is
independent. In this paper, we introduce the concept of
meta-class, which is the meta information (e.g. certain
middle-level features) shareable among all classes. To explicitly learn meta-class representations in few-shot segmentation task, we propose a novel Meta-class Memory
based few-shot segmentation method (MM-Net), where we
introduce a set of learnable memory embeddings to memorize the meta-class information during the base class training and transfer to novel classes during the inference stage.
Moreover, for the k-shot scenario, we propose a novel image quality measurement module to select images from the
set of support images. A high-quality class prototype could
be obtained with the weighted sum of support image features based on the quality measure. Experiments on both
PASCAL-5i and COCO datasets show that our proposed
method is able to achieve state-of-the-art results in both 1shot and 5-shot settings. Particularly, our proposed MMNet achieves 37.5% mIoU on the COCO dataset in 1-shot
setting, which is 5.1% higher than the previous state-of-theart.

1. Introduction
With the development of convolution neural networks
(CNNs), fully supervised image semantic segmentation
[12, 3] has achieved great success in both speed and accuracy. However, the state-of-the-art image segmentation
methods usually require abundant pixel-level annotations
which requires huge human labeling efforts. If we want
to segment a new class that has not been seen in the training set, we usually need to label thousands of images for
* Corresponding author: G. Lin (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

jianfei.cai@monash.edu

Support Mask

Support Image

Support Feature

Feature
Comparison
Query Mask Prediction
Query Image

Query Feature
Our Meta-class Memory Base Few Shot Segmentation (MM-Net)
Support Mask

Support Image

Meta-class
Memory

Support Feature

Meta-class
activation maps

Activation
Maps
Fusion
Query Mask Prediction

Query Image

Meta-class
Query Feature activation maps

Figure 1. Comparison between the typical pipeline of state-of-theart (SOTA) methods (top part) and that of our proposed meta-class
memory based network (MM-Net) (bottom part) for few-shot segmentation. The main difference is that SOTA treats the task as
a class-agnostic conditional foreground-background segmentation
problem, while we propose to learn a set of meta-class middlelevel representations shareable between base and novel classes.

the new class. In order to reduce human labeling efforts
on novel classes, the few-shot image segmentation task
[35, 17] has been introduced, which aims to predict the
segmentation mask of a query image of a novel class with
only one or a few labelled support images in testing, while
with abundant images of base classes with full annotations
in training.
The top part of Fig. 1 shows the typical pipeline of the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) few-shot image segmentation methods [35, 34]. Firstly, a pre-trained CNN network is used
to extract the features of both support and query images.
Then, the two features are typically processed by convolutional layers and compared for similarity so as to gener-

517

