Nerfies: Deformable Neural Radiance Fields
Keunhong Park1 *

Utkarsh Sinha2

Dan B Goldman2
1

(a) casual capture

Jonathan T. Barron2

Steven M. Seitz1,2

Sofien Bouaziz2

Ricardo Martin-Brualla2

2
University of Washington
Google Research
nerfies.github.io

(b) input images

(c) nerfie novel views

(d) novel view depth

Figure 1: We reconstruct photo-realistic nerfies from a user casually waving a mobile phone (a). Our system uses selfie
photos/videos (b) to produce a free-viewpoint representation with accurate renders (c) and geometry (d). Please see video.

Abstract
We present the first method capable of photorealistically
reconstructing deformable scenes using photos/videos captured casually from mobile phones. Our approach augments
neural radiance fields (NeRF) by optimizing an additional
continuous volumetric deformation field that warps each
observed point into a canonical 5D NeRF. We observe that
these NeRF-like deformation fields are prone to local minima, and propose a coarse-to-fine optimization method for
coordinate-based models that allows for more robust optimization. By adapting principles from geometry processing
and physical simulation to NeRF-like models, we propose
an elastic regularization of the deformation field that further
improves robustness. We show that our method can turn
casually captured selfie photos/videos into deformable NeRF
models that allow for photorealistic renderings of the subject
from arbitrary viewpoints, which we dub “nerfies.” We evaluate our method by collecting time-synchronized data using a
rig with two mobile phones, yielding train/validation images
of the same pose at different viewpoints. We show that our
method faithfully reconstructs non-rigidly deforming scenes
and reproduces unseen views with high fidelity.

* Work done while the author was an intern at Google.

1. Introduction
High quality 3D human scanning has come a long way –
but the best results currently require a specialized lab with
many synchronized lights and cameras, e.g., [14, 15, 18].
What if you could capture a photorealistic model of yourself
(or someone else) just by waving your mobile phone camera?
Such a capability would dramatically increase accessibility
and applications of 3D modeling technology.
Modeling people with hand-held cameras is especially
challenging due both to 1) nonrigidity – our inability to stay
perfectly still, and 2) challenging materials like hair, glasses,
and earrings that violate assumptions used in most reconstruction methods. In this paper we introduce an approach
to address both of these challenges, by generalizing Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [32] to model shape deformations.
Our technique recovers high fidelity 3D reconstructions from
short videos, providing free-viewpoint visualizations while
accurately capturing hair, glasses, and other complex, viewdependent materials, as shown in Figure 1. A special case
of particular interest is capturing a 3D self-portrait – we call
such casual 3D selfie reconstructions nerfies.
Rather than represent shape explicitly, NeRF [32] uses a
neural network to encode color and density as a function of
location and viewing angle, and generates novel views using
volume rendering. Their approach produces 3D visualizations of unprecedented quality, faithfully representing thin
15865

