Stochastic Scene-Aware Motion Prediction
Mohamed Hassan1 Duygu Ceylan2 Ruben Villegas2 Jun Saito2 Jimei Yang2 Yi Zhou2 Michael Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Adobe Research
{mhassan, black}@tue.mpg.de

{ceylan, villegas, jsaito, jimyang, yizho}@adobe.com

Figure 1: SAMP synthesizes virtual humans navigating complex scenes with realistic and diverse human-scene interactions.

Abstract
A long-standing goal in computer vision is to capture,
model, and realistically synthesize human behavior. Specifically, by learning from data, our goal is to enable virtual humans to navigate within cluttered indoor scenes and
naturally interact with objects. Such embodied behavior
has applications in virtual reality, computer games, and
robotics, while synthesized behavior can be used as training data. The problem is challenging because real human
motion is diverse and adapts to the scene. For example, a
person can sit or lie on a sofa in many places and with varying styles. We must model this diversity to synthesize virtual humans that realistically perform human-scene interactions. We present a novel data-driven, stochastic motion
synthesis method that models different styles of performing a given action with a target object. Our Scene-Aware
Motion Prediction method (SAMP) generalizes to target objects of various geometries while enabling the character to
navigate in cluttered scenes. To train SAMP, we collected
MoCap data covering various sitting, lying down, walking,
and running styles. We demonstrate SAMP on complex indoor scenes and achieve superior performance than existing solutions. Code and data are available for research at
https://samp.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
The computer vision community has made substantial
progress on 3D scene understanding and on capturing 3D
human motion, but less work has focused on synthesizing

3D people in 3D scenes. The advances in these two subfields, however, have provided tools for, and have created
interest in, embodied agents for virtual worlds (e.g. [35, 42,
55, 56]) and in placing humans into scenes (e.g. [6, 21]).
Creating virtual humans that move and act like real people,
however, is challenging and requires tackling many smaller
but difficult problems such as perception of unseen environments, plausible human motion modeling, and embodied interaction with complex scenes. While advances have been
made in human locomotion modeling [23, 32] thanks to the
availability of large scale datasets [7, 33, 38, 45, 50], realistically synthesizing virtual humans moving and interacting
with 3D scenes, remains largely unsolved.
Imagine instructing a virtual human to “sit on a couch”
in a cluttered scene, as illustrated in Fig. 1. To achieve
this goal, the character needs to perform a series of complex actions. First, it should navigate through the scene to
reach the target object while avoiding collisions with other
objects in the scene. Next, the character needs to choose
a contact point on the couch that will result in a plausible sitting action facing the right direction. Finally, if the
character performs this action multiple times, there should
be natural variations in the motion, mimicking real-world
human-scene interactions; e.g., sitting on different parts of
the couch with different styles such as with crossed legs,
arms in different poses, etc. Achieving these goals requires a system to jointly reason about the scene geometry, smoothly transition between cyclic (e.g., walking) and
acyclic (e.g., sitting) motions, and to model the diversity of
human-scene interactions.
To this end, we propose SAMP for Scene-Aware Mo-

11374

