imGHUM: Implicit Generative Models of 3D Human Shape and Articulated Pose
Thiemo Alldieck*

Hongyi Xu*

Cristian Sminchisescu

Google Research
{alldieck,hongyixu,sminchisescu}@google.com

Abstract
We present imGHUM, the first holistic generative model
of 3D human shape and articulated pose, represented as
a signed distance function. In contrast to prior work, we
model the full human body implicitly as a function zerolevel-set and without the use of an explicit template mesh.
We propose a novel network architecture and a learning
paradigm, which make it possible to learn a detailed implicit generative model of human pose, shape, and semantics, on par with state-of-the-art mesh-based models. Our
model features desired detail for human models, such as
articulated pose including hand motion and facial expressions, a broad spectrum of shape variations, and can be
queried at arbitrary resolutions and spatial locations. Additionally, our model has attached spatial semantics making it
straightforward to establish correspondences between different shape instances, thus enabling applications that are
difficult to tackle using classical implicit representations. In
extensive experiments, we demonstrate the model accuracy
and its applicability to current research problems.

1. Introduction
Mathematical models of the human body have been
proven effective in a broad variety of tasks. In the last
decades models of varying degrees of realism have been
successfully deployed e.g. for 3D human motion analysis
[46], 3D human pose and shape reconstruction [24, 52], personal avatar creation [3, 54], medical diagnosis and treatment [16], or image synthesis and video editing [53, 21].
Modern statistical body models are typically learnt from
large collections of 3D scans of real people, which are used
to capture the body shape variations among the human population. Dynamic scans, when available, can be used to further model how different poses affect the deformation of the
muscles and the soft-tissue of the human body.
The recently released GHUM model [49] follows this
methodology by describing the human body, its shape variation, articulated pose including fingers, and facial expressions as a moderate resolution mesh based on a lowdimensional, partly interpretable parameterization. In the
* The first two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. imGHUM is the first parametric full human body model
represented as an implicit signed distance function. imGHUM
successfully models broad variations in pose, shape, and facial expressions. The level sets of imGHUM are shown in blue-scale.

deep learning literature GHUM and similar models [27, 23]
are typically used as fixed function layers. This means that
the model is parameterized with the output of a neural network or some other non-linear function, and the resulting
mesh is used to compute the final function value. While
this approach works well for several tasks, including, more
recently, 3D reconstruction, the question of how to best represent complex 3D deformable and articulated structures is
open. Recent work dealing with the 3D visual reconstruction of general objects aimed to represent the output not as
meshes but as implicit functions [28, 32, 7, 29]. Such approaches thus describe surfaces by the zero-level-set (decision boundary) of a function over points in 3D-space. This
has clear benefits as the output is neither constrained by a
template mesh topology, nor is it discretized and thus of
fixed spatial resolution.
In this work, we investigate the possibility to learn a
data-driven statistical body model as an implicit function.
Given the maturity of state of the art explicit human models,
it is crucial that an equivalent implicit representation maintains their key, attractive properties – representing comparable variation in shape and pose and similar level of detail.
This is challenging since recently-proposed implicit function networks tend to produce overly smooth shapes and
fail for articulated humans [8]. We propose a novel network architecture and a learning paradigm that enable, for
the first time, constructing detailed generative models of human pose, shape, and semantics, represented as Signed Distance Functions (SDFs) (see fig. 1). Our multi-part architecture focuses on difficult to model body components like
15461

