Bit-Mixer: Mixed-precision networks with runtime bit-width selection
Adrian Bulat
Samsung AI Cambridge
adrian@adrianbulat.com

Georgios Tzimiropoulos
Samsung AI Cambridge
Queen Mary University of London
g.tzimiropoulos@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Mixed-precision networks allow for a variable bit-width
quantization for every layer in the network. A major limitation of existing work is that the bit-width for each layer
must be predefined during training time. This allows little flexibility if the characteristics of the device on which
the network is deployed change during runtime. In this
work, we propose Bit-Mixer, the very first method to train
a meta-quantized network where during test time any layer
can change its bit-width without affecting at all the overall
network’s ability for highly accurate inference. To this end,
we make 2 key contributions: (a) Transitional Batch-Norms,
and (b) a 3-stage optimization process which is shown capable of training such a network. We show that our method
can result in mixed precision networks that exhibit the desirable flexibility properties for on-device deployment without
compromising accuracy. Code will be made available.

1. Introduction
Despite their unprecedented accuracy, directly deploying Deep Neural Networks on devices with limited computational resources and/or power constraints remains prohibitive. To address this problem, a series of related research directions have emerged such as network pruning [29, 35, 25], network compression [24, 40, 27], neural
architecture search [28, 6] and network quantization. The
later offers the most straightforward improvements as using
fewer bits for the weights and activations significantly reduces the compute and storage requirements. For example,
switching from FP32 to Int-8 precision, a 4× improvement
in terms of speed and storage is obtained without any bells
and whistles. This paper is on mixed-precision networks
which allow for a variable bit-width quantization for every
layer in the network.
Mixed-bit precision networks allow for a finer granularity of quantization at a layer level and, hence, offer practical advantages in terms of finding a more optimal tradeoff between efficiency (i.e. speed) and memory require-

ments, and network accuracy. While this is more flexible
than having the same bit-width across the whole network,
mixed-bit precision approaches have also their own limitations. Firstly, due to an ever-growing number of different hardware platforms that a developer needs to support,
each with its own unique characteristics and capabilities,
quantizing networks, partially or fully, with mixed-bit precision in order to obtain an optimal trade-off between accuracy and speed becomes challenging. Secondly, and more
importantly, even on the same device, due to either other
concurrent processes running, battery level, temperature, or
simply prioritization, the available resources can vary. Ideally, a network should be able to dynamically react to these
changes and adapt its quantization level per layer or module on the fly without incurring undesirable, or even more
importantly, unpredictable penalties on inference accuracy.
The method we propose in this paper, coined Bit-Mixer,
attempts to provide an answer to the aforementioned challenges. Bit-Mixer shifts away the focus from finding the
optimal bit-with allocation per layer during training as
done in all previous work. Instead, we propose to train a
meta-quantized network that during test time can switch to
any quantization level for any layer in the network. Training such meta-networks is however non-trivial due to the exponential number of unique combinations, the weight sharing constraint across different bit-widths, and the drastic
variations in representational power that occur when the bitwidth changes (e.g. 4 bits vs 1 bit). To this end, we make
the following contributions:
1. Transitional Batch-Norms: To properly compensate
for the distribution shift that arises when a change in
the bit-width occurs between two consecutive layers,
for each transition between different bit-widths, we
propose to learn a separate batch normalization layer,
coined Transitional Batch-Norm.
2. 3-stage Optimization: We firstly propose an efficient
2-stage process to train an intermediate meta-network
which at runtime can select different bit-widths which
however are shared across the entire network. Then,
a 3-rd final stage is introduced to gradually transition

5188

