A Hybrid Frequency-Spatial Domain Model for Sparse Image Reconstruction in
Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy

1

Bintao He1 , Fa Zhang2 , Huanshui Zhang1,∗ , Renmin Han1, *
Research Center for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Shandong University
2
High Performance Computer Research Center, ICT, CAS

Abstract
Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) is a
powerful technique in high-resolution atomic imaging of
materials. Decreasing scanning time and reducing electron beam exposure with an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio
are two popular research aspects when applying STEM to
beam-sensitive materials. Specifically, partially sampling
with fixed electron doses is one of the most important solutions, and then the lost information is restored by computational methods. Following successful applications of
deep learning in image in-painting, we have developed an
encoder-decoder network to reconstruct STEM images in
extremely sparse sampling cases. In our model, we combine both local pixel information from convolution operators and global texture features, by applying specific filter
operations on the frequency domain to acquire initial reconstruction and global structure prior. Our method can
effectively restore texture structures and be robust in different sampling ratios with Poisson noise. A comprehensive
study demonstrates that our method gains about 50% performance enhancement in comparison with the state-of-art
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/
icthrm/Sparse-Sampling-Reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy(STEM)
has become a powerful and successful technique in the
imaging of “beam stable” materials such as inorganic crystalline samples. However, to achieve high spatial resolution
better than 0.5 Å [2, 10], an order of magnitude for electron
beam doses (typically in excess of 105 −106 e− /Å2 ) is necessary, in which the high-energy electron beam may burn
the materials and destroy the original structures. Therefore,
the imaging capability of a STEM technique at low electron
dose is critical for beam-sensitive materials. By decreasing
the dwell time at a pixel (scan faster) or directly reducing
* All correspondence should be addressed to Huanshui Zhang
(hszhang@sdu.edu.cn) and Renmin Han (hanrenmin@sdu.edu.cn).

the electron accelerator voltage [18], we can achieve low
electron dose imaging with a reduced number of electrons
dashing and passing through samples in unit time [3]. However, the low electron dose configuration leads to another
problem, i.e., the sparsity of the sampling signals and low
signal-to-noise ratio.
Because the electron number per pixel determines the
credibility of a pixel, given total electron doses, sparse sampling makes a pixel acquire more electrons, leading to a
more credible pixel value. Meanwhile, for a STEM system
with 200-300 keV primary beam energy, the Poisson noise
dominates the noise distribution [13, 25, 14]. A one-pass
sparse sampling (or partial scanning) outputs a scatter map
of the true signals of a sample. Except for partial scanning,
multi-pass scanning strategies are developed to further reduce electron beam damage. To obtain the structure details,
restoring missing signals from the scatter map is necessary.
Traditional reconstruction methods in sparse sampling
develop from basic frequency filter to compressed sensing
framework. Fourier or wavelets transform combined with
amplitude filter, frequency filter, and phase drift can roughly
restore the repeating structures [20, 26]. But filter methods are only applicable for materials with a large range of
fixed texture structures, and they can’t accurately determine
the material boundaries, let alone any discrepancy between
the internal structures. Compressed sensing (CS) theory
[8, 5, 4] offers an alternative idea to overcome the limitation. CS makes the assumption that a set of signals is able
to be represented by a suitable basis in an extremely sparse
form if the system satisfies several preliminaries. And if
the sensing matrix obeys i.i.d Bernoulli distribution given
a sparse rate, CS theory guarantees the feasibility and efficiency of image restoration. To achieve satisfying results,
Traditional CS methods such as Group-based Sparse Representation (GSR) [28] and Beta Process Factor Analysis
(BPFA) [29] require almost a dozen hours’ execution time,
which can’t meet the practical need of real-time imaging.
Due to the limitation of execution speed, convolution
neural network (CNN) based methods are recently proposed [16, 1, 23, 11, 24, 27, 19]. Well-trained networks

2682

