Adaptive Hierarchical Graph Reasoning with Semantic Coherence for
Video-and-Language Inference
Juncheng Li1

Siliang Tang1∗ Linchao Zhu2 Haochen Shi3 Xuanwen Huang1
Fei Wu1 Yi Yang1 Yueting Zhuang1
1
2
Zhejiang University ReLER, University of Technology Sydney 3 Université de Montréal
{junchengli, siliang, xwhuang, wufei, yangyics, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn , linchao.zhu@uts.edu.au
haochen.shi@umontreal.ca

Abstract
Video-and-Language Inference is a recently proposed
task for joint video-and-language understanding. This new
task requires a model to draw inference on whether a natural language statement entails or contradicts a given video
clip. In this paper, we study how to address three critical challenges for this task: judging the global correctness of the statement involved multiple semantic meanings,
joint reasoning over video and subtitles, and modeling longrange relationships and complex social interactions. First,
we propose an adaptive hierarchical graph network that
achieves in-depth understanding of the video over complex
interactions. Specifically, it performs joint reasoning over
video and subtitles in three hierarchies, where the graph
structure is adaptively adjusted according to the semantic
structures of the statement. Secondly, we introduce semantic coherence learning to explicitly encourage the semantic
coherence of the adaptive hierarchical graph network from
three hierarchies. The semantic coherence learning can further improve the alignment between vision and linguistics,
and the coherence across a sequence of video segments. Experimental results show that our method significantly outperforms the baseline by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Understanding video story involves analyzing and simulating human vision, language, thinking, and behavior,
which is a significant challenge to current machine learning
technology [21]. Recently, with the advances of large-scale
video datasets [1, 5, 8, 24, 49], joint video-and-language understanding has received increased attention. Several videoand-language tasks have been proposed, such as video cap∗ Siliang Tang is the corresponding author.

00:03 --> 00:05 00:05 --> 00:07
(woman) Give
(man) Gavin
Mitchell's office. me that phone.
(woman) Rachel
Green's office.

00:08 --> 00:12
(woman) Hello,
this is Rachel
Green. How
can I help you?

00:12 --> 00:17
(woman) Uhhuh. Okay,
then. I'll pass
you back to
your son.

00:18 --> 00:21
(man) Hey,
Mom. No,
that's just my
secretary.

Statement:
The woman becomes upset when the man answers the phone because he pretends it is
his own office.
Temporal meaning
Causal meaning
Central meaning

Figure 1: The first two rows show a video clip paired with
its aligned subtitles. The third row shows a statement with
multiple semantic meanings.
tioning [16, 48, 61, 14, 27, 13, 41, 50], text-to-video temporal grounding [15, 3, 6, 29, 36, 59, 63], and video question
answering [28, 60, 47, 23, 25, 37]. In particular, Video-andLanguage Inference (VLI) [33] is a recently proposed task
to foster deeper investigations in video-and-language understanding. Given a video clip with aligned subtitles and a natural language statement based on the video content, a model
needs to infer whether the statement entails or contradicts
the given video clip. To support the study of this new task, a
large-scale dataset, named VIOLIN (VIdeO-and-Language
INference), is introduced.
Compared with TVQA/video captioning where most QA
pairs/captions focus on identifying explicit visual cues (e.g.,
objects, actions, persons), VLI is more challenging and requires more sophisticated reasoning skills, such as interpreting human emotions and relations, understanding the
events, and inferring causal relations of events throughout
the video. First, a single statement may involve multiple semantic meanings, making it harder to judge the global correctness. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the statement consists of three semantic phrases. If the model recognizes the
central meaning and the temporal meaning but ignores the

1867

