Cherry-Picking Gradients: Learning Low-Rank Embeddings of Visual Data via
Differentiable Cross-Approximation
Mikhail Usvyatsov1 , Anastasia Makarova1 , Rafael Ballester-Ripoll2 , Maxim Rakhuba3 , Andreas
Krause1 , and Konrad Schindler1
1

ETH Zürich, 2 IE University, 3 HSE University

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end trainable framework that processes large-scale visual data tensors by looking at a fraction of their entries only. Our method combines a neural network encoder with a tensor train decomposition
to learn a low-rank latent encoding, coupled with crossapproximation (CA) to learn the representation through a
subset of the original samples. CA is an adaptive sampling algorithm that is native to tensor decompositions and
avoids working with the full high-resolution data explicitly.
Instead, it actively selects local representative samples that
we fetch out-of-core and on demand. The required number
of samples grows only logarithmically with the size of the
input. Our implicit representation of the tensor in the network enables processing large grids that could not be otherwise tractable in their uncompressed form. The proposed
approach is particularly useful for large-scale multidimensional grid data (e.g., 3D tomography), and for tasks that
require context over a large receptive field (e.g., predicting
the medical condition of entire organs). The code is available at https://github.com/aelphy/c-pic.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) in combination with parallel processing on GPUs
have brought about dramatic improvements in machine
learning for image data. Unfortunately, parallel hardware is
memory-limited, leading to a curse of dimensionality: stateof-the-art 2D network architectures are typically not viable
for data with 3 or more dimensions, because one runs out of
memory to store the corresponding tensors. Despite efforts
to mitigate the problem via sparse convolutions [11, 18, 19]
or octrees [42, 50], one must in practice limit the size of
the inputs. E.g., the upper bound for 3D volumetric data is
about 5123 voxels on high-end commodity hardware.

X

Ur

Encoder

X

T
r Vr

Decoder

X̂ = Ur

X̂

T
r Vr

Figure 1: 2D illustration of learned low-rank embedding:
rank-3 compression of the input with SVD (the matrix
equivalent of TT decomposition) severely degrades the image (bottom row). In contrast, our encoder warps the image
such that the same rank-3 truncation loses little information
and can be decoded almost perfectly (top row).
It is well-known that visual data usually lives on lowerdimensional manifolds and, therefore, is in principle compressible; c.f . classical ideas like Eigenfaces [48] or nonnegative tensor factorisation [44]. This motivates us
to seek a more memory-efficient representation of highdimensional visual data that is more efficient, and at the
same time compatible with the gradient-based learning process of neural networks.
Selecting a sampling resolution at which data is recorded
and/or processed is always a trade-off between resources
(memory, run-time, power, etc.) and the level of detail and
context that the algorithm has access to. Indeed, relatively
small tensors are sufficient for applications where either
high-frequency details are not crucial and one can operate
at low spatial resolution (e.g., face recognition), or longrange context has little impact and one can process local
windows (e.g., character recognition). But some tasks do
require sharp details and long-range context. For instance,
it has been shown that 3D object classification performance
111426

