From Two to One: A New Scene Text Recognizer with
Visual Language Modeling Network
Yuxin Wang1 , Hongtao Xie1 , Shancheng Fang1 *, Jing Wang2 , Shenggao Zhu2 and Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Huawei Cloud & AI
wangyx58@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie,fangsc,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn
{wangjing105,zhushenggao}@huawei.com

Abstract
In this paper, we abandon the dominant complex language model and rethink the linguistic learning process in
the scene text recognition. Different from previous methods considering the visual and linguistic information in two
separate structures, we propose a Visual Language Modeling Network (VisionLAN), which views the visual and linguistic information as a union by directly enduing the vision
model with language capability. Specially, we introduce the
text recognition of character-wise occluded feature maps in
the training stage. Such operation guides the vision model
to use not only the visual texture of characters, but also the
linguistic information in visual context for recognition when
the visual cues are confused (e.g. occlusion, noise, etc.).
As the linguistic information is acquired along with visual
features without the need of extra language model, VisionLAN significantly improves the speed by 39% and adaptively considers the linguistic information to enhance the
visual features for accurate recognition. Furthermore, an
Occlusion Scene Text (OST) dataset is proposed to evaluate the performance on the case of missing characterwise visual cues. The state of-the-art results on several
benchmarks prove our effectiveness. Code and dataset are
available at https://github.com/wangyuxin87/
VisionLAN .

1. Introduction
As a fundamental and pivotal task, scene text recognition (STR) aiming to read the text content from natural images has attracted great interest in computer vision
[15, 31, 32, 42, 46]. By taking the text image as input
and textual prediction as output, some early methods regard
the text recognition as a symbol classification task [31, 19].
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison between previous methods and ours. Top
left: the architecture of previous methods. Top right: the extra introduced computation cost for capturing linguistic information when the word length increases. Bottom: the proposed VisionLAN endues the vision model with ability to initiatively capture the linguistic information in visual context during the training
stage. In the testing stage, only the vision model is used for prediction.

However, it is hard to recognize images with confused visual cues (e.g. occlusion, noise, etc.), which are beyond visual discrimination. As the scene text image contains twolevel contents: visual texture and linguistic information, inspired by the Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods
[23, 5], recent STR works have shifted their research focus to acquiring linguistic information to assist recognition
[47, 46, 28, 45]. Thus, the two-step architecture of vision
and language models (top left of Fig. 1) is popular in recent
methods. Specifically, the vision model only focuses on visual texture of characters without considering the linguistic
information. Then, the language model predicts the relationship between characters through the linguistic learning
structure (RNN [32], CNN [7] and Transformer [45]).
Though these methods achieve promising results, there
are still two problems: 1) the extra huge computation
cost. The computation cost of language model increases
significantly with the word length getting longer (linear
growth for RNN [32]/ CNN [7] and quadratic growth for

14194

