ECACL: A Holistic Framework for Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation
Kai Li1,2*, Chang Liu2, Handong Zhao3, Yulun Zhang2, Yun Fu2
1

NEC Laboratories, America, 2 Northeastern University, 3 Adobe Research

kaili@nec-labs.com, liu.chang6@northeastern.edu, hdzhao@adobe.com
yulun100@gmail.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
This paper studies Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation
(SSDA), a practical yet under-investigated research topic
that aims to learn a model of good performance using unlabeled samples and a few labeled samples in the target
domain, with the help of labeled samples from a source
domain. Several SSDA methods have been proposed recently, which however fail to fully exploit the value of the
few labeled target samples. In this paper, we propose
Enhanced Categorical Alignment and Consistency Learning (ECACL), a holistic SSDA framework that incorporates
multiple mutually complementary domain alignment techniques. ECACL includes two categorical domain alignment
techniques that achieve class-level alignment, a strong data
augmentation based technique that enhances the model’s
generalizability and a consistency learning based technique
that forces the model to be robust with image perturbations.
These techniques are applied on one or multiple of the three
inputs (labeled source, unlabeled target, and labeled target)
and align the domains from different perspectives. ECACL
unifies them together and achieves fairly comprehensive
domain alignments that are much better than the existing
methods: For example, ECACL raises the state-of-the-art
accuracy from 68.4 to 81.1 on VisDA2017 and from 45.5 to
53.4 on DomainNet for the 1-shot setting. Our code is available at https://github.com/kailigo/pacl.

1. Introduction
Domain adaptation investigates techniques of avoiding
severe performance drop when deploying a model on a new
domain (target) that has domain gap with the one (source)
which the model is trained on. Most existing research focuses on Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) where a
model is trained jointly with unlabeled target data and labeled source data. Many effective UDA approaches have
been proposed, from early works that project data from both
* Work done when Kai Li was with Northeastern University.

domains to a shared feature space [13, 34], to recent ones
that are based on adversarial learning [43, 28].
This paper makes a slight diversion from the mainstream
UDA research direction and investigates how much it can
help if we are further provided with a few (e.g., one sample per class) labeled target samples. We call these scarce
labeled target samples as “landmarks”. This is a practical
(with minimal labeling effort) yet under-investigated problem and is referred as semi-supervised domain adaptation
(SSDA). Preliminary works before the deep learning era use
landmarks to more precisely measure the data distribution
mismatch between source and target domains, either based
on Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) or domain invariant subspace learning [1, 10, 50]. Recent ones revisit this
problem and establish new evaluation benchmarks in the
deep learning context [38, 18]. However, these prior works
have not fully realized the value of the precious landmarks:
They are mainly used to optimize the cross-entropy loss
along with the labeled source samples that are of a much
greater amount; the contribution of the landmarks is significantly diluted and thus the learned model shall still be
biased towards the source domain.
In this paper, we propose Enhanced Categorical Alignment and Consistency Learning (ECACL), a SSDA framework which unifies multiple techniques that align domains
from different complementary perspectives. As we have access to a few labeled samples from the target domain, i.e.,
landmarks, we can align the domains in a supervised way
by explicitly aligning samples of the same category from
the two domains. We propose two techniques to achieve
this objective. The first one is based on the prototypical loss
[40, 23]. We calculate a target prototype for each class by
averaging feature embeddings of the landmarks from that
class. Then, source samples are aligned with the target prototype from the same class. The second one is based on
the triplet loss. We explicitly push source samples close to
the landmarks from the same class and apart from the landmarks from the different classes.
Overfitting would likely occur since the number of landmarks is small. An intuitive approach to this is data aug-

8578

