Weak Adaptation Learning:
Addressing Cross-domain Data Insufficiency with Weak Annotator
Shichao Xu *, Lixu Wang *, Yixuan Wang, Qi Zhu
Northwestern University, Evanston, USA
{shichaoxu2023, lixuwang2025, yixuanwang2024}@u.northwestern.edu, qzhu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Data quantity and quality are crucial factors for datadriven learning methods. In some target problem domains,
there are not many data samples available, which could
significantly hinder the learning process. While data from
similar domains may be leveraged to help through domain
adaptation, obtaining high-quality labeled data for those
source domains themselves could be difficult or costly. To
address such challenges on data insufficiency for classification problem in a target domain, we propose a weak adaptation learning (WAL) approach that leverages unlabeled
data from a similar source domain, a low-cost weak annotator that produces labels based on task-specific heuristics, labeling rules, or other methods (albeit with inaccuracy), and a small amount of labeled data in the target domain. Our approach first conducts a theoretical analysis on
the error bound of the trained classifier with respect to the
data quantity and the performance of the weak annotator,
and then introduces a multi-stage weak adaptation learning
method to learn an accurate classifier by lowering the error
bound. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach in learning an accurate classifier with limited
labeled data in the target domain and unlabeled data in the
source domain.

1. Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) techniques, especially those
based on deep neural networks, have shown great promises
in many applications, to a large extent due to their abilities in studying and memorizing the knowledge embedded
in high-quality training data [12]. Having a large number
of data samples with accurate labels could enable effective supervised learning methods for improving ML model
performance. However, it may be difficult to collect many
data samples in some problem domains or scenarios, such
as for the training of autonomous vehicles during extreme
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

weather (e.g., fog, snow, hail) and natural disasters (e.g.,
mudflow), or for search and rescue robots during forest fire
and earthquake. One possible solution to such problem of
data unavailability is using data from other similar domains
to train the target domain model and then fine-tune it with
limited target domain data, i.e., through domain adaptation.
Taking the aforementioned cases as examples, while there
may not be much data in hailing weather, we could collect
data in days with heavy rain; while it may be difficult to
find images during earthquakes for large parts of America,
we could collect images in Japan, where earthquakes occur
more often in a different environment. However, obtaining
a large amount of high-quality labeled data in these source
domains could still be challenging and costly.
To address the above data insufficiency challenges across
domains, we consider leveraging low-cost weak annotators
that can automatically generate large quantity of labeled
data based on certain labeling rules/functions, task-specific
heuristics, or other methods (which may be inaccurate to
some degree). More specifically, our approach considers
the following setting for classification problems: There is
a small amount of data samples with accurate labels collected for the target domain, which is called target domain
data or target data in this paper for simplicity. There is
also a large amount of unlabeled data that can be acquired
from a similar but different source domain (i.e., there exists domain discrepancy), which is called source (domain)
data in this paper. Finally, there is a weak annotator that
can produce weak (possibly inaccurate) labels on data samples. Our objective is to learn an accurate classifier for the
target domain based on the labeled target data, the initiallyunlabeled source data, and the weak annotator.
The problem we are considering here is related but different from Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) [39, 9, 23]
and Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [24, 8, 47, 7].
In the setting of SSL, the available training data consists of
two parts – one has accurate labels while the other is unlabeled, and the two parts are drawn from the same distribution in terms of training features. This is different from
our problem, where there exists domain discrepancy across

8917

