Detecting Human-Object Relationships in Videos
Jingwei Ji

Rishi Desai Juan Carlos Niebles
Stanford University

{jingweij, rdesai2, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We study a crucial problem in video analysis: humanobject relationship detection. The majority of previous approaches are developed only for the static image scenario,
without incorporating the temporal dynamics so vital to
contextualizing human-object relationships. We propose a
model with Intra- and Inter-Transformers, enabling joint
spatial and temporal reasoning on multiple visual concepts
of objects, relationships, and human poses. We find that
applying attention mechanisms among features distributed
spatio-temporally greatly improves our understanding of
human-object relationships. Our method is validated on
two datasets, Action Genome and CAD-120-EVAR, and
achieves state-of-the-art performance on both of them.

Static image prediction

Spatio-temporal reasoning:
Intra- and Inter-Transformers
……

……

……

1. Introduction
As we develop intelligent agents to understand images
more comprehensively, the computer vision research problems we are solving have become more and more complex. The computer vision community has moved from
classifying images and detecting objects, to detecting object relationships and understanding object interactions. In
real-world applications, we often need to infer human behaviors from videos. In human-centered applications such
as human-robot interaction, senior care [36], and healthcare [19], understanding the interactions people have with
their environment is pivotal. One important problem at the
heart of action recognition is detecting human-object relationships in videos: given the frames of a video, we would
like to detect which objects a person is interacting with and
classify the relationships between the person and objects.
Rather than generating scene graphs on static images
[29, 53, 58, 45], human-object relationship (HOR) detection
in videos focuses on the human and the active objects, that
is the objects the person is actively interacting with. Unlike
human-object interaction (HOI) detection [18, 7, 39, 33],
HOR detection classifies not only the verbs that describe human actions, but also the prepositions between human and
objects, such as “behind”, “beneath” and “in”. While many

Figure 1: We tackle the problem of detecting human-object relationships in videos. Most prior approaches only model humanobject relationships in images and perform static image predictions. We propose extra spatio-temporal reasoning on the top of
static image predictions by intra- and inter-transformers.

verbs are only associated with certain objects, prepositions
are often applicable to numerous object categories.
Compared to scene graph generation and HOI detection
on images, HOR detection in videos faces several challenges. First, the model needs to find out which objects are
the protagonists of the scene. For instance, the clip in Figure 1 contains plenty of background objects that are not of
our interest. How can we accurately focus on only the active
objects? Second, the object detector, a key component in the
detection model, will be confused during model training as
video datasets [24, 60] typically only provide annotations
on active objects. Without the knowledge of human-object
interactions, a simple object detector will mistakenly fire on
both the sat-on chair and those stacked chairs not relevant
to the action. Third, videos can often be blurred at some

8106

