Watch Only Once: An End-to-End Video Action Detection Framework
Shoufa Chen1

Peize Sun1 Enze Xie1 Chongjian Ge1
Lan Ma2,3 Jiajun Shen2,3 Ping Luo1

Jiannan Wu1

1

3

The University of Hong Kong 2 TCL Research
HKU-TCL Joint Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end pipeline, named Watch Once
Only (WOO), for video action detection. Current methods either decouple video action detection task into separated stages of actor localization and action classification or train two separated models within one stage. In
contrast, our approach solves the actor localization and
action classification simultaneously in a unified network.
The whole pipeline is significantly simplified by unifying
the backbone network and eliminating many hand-crafted
components. WOO takes a unified video backbone to simultaneously extract features for actor location and action
classification. In addition, we introduce spatial-temporal
action embeddings into our framework and design a spatialtemporal fusion module to obtain more discriminative features with richer information, which further boosts the action classification performance. Extensive experiments on
AVA and JHMDB datasets show that WOO achieves stateof-the-art performance, while still reduces up to 16.7%
GFLOPs compared with existing methods. We hope our
work can inspire re-thinking the convention of action detection and serve as a solid baseline for end-to-end action
detection. Code is available at https://github.com/
ShoufaChen/WOO.

Person
Detector
NMS
Video
Backbone

Action

(a) Two-Stage
Unified
Backbone

Box
Action

(b) End-to-End
Figure 1: Motivation of WOO. (a) Previous dominant
video action detection methods usually adopt two separate
networks: an independent 2D detection model for actor localization from every key frames, and a 3D video model for
action classification from video clips. (b) Our end-to-end
unified framework uses a single backbone network to handle both 2D image detection and 3D video classification (i.e.
2D spatial dimensions plus a temporal dimension). This
unified backbone only “watches” an input video once, and
directly produces both actor localization and action classification.

1. Introduction
Video action detection consists of actor bounding box
localization and action type classification. It has a significant impact on applications such as robotics, security,
health, and so on. Although considerable progress on accuracy performance has been made, the complex and isolated
pipelines of existing methods obstruct their scalability and
practicality in the real world.
The complexity of current methods comes from a fundamental dilemma between actor localization and action classification, that is, using a single key frame is “positive” for
actor localization but “negative” for action classification,

while using multiple frames has a reverse impact. This is
because actor localization requires a 2D detection model to
predict actor bounding boxes on the key frame of a video
clip. At this stage, taking neighboring frames of the clip
into account brings extra computation and memory cost as
well as localization noise. In contrast, action classification heavily relies on a 3D video model to extract temporal knowledge embedded in the video sequence. A single
key frame brings a poor temporal motion representation for
action classification.
Two possible workarounds are proposed by previous

8178

