FloW: A Dataset and Benchmark for Floating Waste Detection in Inland Waters
Yuwei Cheng∗1,2 , Jiannan Zhu∗1,4 , Mengxin Jiang1,2 , Jie Fu3 , Changsong Pang1,4 , Peidong Wang1,2
Kris Sankaran3 , Olawale Onabola3 , Yimin Liu2 , Dianbo Liu3 , Yoshua Bengio3
1
ORCA-Uboat, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Mila-Québec AI Institute, 4 Northwestern Polytechnical University

Abstract
Marine debris is severely threatening the marine lives
and causing sustained pollution to the whole ecosystem. To
prevent the wastes from getting into the ocean, it is helpful
to clean up the floating wastes in inland waters using the autonomous cleaning devices like unmanned surface vehicles.
The cleaning efficiency relies on a high-accurate and robust
object detection system. However, the small size of the target, the strong light reflection over water surface, and the
reflection of other objects on bank-side all bring challenges
to the vision-based object detection system. To promote
the practical application for autonomous floating wastes
cleaning, we present FloW† , the first dataset for floating
waste detection in inland water areas. The dataset consists of an image sub-dataset FloW-Img and a multimodal
sub-dataset FloW-RI which contains synchronized millimeter wave radar data and images. Accurate annotations
for images and radar data are provided, supporting floating waste detection strategies based on image, radar data,
and the fusion of two sensors. We perform several baseline experiments on our dataset, including vision-based and
radar-based detection methods. The results show that, the
detection accuracy is relatively low and floating waste detection still remains a challenging task.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the marine wastes problem has arisen increasing concern of researchers and the general public. The
wastes, especially the plastics inundating into the oceans
are severely threatening the marine lives and causing sustained pollution to the whole ecosystem [24] (as illustrated
in Figure 1(a)). However, according to [50], only 15% of
the marine wastes are floating over the ocean surface, while
15% remain in the water column and 70% subside on the
seafloor. While there are many projects launched to clean
the floating marine wastes, it is essential to prevent wastes
* Equal contribution.
† FloW dataset as well as the development tools are publicly available

at: https://github.com/ORCA-Uboat/FloW-Dataset.

(a) Marine Wastes

(b) Inland Water Wastes

(c) Cleaning Manually

(d) Cleaning Autonomously

Figure 1. Severe water pollution and cleaning methods.

from getting into the ocean. Land-based sources, as opposed to marine-based sources, are considered the dominant
input of wastes into oceans [20]. Thus, cleaning floating
wastes in inland water areas, such as canals, rivers, lakes,
and bays (as illustrated in Figure 1(b)), is a vital approach
to slow the growing trend of marine wastes and water pollution.
Traditional strategies to cope with the floating wastes in
inland waters mainly rely on manpower as shown in Figure
1(c). However, manual cleaning is low-efficient and costly
when there are a large amount of floating wastes or the polluted water area is pretty broad [48]. What’s more, the potential risks like the toxic gas and liquid from the drainage
systems [49] and accidental drowning, limit the scenes of
manual cleaning. Therefore, efficient autonomous floating
waste cleaning methods are in great and urgent demand.
Recently, unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) have attracted a lot of attention for their usage in various missions.
In particular, USVs have shown great potential in environmental applications, especially the floating waste cleaning
[1, 48] (as shown in Figure 1(d)) since USVs can enter
some hard-to-reach areas and operate independently. [17]
has done a survey on river plastic pollution capture devices
and listed 40 of them for comparison. Compared to some
stationary devices, a good cleaning USV can be considered

10953

