FLAR: A Unified Prototype Framework for Few-sample
Lifelong Active Recognition
Lei Fan, Peixi Xiong, Wei Wei and Ying Wu
Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, USA
{leifan, peixixiong2018, weiwei2022}@u.northwestern.edu, yingwu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Intelligent agents with visual sensors are allowed to actively explore their observations for better recognition performance. This task is referred to as Active Recognition
(AR). Currently, most methods toward AR are implemented
under a fixed-category setting, which constrains their applicability in realistic scenarios that need to incrementally
learn new classes without retraining from scratch. Further,
collecting massive data for novel categories is expensive.
To address this demand, in this paper, we propose a unified
framework towards Few-sample Lifelong Active Recognition (FLAR), which aims at performing active recognition
on progressively arising novel categories that only have few
training samples. Three difficulties emerge with FLAR: the
lifelong recognition policy learning, the knowledge preservation of old categories, and the lack of training samples.
To this end, our approach integrates prototypes, a robust
representation for limited training samples, into a reinforcement learning solution, which motivates the agent to move
towards views resulting in more discriminative features.
Catastrophic forgetting during lifelong learning is then alleviated with knowledge distillation. Extensive experiments
across two datasets, respectively for object and scene recognition, demonstrate that even without large training samples, the proposed approach could learn to actively recognize novel categories in a class-incremental behavior.

Rotate

“What is it?” - Banana

Rotate

“Where am I?” - Beach

(a) The schematic illustrations of two AR tasks: active 3D object recognition and panoramic scene recognition. The system could intelligently select
actions to acquire better views.

Time (Robot Exploration)
Base classes

Novel classes met during exploration

...
(b) A demonstration of lifelong learning during robot exploration. The system needs to expand its knowledge to novel categories that are discovered
continuously.

Active
Recognition

LAR
FLAR

Lifelong
Learning

(c) A diagram depicting the relation with other tasks. The terms LAR and
FLAR are abbreviations for Lifelong Active Recognition and Few-sample
Lifelong Active Recognition.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. FLAR is one challenging task that requires expanding dynamically to novel classes with few training samples. Meanwhile,
the task setting fits the practical needs of robotic applications that
need exploring previously unseen environments.

Visual recognition has been widely studied and achieved
remarkable success in recent decades. In contrast to passive recognition from a still image, in robot learning scenarios, an intelligent agent is allowed to explore different
viewpoints and is equipped with the capability to make decisions about what to observe. This problem is referred to as
Active Recognition (AR), with two specific tasks illustrated
in Figure 1(a).
A number of AR methods [4, 18, 12, 6, 23, 13, 7] have
been proposed over the years with learning-based models.

Despite achieving promising results, these methods are confined to a classical learning setting, i.e., the recognition decision can only be made for the samples from the trained
categories, and massive training data are usually required
to facilitate the learning process. When it comes to more
practical settings where novel categories are continuously
emerging, and more notoriously, only a few samples are
available for the emerging category, it is not clear whether
these models still remain effectual.

15394

