LSG-CPD: Coherent Point Drift with Local Surface Geometry
for Point Cloud Registration
Weixiao Liu 1,2 Hongtao Wu 1,2 Gregory S. Chirikjian1,2 *
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Johns Hopkins University, USA
{mpewxl, mpehtw, mpegre}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Probabilistic point cloud registration methods are becoming more popular because of their robustness. However, unlike point-to-plane variants of iterative closest point (ICP)
which incorporate local surface geometric information such
as surface normals, most probabilistic methods (e.g., coherent point drift (CPD)) ignore such information and build
Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) with isotropic Gaussian
covariances. This results in sphere-like GMM components
which only penalize the point-to-point distance between the
two point clouds. In this paper, we propose a novel method
called CPD with Local Surface Geometry (LSG-CPD) for
rigid point cloud registration. Our method adaptively adds
different levels of point-to-plane penalization on top of the
point-to-point penalization based on the flatness of the local
surface. This results in GMM components with anisotropic
covariances. We formulate point cloud registration as a
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) problem and solve it
with the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm. In the
E step, we demonstrate that the computation can be recast
into simple matrix manipulations and efficiently computed
on a GPU. In the M step, we perform an unconstrained
optimization on a matrix Lie group to efficiently update
the rigid transformation of the registration. The proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of
accuracy and robustness on various datasets captured with
range scanners, RGBD cameras, and LiDARs. Also, it is
significantly faster than modern implementations of CPD.
The source code is available at https://github.com/
ChirikjianLab/LSG-CPD.git.

Figure 1. CPD with Local Surface Geometry (LSG-CPD). Green
denotes the source set; purple denotes the target set. Unlike CPD
[29] which constructs a sphere-like GMM component (c) for each
point in the source set, the proposed method constructs GMM components on the target set. In the proposed method, plane-like GMM
components (a) are created for points with small surface variation [31], i.e., flat local surface; sphere-like GMM components (b)
are created for points with large surface variation.

spondence obtained via the closest point. Various point-toplane ICP variants [7, 8, 35, 36] make use of surface normals
and take advantage of the tendency that most point cloud
data are locally planar. However, ICP and its variants require
good initialization and are susceptible to outliers, noise, and
missing points.
Probabilistic methods formulate point cloud registration
as a probability density estimation problem [14,22,29,37]. In
particular, methods such as CPD [29] and FilterReg [14] describe the geometry of the first point cloud via a probability
distribution over Euclidean space with a GMM. The GMM is
constructed by placing a Gaussian component with isotropic
covariance at every point in the set. The second set is fitted to it via MLE. The introduction of the outlier component
in the GMM and the sphere-like isotropic covariance makes
these methods robust. However, unlike point-to-plane ICP
variants [7, 8, 35, 36] which take advantage of the local planar geometry in point cloud data, these methods ignore such
information. While these methods are robust, the isotropic
covariance does not faithfully capture the local planar geometry of the point clouds, leading to inaccuracy in registration.
In this paper, we propose a novel method, CPD with Local Surface Geometry (LSG-CPD), which takes into account
local surface geometry: surface normal and surface variation. Surface variation [31] is closely related to curvature
and surface flatness. Intuitively, the flatter the local surface,

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration plays an important role in various
computer vision tasks [7, 30, 34, 39]. It is a task of aligning two point clouds and estimating the relative transformation between them. When the correspondences between the
points are known, methods have been proposed to solve it
efficiently [5, 41]. Our paper focuses on the correspondencefree registration. The most popular method, ICP [2], iteratively computes the alignment from point-to-point corre* Corresponding author

15293

