Weakly Supervised Person Search with Region Siamese Networks
Chuchu Han1 ,* Kai Su2 , Dongdong Yu2 , Zehuan Yuan2 , Changxin Gao1 ,
Nong Sang1†, Yi Yang3 , Changhu Wang2
1
Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
ByteDance 3 University of Technology Sydney
{hcc, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn

Yi.Yang@uts.edu.au

{sukai, yudongdong, yuanzehuan, wangchanghu}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Supervised learning is dominant in person search, but
it requires elaborate labeling of bounding boxes and identities. Large-scale labeled training data is often difficult
to collect, especially for person identities. A natural question is whether a good person search model can be trained
without the need of identity supervision. In this paper,
we present a weakly supervised setting where only bounding box annotations are available. Based on this new setting, we provide an effective baseline model termed Region
Siamese Networks (R-SiamNets). Towards learning useful representations for recognition in the absence of identity labels, we supervise the R-SiamNet with instance-level
consistency loss and cluster-level contrastive loss. For
instance-level consistency learning, the R-SiamNet is constrained to extract consistent features from each person region with or without out-of-region context. For cluster-level
contrastive learning, we enforce the aggregation of closest instances and the separation of dissimilar ones in feature space. Extensive experiments validate the utility of our
weakly supervised method. Our model achieves the rank-1
of 87.1% and mAP of 86.0% on CUHK-SYSU benchmark,
which surpasses several fully supervised methods, such as
OIM [36] and MGTS [4], by a clear margin. More promising performance can be reached by incorporating extra
training data. We hope this work could encourage the future research in this field.

1. Introduction
Person search [36] aims to localize and recognize a
query person from a gallery of unconstrained scene images. Despite tremendous progress achieved by recent
works [36, 35, 26, 37, 11, 10, 5, 44], the training process
* This work was done when Chuchu Han was an intern at ByteDance.
† Corresponding author

ID1

ID2

ID3

ID4

ID5

ID6

unlabeled

(a) Fully supervised setting

unlabeled

(b) Proposed weakly supervised setting

Figure 1. Comparisons between two settings. (a) Fully supervised
setting. The images are annotated with both bounding boxes and
person identities. Note that some identity annotations have lacked
in original person search datasets. (b) The proposed weakly supervised setting. The images only have bounding box annotations.

requires strong supervision in terms of bounding boxes and
identity labels, shown in Fig. 1(a). However, obtaining such
annotations at a large scale can be time-consuming and economically expensive. Even in the most widely used dataset,
CUHK-SYSU [36], almost 72.7% of pedestrian bounding
boxes have no identity annotations. It indicates that labeling identities is more difficult than bounding boxes. The
infeasible identity annotations largely restrict the scalability of supervised methods.
Instead of relying on the expensive labeling, a lot of researchers have been dedicated to training models with no
labels [17, 7] or incomplete labels [27, 45] in the areas of
image recognition, object detection, etc. Nevertheless, relevant explorations are missing in the field of person search.
To fill the gap, we investigate the person search modeling in

12006

