Detail Me More: Improving GAN’s photo-realism of complex scenes
Raghudeep Gadde
Amazon

Qianli Feng
Amazon

Aleix M Martinez
Amazon

Figure 1: 1MP synthetic images of living rooms. Images generated using the proposed approach with 5 fine-grained discriminators for couches, chairs, coffee tables, end tables, and lamps. Zoom in to see the improved photo-realism of the details of
the objects in the scene as compared to previous generative models.

Abstract
Generative models can synthesize photo-realistic images
of a single object. For example, for human faces, algorithms
learn to model the local shape and shading of the face components, i.e., changes in the brows, eyes, nose, mouth, jaw
line, etc. This is possible because all faces have two brows,
two eyes, a nose and a mouth, approximately in the same
location. The modeling of complex scenes is however much
more challenging because the scene components and their
location vary from image to image. For example, living
rooms contain a varying number of products belonging to
many possible categories and locations, e.g., a lamp may
or may not be present in an endless number of possible locations. In the present work, we propose to add a “broker”
module in Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) to solve
this problem. The broker is tasked to mediate the use of multiple discriminators in the appropriate image locales. For
example, if a lamp is detected or wanted in a specific area of
the scene, the broker assigns a fine-grained lamp discriminator to that image patch. This allows the generator to
learn the shape and shading models of the lamp. The resulting multi-fine-grained optimization problem is able to synthesize complex scenes with almost the same level of photorealism as single object images. We demonstrate the generability of the proposed approach on several GAN algorithms (BigGAN, ProGAN, StyleGAN, StyleGAN2), image
resolutions (2562 to 10242 ), and datasets. Our approach
yields significant improvements over state-of-the-art GAN
algorithms.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the improvement in the photo-realism
of the images synthesized by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) has been extraordinary. We now have algorithms than can synthesize high-resolution images of human
faces, bodies, cats, dogs, cars and other object categories,
with results basically indistinguishable from real photos to
the untrained eye [20, 21, 22, 19, 36, 2, 3, 10, 38].
However, the high-fidelity of these synthetic images does
not translate to the generation of complex scenes with multiple and varying object categories [6, 40]. For example,
GAN-generated images of living rooms and city streets, although good, are easily distinguishable from real photos
even by the untrained eye.
The classical (vanilla) single discriminator GAN is sufficient to help the generator estimate the underlying distribution of a single object class such as a face. In this case,
the underlying distribution models the shape and shading
changes of the face components located approximately at
the same spatial location. But, a single discriminator GAN
has a much harder time aiding the generator to identify the
underlying distribution that models the shape and shading
variations of all possible objects in all possible image locations.
The present paper derives a solution to this problem. Our
key contribution is to include a “broker” module in GANs
to mediate the use of multiple fine-grained discriminators to
areas of the image that need them. For example, when generating an image of a living room, the broker may decide
to use a couch discriminator, a coffee table discriminator,

13950

