DAM: Discrepancy Alignment Metric for Face Recognition
Jiaheng Liu*1 , Yudong Wu*2 , Yichao Wu†2 , Chuming Li2 , Xiaolin Hu3 , Ding Liang2 , Mengyu Wang2
1
Beihang University, 2 SenseTime Group Limited, 3 Tsinghua University
liujiaheng@buaa.edu.cn, {wuyudong, wuyichao, lichuming, liangding}@sensetime.com,
1600017843@pku.edu.cn, xlhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The field of face recognition (FR) has witnessed remarkable progress with the surge of deep learning. The effective loss functions play an important role for FR. In this paper, we observe that a majority of loss functions, including
the widespread triplet loss and softmax-based cross-entropy
loss, embed inter-class (negative) similarity sn and intraclass (positive) similarity sp into similarity pairs and optimize to reduce (sn − sp ) in the training process. However,
in the verification process, existing metrics directly take the
absolute similarity between two features as the confidence
of belonging to the same identity, which inevitably causes
a gap between the training and verification process. To
bridge the gap, we propose a new metric called Discrepancy Alignment Metric (DAM) for verification, which introduces the Local Inter-class Discrepancy (LID) for each
face image to normalize the absolute similarity score. To
estimate the LID of each face image in the verification process, we propose two types of LID Estimation (LIDE) methods, which are reference-based and learning-based estimation methods, respectively. The proposed DAM is plug-andplay and can be easily applied to the most existing methods. Extensive experiments on multiple popular face recognition benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Face recognition based on deep learning has been well
investigated for decades [31, 35, 42]. Most of the progress
depends on large-scale training data [9, 50, 16], deep neural
network architectures [37, 10, 11], and effective loss function designs [26, 6, 41, 39, 53, 27, 4, 25, 13, 7]. Despite
many efforts, most prior works use the sample-to-sample
absolute similarity metric during inference. The identities
are determined by directly thresholding cosine or L2 dis* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

tance for each face image pair. It is inconsistent with the
training process, which optimizes the relative margin between the intra-class and the inter-class similarities.
Threshold

Threshold

∆!

ID1

Cosine

Calibrated

0
ID2

∆!

ID1

1
∆"

1
∆"

ID2

FN TP

Cosine

0

0

Calibrated

1

(a)

0

FN TP
1

(b)

Figure 1: The similarity distributions on different evaluation
metrics of pairs from different IDs. The green histogram
represents the positive pairs, and the red histogram represents the negative pairs. (a): Distribution of cosine similarity metric. ID1 and ID2 have the same margin between
positive and negative pairs, whereas the overall similarity
of pairs of ID2 is less than ID1, which leads to judge a
large number of positive pairs of ID2 as false negatives. (b):
Distribution of our proposed Discrepancy Alignment Metric (DAM). The scores of positive pairs of ID2 are calibrated
to a higher level.

Specifically, the popular softmax-based loss functions
(e.g., ArcFace [5], CosFace [41]) or metric learning based
loss functions (e.g., Triplet loss [27]) seek to reduce sn − sp
or sn − sp + m as the optimization target [32], where sp
is the intra-class (positive) similarity, sn refers to interclass (negative) similarity and m is the margin term to
enhance the discriminative ability. Therefore, the relative score sp − sn indicates the optimization degree for
each face image during the training process. It works well
for common close-set classification, which maintains category weights of the classifier by relative probabilities, i.e.,
zi
cpred = arg max { Pe ezj }C
i=1 . However, in open-set face
i

3814

