ELSD: Efficient Line Segment Detector and Descriptor
Haotian Zhang1 Yicheng Luo1 Fangbo Qin2 Yijia He Xiao Liu1 *
1
Megvii Technology 2 Institute of Automation, CAS
{zhanghaotian,luoyicheng}@megvii.com
heyijia2016@gmail.com

qinfangbo2013@ia.ac.cn

liuxiao@megvii.com

Abstract
We present the novel Efficient Line Segment Detector and
Descriptor (ELSD) to simultaneously detect line segments
and extract their descriptors in an image. Unlike the traditional pipelines that conduct detection and description separately, ELSD utilizes a shared feature extractor for both
detection and description, to provide the essential line features to the higher-level tasks like SLAM and image matching in real time. First, we design a one-stage compact
model, and propose to use the mid-point, angle and length
as the minimal representation of line segment, which also
guarantees the center-symmetry. The non-centerness suppression is proposed to filter out the fragmented line segments caused by lines’ intersections. The fine offset prediction is designed to refine the mid-point localization. Second, the line descriptor branch is integrated with the detector branch, and the two branches are jointly trained in an
end-to-end manner. In the experiments, the proposed ELSD
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the Wireframe
dataset and YorkUrban dataset, in both accuracy and efficiency. The line description ability of ELSD also outperforms the previous works on the line matching task.

1. Introduction
Image perception for low-level visual patterns is an essential issue for many computer vision tasks such as SLAM,
Structure-from-Motion (SfM), and image matching. Local
point features [4, 21, 24] are widely used in these tasks,
and recently the researchers have been exploring the usage
of structural features for better geometric representation[9,
10, 13, 30, 34]. Line segments are the most widely seen
structural features in man-made environments. The reliable
extraction of line segments and the matching across frames
are important for the aforementioned tasks.
Recently, the convolutional neural networks (CNN)
* Corresponding author.
This paper is supported by the National
Key R&D Plan of the Ministry of Science and Technology (Project No.
2020AAA0104400).

Figure 1. Inference speed (FPS) and accuracy (sAP 10 ) on Wireframe dataset.

based line segment detection models have significantly outperformed the traditional methods. The models[33, 36, 38]
consist of two stages. They first detect junctions and then
generate line segment proposals and finally feed the embedding of each line segment into a classifier. Although
these two-stage methods can achieve high performance,
their running speed cannot satisfy real-time applications.
TP-LSD[12] first realizes the compact one-stage detection
by introducing the Tri-points (a root-point and two endpoints) representation of line segment. However, TP-LSD
predicts the two end-points separately and does not leverage
the center-symmetric characteristics of the line segment.
Thus, the predicted root-point might not be the exact midpoint of the two predicted end-points, and even the three
points might be not co-linear. Moreover, the prediction of
the root point is ambiguous especially when the lines intersect with each other so that many false root-points belonging to the fragmented line segments are detected. Besides,
TP-LSD does not differentiate hard and easy examples during training. Some hard root points of line segments may
not be properly detected.
Line segment descriptor is required to represent the line
segment in a high-dimensional metric space, and the same
line in two adjacent frames should be close in this metric

2969

