Crowd Counting With Partial Annotations in an Image
Yanyu Xu∗1 , Ziming Zhong∗2 , Dongze Lian2 , Jing Li2 , Zhengxin Li2 , Xinxing Xu1
Shenghua Gao† 2,3,4
1

2

IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore. {xu yanyu,xuxinx}@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
ShanghaiTech University, China. {zhongzm,liandz,lijing1,lizhx, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging, China.
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Energy Efficient and Custom AI IC, China.

Abstract
To fully leverage the data captured from different scenes
with different view angles while reducing the annotation
cost, this paper studies a novel crowd counting setting, i.e.
only using partial annotations in each image as training
data. Inspired by the repetitive patterns in the annotated
and unannotated regions as well as the ones between them,
we design a network with three components to tackle those
unannotated regions: i) in an Unannotated Regions Characterization (URC) module, we employ a memory bank to
only store the annotated features, which could help the visual features extracted from these annotated regions flow
to these unannotated regions; ii) For each image, Feature
Distribution Consistency (FDC) regularizes the feature distributions of annotated head and unannotated head regions
to be consistent; iii) a Cross-regressor Consistency Regularization (CCR) module is designed to learn the visual features of unannotated regions in a self-supervised style. The
experimental results validate the effectiveness of our proposed model under the partial annotation setting for several datasets, such as ShanghaiTech, UCF-CC-50, UCFQNRF, NWPU-Crowd and JHU-CROWD++. With only
10% annotated regions in each image, our proposed model
achieves better performance than the recent methods and
baselines under semi-supervised or active learning settings
on all datasets. The code is https://github.com/
svip-lab/CrwodCountingPAL.

1. Introduction
The crowd counting task aims to estimate the total number of persons in static images or dynamic videos. The recent data-driven models have achieved satisfactory results
on crowd counting due to the success of CNN [10], but they
∗ : Equal Contribution. †: Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Crowd counting with different supervisions.

still require large amounts of annotated data. For instance,
the annotators need to label the positions of all heads with
points to overcome the various challenging scenes, such as
the lighting, camera view, occlusion and various head poses
in Fig. 1 (a). Such a labeling strategy is an extremely laborintensive task, e.g., the total annotation cost is 3,000 human
hours in labeling the NWPU-Crowd dataset [42].
Naturally, a key question arises. Can the designed model
still produce the competitive performance but use as few
annotations as possible? One of the potential directions is to
use a part of the dataset in full annotations, as shown in Fig.
1 (b), under the semi-supervised learning (SSL) [21, 34]
or active learning [47] strategy. Although these strategies
could reduce the number of annotated training images, we
still need to fully annotate the images. It might result in
limited challenging scenes, limited viewing angles of the
camera as well as limited lighting conditions, which might
degrade the model’s generalization ability in the test stage.
We notice that in one image, the person’s head poses are
usually the same or similar and the lighting conditions and
the viewing angles are consistent. It might be redundant to
annotate all the person heads in one image. Therefore, to
fully leverage the data captured from different scenes with
different view angles while reducing the annotation cost,
we propose a novel crowd counting setting, named Partial

15570

