Procedure Planning in Instructional Videos
via Contextual Modeling and Model-based Policy Learning
Jing Bi
jing.bi@rochester.edu

Jiebo Luo
Chenliang Xu
University of Rochester

jiel@cs.rochester.edu

chenliang.xu@rochester.edu

Abstract
Learning new skills by observing humans’ behaviors is
an essential capability of AI. In this work, we leverage instructional videos to study humans’ decision-making processes, focusing on learning a model to plan goal-directed
actions in real-life videos. In contrast to conventional action recognition, goal-directed actions are based on expectations of their outcomes requiring causal knowledge of potential consequences of actions. Thus, integrating the environment structure with goals is critical for solving this
task. Previous works learn a single world model will fail
to distinguish various tasks, resulting in an ambiguous latent space; planning through it will gradually neglect the
desired outcomes since the global information of the future
goal degrades quickly as the procedure evolves. We address
these limitations with a new formulation of procedure planning and propose novel algorithms to model human behaviors through Bayesian Inference and model-based Imitation
Learning. Experiments conducted on real-world instructional videos show that our method can achieve state-ofthe-art performance in reaching the indicated goals. Furthermore, the learned contextual information presents interesting features for planning in a latent space.

1. Introduction
Humans can learn new skills by watching demo videos.
Although this seems natural to human, it is challenging for
AI. We have seen rich works on modeling human behaviors
from videos with the majority focusing on recognizing actions [21, 18, 26]. However, solely perceiving what actions
are performed without modeling the underlying decisionmaking process is insufficient for AI to learn new skills. The
next-generation AI needs to figure out what actions are necessary to achieve the desired goals [5] with the consideration of actions’ potential consequences. In this paper, we focus on learning the goal-directed actions from instructional
videos. Recently, Chang et al. [6] proposed a new problem known as procedure planning in instructional videos.

Encoder

Context
Information

Encoder

Generation
Model

whisk
mixture

spread
creme

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed method. Given a
starting observation (top-left image) and a desired visual
goal (bottom-left image), we extract the contextual information of the planning trajectory upon which the Generation Model outputs a sequence of actions. The model is responsible for learning plannable latent representations with
a focus on procedures and action consequences. Thus, we
can retrieve images of intermediate steps (top-right images).
It requires a model to 1) plan a sequence of verb-argument
actions and 2) retrieve the intermediate steps for achieving
a given visual goal in real-life tasks such as making a strawberry cake (see Fig. 1). This task is different from the typical image-language translation problem in the way that certain actions can be exchanged to achieve the same goal (e.g.,
the order of adding salt and sugar usually does not matter),
making it difficult to predict the same action sequence as
ground-truth using sequence mapping.
Moreover, sequence-to-sequence based structure, suitable for modeling events that tend to occur in sequence with
high probability, is thought to involve no consideration of
the likely outcome [9]. Therefore, we formalize this task as
a planning problem with focus on two different sequential
patterns that can be easily observed in Fig. 4: In the context
of making a cake, mixing ingredients and washing cherries
are interchangeable, i.e., short-term action separation, but
both should be ahead of the action putting cherries on the
top, i.e., long-term action association.
Inspired by Raab et al. [9], we think that when performing goal-directed tasks, it is beneficial to consider both the
task contextual information and the potential action consequences. Contextual information here refers to the timeinvariant knowledge (not changed during planning) that dis-

15611

