Learning Conditional Knowledge Distillation for Degraded-Reference
Image Quality Assessment
Heliang Zheng1 *, Huan Yang2 , Jianlong Fu2 , Zheng-Jun Zha1 , Jiebo Luo3
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
3

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

University of Rochester, Rochester, NY

zhenghl@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {huayan, jianf}@microsoft.com, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

1. Introduction
Digital images may be subject to various quality
degradations during processing, compression, transmission,
etc. [36]. And image restoration (IR) algorithms are developed to improve the quality of degraded images [18, 35,
38, 41, 43, 46, 47]. A consequential question is how to assess the quality of restored images and evaluate IR algorithms. The state-of-the-art IQA approaches adopt a fullreference paradigm (FR-IQA), which learns to compare restored images with their corresponding pristine-quality im* This work was performed when Heliang Zheng was visiting Microsoft
Research as a research intern. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/researchmm/CKDN.

H: unavailable

An important scenario for image quality assessment
(IQA) is to evaluate image restoration (IR) algorithms. The
state-of-the-art approaches adopt a full-reference paradigm
that compares restored images with their corresponding
pristine-quality images. However, pristine-quality images
are usually unavailable in blind image restoration tasks and
real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose a practical solution named degraded-reference IQA (DR-IQA),
which exploits the inputs of IR models, degraded images,
as references. Specifically, we extract reference information from degraded images by distilling knowledge from
pristine-quality images. The distillation is achieved through
learning a reference space, where various degraded images
are encouraged to share the same feature statistics with
pristine-quality images. And the reference space is optimized to capture deep image priors that are useful for quality assessment. Note that pristine-quality images are only
used during training. Our work provides a powerful and differentiable metric for blind IRs, especially for GAN-based
methods. Extensive experiments show that our results can
even be close to the performance of full-reference settings.

H: available

Abstract

Image Quality Assessment
D

IR

R

FR-IQA

S

0.7922
(SRCC)

H
D

IR

R

NR-IQA

S

0.6513
(↓0.1409)

D

IR

R

DR-IQA

S

0.7669
(↑0.1156)

Degradation
Pristine-quality
Image (H)
(Noise, LR, etc.)

Restoration
Restored
Degraded
Image (D) (Denoising, SR, etc.) Image (R)

Figure 1. (a) Pristine-quality images can provide strong reference information for IQA. When pristine-quality images are unavailable, (b) directly regressing restored images to quality scores
causes a dramatic drop in performance. To this end, (c) we propose
to extract reference information from degraded images and make
such a solution effective. FR, NR, DR, S, and SRCC indicate fullreference, no-reference, degraded-reference, quality score, and
Spearman’s Rank order Correlation Coefficients [30], respectively.

ages (as shown in Figure 1 (a)). FR-IQA algorithms have
been widely adopted as IR evaluation metrics, e.g., PSNR,
SSIM [36], and LPIPS [45]. However, they cannot be applied to blind image restoration tasks and real-world applications, where pristine-quality images are unavailable. In
this paper, we study the problem of evaluating IR models
without relying on pristine-quality images.
To evaluate IR models without pristine-quality images,
no-reference IQA (NR-IQA) methods provide a solution,
that is, directly regressing restored images to quality scores,
i.e., mean opinion scores (MOS) [2, 13, 20, 32]. However, the absence of reference information makes the problem much more challenging and causes a dramatic drop in
performance, e.g., 0.1409 SRCC (Spearman’s Rank order
Correlation Coefficients [30]) drops. This motivates us to
seek available reference information. We find that the in-

10242

