VolumeFusion: Deep Depth Fusion for 3D Scene Reconstruction
Jaesung Choe
KAIST

Sunghoon Im
DGIST

Francois Rameau
KAIST

Minjun Kang
KAIST

Abstract
To reconstruct a 3D scene from a set of calibrated views,
traditional multi-view stereo techniques rely on two distinct
stages: local depth maps computation and global depth
maps fusion. Recent studies concentrate on deep neural
architectures for depth estimation by using conventional
depth fusion method or direct 3D reconstruction network
by regressing Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF).
In this paper, we advocate that replicating the traditional
two stages framework with deep neural networks improves
both the interpretability and the accuracy of the results. As
mentioned, our network operates in two steps: 1) the local computation of the local depth maps with a deep MVS
technique, and, 2) the depth maps and images’ features fusion to build a single TSDF volume. In order to improve the
matching performance between images acquired from very
different viewpoints (e.g., large-baseline and rotations), we
introduce a rotation-invariant 3D convolution kernel called
PosedConv. The effectiveness of the proposed architecture
is underlined via a large series of experiments conducted on
the ScanNet dataset where our approach compares favorably against both traditional and deep learning techniques.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is a fundamental research
topic that has been extensively investigated over the past
decades [18]. The main goal of MVS is to reconstruct
a 3D scene from a set of images acquired from different
viewpoints. This problem is commonly framed as a correspondence search problem by optimizing photometric or
geometric consistency among groups of pixels in different images. Conventional non-learning-based MVS frameworks [15, 2, 13] generally achieve the reconstruction using
various 3D representations [12]: depth maps [15, 2], point
cloud [13], voxels [29, 19], and meshes [11].
The recent use of deep neural networks for MVS [39, 20,
22, 32, 43, 4, 16] has proven effective in addressing the limitations of traditional techniques like repetitive patterns, lowtexture regions, and reflections. Usually, deep-based MVS

In So Kweon
KAIST

(d) PosedConv

1st stage
Local MVS

2nd stage
Volume Fusion
(depth fusion)

(a) Multi-view
images

(b) Multi-view stereo
depth estimation

(c) 3D scene
reconstruction

Figure 1. Volume fusion. Given (a) multi-view images and their
camera parameters, our network aims at 3D scene reconstruction.
(b) First, we estimate local multi-view depth maps. (b) Second, we
introduce differentiable depth fusion with the guidance of poseinvariant features from (d) our PosedConv.

methods [43, 4, 16] center on the estimation of the pixelwise correspondence between a reference image and its surrounding views. While this strategy can be elegantly integrated into deep learning frameworks, they can only work
locally where frames largely overlap. For the full 3D reconstruction of the entire scene, these methods [43, 4, 16]
require to perform a depth map fusion [31, 14] to merge
local reconstructions as post-processing.
More recently, Murez et al. [32] suggest that a direct regression of the Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF)
volume of the scene is more effective than using intermediate 3D representations, i.e. depth maps. The overall concept of their technique consists in the back-projection of
all the extracted image features into a global scene volume
from which the network directly regresses the TSDF volume. This end-to-end approach [32] has the advantage of
being straightforward and scalable to a large number of images. However, this pioneering work [32] has difficulty in
shaping the global structure of complex scenes, such as the
corners of rooms or long hallways.
To address this issue, we propose to closely mimic
the traditional 3D reconstruction pipeline with two distinct
stages: local reconstruction and global fusion. However,
unlike the previous studies [43, 10, 32] and concurrent papers [38, 1], we integrate these two stages in an end-toend manner. First, our network computes the local geometry, i.e., dense depth maps from neighboring frames. Then,
16086

