ORBIT: A Real-World Few-Shot Dataset for Teachable Object Recognition
Daniela Massiceti^1
Matthew Tobias Harris^4
^1

Microsoft Research

Luisa Zintgraf^2

Edward Cutrell^1
^2

University of Oxford

John Bronskill^3

Cecily Morrison^1
^3

Lida Theodorou^4

Katja Hofmann^1

University of Cambridge

^4

Simone Stumpf^4

City, University of London

Abstract
Object recognition has made great advances in the last
decade, but predominately still relies on many high-quality
training examples per object category. In contrast, learning
new objects from only a few examples could enable many
impactful applications from robotics to user personalization.
Most few-shot learning research, however, has been driven
by benchmark datasets that lack the high variation that these
applications will face when deployed in the real-world. To
close this gap, we present the ORBIT dataset and benchmark,
grounded in the real-world application of teachable object
recognizers for people who are blind/low-vision. The dataset
contains 3,822 videos of 486 objects recorded by people who
are blind/low-vision on their mobile phones. The benchmark
reflects a realistic, highly challenging recognition problem,
providing a rich playground to drive research in robustness
to few-shot, high-variation conditions. We set the benchmark’s first state-of-the-art and show there is massive scope
for further innovation, holding the potential to impact a
broad range of real-world vision applications including tools
for the blind/low-vision community. We release the dataset
at https://doi.org/10.25383/city.14294597 and benchmark
code at https://github.com/microsoft/ORBIT-Dataset.

1. Introduction
Object recognition systems have made spectacular advances in recent years [42, 47, 43, 37, 14, 30, 36] however,
most systems still rely on training datasets with 100s to
1,000s of high-quality, labeled examples per object category.
These demands make training datasets expensive to collect,
and limit their use to all but a few application areas.
Few-shot learning aims to reduce these demands by training models to recognize completely novel objects from only
a few examples [9, 49, 40, 2, 38, 11, 46]. This will enable
recognition systems that can adapt in real-world, dynamic
scenarios, from self-driving cars to applications where users
provide the training examples themselves. Meta-learning
algorithms which “learn to learn” [45, 9, 49, 11] hold partic-

(a) Frames from clean videos

(b) Frames from clutter videos

Figure 1: High-variation examples in the ORBIT dataset – a
facemask, hairbrush, keys, and watering can. Full videos in
the supplementary material. Further examples in Figure A.5.
ular promise toward this goal with recent advances opening
exciting possibilities for light-weight, adaptable recognition.
Most few-shot learning research, however, has been
driven by datasets that lack the high variation — in number
of examples per object and quality of those examples (framing, blur, etc.; see Table 1) — that recognition systems will
likely face when deployed in the real-world. Key datasets
such as Omniglot [23, 49] and miniImageNet [49], for example, present highly structured benchmark tasks which assume
a fixed number of objects and training examples per object.
Meta-Dataset [48], another key dataset, poses a more challenging benchmark task of adapting to novel datasets given a
small (random) number of training examples. Its constituent
datasets [23, 17, 39, 26, 32, 50, 6], however, mirror the
high-quality images of Omniglot and miniImageNet, leaving robustness to the noisy frames that would be streamed
from a real-world system unaddressed. While these datasets
have catalyzed research in few-shot learning, state-of-the-art
performance is now relatively saturated and leaves reduced
scope for algorithmic innovation [16, 4, 33].
To drive further innovation in few-shot learning for realworld impact, there is a strong need for datasets that capture
the high variation inherent in real-world applications. We

10818

