NEAT: Neural Attention Fields for End-to-End Autonomous Driving
Kashyap Chitta*1,2
Aditya Prakash*1
Andreas Geiger1,2
1
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
University of Tübingen
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Efficient reasoning about the semantic, spatial, and temporal structure of a scene is a crucial prerequisite for
autonomous driving. We present NEural ATtention fields
(NEAT), a novel representation that enables such reasoning
for end-to-end imitation learning models. NEAT is a continuous function which maps locations in Bird’s Eye View
(BEV) scene coordinates to waypoints and semantics, using
intermediate attention maps to iteratively compress highdimensional 2D image features into a compact representation. This allows our model to selectively attend to relevant regions in the input while ignoring information irrelevant to the driving task, effectively associating the images
with the BEV representation. In a new evaluation setting involving adverse environmental conditions and challenging
scenarios, NEAT outperforms several strong baselines and
achieves driving scores on par with the privileged CARLA
expert used to generate its training data. Furthermore, visualizing the attention maps for models with NEAT intermediate representations provides improved interpretability.

1. Introduction
Navigating large dynamic scenes for autonomous driving requires a meaningful representation of both the spatial and temporal aspects of the scene. Imitation Learning (IL) by behavior cloning has emerged as a promising
approach for this task [5, 10, 16, 53, 78]. Given a dataset
of expert trajectories, a behavior cloning agent is trained
through supervised learning, where the goal is to predict
the actions of the expert given some sensory input regarding the scene [48]. To account for the complex spatial and
temporal scene structure encountered in autonomous driving, the training objectives used in IL-based driving agents
have evolved by incorporating auxiliary tasks. Pioneering
methods, such as CILRS [16], use a simple self-supervised
auxiliary training objective of predicting the ego-vehicle velocity. Since then, more complex training signals aiming
* indicates equal contribution

t
ci
x
y
t

x
Waypoint
Offsets
t

MLP
Attention
Map

2D Image
Features

y

N iterations

y
x
Semantics

Figure 1: Neural Attention Fields. We use an MLP to iteratively compress the high-dimensional input into a compact
low-dimensional representation ci based on the BEV query
location (x, y, t). Our model outputs waypoint offsets and
auxiliary semantics from ci continuously and with a low
memory footprint. Training for both tasks jointly leads to
improved driving performance on CARLA.
to reconstruct the scene have become common, e.g. image
auto-encoding [47], 2D semantic segmentation [29], Bird’s
Eye View (BEV) semantic segmentation [37], 2D semantic
prediction [27], and BEV semantic prediction [58]. Performing an auxiliary task such as BEV semantic prediction,
which requires the model to output the BEV semantic segmentation of the scene at both the observed and future timesteps, incorporates spatiotemporal structure into the intermediate representations learned by the agent. This has been
shown to lead to more interpretable and robust models [58].
However, so far, this has only been possible with expensive
LiDAR and HD map-based network inputs which can be
easily projected into the BEV coordinate frame.
The key challenge impeding BEV semantic prediction
from camera inputs is one of association: given a BEV spatiotemporal query location (x, y, t) in the scene (e.g. 2 meters in front of the vehicle, 5 meters to the right, and 2 seconds into the future), it is difficult to identify which image
pixels to associate to this location, as this requires reasoning about 3D geometry, scene motion, ego-motion, and intention, as well as interactions between scene elements. In
this paper, we propose NEural ATtention fields (NEAT), a

15793

