Evidential Deep Learning for Open Set Action Recognition
Wentao Bao, Qi Yu, Yu Kong
Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology
{wb6219, qi.yu, yu.kong}@rit.edu

1. Introduction
Video action recognition aims to classify a video that
contains a human action into one of the pre-defined action
categories (closed set). However, in a real-world scenario, it
is essentially an open set problem [52], which requires the
classifier to simultaneously recognize actions from known
classes and identify actions from unknown ones [46, 17].
In practice, open set recognition (OSR) is more challenging
than closed set recognition, while it is important for applications such as face recognition [36], e-commerce product
classification [60], autonomous driving [45], and so on.
OSR was originally formalized in [46] and many existing approaches have been proposed using image datasets
such as MNIST [32] and CIFAR-10 [30]. However, unlike
OSR, limited progress has been achieved for open set action
recognition (OSAR) which is increasingly valuable in practice. In fact, novel challenges arise in OSAR from the following key aspects. First, the temporal nature of videos may

80

I3D
TSM
TPN
SlowFast

72

DEAR (Ours)
SoftMax
OpenMax
RPL
MC Dropout
BNN SVI

75
70
65
6072

76

74

Open maF1 (%)

85
Open maF1 (%)

In a real-world scenario, human actions are typically
out of the distribution from training data, which requires
a model to both recognize the known actions and reject
the unknown. Different from image data, video actions are
more challenging to be recognized in an open-set setting
due to the uncertain temporal dynamics and static bias of
human actions. In this paper, we propose a Deep Evidential
Action Recognition (DEAR) method to recognize actions
in an open testing set. Specifically, we formulate the action recognition problem from the evidential deep learning
(EDL) perspective and propose a novel model calibration
method to regularize the EDL training. Besides, to mitigate the static bias of video representation, we propose a
plug-and-play module to debias the learned representation
through contrastive learning. Experimental results show
that our DEAR method achieves consistent performance
gain on multiple mainstream action recognition models and
benchmarks. Code and pre-trained models are available at
https://www.rit.edu/actionlab/dear .

MiT-v2 as Unknown

HMDB-51 as Unknown

Abstract

76 78 80 82
Open-Set AUC Score (%)

84

68
64
6075

I3D
TSM
TPN
SlowFast
DEAR (Ours)
SoftMax
OpenMax
RPL
MC Dropout
BNN SVI

79
83
87
Open-Set AUC Score (%)

Figure 1: Open Set Action Recognition Performance. HMDB51 [31] and MiT-v2 [39] are separately used as small- and largescale unknown data for models trained on the closed set UCF101 [54]. Our DEAR method (⋆) significantly outperforms existing approaches on multiple action recognition models.

lead to a high diversity of human action patterns. Hence, an
OSAR model needs to capture the temporal regularities of
closed set actions but also be aware of what it does not know
when presented with unknown actions from an open set scenario. Second, the visual appearance of natural videos typically contain static biased cues [34, 11] (e.g., “surfing water” in totally different scenes as shown in Fig. 2). Without addressing the temporal dynamics of human actions,
the static bias could seriously hamper the capability of an
OSAR model to recognize unknown actions from an unbiased open set. Due to these challenges, existing effort
on OSAR is quite limited with few exceptions [52, 27, 62].
They simply regard each video as a standalone sample and
primarily rely on image-based OSR approaches. As a result, they fall short in addressing the inherent video-specific
challenges in the open set context as outlined above.
In this paper, we propose a Deep Evidential Action
Recognition (DEAR) method for the open set action recognition task. To enable the model to “know unknown” in
an OSAR task, our method formulates it as an uncertainty
estimation problem by leveraging evidential deep learning
(EDL) [49, 65, 51, 1, 48]. EDL utilizes deep neural networks to predict a Dirichlet distribution of class probabilities, which can be regarded as an evidence collection process. The learned evidence is informative to quantify the
predictive uncertainty of diverse human actions so that unknown actions would incur high uncertainty, i.e., the model

13349

