RDI-Net: Relational Dynamic Inference Networks
Huanyu Wang

Songyuan Li
Shihao Su
Zhejiang University

Zequn Qin

Xi Li*

{huanyuhello, leizungjyun, shihaocs}@zju.edu.cn
zequnqin@gmail.com, xilizju@zju.edu.cn ∗

Abstract
Dynamic inference networks, aimed at promoting computational efficiency, go along an adaptive executing path
for a given sample. Prevalent methods typically assign a
router for each convolutional block and sequentially make
block-by-block executing decisions, without considering the
relations during the dynamic inference. In this paper, we
model the relations for dynamic inference from two aspects:
the routers and the samples. We design a novel type of
router called the relational router to model the relations
among routers for a given sample. In principle, the current relational router aggregates the contextual features of
preceding routers by graph convolution and propagates its
router features to subsequent ones, making the executing
decision for the current block in a long-range manner. Furthermore, we model the relation between samples by introducing a Sample Relation Module (SRM), encouraging correlated samples to go along correlated executing paths. As
a whole, we call our method the Relational Dynamic Inference Network (RDI-Net). Extensive experiments on CIFAR10/100 and ImageNet show that RDI-Net achieves state-ofthe-art performance and computational cost reduction.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a growing research interest in dynamic inference networks, which have been used
in a wide range of applications, e.g., image classification [40, 51, 48, 1, 41], action recognition [21, 33], and
object detection [55]. Dynamic inference networks, aimed
at reducing computational redundancy, execute an adaptive
path for a given sample at the inference time. A typical
solution [40, 44, 51] is to assign a router to each convolutional block to decide whether the current block should be
executed based on the output of the last block.
In essence, prevalent routers for dynamic inference make
executing decisions in a short-range manner. Since a router
∗ Corresponding author

skip
cat

(a) Prevalent methods

skip

skip
cat

feature propagation

(b) Our proposed relational routers

Figure 1. Illustration of our relational routers. (a) The traditional
router (circle) only considers the output features of the last block
(rectangle). (b) With a relation graph, the proposed relational
router aggregates the features of preceding routers and makes the
executing decision in a long-range manner. In principle, the further the distance between routers, the less the effect from preceding routers to the current one.

only takes the output of the last convolutional block as
the input, an executing path is composed of a sequence of
block-by-block executing decisions by individual routers.
In this way, the features of the preceding routers are neglected when a subsequent router makes executing decision.
Here arises a question: do the features of preceding routers
benefit the decisions of subsequent ones? In this paper, we
manage to explicitly model the relation between routers, enabling routers to make decisions in a long-range manner.
We propose a novel relational router to relate the current
router to others: a relational router aggregates the features
of preceding routers and propagates its features to subsequent ones. Specifically, the current relational router employs a router-wise directed relation graph, taking a certain
amount of preceding routers into account. In the relation
graph, a node stands for a relational router, and a directed
edge stands for the effect of a router on another router where
the further the distance between routers, the less the effect.
Based on the relation graph, the current relational router

4621

