TAM: Temporal Adaptive Module for Video Recognition
Zhaoyang Liu1, 2 Limin Wang1 B Wayne Wu2 Chen Qian2 Tong Lu1
1
State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
SenseTime Research
zyliumy@gmail.com

lmwang@nju.edu.cn {wuwenyan,qianchen}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Video data is with complex temporal dynamics due to
various factors such as camera motion, speed variation,
and different activities. To effectively capture this diverse
motion pattern, this paper presents a new temporal adaptive module (TAM) to generate video-specific temporal kernels based on its own feature map. TAM proposes a unique
two-level adaptive modeling scheme by decoupling the dynamic kernel into a location sensitive importance map and
a location invariant aggregation weight. The importance
map is learned in a local temporal window to capture shortterm information, while the aggregation weight is generated from a global view with a focus on long-term structure. TAM is a modular block and could be integrated into
2D CNNs to yield a powerful video architecture (TANet)
with a very small extra computational cost. The extensive experiments on Kinetics-400 and Something-Something
datasets demonstrate that our TAM outperforms other temporal modeling methods consistently, and achieves the
state-of-the-art performance under the similar complexity. The code is available at https://github.com/
liu-zhy/temporal-adaptive-module.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has brought great progress for various
recognition tasks in image domain, such as image classification [21, 12], object detection [28], and instance segmentation [11]. The key to these successes is to devise
flexible and efficient architectures that are capable of learning powerful visual representations from large-scale image
datasets [4]. However, deep learning research progress in
video understanding is relatively slower, partially due to the
high complexity of video data. The core technical problem in video understanding is to design an effective temporal module, that is expected to be able to capture complex
temporal structure with high flexibility, while yet to be of
B: Corresponding author.

lutong@nju.edu.cn

low computational consumption for processing high dimensional video data efficiently.
3D Convolutional Neural Networks (3D CNNs) [15, 34]
have turned out to be mainstream architectures for video
modeling [1, 8, 36, 27]. The 3D convolution is a direct
extension over its 2D counterparts and provides a learnable operator for video recognition. However, this simple extension lacks specific consideration about the temporal properties in video data and might as well lead to
high computational cost. Therefore, recent methods aim to
model video sequences in two different aspects by combining a lightweight temporal module with 2D CNNs to improve efficiency (e.g., TSN [40], TSM [23]), or designing
a dedicated temporal module to better capture temporal relation (e.g., Nonlocal Net [41], ARTNet [38], STM [17],
TDN [39]). However, how to devise a temporal module
with both high efficiency and strong flexibility still remains
to be an unsolved problem. Consequently, we aim at advancing the current video architectures along this direction.
In this paper, we focus on devising an adaptive module
to capture temporal information in a more flexible way. Intuitvely, we observe that video data is with extremely complex dynamics along the temporal dimension due to factors
such as camera motion and various speeds. Thus 3D convolutions (temporal convolutions) might lack enough representation power to describe motion diversity by simply employing a fixed number of video invariant kernels. To deal
with such complex temporal variations in videos, we argue
that adaptive temporal kernels for each video are effective
and as well necessary to describe motion patterns. To this
end, as shown in Figure 1, we present a two-level adaptive
modeling scheme to decompose the video specific temporal
kernel into a location sensitive importance map and a location invariant (also video adaptive) aggregation kernel. This
unique design allows the location sensitive importance map
to focus on enhancing discriminative temporal information
from a local view, and enables the video adaptive aggregation to capture temporal dependencies with a global view of
the input video sequence.
Specifically, the design of temporal adaptive module

13708

