OadTR: Online Action Detection with Transformers
Xiang Wang1

Shiwei Zhang2∗ Zhiwu Qing1 Yuanjie Shao1 Zhengrong Zuo1
Changxin Gao1 Nong Sang1∗
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Alibaba Group, China

{wxiang,qzw,shaoyuanjie,zhrzuo,cgao,nsang}@hust.edu.cn, zhangjin.zsw@alibaba-inc.com

1.6

Most recent approaches for online action detection tend
to apply Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) to capture longrange temporal structure. However, RNN suffers from nonparallelism and gradient vanishing, hence it is hard to
be optimized. In this paper, we propose a new encoderdecoder framework based on Transformers, named OadTR,
to tackle these problems. The encoder attached with a task
token aims to capture the relationships and global interactions between historical observations. The decoder extracts auxiliary information by aggregating anticipated future clip representations. Therefore, OadTR can recognize
current actions by encoding historical information and predicting future context simultaneously. We extensively evaluate the proposed OadTR on three challenging datasets:
HDD, TVSeries, and THUMOS14. The experimental results show that OadTR achieves higher training and inference speeds than current RNN based approaches, and significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms
of both mAP and mcAP. Code is available at https:
//github.com/wangxiang1230/OadTR.

1. Introduction
The purpose of online action detection is to correctly
identify ongoing actions from streaming videos without any
access to the future. Recently, this task has received increasing attention due to its great potential of diverse application prospects in real life, such as autonomous driving [24],
video surveillance [45], anomaly detection [37,38], etc. The
crucial challenge of this task is that we need to detect the
actions at the moment that video frames arrive with inadequate observations. To solve the problem, it is important to
learn the long-range temporal dependencies.
∗ Corresponding authors.

Inference Speed

Loss Curves

Abstract

TRN
IDN
OadTR

1.3

1

(frames/second)

110

Performance
(mAP %)

58

95

55

80

52

65

49

50

46

35

43

SOTA

0.7

0.4

0.1

0

4

8

12

16

Train Epoch

(a)

20

24

20

40

TRN

IDN

(b)

OadTR

TRN

IDN

(c)

OadTR

Figure 1: Comparison between OadTR and the state-ofthe-art online action detection methods (i.e., TRN [54] and
IDN [15]): (a) Comparison of the training speeds; (b) Comparison of the inference speeds; (c) Comparison of the performance on the challenge THUMOS14 dataset.
Current approaches tend to apply RNN to model the temporal dependencies and have achieved impressive improvements [11, 13, 15, 16, 28, 54]. Typically, Information Discrimination Network (IDN) [15] designs a RNN like architecture to encode long-term historical information, and
then conduct action recognition at current moment. However, RNN like architectures have the problems of nonparallelism and gradient vanishing [33, 39]. Thus it is hard
to optimize the architectures, which may result in an unsatisfactory performance. This is a challenging problem for
current approaches, but much less effort has been paid to
solve it. To further improve the performance, we need to
design a new efficient and easily-optimized framework. For
this purpose, we propose to apply Transformers [48]. Transformers possess the strong power of long-range temporal
modeling by the self-attention module, and have achieved
remarkable performance in both natural language processing [12, 48, 57] and various vision tasks [14, 58]. Existing
works have proved that Transformers have a better convergence than RNN architectures [23, 26], and they are also
computationally efficient. The above properties of Trans-

7565

