Multi-Class Cell Detection Using Spatial Context Representation
Shahira Abousamra, David Belinsky, John Van Arnam, Felicia Allard, Eric Yee,
Rajarsi Gupta, Tahsin Kurc, Dimitris Samaras, Joel Saltz, Chao Chen
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA

Abstract
In digital pathology, both detection and classification of
cells are important for automatic diagnostic and prognostic tasks. Classifying cells into subtypes, such as tumor
cells, lymphocytes or stromal cells is particularly challenging. Existing methods focus on morphological appearance
of individual cells, whereas in practice pathologists often
infer cell classes through their spatial context. In this paper, we propose a novel method for both detection and classification that explicitly incorporates spatial contextual information. We use the spatial statistical function to describe
local density in both a multi-class and a multi-scale manner.
Through representation learning and deep clustering techniques, we learn advanced cell representation with both appearance and spatial context. On various benchmarks, our
method achieves better performance than state-of-the-arts,
especially on the classification task.

1. Introduction
We propose the first joint cell detection and classification
method that explicitly learns a spatial-context-aware representation of cells. We demonstrate that incorporating spatial
context will significantly improve the performance, especially for the classification task.
Identification of various types of cells such as tumor
cells, lymphocytes, and stromal cells from whole-slide histology images is an important step towards automatic diagnosis and prognosis in digital pathology. The spatial arrangement of different cells can comprehensively characterize the interaction between tumor and immune cells and be
correlated with clinical outcomes [29, 48, 23]. One good example is the detection and measurement of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), i.e., lymphocytes residing within
the border of invasive tumors [36]. The prevalence of TILs
has been shown to be associated with better clinical outcomes [37, 38, 41]. Aside from lymphocytes, the presence
of isolated or small clusters of tumor cells at the invasive
tumor front, a phenomenon known as tumor budding, is a

prognosis biomarker associated with an increased risk of
lymph node metastasis in colorectal carcinoma and other
solid malignancies [28]. Other examples include the assessment of lymphovascular invasion and perineural invasion
[27] and the identification and measurement of intraepithelial lymphocytes for the diagnosis of celiac disease [34]. All
these studies necessitate an effective algorithm to accurately
identify cells of different types.
Multi-class cell identification involves both cell detection and cell classification. Cell detection has been studied extensively in the past few decades [40, 21, 45]. Existing approaches either adopt the object detection algorithm
from computer vision [20, 47], or treat the problem as an
instance segmentation problem and segment nuclei one-byone [18, 19, 32, 25, 30]. Although segmentation methods
provide detailed nuclei morphology, their training requires
highly detailed and thus time-consuming nuclei mask annotation. To circumvent this bottleneck, one may use weaklysupervised methods [31, 46, 43, 11] to segment nuclei based
only on point annotations, i.e., points placed at the centers
of nuclei. Point annotation is a much more affordable annotation for large scale training.
Despite the success in the cell detection, our progress on
cell classification is not as advanced. Indeed, classification
is a challenging task even for human experts. Cells of different kinds can manifest with similar appearance. Meanwhile,
cells of the same type may exhibit large variation of morphology and texture in regions of neoplasia and inflammation. To correctly classify cells in such challenging scenarios, pathologists not only use appearance, but also rely on
the contextual information of surrounding cells, their spatial
relationships and tissue architecture. For example, degenerating or apoptotic cells often cluster together within the
luminal spaces of gland forming tumors and can be readily
identified in this context despite the spectrum of morphologic features they display; a context which can be identified
through cellular architectural patterns in a larger scale. Similarly, architectural patterns can be used to help distinguish
reactive stromal cells from tumor cells when their shape and
chromatin pattern are indistinguishable.

4005

