Self-Supervised Cryo-Electron Tomography Volumetric Image Restoration from
Single Noisy Volume with Sparsity Constraint
Zhidong Yang1,2,3 , Fa Zhang1,∗ , Renmin Han2, *
High Performance Computer Research Center, ICT, CAS
2
Research Center for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Shandong University
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

Abstract
Cryo-Electron Tomography (cryo-ET) is a powerful tool
for 3D cellular visualization. Due to instrumental limitations, cryo-ET images and their volumetric reconstruction
suffer from extremely low signal-to-noise ratio. In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end self-supervised learning
model, the Sparsity Constrained Network (SC-Net), to restore volumetric image from single noisy data in cryo-ET.
The proposed method only requires a single noisy data as
training input and no ground-truth is needed in the whole
training procedure. A new target function is proposed to
preserve both local smoothness and detailed structure. Additionally, a novel procedure for the simulation of electron
tomographic photographing is designed to help the evaluation of methods. Experiments are done on three simulated
data and four real-world data. The results show that our
method could produce a strong enhancement for a single
very noisy cryo-ET volumetric data, which is much better
than the state-of-the-art Noise2Void, and with a competitive
performance comparing with Noise2Noise. Code is available at https://github.com/icthrm/SC-Net.

1. Introduction
Cryo-ET is a powerful technique for the visualization
of cellular ultrastructure and macromolecules in threedimensional space, where 3D structures can be reconstructed from a series of 2D images (tilt series) taken from
different angles [6, 9]. However, due to instrumental limitations, cryo-ET volumetric images always suffer from extremely low Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). To restore the
corrupted ultrastructure from noisy 3D volume is an essential task in cryo-ET data analysis.
Recently, trainable Deep Neural Network (DNN) based
image restoration model has attracted much attention because of its excellent performance, which can be divided
* All
correspondence should be addressed to Fa
(zhangfa@ict.ac.cn) and Renmin Han (hanrenmin@sdu.edu.cn).

Zhang

into two categories: clean-target-based supervised learning
model and self-supervised learning model. The supervised
learning model needs plenty of “noisy-clean” image pairs to
train a reliable model. Although supervised learning model
is able to achieve very good performance with clearly defined datasets, it cannot well handle the real-world noisy
data whose ground-truth or noisy pattern is unavailable, for
example, the cryo-ET data. To improve this, self-supervised
model is proposed. Self-supervised model does not need
ground-truth information during training, in which the supervisory information is observed from the original noisy
data. Recently, Noise2Noise (N2N) [19] and Noise2Void
(N2V) [17] have emerged as two main branches of selfsupervised restoration model. Specifically, N2V is able to
perform single-image training. However, for the images
with very high noise, the results produced by N2V may still
be too noisy, especially for the 3D volumetric image.
Here, we mainly focus on the image restoration of volumetric data in cryo-Electron Tomography (cryo-ET). One
possible data enhancement strategy is to first filter the
2D projections and then build a denoised 3D tomographic
volume [21]. Although such procedure can produce a
smoothed tomography, its output is usually over-smoothed
and loses a lot of fine-grained structures. Because the filtering operation on 2D projections cannot strictly keep the 2Dto-3D relationship defined by Fourier-slice-theorem [24], it
is more reasonable to directly operate on the 3D cryo-ET
volumetric image [6]. However, it is very hard to acquire a
large number of homogeneous volumetric images for a specific kind of specimen in cryo-ET, which hampers the application of restoration models relied on large training dataset.
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised deep learning model, the Sparsity Constrained Network (SC-Net), to
directly restore cryo-ET 3D volumetric image from only a
single noisy data. By combining the structure information
from raw noisy volume and local smoothness information
from smoothed representation, our proposed model can suppress high-frequency noise and preserve ultrastructure details in a self-supervised manner, requiring only one single

4056

