Fusion Moves for Graph Matching
Lisa Hutschenreiter∗ , Stefan Haller∗ , Lorenz Feineis∗ ,
Carsten Rother∗ , Dagmar Kainmüller† , Bogdan Savchynskyy∗
∗

Heidelberg University, † Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin

We contribute to approximate algorithms for the
quadratic assignment problem also known as graph matching. Inspired by the success of the fusion moves technique
developed for multilabel discrete Markov random fields, we
investigate its applicability to graph matching. In particular, we show how fusion moves can be efficiently combined
with the dedicated state-of-the-art dual methods that have
recently shown superior results in computer vision and bioimaging applications. As our empirical evaluation on a wide
variety of graph matching datasets suggests, fusion moves
significantly improve performance of these methods in terms
of speed and quality of the obtained solutions. Our method
sets a new state-of-the-art with a notable margin with respect
to its competitors.

1. Introduction
The quadratic assignment problem also known as graph
matching is one of the most prominent combinatorial problems having numerous applications. In computer vision
it is predominantly used for feature matching [47]. The
modern approach to this application is deep graph matching, see e.g. [40, 42, 55], which enjoys constantly growing
attention in the community. As follows from the name,
deep graph matching combines neural networks with combinatorial matching techniques for inference and joint learning. Whereas most of earlier deep graph matching approaches [17, 24, 51, 52, 53] employed a linear assignment
problem (LAP) solver1 to obtain matchings in their pipeline,
the most promising state-of-the-art method [40] uses a fully
featured graph matching solver. Being called in a loop on
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the European Research Council (ERC European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation program, grant 647769), the German Research Foundation (Exact Relaxation-Based Inference in Graphical Models, DFG SA 2640/11), and the Helmholtz Information & Data Science School for Health
(HIDSS4Health). The computations were performed on an HPC Cluster
at the Center for Information Services and High Performance Computing
(ZIH) at TU Dresden.
1 A polynomial subclass of graph matching without quadratic costs.

energy (×1000)

Abstract

−50

dd-ls0
+ fusion

−60
0

100

200
time (s)

300

Figure 1. (Top) Scalable graph matching is especially important for
bio-imaging, where hundreds or even thousands of cells on different
images must be matched to each other. An instance from the pairs
dataset (see Sec. 6), only each 5th matching is shown. (bottom)
Convergence of the state-of-the-art method dd-ls0 [47] (see Sec. 6)
without and with fusion moves. Note that fusion moves attain much
better energy in notably shorter time.

each training iteration, this solver must provide high-quality
solutions within a very restricted time budget, typically less
than a second. Modern state-of-the-art methods [46, 47, 56]
satisfy this requirement only if applied to relatively small
problems, with a few dozen feature points at most. Hence,
scalability of deep graph matching critically depends on the
existence of highly-efficient graph matching solvers.
In this work we address this problem by introducing a
new graph matching technique, which notably improves the
state-of-the-art in terms of speed and attained accuracy. In
particular, it provides highly accurate solutions for problems
with more than 500 features in less than a second.
Related work. First formulated in 1957 [6], the graph
matching problem plays a central role in combinatorial optimization. Due to its importance, nearly all possible optimization techniques were put to the test for it, see the
surveys [10, 12, 38] and references therein.
As usual for NP-hard problems, no single method can
efficiently address all graph matching instances. Different
applications require different methods, and we concentrate

6270

