Visual-Textual Attentive Semantic Consistency for Medical Report Generation
Yi Zhou ∗1 , Lei Huang2 , Tao Zhou3 , Huazhu Fu4 , and Ling Shao4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
SKLSDE, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Abstract
Automatic report generation on medical radiographs
have recently gained interest. However, identifying diseases
as well as correctly predicting their corresponding sizes,
locations and other medical description patterns, which is
essential for generating high-quality reports, is challenging. Although previous methods focused on producing readable reports, how to accurately detect and describe findings that match with the query X-Ray has not been successfully addressed. In this paper, we propose a multi-modality
semantic attention model to integrate visual features, predicted key finding embeddings, as well as clinical features,
and progressively decode reports with visual-textual semantic consistency. First, multi-modality features are extracted
and attended with the hidden states from the sentence decoder, to encode enriched context vectors for better decoding a report. These modalities include regional visual features of scans, semantic word embeddings of the top-K findings predicted with high probabilities, and clinical features
of indications. Second, the progressive report decoder consists of a sentence decoder and a word decoder, where we
propose image-sentence matching and description accuracy
losses to constrain the visual-textual semantic consistency.
Extensive experiments on the public MIMIC-CXR and IU
X-Ray datasets show that our model achieves consistent improvements over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Chest X-Rays are highly important radiological examinations. However, interpreting chest X-Ray images requires the strong expertise and experience of radiologists
and is prone to mistakes. Therefore, automatic diagnosis
of diseases [41, 35, 19, 21, 31, 7, 51] has been a rising research topic in the medical imaging community. The com∗ Corresponding author: Yi Zhou (yizhou.szcn@gmail.com)

Visual and Clinical
Information Encoder

Multi-attentive
Progressive Report
Decoder

Key Findings Prediction:

Airspace Opacity 0.9558 / Pleural Effusion 0.9477
/ multiple 0.9386 / Lung Lesion 0.9162 / left
0.9130 / lower 0.9044 / Atelectasis 0.8644 /
Fracture 0.8617 / large 0.8062 / Emphysema
0.8014 / Pleural other 0.7843 / …

Female, 53 years old
Clinical information:
Chest pain, cough.

Generated Report:
1. Atelectatic left lung with multi-loculated pleural lesion.
2. Heart is unremarkable.
3. Suspicious rib destruction on left seventh and eighth.
4. Left chest wall mass.
5. Compatible with left lung cancer with pleural and
chest wall extension.

Figure 1. Illustration of automatic medical report generation.
Given a chest X-Ray and corresponding clinical information, our
model predicts key findings and generates a diagnostics report.

mon tasks include identification of different chest lesions
[42, 45, 52] and their corresponding positions and sizes, and
generating human-readable reports [26, 24, 20, 53] which
contain detailed descriptions such as lesion shape and type.
The basic framework of medical report generation is
similar to that of image captioning [16]. Currently, most
image captioning models [39, 43, 1, 27, 9] adopt deep
learning due to its recent breakthroughs in many tasks
[15, 14, 37, 40, 50, 11]. However, medical report generation is more challenging than image captioning for two main
reasons. First, compared to general images, abnormal lesion
appearances in medical images are not always obvious and
sometimes even difficult for radiologists to identify. Public benchmarks with paired image-report data are scarce.
However, the objects in a general image and corresponding
relations among them are very clear and easy to describe.
Large-scale matched image-sentence training datasets are
available, such as MS COCO [29] and Visual Genome [23].
Second, the target of image captioning is usually to generate
one sentence for each image or several sentences with similar descriptions. For medical reports, multiple sentences
need to be generated to focus on different diseases in vari-

3985

