Adversarial Attacks On Multi-Agent Communication
James Tu1,2 * Tsunhsuan Wang3∗ Jingkang Wang1,2 Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2
Mengye Ren1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1

Waabi

2

University of Toronto

3

MIT

{jtu, wangjk, manivasagam, mren, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu
johnsonwang0810@gmail.com

Abstract
Growing at a fast pace, modern autonomous systems will
soon be deployed at scale, opening up the possibility for
cooperative multi-agent systems. Sharing information and
distributing workloads allow autonomous agents to better
perform tasks and increase computation efficiency. However, shared information can be modified to execute adversarial attacks on deep learning models that are widely employed in modern systems. Thus, we aim to study the robustness of such systems and focus on exploring adversarial attacks in a novel multi-agent setting where communication is
done through sharing learned intermediate representations
of neural networks. We observe that an indistinguishable
adversarial message can severely degrade performance, but
becomes weaker as the number of benign agents increases.
Furthermore, we show that black-box transfer attacks are
more difficult in this setting when compared to directly perturbing the inputs, as it is necessary to align the distribution
of learned representations with domain adaptation. Our
work studies robustness at the neural network level to contribute an additional layer of fault tolerance to modern security protocols for more secure multi-agent systems.

1. Introduction
With rapid improvements of modern autonomous systems, it is only a matter of time until they are deployed at
scale, opening up the possibility of cooperative multi-agent
systems. Individual agents can benefit greatly from shared
information to better perform their tasks [26, 59]. For example, by aggregating sensory information from multiple
viewpoints, a fleet of vehicles can perceive the world more
clearly, providing significant safety benefits [52]. Moreover, in a network of connected devices, distributed processing across multiple agents can improve computation ef* Equal contribution.

Work done while all authors were at UberATG.

ficiency [18]. While cooperative multi-agent systems are
promising, relying on communication between agents can
pose security threats as shared information can be malicious
or unreliable [54, 3, 37].
Meanwhile, modern autonomous systems typically rely
on deep neural networks known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Such attacks craft small and imperceivable
perturbations to drastically change a neural network’s behavior and induce false outputs [48, 21, 8, 30]. Even if an attacker has the freedom to send any message, such small perturbations may be the most dangerous as they are indistinguishable from their benign counterparts, making corrupted
messages difficult to detect while still highly malicious.
While modern cyber security algorithms provide adequate protection against communication breaches, adversarial robustness of multi-agent deep learning models has yet
to be studied. Meanwhile, when it comes to safety-critical
applications like self-driving, additional layers of redundancy and improved security are always welcome. Thus,
by studying adversarial robustness, we can enhance modern
security protocols by introducing an additional layer of fault
tolerance at the neural network level.
Adversarial attacks have been studied extensively but existing approaches mostly consider attacks on input domains
like images [48, 21], point clouds [7, 50], and text [44, 14].
On the other hand, multi-agent systems often distribute
computation across different devices and transmit intermediate representations instead of input sensory information [52, 18]. Specifically, when deep learning inference is
distributed across different devices, agents will communicate by transmitting feature maps, which are activations of
intermediate neural network layers. Such learned communication has been shown to be superior due to transmitting
compact but expressive messages [52] as well as efficiently
distributing computation [18].
In this paper, we investigate adversarial attacks in this
novel multi-agent setting where perturbations are applied
to learned intermediate representations. An illustration is

7768

