Interpreting Attributions and Interactions of Adversarial Attacks
Xin Wanga∗ , Shuyun Lina ,* Hao Zhanga , Yufei Zhua , Quanshi Zhanga†
a
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
This paper aims to explain adversarial attacks in terms
of how adversarial perturbations contribute to the attacking task. We estimate attributions of different image regions to the decrease of the attacking cost based on the
Shapley value. We define and quantify interactions among
adversarial perturbation pixels, and decompose the entire perturbation map into relatively independent perturbation components. The decomposition of the perturbation map shows that adversarially-trained DNNs have more
perturbation components in the foreground than normallytrained DNNs. Moreover, compared to the normally-trained
DNN, the adversarially-trained DNN have more components which mainly decrease the score of the true category.
Above analyses provide new insights into the understanding
of adversarial attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown promise in
various tasks, such as image classification [36] and speech
recognition [14]. Adversarial robustness of DNNs has received increasing attention in recent years. Previous studies mainly focused on attacking algorithms [47, 3, 27], the
detection of adversarial examples for the adversarial defense [28, 11, 25], and adversarial training to learn DNNs
robust to adversarial attacks [13, 27].
Unlike previous studies of designing more powerful attacks or learning more robust DNNs, in this research, we
aim to explain the signal-processing behavior behind the
adversarial attack, i.e. how pixel-wise perturbations cooperate with each other to achieve the attack. We develop new
methods to explain adversarial attacks from the following
perspectives.
1. Given an input image, the regional attribution to
the adversarial attack is computed to diagnose the importance of each image region to the decrease of the attacking
* Equal contribution
† Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author.

He is with the John
Hopcroft Center and the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.

165

4567891
1 7789

165

0123

013

023

5171
5 1789

03

75 
75 

5 1789
88959

03

Figure 1. (a) Regional attributions to the adversarial attack. Regions with high attributions are important for the decrease of the
attacking cost. (b2) Perturbation pixels A and B interact with each
other and form a curve to conduct the adversarial attack; (b3) the
entire perturbation can be decomposed into several components.
Perturbation pixels within each component have strong interactions, whereas perturbation pixels between different components
have relatively weak interactions.

cost, i.e. the Lp norm of the adversarial perturbation. As
Fig. 1 (a2) shows, regions of the bird’s head and neck have
high attributions to the adversarial attack. If these two regions are not allowed to be perturbed, then magnitudes of
adversarial perturbations in other regions would be significantly increased for attacking. In this way, the attacking
cost may increase significantly.
The regional attribution (importance) provides a new
perspective to understand adversarial attacks. We compute
such regional attributions as Shapley values w.r.t. the attacking cost.
2. Pixel-wise interactions & perturbation components in the adversarial attack: Given a perturbation map
of the input image, we further define and quantify interactions among pixel-wise perturbations in the perturbation
map, termed perturbation pixels. I.e. we aim to explore how
perturbation pixels cooperate to achieve the attack. According to [45], the adversarial power of a single pixel mainly
depends on the context around the pixel, rather than rely
on each perturbation pixel independently. For instance, in
Fig. 1 (b2), perturbation pixels A and B do not directly contribute to the attack. Instead, they interact with each other
to form a curve to fool the DNN.
The interaction among perturbation pixels can be defined
based on the game theory. Given a DNN g trained for classification and an adversarial image x0 = x + δ ∈ Rn ,
y = g(x0 ) ∈ R denotes the scalar output of the DNN (or one
dimension of the vectorized network output). Let φi denote
the importance (attribution) of the i-th perturbation pixel of

1095

