A Simple Feature Augmentation for Domain Generalization
Pan Li1∗ , Da Li2,3∗ , Wei Li1
Shaogang Gong1 , Yanwei Fu4† and Timothy M. Hospedales2,3
1

Queen Mary University of London 2 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge
3
University of Edinburgh 4 Fudan University
{pan.li, wei.li, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk

dali.academic@gmail.com, yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
The topical domain generalization (DG) problem asks
trained models to perform well on an unseen target domain
with different data statistics from the source training domains. In computer vision, data augmentation has proven
one of the most effective ways of better exploiting the source
data to improve domain generalization. However, existing
approaches primarily rely on image-space data augmentation, which requires careful augmentation design, and provides limited diversity of augmented data. We argue that
feature augmentation is a more promising direction for DG.
We find that an extremely simple technique of perturbing
the feature embedding with Gaussian noise during training leads to a classifier with domain-generalization performance comparable to existing state of the art. To model
more meaningful statistics reflective of cross-domain variability, we further estimate the full class-conditional feature
covariance matrix iteratively during training. Subsequent
joint stochastic feature augmentation provides an effective
domain randomization method, perturbing features in the
directions of intra-class/cross-domain variability. We verify
our proposed method on three standard domain generalization benchmarks, Digit-DG, VLCS and PACS, and show it
is outperforming or comparable to the state of the art in all
setups, together with experimental analysis to illustrate how
our method works towards training a robust generalisable
model.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods demonstrate exceptional performance in different fields of computer vision, such as object recognition, semantic segmentation or object detection.
∗ Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

Class one

Perturbed instances

Class two

Classifier

Figure 1: Illustrative schematic of our stochastic feature
augmentation method. The trained vanilla model has limited robustness as simple perturbed feature instances, as
might be encountered experiencing domain-shift, could induce the classifier to make a mistake. During the training,
we persistently perturb the feature embedding, which leads
to classification mistakes. In order to discriminate these erroneous perturbed instances, the feature spare must adapt to
separate the classes with a more robust decision boundary.
This new boundary is in turn more robust to domain-shift.

However, these machine learning systems’ performance
drops dramatically when encountering test data, which is
statistically different from the training data [5]. This issue
is known as the domain shift problem, which domain generalization (DG) research aims to address. Models with good
DG properties are crucial in practical applications since the
distribution of testing data in deployment is inevitably different from training data collected for model fitting [17],
whether due to either the expense or simple impossibility of
collecting representative training data.
DG research traces back to a decade ago [3]. Since then
a variety of methods were proposed to push the DG boundary, including learning domain-invariant features [28, 14],
extracting the underlying domain knowledge [15, 20], and

8886

