A Confidence-based Iterative Solver of Depths and Surface Normals
for Deep Multi-view Stereo
Wang Zhao1,3 * Shaohui Liu2,3∗ Yi Wei1
1
Tsinghua University 2 ETH Zurich

Hengkai Guo3 Yong-Jin Liu1,4
ByteDance Inc. 4 JCMV

3

b1ueber2y@gmail.com, {zhao-w19, y-wei19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
guohengkai@bytedance.com, liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a deep multi-view stereo
(MVS) system that jointly predicts depths, surface normals
and per-view confidence maps. The key to our approach
is a novel solver that iteratively solves for per-view depth
map and normal map by optimizing an energy potential
based on the locally planar assumption. Specifically, the
algorithm updates depth map by propagating from neighboring pixels with slanted planes, and updates normal map
with local probabilistic plane fitting. Both two steps are
monitored by a customized confidence map. This solver is
not only effective as a post-processing tool for plane-based
depth refinement and completion, but also differentiable
such that it can be efficiently integrated into deep learning pipelines. Our multi-view stereo system employs multiple optimization steps of the solver over the initial prediction of depths and surface normals. The whole system can
be trained end-to-end, decoupling the challenging problem
of matching pixels within poorly textured regions from the
cost-volume based neural network. Experimental results
on ScanNet and RGB-D Scenes V2 demonstrate state-ofthe-art performance of the proposed deep MVS system on
multi-view depth estimation, with our proposed solver consistently improving the depth quality over both conventional
and deep learning based MVS pipelines. Code is available
at https://github.com/thuzhaowang/idn-solver.

1. Introduction
Dense multi-view stereo (MVS) has been a longstanding fundamental topic in computer vision. The key
idea of most existing techniques is to compare the similarity of image patches at different depth hypotheses, densely
matching pixels across images. While great improvement
has been witnessed over decades, it is still a hard problem
to accurately estimate dense geometry from posed images
* Equal contribution

(a) Input RGB image

(b) w/o. solver

(c) w. solver only at training

(d) w. solver at training and inference

Figure 1. By integrating the proposed iterative solver into end-toend training, our method decouples the challenging problem of
estimating depth values within poorly textured regions from the
initial network predictions, getting the network to focus more on
reliable estimation on well textured pixels. This improves depth
quality on both textured (blue) and texture-less (red) regions. Note
that on texture-less areas (red box on (c)(d)), the network jointly
trained with the solver only focuses on predicting reliable geometry on neighboring areas, leaving the poorly textured pixels to be
resolved with the iterative solver module.

in many real-world scenarios, especially in indoor environments, where one of the most typical reasons of failure is
the existence of texture-less areas (e.g. walls), which incur
significant ambiguities to the matching step, as a number of
different depths all result in low matching costs.
There have been various attempts to tackle this crucial
problem. Global optimization [19, 5, 50] is one possible direction to resolve the ambiguities. Those methods initially
assume a fixed set of superpixels and apply Markov random
field with slanted-plane models. The optimization prefers
globally smoothed geometry with locally planar surfaces
and achieves promising performance. However, global optimization methods suffer from large computational complexity and the performance is also limited by the quality of
superpixels and handcrafted dense features.
With the recent success of deep learning, learning-based

6168

