Semantic Concentration for Domain Adaptation
∗

Shuang Li1 Mixue Xie1 Fangrui Lv1 Chi Harold Liu1 Jian Liang2 Chen Qin3 Wei Li4
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Alibaba Group 3 University of Edinburgh 4 Inceptio Tech.
shuangli@bit.edu.cn

michellexie102@gmail.com

liangjianzb12@gmail.com

fangruilv@bit.edu.cn

Chen.Qin@ed.ac.uk

liuchi02@gmail.com

liweimcc@gmail.com

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) paves the way for label annotation and dataset bias issues by the knowledge transfer from
a label-rich source domain to a related but unlabeled target domain. A mainstream of DA methods is to align the
feature distributions of the two domains. However, the majority of them focus on the entire image features where irrelevant semantic information, e.g., the messy background,
is inevitably embedded. Enforcing feature alignments in
such case will negatively influence the correct matching
of objects and consequently lead to the semantically negative transfer due to the confusion of irrelevant semantics. To tackle this issue, we propose Semantic Concentration for Domain Adaptation (SCDA), which encourages the
model to concentrate on the most principal features via the
pair-wise adversarial alignment of prediction distributions.
Specifically, we train the classifier to class-wisely maximize
the prediction distribution divergence of each sample pair,
which enables the model to find the region with large differences among the same class of samples. Meanwhile,
the feature extractor attempts to minimize that discrepancy,
which suppresses the features of dissimilar regions among
the same class of samples and accentuates the features of
principal parts. As a general method, SCDA can be easily
integrated into various DA methods as a regularizer to further boost their performance. Extensive experiments on the
cross-domain benchmarks show the efficacy of SCDA.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network (DNN) has achieved great success
in diverse machine learning problems [17, 3, 33]. Unfortunately, the impressive performance gain heavily relies on
the access to massive well-labeled training data. And it is
often time and cost prohibitive to manually annotate sufficient training data in practice. Besides, another drawback
of conventional deep learning is the poor generalization on a
∗ Corresponding author.

Before adaptation

After adaptation

Adaptation with SCDA

Maximize prediction
distribution discrepancy
Class A

Minimize prediction
distribution discrepancy

Class B

Pairing region

Source

Class A

Target

Class B

Training flow
Decision boundary

Figure 1. Illustration of the adversarial process of SCDA at the
macro level. Classifier is trained to maximize the prediction distribution discrepancy of samples in the pairing region, which causes
the decision boundary to pass through the high density area of the
pairing region. While the feature extractor tries to minimize that
discrepancy, which pushes the features away from the decision
boundary. Finally, well-aligned features can be obtained through
the adversarial game between the classifier and feature extractor.

new dataset, due to the domain shift issue [2, 29, 1]. Hence,
there is a strong motivation to utilize the knowledge of a
label-rich domain (i.e., source domain) to assist the learning in a related but unlabeled domain (i.e., target domain),
which is often referred to as domain adaptation (DA).
To alleviate the domain shift problem, the common practice of DA is to reduce the cross-domain distribution discrepancy by learning domain-invariant feature representations. Generally, these DA methods can be roughly categorized as the discrepancy-based methods [23, 26, 7, 12],
which align the domain distributions by minimizing a welldesigned statistic metric, and the adversarial-based methods
[8, 24, 41, 37, 20, 31], where the domain discriminator is
designed to distinguish between source and target samples
and the feature extractor tries to confuse the discriminator.

9102

