ELLIPSDF: Joint Object Pose and Shape Optimization with a Bi-level Ellipsoid
and Signed Distance Function Description
Mo Shan, Qiaojun Feng, You-Yi Jau, Nikolay Atanasov
University of California San Diego
{moshan,qjfeng,yjau,natanasov}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Autonomous systems need to understand the semantics
and geometry of their surroundings in order to comprehend
and safely execute object-level task specifications. This paper proposes an expressive yet compact model for joint object pose and shape optimization, and an associated optimization algorithm to infer an object-level map from multiview RGB-D camera observations. The model is expressive
because it captures the identities, positions, orientations,
and shapes of objects in the environment. It is compact because it relies on a low-dimensional latent representation
of implicit object shape, allowing onboard storage of large
multi-category object maps. Different from other works that
rely on a single object representation format, our approach
has a bi-level object model that captures both the coarse
level scale as well as the fine level shape details. Our approach is evaluated on the large-scale real-world ScanNet
dataset and compared against state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Range sensors, such as RGB-D cameras and LIDARs,
have become a primary data source for robot localization
and mapping due to their increasing accuracy, affordability, and compactness. This has contributed to the development of RGB-D Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM) [23, 33, 35, 46] and Structure from Motion
(SfM) [2, 11, 43] approaches that provide accurate and efficient ego-motion estimation and map reconstruction. The
map representations used in RGB-D SLAM, however, are
predominantly geometric, composed of point landmarks
[23, 45], surfels [47] or explicit (mesh) and implicit (signed
distance field) surface representations [33, 39]. These geometric models do not provide semantic information such as
the class, pose, shape, or affordances of objects in the scene.
Maps that combine geometric and semantic information are
We gratefully acknowledge support from ARL DCIST CRA
W911NF-17-2-0181 and NSF RI IIS-2007141.

Figure 1. Overview of ELLIPSDF: a) Ground-truth scene reconstruction from colored point clouds in ScanNet [13] scene 0087,
where the RGB axes show the camera trajectory, b) Reconstructed
object meshes in the world frame using the SDF model decoded
from a latent code, and the optimized SIM(3) transformation representing object pose.

useful and understandable for humans and allow specification of symbolic tasks, such as retrieval, object-directed
navigation, grasping, and safety critical operation, in terms
of object entities.
Recent works that focus on object-level localization and
mapping include [37, 42, 32, 45, 29, 20], which utilize objects as landmarks for localization and navigation [42, 3, 32,
45, 29, 20] or as functional entities for motion, part, and affordance identification [26, 38, 31, 27]. The memory and
computational efficiency of the object representations used
by semantic SLAM are vital for accommodating online construction, onboard storage, and multi-robot use of large semantic maps. On one hand, a parsimonious way for optimizing and storing object maps is needed to ensure online
computation and low onboard memory use. On the other
hand, it is desirable to preserve as many details about the
object shapes, texture, and affordances as possible. Striking the right balance between a faithful object reconstruction and a compact object representation remains an open
research problem.
This paper proposes ELLIPSDF, which is an expressive
yet compact model of object pose and shape, and an associated optimization algorithm to infer an object-level map
from multi-view RGB-D camera observations, as shown in
Fig. 1. ELLIPSDF is expressive because it captures the

5946

