An Elastica Geodesic Approach with Convexity Shape Prior
Da Chen
Shandong Artificial Intelligence Institute,
Qilu University of Technology
(Shandong Academy of Sciences), China

Laurent D. Cohen
University Paris Dauphine, PSL Research University,
CNRS, UMR 7534, CEREMADE, Paris, France.
cohen@ceremade.dauphine.fr

dachen.cn@hotmail.com

Xue-Cheng Tai
Department of Mathematics,
Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong

Jean-Marie Mirebeau
Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay, CNRS,
Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay,
91405 ORSAY, France

xuechengtai@hkbu.edu.hk

jean-marie.mirebeau@math.u-psud.fr

Abstract
The minimal geodesic models based on the Eikonal
equations are capable of finding suitable solutions in various image segmentation scenarios. Existing geodesic-based
segmentation approaches usually exploit the image features
in conjunction with geometric regularization terms (such
as curve length or elastica length) for computing geodesic
paths. In this paper, we consider a more complicated problem: finding simple and closed geodesic curves which are
imposed a convexity shape prior. The proposed approach
relies on an orientation-lifting strategy, by which a planar
curve can be mapped to an high-dimensional orientation
space. The convexity shape prior serves as a constraint for
the construction of local metrics. The geodesic curves in
the lifted space then can be efficiently computed through
the fast marching method. In addition, we introduce a way
to incorporate region-based homogeneity features into the
proposed geodesic model so as to solve the region-based
segmentation issues with shape prior constraints.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a fundamental and challenging
problem posed in the fields of image analysis and computer vision. In the past decades, a large variety of segmentation approaches have been devoted to address the related segmentation problems. Among them, the energy
minimization-based models integrating with priors on the
target regions have proven to yield satisfactory solutions.
Prior-driven segmentation approaches. One widely considered geometric prior is to assume that the target bound-

aries appear to be short in terms of Euclidean curve length,
by which the image noises can be suppressed in some extent. Such a first-order geometric prior has been commonly
utilized in various energy minimization-based segmentation
approaches such as active contours [9, 10, 38] and graphbased models [5,21]. Efficient higher order geometric priors
may include the curvature-penalized length term [3, 26, 43]
and data-driven weighted length [32, 42]. However, utilizing geometric regularity as a single prior is sometimes insufficient to find favorable segmentations, especially when
dealing with images with complex intensity distribution. In
contrast, the strategy of incorporating shape-driven priors
into the objective energies can yield more accurate and efficient constraints for segmentation. These priors are often
carried out via a statistical model about the target regions or
contours [6,8,22,23,40]. The implementation of the shapedriven priors is capable of encouraging satisfactory segmentations, even in the absence of reliable image appearance
features which are used to distinguish disjoint regions.
Recently, the shape constraints associated to the convexity and star convexity were regarded as flexible shape priors.
Existing approaches in conjunction with these shape priors
can be loosely categorized as either discrete or continuous
types. In the discrete setting, the convexity prior [28], the
star convexity prior [46], or geodesic star convexity [29]
are characterized as a regularization term to construct the
discrete energy functionals together with image data-driven
terms. The energy minimization can be addressed by the
graph cut algorithm [5]. In [27, 41], the convexity prior
was incorporated into graph-based segmentation framework
to solve multi-region segmentation tasks. The hedgehoglike shape prior [31] generalizes the geodesic star convexity
constraint [27] to enlarge the applicable scope of the orig-

6900

