Self-Conditioned Probabilistic Learning of Video Rescaling
Yuan Tian1

Guo Lu2 Xiongkuo Min1 Zhaohui Che1 Guangtao Zhai1∗ Guodong Guo3
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong Unversity 2 Beijing Institute of Technology 3 Baidu

Zhiyong Gao1

{ee tianyuan, minxiongkuo, chezhaohui, zhaiguangtao, zhiyong.gao}@sjtu.edu.cn
guo.lu@bit.edu.cn, guoguodong01@baidu.com

Abstract
Bicubic downscaling is a prevalent technique used to reduce the video storage burden or to accelerate the downstream processing speed. However, the inverse upscaling
step is non-trivial, and the downscaled video may also deteriorate the performance of downstream tasks. In this paper,
we propose a self-conditioned probabilistic framework for
video rescaling to learn the paired downscaling and upscaling procedures simultaneously. During the training, we decrease the entropy of the information lost in the downscaling by maximizing its probability conditioned on the strong
spatial-temporal prior information within the downscaled
video. After optimization, the downscaled video by our
framework preserves more meaningful information, which
is beneficial for both the upscaling step and the downstream
tasks, e.g., video action recognition task. We further extend the framework to a lossy video compression system,
in which a gradient estimator for non-differential industrial
lossy codecs is proposed for the end-to-end training of the
whole system. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of our approach on video rescaling, video
compression, and efficient action recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
High-resolution videos are widely used over various
computer vision tasks [44][62][7][35][33][50][64]. However, considering the increased storage burden or the high
computational cost, it is usually required to first downscale
the high-resolution videos. Then we can either compress
the output low-resolution videos for saving storage cost or
feed them to the downstream tasks to reduce the computational cost. Despite that this paradigm is prevalent, it has
the following two disadvantages. First, it is non-trivial to
restore the original high-resolution videos from the (compressed) low-resolution videos, even we use the latest superresolution methods [30, 63, 48, 57]. Second, it is also a
challenge for the downstream tasks to achieve high performance based on these low-resolution videos. Therefore,
∗ Corresponding author.

it raises the question that whether the downscaling operation can facilitate the reconstruction of the high-resolution
videos and also preserve the most meaningful information.
Recently, this question has been partially studied as a
single image rescaling problem [24, 27, 47, 60], which
learns the down/up scaling operators jointly. However,
how to adapt these methods from image to video domain
and leverage the rich temporal information within videos
are still open problems. More importantly, modeling the
lost information during downscaling is non-trivial. Current methods either ignore the lost information [24, 27, 47]
or assume it as an independent distribution in the latent
space [60], while neglecting the internal relationship between the downscaled image and the lost information. Besides, all literature above has not explored how to apply the
rescaling technique to the lossy image/video compression.
In this paper, we focus on building a video rescaling framework and propose a self-conditioned probabilistic
learning approach to learn a pair of video downscaling and
upscaling operators by exploiting the information dependency within the video itself. Specifically, we first design
a learnable frequency analyzer to decompose the original
high-resolution video into its downscaled version and the
corresponding high-frequency component. Then, a Gaussian mixture distribution is leveraged to model the highfrequency component by conditioning on the downscaled
video. For accurate estimation of the distribution parameters, we further introduce the local and global temporal
aggregation modules to fuse the spatial information from
adjacent downscaled video frames. Finally, the original
video can be restored by a frequency synthesizer from the
downscaled video and the high-frequency component sampled from the distribution. We integrate the components
above as a novel self-conditioned video rescaling framework termed SelfC and optimize it by minimizing the negative log-likelihood for the distribution.
Furthermore, we apply our proposed SelfC in two practical applications, i.e., lossy video compression and video
action recognition. In particular, to integrate our framework with the existing non-differential video codecs (e.g.,

4490

