AESOP: Abstract Encoding of Stories, Objects, and Pictures
Hareesh Ravi1 *

1

Kushal Kafle2
Scott Cohen2
Mubbasir Kapadia1
1
Rutgers University, 2 Adobe Research

Jonathan Brandt2

{hr268, mk1353}@cs.rutgers.edu, 2 {kkafle, scohen, jbrandt}@adobe.com

Abstract
Visual storytelling and story comprehension are uniquely
human skills that play a central role in how we learn about
and experience the world. Despite remarkable progress in
recent years in synthesis of visual and textual content in
isolation and learning effective joint visual-linguistic representations, existing systems still operate only at a superficial, factual level. With the goal of developing systems
that are able to comprehend rich human-generated narratives, and co-create new stories, we introduce AESOP: a
new dataset that captures the creative process associated
with visual storytelling. Visual panels are composed of clipart objects with specific attributes enabling a broad range
of creative expression. Using AESOP, we propose foundational storytelling tasks that are generative variants of
story cloze tests, to better measure the creative and causal
reasoning ability required for visual storytelling. We further develop a generalized story completion framework that
models stories as the co-evolution of visual and textual concepts. We benchmark the proposed approach with human
baselines and evaluate using comprehensive qualitative and
quantitative metrics. Our results highlight key insights related to the dataset, modelling and evaluation of visual storytelling for future research in this promising field of study.

1. Introduction
“Examples are the best precept” – Aesop, The Two Crabs
Storytelling is integral to human experience. Starting
from when we are very young, stories help shape our understanding of the world around us, and the people that inhabit it. Through stories, we encode a wide range of shared
knowledge, including common sense physics, cause and effect, human psychology, and morality [52]. Storytelling and
story comprehension are closely linked in that both involve
the construction of rich mental models, comprising scenes,
* A portion of this work was done during Hareesh Ravi’s internship at
Adobe Research.

inanimate objects and their properties, as well as characters
and their intentions [36]. Consequently, stories are crucial
to mental development in humans. We postulate that machine intelligence requires comparable skills, particularly
when interacting with people.
Though there have been some works on understanding
and modelling natural language stories [55, 57, 68], there
is limited work on aligning stories with the visual world
[33, 34]. When there is no visual information available
as part of a story, such as in novels, people still inherently visualize the events in real-time to disambiguate details and make inferences about the story [95] with ease.
Humans draw upon deep world knowledge, grounded in
visual-linguistic stories and experience that we’ve accumulated from a young age. Therefore, it is likely worthwhile
to similarly ground machine comprehension and synthesis
of stories in the visual world.
Much of the current work on joint understanding of vision and language hinges on learning to describe factual information about objects and scenes in an image. Particularly, the text, and benchmarks associated with images in
popular datasets such as MSCOCO [47], Flickr [87] and Visual Genome [42] focus on superficial factual descriptions,
rather than a narrative. Moreover, the few existing visual
story datasets [33, 30] lack coherence and diversity [64] that
are key to a good story. Also, these datasets assume visual
storytelling as a perceptive process rather than a creative
process. For example, in [33], crowd workers wrote natural
language stories given a sequence of images from photo albums. Such a process leads to superficial and disjoint stories
[3, 34] that focus on connecting text to image rather than on
forming a coherent narrative. The limitation of such a process is evident when people are shown the story panels in
random order. For over a third of the stories in [33], human observers are unable to find the “true” order of events,
calling into question the value of such datasets for studying
stories. Another limitation is that the task is to generate text
for a sequence of given images, with story writers having no
control over the visual input. Consequently, a trained model
is required only to produce a “feasible” text for a given im-

2052

