Learning Attribute-driven Disentangled Representations for Interactive Fashion
Retrieval
Yuxin Hou∗
Aalto University

Eleonora Vig
Amazon

Michael Donoser
Amazon

Loris Bazzani
Amazon

yuxin.hou@aalto.fi

eleonov@amazon.com

donoserm@amazon.de

bazzanil@amazon.de

Abstract
change color
from blue to grey

Interactive retrieval for online fashion shopping provides the ability to change image retrieval results according
to the user feedback. One common problem in interactive
retrieval is that a specific user interaction (e.g., changing
the color of a T-shirt) causes other aspects to change inadvertently (e.g., the retrieved item has a sleeve type different
than the query). This is a consequence of existing methods
learning visual representations that are semantically entangled in the embedding space, which limits the controllability
of the retrieved results. We propose to leverage on the semantics of visual attributes to train convolutional networks
that learn attribute-specific subspaces for each attribute to
obtain disentangled representations. Thus operations, such
as swapping out a particular attribute value for another,
impact the attribute at hand and leave others untouched.
We show that our model can be tailored to deal with different retrieval tasks while maintaining its disentanglement
property. We obtain state-of-the-art performance on three
interactive fashion retrieval tasks: attribute manipulation
retrieval, conditional similarity retrieval, and outfit complementary item retrieval. Code and models are publicly
available1 .

1. Introduction
Content-based image retrieval has been a fundamental
computer vision task for decades. More recently, this task
has evolved in the direction of enabling users to provide
additional forms of interaction (e.g., sentences, attributes
and clicks) along with the query image. Interactive image retrieval [11, 15, 57] is relevant in the context of online shopping, specifically for product categories for which
appearance is one of the pre-eminent factors for selection, such as fashion items. In this context, it is not only
∗ Work done during an internship with Amazon
1 https://github.com/amzn/fashion-attributedisentanglement

Attribute-specific
Disentangled Encoder
category
color
pattern

search for items
with similar color

search for
compatible bottoms

category vector

Figure 1: Disentangled representation of images with a subspace for each attribute that can be used for attribute manipulation retrieval, conditional similarity retrieval and outfit
complementary item retrieval.

necessary to train expressive visual representations of images [22, 33, 16, 42, 46], but also to empower the model
with the ability of understanding interactions of the user and
modify the search results accordingly.
One of the main limitations of existing methods for interactive image retrieval [11, 26, 15, 10, 57, 3, 36, 48] is
that representations are semantically entangled in the embedding space. An interaction that involves a specific aspect
of the image (e.g., changing the color of a T-shirt) causes
other entangled aspects to change inadvertently (e.g., sleeve
type or neck style). In our work, we advocate that disentanglement plays a fundamental role in interactive fashion retrieval for obtaining more controllability and interpretability of the search results, and therefore handling the
aforementioned limitation. We leverage on the semantics of
visual attributes to train convolutional networks that learn
attribute-specific subspaces via separate loss functions for
each attribute. Our disentangled representations thus consist of the concatenation of attribute-specific embeddings,
as shown in Figure 1. In this way, it is possible to apply
operators directly on the desired subspace selected by the

12147

