Walk in the Cloud: Learning Curves for Point Clouds Shape Analysis
Tiange Xiang
University of Sydney

Chaoyi Zhang
University of Sydney

Yang Song
University of New South Wales

txia7609@uni.sydney.edu.au

chaoyi.zhang@sydney.edu.au

yang.song1@unsw.edu.au

Jianhui Yu
University of Sydney

Weidong Cai
University of Sydney

jianhui.yu@sydney.edu.au

tom.cai@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Discrete point cloud objects lack sufficient shape descriptors of 3D geometries. In this paper, we present a
novel method for aggregating hypothetical curves in point
clouds. Sequences of connected points (curves) are initially
grouped by taking guided walks in the point clouds, and
then subsequently aggregated back to augment their pointwise features. We provide an effective implementation of
the proposed aggregation strategy including a novel curve
grouping operator followed by a curve aggregation operator. Our method was benchmarked on several point cloud
analysis tasks where we achieved the state-of-the-art classification accuracy of 94.2% on the ModelNet40 classification task, instance IoU of 86.8% on the ShapeNetPart segmentation task and cosine error of 0.11 on the ModelNet40
normal estimation task. Our project page with source code
is available at: https://curvenet.github.io/.

1. Introduction
The point cloud is a primary data structure in a string of
indoor/outdoor computer vision applications. A large variety of 3D sensors (e.g. LiDAR sensors) are now able to capture real-world objects, and their projections to digital forms
can be made by sampling discrete points on the surface.
To reach a better understanding of the 3D targets, effective
point cloud analysis techniques and methods are in great demand. With the thriving of deep learning, the pioneer works
[27, 29] and their followers [21, 6, 44, 1, 43, 7, 18, 48] processed point clouds through well-designed neural networks
to learn the latent mappings between input point coordinates
and the ground truth labels. Differing from conventional
2D vision tasks, the points are usually in irregular and unordered forms, hence, effective design of feature aggregation and message passing schemes among point clouds still
remains challenging.
Local feature aggregation is a basic operation that has
been widely studied recently. For each key point, its neighborhood point features are first grouped by pre-defined rules

Local aggregation

Non-local aggregation

Curve aggregation (ours)

Figure 1. Common aggregations and the curve aggregation.
Blue circles denote key points, orange circles denote query points
or query range. In curve aggregation, query features will be aggregated into all points.

(e.g. KNN). The relative position encodings between the
query point and neighboring points will be computed subsequently and then passed into various point-based transformation and aggregation modules for local feature extraction. Although the above operations help depict local
patterns to some extent, long-range point relations are neglected. While the non-local module [35] provides a solution to aggregate global features, we argue that the global
point-to-point mapping might still be insufficient to extract
underlying patterns implied by the point cloud shapes.
To this end, we propose to improve the point cloud geometry learning through generating continuous sequences
of point segments. We posit that such continuous descriptors are more adequate for depicting the geometry of point
cloud objects, compared to popular existing local and nonlocal operators nowadays. We denote such continuous descriptors as curves. By regarding a point cloud as an undirected graph, where the discrete points serve as the graph
nodes and the neighbor point connections as the graph
edges, a curve can therefore be described as a walk in the
graph. Figure 1 intuitively compares the local aggregation,
non-local aggregation, and our curve aggregation operators.
In this paper, we first revisit the local feature aggregation in
its general form and provide in-depth discussions on why
long-range feature aggregation strategies are desired (Sec.
3.1). We then formulate our method formally by defining
the curve grouping policy (Sec. 3.2) and the aggregation between curve features and point features (Sec. 3.3). A novel

915

