Product Quantizer Aware Inverted Index for Scalable Nearest Neighbor Search
Haechan Noh, Taeho Kim, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{noru0114, kth0522, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Abstract
The inverted index is one of the most commonly used
structures for non-exhaustive nearest neighbor search on
large-scale datasets. It allows a significant factor of acceleration by a reduced number of distance computations with
only a small fraction of the database. In particular, the inverted index enables the product quantization (PQ) to learn
their codewords in the residual vector space. The quantization error of the PQ can be substantially improved in such
combination since the residual vector space is much more
quantization-friendly thanks to their compact distribution
compared to the original data. In this paper, we first raise
an unremarked but crucial question; why the inverted index and the product quantizer are optimized separately even
though they are closely related? For instance, changes on
the inverted index distort the whole residual vector space.
To address the raised question, we suggest a joint optimization of the coarse and fine quantizers by substituting
the original objective of the coarse quantizer to end-to-end
quantization distortion. Moreover, our method is generic
and applicable to different combinations of coarse and fine
quantizers such as inverted multi-index and optimized PQ.

1. Introduction
For decades, approximate nearest neighbor search has
been a vital problem in various fields including computer
vision. It is especially difficult with high-dimensional and
large-scale datasets because of its impractical requirements
for computational costs and memory overhead. To address
such difficulty, efficient indexing and compact data representation techniques have been highlighted.
The Product Quantization (PQ) [16] and its variations [11, 19, 3, 29, 15, 8, 23, 21] has been recognized as
the most popular and successful solution, since they provide significant factors of data compression rate and efficiency in distance estimation. Specifically, the PQ divides
the high-dimensional vector into M disjoint sub-vectors and
* Corresponding author

Difference in updating coarse center

Conventional
data point
coarse center

Proposed
fine code
loss

Figure 1: This figure describes difference between coarse
center updates of conventional inverted index and those of
our proposed method. While the conventional inverted index considers the distortion of the coarse centers only, the
proposed method also considers the quantization error of
the fine quantizer in the coarse center updates.

quantizes those sub-vectors into K sub-codewords independently. In this way, the PQ utilizes M K representations
with a small memory footprint. Moreover, it is empirically
shown that the PQ-based techniques provide superior search
quality than parallel research directed toward the same goal,
the binary hashing methods [2, 27, 14, 28, 13, 9]
The inverted index provides a non-exhaustive search by
a simple shortlisting mechanism based on the data clustering. A practical scalable search system is implemented by
the following procedure; given a query, the inverted index
collects the shortlist which is a small fraction of the whole
data, and the PQ re-ranks the candidates according to the
estimated distances with the compact codes. Behind this
visible synergy effect between them towards high scalability in terms of both speed and memory, the inverted index
transforms the data into quantization-friendly residual vec-

12210

