Video Question Answering Using Language-Guided Deep Compressed-Domain
Video Feature

+

Nayoung Kim+ , Seong Jong Ha∗ , Je-Won Kang+,†
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Ewha W. University, Korea
∗
Vision AI Lab, AI Center, NCSOFT
†
Graduate Program in Smart Factory, Ewha W. University, Korea
1210513skdud@ewhain.net, seongjongha@ncsoft.com, jewonk@ewha.ac.kr

Abstract
Video Question Answering (Video QA) aims to give an
answer to the question through semantic reasoning between visual and linguistic information. Recently, handling large amounts of multi-modal video and language
information of a video is considered important in the industry. However, the current video QA models use deep
features, suffered from significant computational complexity and insufficient representation capability both in training and testing. Existing features are extracted using pretrained networks after all the frames are decoded, which
is not always suitable for video QA tasks. In this paper,
we develop a novel deep neural network to provide video
QA features obtained from coded video bit-stream to reduce the complexity. The proposed network includes several dedicated deep modules to both the video QA and the
video compression system, which is the first attempt at the
video QA task. The proposed network is predominantly
model-agnostic. It is integrated into the state-of-the-art networks for improved performance without any computationally expensive motion-related deep models. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed network outperforms the previous studies at lower complexity. https:
//github.com/Nayoung-Kim-ICP/VQAC

1. Introduction
Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) have
brought significant attention to the multidisciplinary research area of computer vision (CV) and natural langue
processing (NLP). Video question answering (QA) aims to
give a reasonable answer by jointly conducting visual understanding and language-specific reasoning. It has a number of real-time emerging intelligent applications such as
human-AI interactions and communication systems.
Previous video QA studies have focused on develop-

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed VQAC-baseline network architecture. It retrieves residue and motion vectors (MVs) from a
coded bit-stream from only the partial decoding to save computational resources. The compressed-domain features are used for
generating a motion-appearance aggregation (MA+) feature.

ing sophisticated deep learning models to resolve diverse
reasoning problems in multimodal data. In recent studies [14, 43, 9, 45, 12], the QA models incorporated external memories [14, 12] and attention mechanisms [42, 45]
to improve performance. Nevertheless, the previous studies straightforwardly used the same baseline neural network
architecture for extracting video features and question features. A convolutional neural network (CNN) and 3D-CNN
[34, 6] are used for an appearance feature and a motion
feature, respectively. A recurrent neural network (RNN) is
used for a question feature [11, 25]. Given with the separately generated features, the previous models were used to
understand semantic relations to answer the question. However, several studies indicated that the current approaches
suffered from significantly degraded performance when the
features lacked sufficient representation capabilities [5, 10].
It is problematic that the current baseline model naively

1708

