ISNet: Integrate Image-Level and Semantic-Level Context
for Semantic Segmentation
Zhenchao Jin, Bin Liu*, Qi Chu, Nenghai Yu
CAS Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information,
University of Science and Technology of China
{blwx@mail., flowice@, qchu@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Co-occurrent visual pattern makes aggregating contextual information a common paradigm to enhance the pixel
representation for semantic image segmentation. The existing approaches focus on modeling the context from the
perspective of the whole image, i.e., aggregating the imagelevel contextual information. Despite impressive, these
methods weaken the significance of the pixel representations of the same category, i.e., the semantic-level contextual information. To address this, this paper proposes
to augment the pixel representations by aggregating the
image-level and semantic-level contextual information, respectively. First, an image-level context module is designed
to capture the contextual information for each pixel in the
whole image. Second, we aggregate the representations of
the same category for each pixel where the category regions are learned under the supervision of the ground-truth
segmentation. Third, we compute the similarities between
each pixel representation and the image-level contextual
information, the semantic-level contextual information, respectively. At last, a pixel representation is augmented by
weighted aggregating both the image-level contextual information and the semantic-level contextual information with
the similarities as the weights. Integrating the image-level
and semantic-level context allows this paper to report stateof-the-art accuracy on four benchmarks, i.e., ADE20K, LIP,
COCOStuff and Cityscapes 1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation, which assigns per-pixel
predictions of object categories for the given image, is a fundamental problem in computer vision. This task is exceptionally significant to tons of real-world applications, e.g.,
automatic driving and robot sensing. Recent developments
* Corresponding author.
1 Our code will be available at https://github.com/SegmentationBLWX

/sssegmentation.

Semantic-Level Context for Car

Au

gm

en

t
Pixels of Car

Input Image

gm

Au

t

en

Image-Level Context for Car

Figure 1. Main idea of integrating image-level and semantic-level
context. The blue region on the upper branch denotes for semanticlevel context and the purple area on the lower branch stands for
image-level context.

of deep neural networks [16, 24] encourage the emergence
of a series of works [4, 5, 7, 22, 30, 35], where FCN is the
cornerstone of these works. Its encoder-decoder structure,
which reduces the spatial dimension to extract features and
then leverages upsampling to recover spatial extent, shows
numerous improvements in semantic segmentation. Based
on this, recent researches mainly focus on two issues to further boost the segmentation performance. One is how to
improve the encoder structure so that the models can extract more robust representation for each pixel [25, 29, 34].
The other is how to model the context so that the network
can enhance the representation capability of each pixel by
encoding the contextual information into the original feature representations [4, 11, 14, 17, 30, 35], which is also the
interest of this paper.
Co-occurrent visual pattern inspires the emergence of a
series of works about modeling context. These approaches
can be roughly divided into two types, i.e., multi-scale context modeling and relational context modeling. For multiscale context modeling, Deeplab [4] introduces the atrous
spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) so that it can leverage various dilation convolutions to capture the multi-scale contextual information. PSPNet [35] proposes to utilize pyramid
spatial pooling to aggregate the multi-scale contextual information. For relational context modeling, Wang et al. [26]
first revisit the traditional local means [1], and then design

7189

