Rethinking Self-supervised Correspondence Learning:
A Video Frame-level Similarity Perspective
Jiarui Xu
Xiaolong Wang
UC San Diego

Abstract
Learning a good representation for space-time correspondence is the key for various computer vision tasks,
including tracking object bounding boxes and performing
video object pixel segmentation. To learn generalizable
representation for correspondence in large-scale, a variety of self-supervised pretext tasks are proposed to explicitly perform object-level or patch-level similarity learning.
Instead of following the previous literature, we propose
to learn correspondence using Video Frame-level Similarity (VFS) learning, i.e, simply learning from comparing
video frames. Our work is inspired by the recent success
in image-level contrastive learning and similarity learning
for visual recognition. Our hypothesis is that if the representation is good for recognition, it requires the convolutional features to find correspondence between similar objects or parts. Our experiments show surprising results that
VFS surpasses state-of-the-art self-supervised approaches
for both OTB visual object tracking and DAVIS video object segmentation. We perform detailed analysis on what
matters in VFS and reveals new properties on image and
frame level similarity learning. Project page with code:
https://jerryxu.net/VFS.

1. Introduction
Learning visual correspondence across space and time
is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision. It is widely applied in 3D reconstruction, scene understanding, and modeling object dynamics. The research
of learning correspondence in videos can be cast into two
categories: the first one is learning object-level correspondence for visual object tracking [62, 60, 69], relocalizing
the object with bounding boxes along the video; the other
one is learning fine-grained correspondence, which is commonly applied in optical flow estimation [31, 21] and video
object segmentation [9, 80]. While both lines of research
have been extensively explored, most approaches acquire
training supervision from simulations or limited human annotations, which increases the difficulty for generalization

Frame-level Similarity
(the only loss)

fully-connected

res5

Object-level
Correspondence (emerged)

res4
Fine-grained
Correspondence (emerged)

Predictor
Encoder

Target
Encoder

Figure 1. Video Frame-level Similarity (VFS) learning. It compares the fully-connected layer embeddings of frames from the
same video for learning. By minimizing the frame-level feature
distance, the fine-grained and object-level correspondence can automatically emerge in res4 and res5 blocks in the ResNet architecture, without using any explicit tracking-based pretext task.

across different data and tasks.
One way to tackle this problem is to learn representations for correspondence using free temporal supervision
signals in videos. Recently, a lot of efforts have been made
in self-supervised learning of space-time visual correspondence [70, 74, 33], where different pretext tasks are designed to learn to track pixels or objects in videos. For example, Wang et al. [74] propose to use the cycle-consistency
of time (i.e., forward-backward object tracking) as a supervisory signal for learning. Building on this, Jabri et al. [33]
combine the cycle-consistency of time with patch-level similarity learning and achieve a significant improvement in
learning correspondence. Given this encouraging result, we
take a step back and ask the questions: Do we really need
to design self-supervised object (or patch) tracking task explicitly to learn correspondence? Can image-level similarity
learning alone learn the correspondence?
Recent development in image-level similarity learning
(e.g., contrastive learning) has shown the self-supervised

10075

