Revitalizing Optimization for 3D Human Pose and Shape Estimation:
A Sparse Constrained Formulation
Taosha Fan1,2 , Kalyan Vasudev Alwala1 , Donglai Xiang3,4 , Weipeng Xu3 ,
Todd Murphey2 , Mustafa Mukadam1
1

Facebook AI Research, 2 Northwestern University,
3
Facebook Reality Labs, 4 Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
We propose a novel sparse constrained formulation and
from it derive a real-time optimization method for 3D human pose and shape estimation. Our optimization method,
SCOPE (Sparse Constrained Optimization for 3D human
Pose and shapE estimation), is orders of magnitude faster
(avg. 4ms convergence) than existing optimization methods, while being mathematically equivalent to their dense
unconstrained formulation under mild assumptions. We
achieve this by exploiting the underlying sparsity and constraints of our formulation to efficiently compute the GaussNewton direction. We show that this computation scales
linearly with the number of joints and measurements of a
complex 3D human model, in contrast to prior work where
it scales cubically due to their dense unconstrained formulation. Based on our optimization method, we present
a real-time motion capture framework that estimates 3D
human poses and shapes from a single image at over
30 FPS. In benchmarks against state-of-the-art methods
on multiple public datasets, our framework outperforms
other optimization methods and achieves competitive accuracy against regression methods. Project page with code
and videos: https://sites.google.com/view/
scope-human/.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human poses and shapes from an image has a broad range of applications in embodied AI,
robotics, AR/VR, and has seen remarkable progress in recent years. Among leading techniques, optimization methods [4, 15, 16, 21, 22, 35] have been successful. However,
they can still take up to tens of seconds to fit 3D human poses and shapes given an image, which is not ideal
for real-time applications. Deep learning based regression
methods [11, 13] have significantly reduced the computation times down to just tens of milliseconds, but often rely
on optimization during training or for refining the network
outputs. With a novel formulation, we revitalize optimiza-

Figure 1: Example solutions from our motion capture framework
based on our proposed sparse constrained optimization. (left) input image from the 3DPW [33] dataset, (middle) 3D pose and
shape reconstruction overlayed on the input image, (right) 3D reconstruction shown from a rotated viewpoint.

tion towards solving this problem in real-time.
Most optimization methods [4, 15, 16, 21, 22, 35] formulate 3D human pose and shape estimation as dense unconstrained optimization problems, differing only in terms of
the objective functions. These formulations are dense as
they result in dense Hessian matrices and unconstrained
as the optimization variables are unconstrained. To optimize the objective they use iterative techniques like GaussNewton [23] to find a local minimum given an initial guess.
These formulations however, suffer from high computation times due to the dense Hessian matrices that lead to
O(K 3 ) + O(K 2 N ) time to compute the Gauss-Newton direction for a 3D human model with K joints and N measurements. In particular, computing this direction involves
the steps of linearization to find the Jacobian, building and
then solving the linear system, where a dense formulation
renders all these steps expensive. Therefore, it is critical to
improve the efficiency of the Gauss-Newton direction computation to develop real-time optimization methods for 3D
human pose and shape estimation.

11457

