Graph-to-3D: End-to-End Generation and Manipulation of 3D Scenes Using
Scene Graphs
Helisa Dhamo 1,∗

Fabian Manhardt 2,∗
Nassir Navab 1
Federico Tombari 1,2
2
Technische Universität München
Google

1

Abstract
Controllable scene synthesis consists of generating 3D
information that satisfy underlying specifications. Thereby,
these specifications should be abstract, i.e. allowing easy
user interaction, whilst providing enough interface for detailed control. Scene graphs are representations of a scene,
composed of objects (nodes) and inter-object relationships
(edges), proven to be particularly suited for this task, as
they allow for semantic control on the generated content.
Previous works tackling this task often rely on synthetic
data, and retrieve object meshes, which naturally limits the
generation capabilities. To circumvent this issue, we instead propose the first work that directly generates shapes
from a scene graph in an end-to-end manner. In addition,
we show that the same model supports scene modification,
using the respective scene graph as interface. Leveraging
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) we train a variational Auto-Encoder on top of the object and edge categories, as well as 3D shapes and scene layouts, allowing
latter sampling of new scenes and shapes.

1. Introduction
Scene content generation, including 3D object shapes,
images and 3D scenes is of high interest in computer vision.
Applications involve helping the work of designers through
automatically generated intermediate results, as well as understanding and modeling scenes, in terms of, e.g., object
constellations an co-occurrences. Furthermore, conditional
synthesis allows for a more controllable content generation,
since users can specify which image or 3D model they want
to let appear in the generated scene. Common conditions involve text descriptions [39], semantic maps [34] and scene
graphs. Thereby, scene graphs have recently shown to offer
a suitable interface for controllable synthesis and manipulation [11, 4, 20], enabling semantic control on the generated
scene, even for complex scenes. Compared to dense semantic maps, scene graph structures are more high-level and ex∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work

Figure 1. a) Scene generation: given a scene graph (top, solid
lines), Graph-to-3D generates a 3D scene consistent with it. b)
Scene manipulation: given a 3D scene and an edited graph (top,
solid+dotted lines), Graph-to-3D is able to generate a varied set of
3D scenes adjusted according to the graph manipulation.

plicit, simplifying the interaction with the user. Moreover,
they enable controlling the semantic relation between entities, which is often not captured in a semantic map.
While there are a lot of methods for scene graph inference from images [36, 23] as well as the reverse problem [11, 2], in the 3D domain, only a few works on scene
graph prediction from 3D data have been very recently presented [31, 35]. With this work, we thus attempt to fill this
gap by proposing a method for end-to-end generation of
3D scenes from scene graphs. A few recent works investigate the problem of scene layout generation from scene
graphs [32, 20], thereby predicting a set of top-view object occupancy regions or 3D bounding boxes. To construct
a 3D scene from this layout, these methods typically rely
on retrieval from a database. On the contrary, we employ
a fully generative model that is able to synthesize novel
context-aware 3D shapes for the scene. Though retrieval
leads to good quality results, shape generation is an emerging alternative as it allows further costumizability via interpolation at the object level [8] and part level [22]. Further,
retrieval works can achieve at best (sub-) linear complexity

16352

