Query Adaptive Few-Shot Object Detection with Heterogeneous Graph
Convolutional Networks
Guangxing Han, Yicheng He, Shiyuan Huang, Jiawei Ma, Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University
{gh2561,yh3330,sh3813,jiawei.m,sc250}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Few-shot object detection (FSOD) aims to detect neverseen objects using few examples. This field sees recent improvement owing to the meta-learning techniques by learning how to match between the query image and few-shot
class examples, such that the learned model can generalize to few-shot novel classes. However, currently, most of
the meta-learning-based methods perform parwise matching between query image regions (usually proposals) and
novel classes separately, therefore failing to take into account multiple relationships among them. In this paper, we
propose a novel FSOD model using heterogeneous graph
convolutional networks. Through efficient message passing
among all the proposal and class nodes with three different types of edges, we could obtain context-aware proposal
features and query-adaptive, multiclass-enhanced prototype
representations for each class, which could help promote the
pairwise matching and improve final FSOD accuracy. Extensive experimental results show that our proposed model,
denoted as QA-FewDet, outperforms the current state-of-theart approaches on the PASCAL VOC and MSCOCO FSOD
benchmarks under different shots and evaluation metrics.

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed few-shot object detection
(FSOD) method. (a) Previous meta-learning-based FSOD method.
These methods aim to learn how to match between the regions
(usually proposals) in the query image and few-shot class examples. Note that the key module, the matching network, will be
repeatedly applied on each proposal and class pair. (b) Built upon
the meta-learning-based approach, our method proposes a novel
heterogeneous GCNs module with three different types of edges,
allowing efficient message passing among all the nodes. (c) Three
types of edges used in our model.

1. Introduction
With abundant annotated training examples of objects,
deep neural networks are tailored to extract commonalities
and detect object instances accordingly. However, such methods tend to over-fit when there are only a few examples available. On the other hand, having seen many similar objects,
humans can recognize a novel object when shown only a
few examples of it. Inspired by humans’ outstanding ability
to generalize knowledge, few-shot object detection aims to
detect novel object instances in an image given a few examples of the novel object (a.k.a novel class) and abundant
examples of other objects (a.k.a base classes).
Although object detection methods like Faster-RCNN
[31] work extremely well on data-abundant base classes, it

is non-trivial to adapt the model to few-shot novel classes.
This is mainly because the softmax classifier used in R-CNN
is tasked to perform classification among foreground classes
and reject background regions at the same time. However,
the notion of background changes when we adapt the model
to novel classes. Typically, there are two approaches addressing this problem. One approach [37, 40] is to use long-tailed
learning methods for training on the unbalanced dataset, but
the generalization ability of such model is still limited. The
other approach [3, 29, 39, 14] is to use meta-learning method
to learn a class-agnostic few-shot detector on base classes,
which can be easily adapted to novel classes without additional training. The simple framework and high detection

3263

