Uncertainty-aware Pseudo Label Refinery for Domain Adaptive Semantic
Segmentation
Yuxi Wang1,2,5
Junran Peng6
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4,5 *
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
5
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR) 6 Huawei Cloud&AI.
1

wangyuxi2016@ia.ac.cn, jrpeng4ever@gmail.com, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic segmentation aims to assign the pixel-level labels for unlabeled
target domain by transferring knowledge from the labeled
source domain. A typical self-supervised learning approach
generates pseudo labels from the source model and then retrains the model to fit the target distribution. However, it
suffers from noisy pseudo labels due to the existence of domain shift. Related works alleviate this problem by selecting high-confidence predictions, but uncertain classes with
low confidence scores have rarely been considered. This
informative uncertainty is essential to enhance feature representation and align source and target domains. In this
paper, we propose a novel uncertainty-aware pseudo label refinery framework considering two crucial factors simultaneously. First, we progressively enhance the feature
alignment model via the target-guided uncertainty rectifying framework. Second, we provide an uncertainty-aware
pseudo label assignment strategy without any manually designed threshold to reduce the noisy labels. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach and achieve state-of-the-art performance on two
standard synthetic-2-real tasks.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [18], considered as one of the
fundamental problems in Computer Vision, aims to understand the image scene at the pixel level. Since the increasing numbers of images, recent advances in semantic segmentation have shown rapid progress on current datasets,
such as Pascal VOC-2012 [8] and Cityscapes [5]. However,
* Corresponding Author

Prediction

(a)
False Positive

(b)
True Positive

Assigned Pseudo label

(c)
Threshold Bound

Figure 1. Problems for existing threshold-based pseudo labels generation. (a) Ignoring true positive predictions; (b) Assigning false
positive predictions as labels (c) Ideal pseudo labels generation.

collecting large-scale real-world datasets with well-labeled
dense annotations is labor-intensive and time-consuming.
To overcome this limitation, one feasible solution is to train
a model using synthetic and realistic datasets with free annotations, exampling as GTA5 [25] and SYNTHIA [27],
and predict on the real-world dataset like Cityscapes [5].
Unfortunately, the inevitable question is that the performance will drop significantly due to the domain shift between the synthetic and the real data.
To address domain discrepancy, unsupervised domain
adaptation methods have been proposed for semantic segmentation [12, 31, 25, 27]. Seminal practices usually exploit adversarial learning or self-supervised learning techniques. For adversarial learning methods, the dominant
trend is to match the distributions of source and target domains at different levels: pixel level [11, 4, 14, 21], feature level [12, 3], output level [31, 33, 35], category level
[20, 7], and patch level [32]. For self-supervised learning
approaches, the key idea is to generate high-quality pseudo
labels [41, 40, 30]. Although these methods significantly

9092

