Unsupervised Real-World Super-Resolution: A Domain Adaptation Perspective
Wei Wang1∗ , Haochen Zhang12∗ , Zehuan Yuan1† , Changhu Wang1
1
ByteDance AI Lab, 2 UC San Diego
{wangwei.frank, yuanzehuan, wangchanghu}@bytedance.com haz035@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Most existing convolution neural network (CNN) based
super-resolution (SR) methods generate their paired training dataset by artificially synthesizing low-resolution (LR)
images from the high-resolution (HR) ones. However, this
dataset preparation strategy harms the application of these
CNNs in real-world scenarios due to the inherent domain
gap between the training and testing data. A popular attempts towards the challenge is unpaired generative adversarial networks, which generate “real” LR counterparts
from real HR images using image-to-image translation and
then perform super-resolution from “real” LR→SR. Despite great progress, it is still difficult to synthesize perfect
“real” LR images for super-resolution. In this paper, we
firstly consider the real-world SR problem from the traditional domain adaptation perspective. We propose a novel
unpaired SR training framework based on feature distribution alignment, with which we can obtain degradationindistinguishable feature maps and then map them to HR
images. In order to generate better SR images for target
LR domain, we introduce several regularization losses to
force the aligned feature to locate around the target domain.
Our experiments indicate that our SR network obtains the
state-of-the-art performance over both blind and unpaired
SR methods on diverse datasets.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR), aiming to increase
the resolution of an image from a single low-resolution
(LR) counterpart, has attracted a lot of attentions in computer vision community. In recent years, convolution neural networks (CNNs) have been applied to SISR task[6]
and achieved the state-of-the-art performance[5] over traditional arts. In order to construct training image pairs, some
SR studies leverage determined operations such as bicubic
interpolation, to down-sample the original high-resolution
* Authors contributed equally. This work was performed while
Haochen Zhang worked as an intern at ByteDance.
† Corresponding author.

(HR) images. Obviously, such predefined techniques limit
the model generalization capability as several blur and noise
of unknown types exist in real LR images. As a result, the
notorious domain gap, between the training LR images and
the real-world testing images, harms the inference performance of these well-trained CNNs in real-world scenarios.
Blind SR is a straightforward attempt to process real LR
images, which aims to restore HR images from LR counterparts with unknown degradation parameters. For example,
[1, 10, 20] considered arbitrary blur kernels during the training process. Although these blind models have achieved
satisfactory performance for a large range of predefined
degradations, the performance still will drop drastically in
real-world scenerios, as the distribution of real LR images
is different from those degraded by manually designed operations anyway. Recently, inspired by the success of generative adversarial network (GAN) [9] in image style translation [48], many studies use CycleGAN[48] framework to
train SR networks in an unpaired manner. They usually suppose that only two unpaired datasets are available: a real
LR dataset with no predefined degradations and a real HR
one. The main idea is directly generating real LR counterparts from real HR images using image-to-image translation. Then a SR network is trained to map the degraded LR
outputs to the corresponding HR images in a paired manner. Although these methods have shown their advantages
in real-world SR by directly simulating the real LR image
distribution, it is still difficult to train an ideal degraded LR
image generator to perfectly mimic real images and realworld SR remains a challenging problem so far.
In contrast to existing SISR efforts generating plausible
“real” LR by image-to-image transferring, in this paper we
reconsider the unpaired real-world SR from a feature-level
domain adaptation perspective. Specifically, the source domain includes the real HR dataset and its synthetic LR
counterparts while the real LR dataset is regarded as the
target domain inputs without labels. As opposed to highlevel vision tasks which try to learn a domain-invariant
image representation, our goal is to obtain degradationindistinguishable feature maps and then map these feature
maps to HR images.

4318

