Weakly Supervised Text-based Person Re-Identification
Shizhen Zhao1 , Changxin Gao1 *, Yuanjie Shao1 , Wei-Shi Zheng2 , Nong Sang1
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, School of Artificial Intelligence
and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Sun Yat-sen University
Email:

xbrainzsz@gmail.com, cgao@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
The conventional text-based person re-identification
methods heavily rely on identity annotations. However, this
labeling process is costly and time-consuming. In this paper, we consider a more practical setting called weakly
supervised text-based person re-identification, where only
the text-image pairs are available without the requirement
of annotating identities during the training phase. To this
end, we propose a Cross-Modal Mutual Training (CMMT)
framework. Specifically, to alleviate the intra-class variations, a clustering method is utilized to generate pseudo
labels for both visual and textual instances. To further refine the clustering results, CMMT provides a Mutual Pseudo
Label Refinement module, which leverages the clustering
results in one modality to refine that in the other modality
constrained by the text-image pairwise relationship. Meanwhile, CMMT introduces a Text-IoU Guided Cross-Modal
Projection Matching loss to resolve the cross-modal matching ambiguity problem. A Text-IoU Guided Hard Sample
Mining method is also proposed for learning discriminative textual-visual joint embeddings. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed CMMT, and the results show that CMMT performs favorably against existing text-based person re-identification
methods. Our code will be available at https://
github.com/X-BrainLab/WS_Text-ReID.

1. Introduction
Text-based Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) [20] is a
challenging task that aims to retrieve the corresponding
person images by textual descriptions. In recent years,
numerous fully-supervised textual-visual embedding methods [30, 15, 25, 23, 18] have made great progress. These
methods follow a similar learning scheme: 1) The identity
loss is utilized to suppress the intra-class variations in each
* Corresponding author

Weakly Supervised

Fully Supervised

Label
Image

Text

Image

Text

(a)

(b)

Intra-class Variation

Cross-Modal Matching Ambiguity

Description 1: A woman wearing a white
and black floral print shirt, a pair of black
pants and a pair of black shoes.

A man wearing a blue and white stripe
tank top, a pair of green pants and a pair of
pink shoes.

Description 2: The lady wears a black
and white shirt black pants with black
sandals she carries a grey and black
shoulder purse.

The man has short dark hair and is
wearing a white t-shirt, dark pants and a
black backpack.
The man is wearing a blue and white
striped tank top and green pants. He has
pink headphones around his neck.

Description 3: A woman wears a white
and black floral shirt and a pair of black
pants.

Textual Variation

(c)

Matching

Visual Variation

A girl with brown hair in a bob style is
wearing jeans and a black and grey teeshirt and is walking away from the camera

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) fully supervised text-based person reidentification, (b) our proposed weakly supervised text-based person re-identification, (c) intra-class variation in both textual and
visual modalities and (d) cross-modal matching ambiguity.

modality; 2) The cross-modal matching is supervised by automatically generated positive or negative labels, based on
whether it originates from the same identity or not. It can be
observed that they heavily rely on the identity annotations,
as shown in Figure 1(a). However, the identity labeling process across multiple non-overlapping camera views is costly
and time-consuming. In this work, we consider a more practical setting called weakly supervised text-based person ReID, where only text-image pairs are available without any
identity annotations in the training phase, as illustrated in
Figure 1(b).
There are two main challenges due to the absence of
identity annotations. 1) It is difficult to mitigate the effect
caused by the intra-class variations in both textual and visual modalities. As shown in Figure 1(c), descriptions of a
person may be syntactically different. Meanwhile, images
captured by different cameras are always visually affected

11395

