Semantic Perturbations with Normalizing Flows for Improved Generalization
Oğuz Kaan Yüksel†

Sebastian U. Stich†
Martin Jaggi†
Tatjana Chavdarova†,‡
†
Machine Learning and Optimization Lab, EPFL
‡
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley
Abstract

Data augmentation is a widely adopted technique for
avoiding overfitting when training deep neural networks.
However, this approach requires domain-specific knowledge and is often limited to a fixed set of hard-coded transformations. Recently, several works proposed to use generative models for generating semantically meaningful perturbations to train a classifier. However, because accurate
encoding and decoding are critical, these methods, which
use architectures that approximate the latent-variable inference, remained limited to pilot studies on small datasets.
Exploiting the exactly reversible encoder-decoder structure of normalizing flows, we perform on-manifold perturbations in the latent space to define fully unsupervised
data augmentations. We demonstrate that such perturbations match the performance of advanced data augmentation techniques—reaching 96.6% test accuracy for CIFAR10 using ResNet-18 and outperform existing methods, particularly in low data regimes—yielding 10–25% relative improvement of test accuracy from classical training. We find
that our latent adversarial perturbations adaptive to the
classifier throughout its training are most effective, yielding the first test accuracy improvement results on real-world
datasets—CIFAR-10/100—via latent-space perturbations.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown impressive
results across several machine learning tasks [17, 40], and—
due to their automatic feature learning—have revolutionized the field of computer vision. However, their success depends on the availability of large annotated datasets for the
task at hand. Thus, among other overfitting techniques—
such as L1/L2 regularization, dropout [52], early stopping,
among others—data augmentation remains a mandatory
component that is frequently used in practice.
Traditional data augmentation (DA) techniques apply a
predefined set of transformations to the training samples
Correspondence to oguz.yuksel@epfl.ch.

that do not change the corresponding class label, to increase
the number of training samples. As this approach is limited to making the classifier robust only to the fixed set of
hard-coded transformations, advanced methods incorporate
more loosely defined transformations in the data space. For
example, mixup [66] uses convex combinations of pairs of
examples and their labels, and cutout [9] randomly masks
square regions of the input sample. Albeit implicitly, these
methods still require domain-specific knowledge that, for
example, such masking will not change the label.
Surprisingly, in the context of computer vision, it has
been shown that small perturbations in image space that
are not visible to the human eye can fool a well-performing
classifier into making wrong predictions. This observation
motivated an active line of research on adversarial training [see 4, and references therein]—namely, training with
such adversarial samples to obtain robust classifiers. However, further empirical studies showed that such training reduces the training accuracy, indicating the two objectives
are competing [58, 54].
Stutz et al. [53] postulate that this robustnessgeneralization trade-off appears due to using off-manifold
adversarial attacks that leave the data-manifold and that
on-manifold adversarial attacks can improve generalization. For verifying this hypothesis, the authors proposed
to use perturbations in the latent space of a generative
model. Their proposed method employs (class-specific)
models named VAE-GANs [33, 48]—which are based on
Generative Adversarial Networks [16] and, to tackle their
non-invertibility, further combine GANs with Variational
Autoencoders [28]. However, the VAE-GAN model introduces hard-to-tune hyperparameters, and notably, it optimizes a lower bound on the log-likelihood of the data.
Moreover, improved test accuracy was only shown on toy
datasets [53, Fig. 5], and yet in some cases, the test accuracy did not improve relative to classical training. We observe that on real-world datasets, such training can decrease
the test accuracy, see §5.
In this work, we focus on the possibility of employing advanced normalizing flows such as Glow [27], to define entirely unsupervised augmentations—contrasting with

6619

