Planar Surface Reconstruction from Sparse Views
Linyi Jin

Shengyi Qian Andrew Owens
University of Michigan

David F. Fouhey

{jinlinyi,syqian,ahowens,fouhey}@umich.edu
https://jinlinyi.github.io/SparsePlanes

Figure 1: Given two RGB images with an unknown relationship, our system produces a single, coherent planar surface
reconstruction of the scene in terms of 3D planes and relative camera poses. Our method succeeds despite the wide baseline
and the relatively small amount of overlap in structure (here: 64◦ rotation and 1.7m translation and 27% overlap). We show
this reconstruction with the inferred left and right cameras in Blue and Red.

Abstract
The paper studies planar surface reconstruction of indoor scenes from two views with unknown camera poses.
While prior approaches have successfully created objectcentric reconstructions of many scenes, they fail to exploit
other structures, such as planes, which are typically the
dominant components of indoor scenes. In this paper, we reconstruct planar surfaces from multiple views, while jointly
estimating camera pose. Our experiments demonstrate that
our method is able to advance the state of the art of reconstruction from sparse views, on challenging scenes from
Matterport3D.

1. Introduction
Consider the two photos in Figure 1, as humans, we can
infer that they were taken from the same scene: there is a
chair on one side, a bedside table on the other, and a large
glass wall and floor in the middle. We perceive the scene
correctly despite the fact that they are sparse views [37]:
they were taken from very different camera poses, and very
little of the scene structure within them overlaps. There are
also challenges in grouping: while each photo might, at first
glance, seem to contain its own glass wall and floor, they are
each “slices” of the same planar objects. Despite these challenges, humans readily understand spaces like these from
only a few ordinary photos, such as when they share collections of photos from the same event or look for housing.
Yet this setting poses challenges for today’s computer

vision methods. Traditional tools from multi-view geometry [18, 1] largely rely on correspondence for reconstruction and are fundamentally limited to the small part of the
scene that directly overlaps, even when the camera pose
is known. Learning-based single view 3D [63, 28], offers
ways of reconstructing each image, but produces two messy
piles of partial reconstructions due to the unknown viewpoint change. In Figure 1, the floor is fragmented across
both views and the back of the chair is present in only one
view. While humans can associate these pieces and infer
their relative positions to produce a coherent reconstruction,
it is not trivial for today’s reconstruction algorithms.
We believe the ease with which humans solve the two
unknown camera reconstruction problem, coupled with the
difficulty it poses for computers marks it as an important
task on the path to human-level 3D perception. Indeed,
it poses challenges to existing work in deep learning for
multiview reconstruction, which typically requires known
camera poses [23, 31] as opposed to unknown poses, many
views [21] as opposed to two, additional depth information
at test time [65, 62] as opposed to RGB images, or works
only on synthetic data [37]. Typically the extra information
used is fundamental to the algorithm (e.g., using poses for
triangulation) and cannot be removed to produce a method
that works in the two unknown view reconstruction settings.
We propose a learning-based approach that constructs
a coherent 3D reconstruction from two views with an unknown relationship. Our insight, supported empirically, is
that progress can be made by jointly tackling three related
challenges: per-view reconstruction, inter-view correspon-

12991

