Making Higher Order MOT Scalable: An Efficient Approximate Solver for
Lifted Disjoint Paths
Andrea Hornakova∗1
Timo Kaiser∗2
Bodo Rosenhahn2
∗

Paul Swoboda1
Roberto Henschel2

Michal Rolinek3

Authors contributed equally, 1 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, 2 Institute for Information Processing,
Leibniz University Hannover, 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Abstract
We present an efficient approximate message passing
solver for the lifted disjoint paths problem (LDP), a natural
but NP-hard model for multiple object tracking (MOT). Our
tracker scales to very large instances that come from long
and crowded MOT sequences. Our approximate solver enables us to process the MOT15/16/17 benchmarks without
sacrificing solution quality and allows for solving MOT20,
which has been out of reach up to now for LDP solvers due
to its size and complexity. On all these four standard MOT
benchmarks we achieve performance comparable or better than current state-of-the-art methods including a tracker
based on an optimal LDP solver.

1. Introduction
Deriving high-level understanding from a video is a desired task that has been studied in computer vision for a
long time. Nevertheless, solving the problem is a long way
off. A computer vision system able to extract the motions
of objects appearing in a video in terms of trajectories is
considered as a prerequisite for the goal. This task called
multiple object tracking (MOT) has numerous applications,
e.g. in the area of video surveillance [18], sports analysis
[2, 42], urban planning [3], or autonomous driving [39, 19].
Yet, solving MOT is challenging, especially for long and
crowded sequences. The predominant approach for MOT is
the tracking-by-detection paradigm, which splits the problem into two subtasks. First, objects are detected in all video
frames by an object detector. Then, the detections are linked
across frames to form trajectories. While the performance
of object detectors has improved considerably by latest advances of CNNs [47, 63, 46, 17], the latter task called the
data association remains challenging. The data association
reasons from pairwise costs, which indicate for each pair of
detections the likelihood of belonging to the same object.
Appearance and spatio-temporal information are often

ambiguous, especially in crowded scenes, so that pairwise
costs can be misleading. Moreover, object detectors produce more errors in crowded scenes due to partial occlusions. To resolve these issues, it is crucial that the data association incorporates global context.
The disjoint paths problem (DP) [65, 35] is a natural
model for MOT. Results are computed efficiently using a
min-cost flow algorithm that delivers the global optimal solution. Unfortunately, the integration of long range temporal interactions is limited, as DP obeys the first-order
Markov-chain assumption: for each trajectory, consistency
is ensured only between directly linked detections, which is
a strong simplification that ignores higher order consistencies among multiple linked detections.
To fix this deficiency, [28] generalizes DP to lifted disjoint paths (LDP) by using additional connectivity priors
in terms of lifted edges. This makes the formulation much
more expressive while it maintains the feasibility set of the
DP (Sec. 3). The optimization problem enables to take into
account pairwise costs between arbitrary detections belonging to one trajectory. It thus enables to incorporate long
range temporal interactions effectively and leads to considerable improvement of recall and precision [28]. Similar extensions have been made for the multicut problem [56, 57].
While the integration of the global context by LDP is
crucial to obtain high-quality tracking results, it makes the
data association problem NP-hard. Still, [28] presented
a global optimal LDP solver usable for semi-crowded sequences with reasonable computational effort. However,
when applied to longer and crowded sequences, such approaches are not tractable anymore, due to too high demands on runtime and memory.
In order to close this gap, we present the first approximate solver for LDP. The resulting tracker scales to big
problem instances and incorporates global context with similar accuracy as the global optimal LDP solver. Moreover,
our solver outputs certificates in terms of primal/dual gaps.
In particular, our solver is based on a Lagrangean (dual)
decomposition of the problem. This dual is iteratively opti-

6330

