Dual Bipartite Graph Learning:
A General Approach for Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Chaoqi Chen1 , Jiongcheng Li2 , Zebiao Zheng2 , Yue Huang2 , Xinghao Ding2 , Yizhou Yu1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Xiamen University
cqchen1994@gmail.com, jiongchengli@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zbzheng@stu.xmu.edu.cn
huangyue05@gmail.com, dxh@xmu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) relieves the
reliance on large-scale annotated data by transferring the
knowledge learned from a labeled source domain to a new
unlabeled target domain. Recent DAOD approaches resort
to local feature alignment in virtue of domain adversarial
training in conjunction with the ad-hoc detection pipelines
to achieve feature adaptation. However, these methods are
limited to adapt the specific types of object detectors and
do not explore the cross-domain topological relations. In
this paper, we first formulate DAOD as an open-set domain
adaptation problem in which foregrounds (pixel or region)
can be seen as the “known class”, while backgrounds (pixel
or region) are referred to as the “unknown class”. To this
end, we present a new and general perspective for DAOD
named Dual Bipartite Graph Learning (DBGL), which captures the cross-domain interactions on both pixel-level and
semantic-level via increasing the distinction between foregrounds and backgrounds and modeling the cross-domain
dependencies among different semantic categories. Experiments reveal that the proposed DBGL in conjunction with
one-stage and two-stage detectors exceeds the state-of-theart performance on standard DAOD benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Object detection has gained unprecedented development
in the past decade, owing to the renaissance in deep learning
and the explosive increase of labeled training data. Nevertheless, the performance gains rely on an assumption that
the training and test data are drawn from identical distribution, which is challenged to be satisfied in real-world applications. Moreover, collecting large-scale annotated data
in various domains is impractical. An intuitive solution is
to directly apply the off-the-shelf object detection models
trained on the source domain to a new domain. However,
* Corresponding author

Figure 1: We formulate DAOD as an open-set domain
adaptation problem, where foregrounds refer to the “known
class” and backgrounds refer to the “unknown class”.
domain shift [36] hinders the deployment of models and
emerges as an inevitable challenge. Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) [31] serves as a plausible solution to
tackle this problem by facilitating knowledge transfer and
mitigating the distributional shift between domains. The design principle of UDA is to learn domain-invariant features
and ensure that the learned features will preserve a low risk
on the source domain. Existing UDA methods mainly fall
into two types, i.e., statistics matching [15, 12, 26, 49, 35]
and adversarial learning [13, 42, 27, 5, 19]. In this paper, we
aim to investigate the UDA techniques for object detection,
namely, Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD).
Considering the local nature of detection tasks, most existing DAOD approaches strive to change the emphasis of
adaptation from holistic to local in virtue of elaborate feature alignment modules regarding the foreground objects.
However, they are highly model-related, that is to say, their
adaptation process relies on the specific pipelines of detection models. For example, most of them [7, 52, 38, 4, 6,
47, 51, 46] resort to incorporate the adversarial training [13]
within Faster R-CNN [37] based on the region proposal step
to generate a sparse set of proposals (instance-level features). Given the dense prediction property of SSD [25],
Kim et al. [21] propose to jointly reduce the false positives
and false negatives during hard negative mining step. How

2703

