STR-GQN: Scene Representation and Rendering for
Unknown Cameras Based on Spatial Transformation Routing
Wen-Cheng Chen
National Cheng Kung University

Min-Chun Hu
National Tsing Hua University

jerrywiston@mislab.csie.ncku.edu.tw

anitahu@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Chu-Song Chen
National Taiwan University
chusong@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Geometry-aware modules are widely applied in recent
deep learning architectures for scene representation and
rendering. However, these modules require intrinsic camera information that might not be obtained accurately. In
this paper, we propose a Spatial Transformation Routing
(STR) mechanism to model the spatial properties without
applying any geometric prior. The STR mechanism treats
the spatial transformation as the message passing process,
and the relation between the view poses and the routing
weights is modeled by an end-to-end trainable neural network. Besides, an Occupancy Concept Mapping (OCM)
framework is proposed to provide explainable rationals for
scene-fusion processes. We conducted experiments on several datasets and show that the proposed STR mechanism
improves the performance of the Generative Query Network
(GQN). The visualization results reveal that the routing process can pass the observed information from one location
of some view to the associated location in the other view,
which demonstrates the advantage of the proposed model
in terms of spatial cognition.

1. Introduction
Understanding the structure of 3D scenes from the 2D
observations is a fundamental topic in the field of computer
vision. With the progress of the geometry-based model, researchers have developed several techniques to recover the
3D geometry from 2D views via optimization [10, 13] and
machine learning [21, 24, 25, 20, 4, 27, 26, 5]. Different
from reconstructing the explicit 3D geometry, Generative
Query Network (GQN) [3] constructs the implicit scene
representation and achieves novel view rendering merely
based on the observed images and the pose information.

Figure 1. The basic concept of the proposed model, which treats
the spatial transformation as a message passing process.

Unfortunately, GQN does not consider the spatial property
and only has a weak generalization ability. For example,
GQN fails to generalize the knowledge learned from the
scene containing two objects to the scene containing four
objects. Based on the geometric optics and camera models,
some recent works combine the geometry-aware operations
with GQN so that the model can be applied to more complex
scenes. For instance, E-GQN [19] utilizes epipolar line to
search the features in the observations. GRNN [22] applies
camera projection and unprojection to pass the information
between 2D views and a voxel-based feature memory.
However, geometry-aware operations rely on accurate
camera intrinsic parameters which require additional calibration process and can only be used in a fixed and simple
imaging situation. To design a general model which can
be flexibly applied to different visual sensors with different imaging situations, an interesting question thus arises:
can the model learn the spatial transformation property of
the 3D space through observations without applying explicit
geometry priors such as camera projection matrix, field of
view, and the distortion coefficients? Aiming at this goal,
we design a new architecture based on GQN to separate the
process of spatial transformation and feature extraction, so
as to learn the content-independent concept of spatial cognition. Following this idea, we propose a Spatial Trans-

5966

