Neural Photofit: Gaze-based Mental Image Reconstruction
Florian Strohm1 , Ekta Sood1 , Sven Mayer2 , Philipp Müller3 , Mihai Bâce1 , Andreas Bulling1
University of Stuttgart {florian.strohm,ekta.sood,mihai.bace,andreas.bulling}@vis.uni-stuttgart.de
LMU Munich info@sven-mayer.com
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) philipp.mueller@dfki.de

Abstract
Mental
Image

We propose a novel method that leverages human fixations to visually decode the image a person has in mind into
a photofit (facial composite). Our method combines three
neural networks: An encoder, a scoring network, and a decoder. The encoder extracts image features and predicts a
neural activation map for each face looked at by a human
observer. A neural scoring network compares the human
and neural attention and predicts a relevance score for each
extracted image feature. Finally, image features are aggregated into a single feature vector as a linear combination
of all features weighted by relevance which a decoder decodes into the final photofit. We train the neural scoring
network on a novel dataset containing gaze data of 19 participants looking at collages of synthetic faces. We show
that our method significantly outperforms a mean baseline
predictor and report on a human study that shows that we
can decode photofits that are visually plausible and close to
the observer’s mental image.

Image 1

Image n

Fixation Data

Scoring
Network

Activation
Map

Encoder

Image
Features

Relevance
Scores

Visually decoding images that only exist in peoples’
minds (also known as mental image reconstruction, MIR)
has recently started to attract increasing research interest across a range of disciplines, including computational
neuroscience, computational biology, and computer vision.
MIR is profoundly challenging given that the information required to succeed in this task is encoded in complex neural dynamics in the brain and not easily accessible from the outside. The dominant approach for MIR has
been to reconstruct mental images directly from brain activity recorded using functional magnetic resonance imaging [2, 13, 17, 31, 34] or electroencephalography [7, 30].
Another recent line of work has explored other sensing
modalities, in particular human eye fixations. Although fixations, in comparison, only provide an indirect measure of
a person’s mental image and as such complicate the recon-

Decoder

1. Introduction
Reconstructed
Mental
Image

Figure 1. Overview of our method for gaze-based mental image
reconstruction. With an image in mind, users search for similar facial features in multiple auxiliary images while their gaze is being
recorded. An encoder extracts image features and corresponding
neural activation maps from these images. A scoring network predicts the relevance of each image feature by comparing the fixation
and neural activation maps. Image features are finally aggregated
and decoded into a photofit.

245

