Exploiting a Joint Embedding Space for Generalized Zero-Shot Semantic
Segmentation
Donghyeon Baek*
Youngmin Oh*
Bumsub Ham†
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/JoEm

Abstract
We address the problem of generalized zero-shot semantic segmentation (GZS3) predicting pixel-wise semantic labels for seen and unseen classes. Most GZS3 methods adopt a generative approach that synthesizes visual
features of unseen classes from corresponding semantic
ones (e.g., word2vec) to train novel classifiers for both seen
and unseen classes. Although generative methods show decent performance, they have two limitations: (1) the visual
features are biased towards seen classes; (2) the classifier
should be retrained whenever novel unseen classes appear.
We propose a discriminative approach to address these limitations in a unified framework. To this end, we leverage
visual and semantic encoders to learn a joint embedding
space, where the semantic encoder transforms semantic features to semantic prototypes that act as centers for visual
features of corresponding classes. Specifically, we introduce boundary-aware regression (BAR) and semantic consistency (SC) losses to learn discriminative features. Our
approach to exploiting the joint embedding space, together
with BAR and SC terms, alleviates the seen bias problem.
At test time, we avoid the retraining process by exploiting
semantic prototypes as a nearest-neighbor (NN) classifier.
To further alleviate the bias problem, we also propose an inference technique, dubbed Apollonius calibration (AC), that
modulates the decision boundary of the NN classifier to the
Apollonius circle adaptively. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, achieving a new
state of the art on standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recent works using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [6, 36, 45, 57] have achieved significant
success in semantic segmentation. They have proven
effective in various applications such as image editing [34]
and autonomous driving [54], but semantic segmentation
* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.

Training
Stage 2
visual
feature

Stage 1

Stage 3

car

segmentation
network

bicycle

generator

Training

Visual
Encoder

car
bicycle

gradient
Semantic
Encoder

new
classifier

person
Inference

decision boundary

Joint Embedding Space
person
car
bicycle

Figure 1: In contrast to generative methods [3, 32] (top), we update both visual and semantic encoders to learn a joint embedding
space, and leverage a nearest neighbor classifier in the joint embedding space at test time (bottom). This alleviates a bias problem
towards seen classes, and avoids re-training the classifier. We visualize visual features and semantic prototypes by circles and stars,
respectively. Best viewed in color.

in the wild still has two limitations. First, existing methods
fail to generalize to new domains/classes, assuming that
training and test samples share the same distribution. Second, they require lots of training samples with pixel-level
ground-truth labels prohibitively expensive to annotate.
As a result, current methods could handle a small set of
pre-defined classes only [23].
As alternatives to pixel-level annotations, weaklysupervised semantic segmentation methods propose to exploit image-level labels [19], scribbles [35], and bounding
boxes [8], all of which are less labor-intensive to annotate. These methods, however, also require a large number of weak supervisory signals to train networks for novel
classes. On the contrary, humans can easily learn to recognize new concepts in a scene with a few visual examples,
or even with descriptions of them. Motivated by this, fewand zero-shot learning methods [29, 42, 48] have been proposed to recognize objects of previously unseen classes with

9536

