Instance-level Image Retrieval using Reranking Transformers
Fuwen Tan
University of Virginia

Jiangbo Yuan
eBay Computer Vision

Vicente Ordonez
Rice University

fuwen.tan@virginia.edu

jiayuan@ebay.com

vicenteor@rice.edu

Abstract
Instance-level image retrieval is the task of searching
in a large database for images that match an object in a
query image. To address this task, systems usually rely on
a retrieval step that uses global image descriptors, and a
subsequent step that performs domain-specific refinements
or reranking by leveraging operations such as geometric
verification based on local features. In this work, we propose Reranking Transformers (RRTs) as a general model
to incorporate both local and global features to rerank the
matching images in a supervised fashion and thus replace
the relatively expensive process of geometric verification.
RRTs are lightweight and can be easily parallelized so that
reranking a set of top matching results can be performed in
a single forward-pass. We perform extensive experiments
on the Revisited Oxford and Paris datasets, and the Google
Landmarks v2 dataset, showing that RRTs outperform previous reranking approaches while using much fewer local
descriptors. Moreover, we demonstrate that, unlike existing approaches, RRTs can be optimized jointly with the feature extractor, which can lead to feature representations tailored to downstream tasks and further accuracy improvements. The code and trained models are publicly available
at https://github.com/uvavision/RerankingTransformer.

1. Introduction
Instance recognition is a challenging task that aims to visually recognize an object instance. This is distinct from
category-level recognition that identifies only the object
class. Instance recognition is important in e-commerce
where it is often desired to find a specific product in a large
image collection, or in place identification where the objective is to infer the identity of a public landmark. As the
number of instances is much larger than the number of object categories, instance recognition is typically cast as image retrieval instead of classification, and usually involves
both metric learning and local feature based reranking.
Over the last decade, instance recognition continues to
be a major focus of research. Pioneering systems lever-

Figure 1. Top performing instance recognition methods often rely
on reranking the top results using a score such as the number of
inlier correspondences from geometric verification. We propose
to replace this step with a Reranking Transformer (RRT) that can
be learned with the underlying representations of the images.

aged hand-crafted local descriptors and matching algorithms [52, 42]. More recent approaches incorporate both
global and local descriptors extracted from deep learning
models [3, 37]. Global descriptors summarize an image
into a single vector, leading to a compact representation for
large-scale search. Local descriptors encode detailed spatial
features for patch-level matching, and are shown to be important for high retrieval precision [56, 9]. The best methods typically use a global descriptor to reduce the solution
space to a set of candidate matching images, and local descriptors to re-rank the nearest images [51, 9]. While extensive progress has been made to improve image retrieval using global features, fewer efforts have been made to develop
similarity metrics based on local features. State-of-the-art
approaches still rely on classic matching techniques, such as
geometric verification [42] and aggregated selective match
kernels (ASMK) [55]. Geometric verification assumes object instances are rigid and local matches between images
can be estimated as a homography using RANSAC [20]. It
is also an expensive process that requires iterative optimization on a large set of local descriptors. ASMK aggregates
the similarities of features without modeling the geometric alignment, but requires offline clustering and encoding
procedures. It was mainly used as a global retrieval technique in previous literature. Both geometric verification and

12105

