Z-Score Normalization, Hubness, and Few-Shot Learning
Nanyi Fei2,3 Yizhao Gao1,2 Zhiwu Lu1,2, * Tao Xiang4
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
4
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
{feinanyi, luzhiwu}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

ject classes with only few labeled samples by exploiting a
set of base classes each containing ample samples.

The goal of few-shot learning (FSL) is to recognize a set
of novel classes with only few labeled samples by exploiting a large set of abundant base class samples. Adopting a
meta-learning framework, most recent FSL methods metalearn a deep feature embedding network, and during inference classify novel class samples using nearest neighbor in
the learned high-dimensional embedding space. This means
that these methods are prone to the hubness problem, that
is, a certain class prototype becomes the nearest neighbor
of many test instances regardless which classes they belong
to. However, this problem is largely ignored in existing FSL
studies. In this work, for the first time we show that many
FSL methods indeed suffer from the hubness problem. To
mitigate its negative effects, we further propose to employ
z-score feature normalization, a simple yet effective transformation, during meta-training. A theoretical analysis is
provided on why it helps. Extensive experiments are then
conducted to show that with z-score normalization, the performance of many recent FSL methods can be boosted, resulting in new state-of-the-art on three benchmarks.

Recent FSL methods typically follow the meta-learning
framework and adopt episodic training [8, 47, 49, 2, 19, 9,
59, 7, 63]. That is, they train their models over a large number of meta-tasks/episodes sampled from the abundant base
class images. This is to imitate the few-shot classification
tasks for the novel classes. Specifically, each episode is constructed by sampling N base/novel classes with K labeled
samples in each class as the support set and a set of query
images to be classified. Existing meta-learning methods differ in which part of the recognition model, comprising a feature embedding network and a classifier, is meta-learned. It
is noted that most recent FSL methods [47, 2, 59, 63] focus
on meta learning the embedding network. Once the model
learned, during inference, the support set samples are used
to construct class prototypes in that embedding space, and
the classification of query samples is done by the simple
nearest neighbor (NN) search.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the advances of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have had profound impacts on a variety of vision areas, such as object recognition [45, 38, 13],
semantic segmentation [26, 4], and even image generation
[33, 42]. To train an effective CNN model for visual recognition, a large number of manually labeled training samples
are often required. However, obtaining sufficient training
data is often expensive and sometimes even infeasible (e.g.,
for rare object categories). One solution to the data hungry nature of deep recognition models is few-shot learning
(FSL) [20, 21], which aims to recognize a set of novel ob* Corresponding author.

Using NN in a high dimensional embedding space makes
these FSL methods prone to the hubness problem [34, 43,
50]. Specifically, in a high dimensional space, nearest
neighbor suffers from the existence of hubs, i.e., the class
prototypes which are the nearest neighbors of many test
samples, regardless which classes they belong to. These
hubs thus clearly harm the recognition performance. To illustrate the hubness problem, let us take a concrete example.
(h)
Denote k-occurrence Nk (x) as the number of times that a
sample x occurs among the k nearest neighbors of all other
(h)
points in a dataset. We visualize the distribution of N5
on the test set of miniImageNet [52] in Figure 1(a), where
a four-block CNN Conv4-64 pre-trained on the training set
is used. We also calculate the hubness measure skewness
SN (h) of the distribution (see the detailed definition in Sec5
tion 4.3). It can be observed that the distribution is heavily
skewed to the right, i.e., a large number of samples have low
(h)
N5 values while a small group of samples are frequently

142

