LoFGAN: Fusing Local Representations for Few-shot Image Generation
Zheng Gu†1 , Wenbin Li †1 , Jing Huo∗1 , Lei Wang2 , and Yang Gao1
1

2

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong

Abstract
Given only a few available images for a novel unseen
category, few-shot image generation aims to generate more
data for this category. Previous works attempt to globally fuse these images by using adjustable weighted coefﬁcients. However, there is a serious semantic misalignment
between different images from a global perspective, making these works suffer from poor generation quality and diversity. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel LocalFusion Generative Adversarial Network (LoFGAN) for fewshot image generation. Instead of using these available
images as a whole, we ﬁrst randomly divide them into a
base image and several reference images. Next, LoFGAN
matches local representations between the base and reference images based on semantic similarities, and replaces
the local features with the closest related local features. In
this way, LoFGAN can produce more realistic and diverse
images at a more ﬁne-grained level, and simultaneously
enjoy the characteristic of semantic alignment. Furthermore, a local reconstruction loss is also proposed, which
can provide better training stability and generation quality.
We conduct extensive experiments on three datasets, which
successfully demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed
method for few-shot image generation and downstream visual applications with limited data. Code is available at
https://github.com/edward3862/LoFGAN-pytorch.

1. Introduction
As a representative deep generative model, generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [7] have shown impressive
results in various visual tasks in recent years. However,
most GAN models still struggle with insufﬁcient training
data [25]. Although many GAN-based few-shot learning
algorithms have been presented recently, most of these algorithms are specially designed for discriminative tasks like
† Equal contribution, ∗ Corresponding author.

image classiﬁcation [20] and segmentation [21], rather than
the pure image generation in a data-limited regime.
To this end, few-shot image generation has aroused increasing attention. The goal of few-shot image generation
is to generate diverse images for a novel category, when a
few available images of this category are given. In particular, inspired by the episodic training mechanism [20], the
generative model is generally trained on an auxiliary dataset
with sufﬁcient labeled training categories and images. After that, given a few images from a new unseen category,
the learned generative model is expected to generate diverse
images for this speciﬁc category. Considering the disjoint
label spaces between the seen auxiliary dataset and the unseen test dataset, the generative model is hoped to obtain the
generalization ability by learning from thousands of simulated few-shot image generation tasks.
Current few-shot generation approaches can be roughly
divided into three types, i.e., transformation-based [2],
optimization-based [5, 13], and fusion-based [8, 9].
Transformation-based methods apply intra-category transformation on one conditional image while optimizationbased methods introduces a meta-learning paradigm [6, 16]
to learn an initialization strategy for unconditional image
generation tasks, both applicable to simple generation tasks.
Fusion-based methods (inspired by metric-based few-shot
learning) deﬁne this problem as a conditional generation
task. The generative model encodes several input images to
a feature space and performs a fusion operation (instead of
the comparison operation in metric-based few-shot classiﬁcation). The fused feature is then decoded back to a realistic
image of the same category.
The essence of fusion-based few-shot generation is to
implement a label-consistent mapping from a few conditional inputs to diverse outputs while simultaneously
maintaining the image quality and diversity. Technically,
GMN [3] combines Matching Network [20] with VAE [11]
by appending a decoder after the matching procedure. Due
to the limited generation capacity of VAE, this method is
only applicable to generate digits and simple visual pat-

8463

