Self-supervised Domain Adaptation for Forgery Localization of JPEG
Compressed Images
Yuan Rao1 , Jiangqun Ni2,3
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Security, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
1

raoy3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, issjqni@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
With wide applications of image editing tools, forged images (splicing, copy-move, removal and etc.) have been
becoming great public concerns. Although existing image forgery localization methods could achieve fairly good
results on several public datasets, most of them perform
poorly when the forged images are JPEG compressed as
they are usually done in social networks. To tackle this
issue, in this paper, a self-supervised domain adaptation network, which is composed of a backbone network
with Siamese architecture and a compression approximation network (ComNet), is proposed for JPEG-resistant
image forgery localization. To improve the performance
against JPEG compression, ComNet is customized to approximate the JPEG compression operation through selfsupervised learning, generating JPEG-agent images with
general JPEG compression characteristics. The backbone
network is then trained with domain adaptation strategy to
localize the tampering boundary and region, and alleviate
the domain shift between uncompressed and JPEG-agent
images. Extensive experimental results on several public
datasets show that the proposed method outperforms or rivals to other state-of-the-art methods in image forgery localization, especially for JPEG compression with unknown
QFs.

1. Introduction
For image forgery forensics, a fundamental task consists in precisely localizing the forged regions, which is
more challenging with the presence of post-processing
operations, such as filtering, resampling and compression. Among these content-preserving manipulations,
JPEG compression are most widely used in social networks
to reduce transmission bandwidth or storage space. The
subtle tampering artifacts, however, would be eliminated af-

Edge loss

Region loss

Uncompressed image

(Source Domain)
Backbone Network

Source domain
feature

Compression
Approximation
Network

Shared
parameters

Domain loss

JPEG-agent image

(Target Domain)
Backbone Network

Target domain
feature

Figure 1. The architecture of the self-supervised domain adaptation network, which is composed of a backbone network with
Siamese architecture and a compression approximation network.

ter strong JPEG compression, degrading the performance of
forgery forensic methods. On the other hand, the variety of
image tampering manipulations, e.g., splicing, copy-move,
removal and etc., also seriously influences the generalization capability of forensic methods to unseen forgeries.
Typically, conventional hand-crafted feature based methods rely on the hypothesis of a specific manipulation artifact, and aim to expose the forgeries by exploring local
inconsistencies of color filter array (CFA) [14, 30], photoresponse non-uniformity noise (PRNU) [23, 8], JPEG
blocking artifacts [35, 19], texture units [25, 18], illumination [12, 6] and steganography-based local descriptors
[32, 10, 22]. Alternatively, most of the state-of-the-art image forgery forensic methods [29, 27, 4, 34, 11, 24] resort to deep learning technique due to its powerful feature representation capability. Taking advantages of massive training samples with multiple forgeries, these deep
learning based methods are able to perform much better in
image forgery localization than the conventional ones. On
the other hand, to achieve better robustness performance
against JPEG compression, deep learning based methods
commonly train the network models with targeted data augmentation strategy with tampered JPEG images of various
quality factors (QFs). This, however, manifests deficiency

15034

