DRB-GAN: A Dynamic ResBlock Generative Adversarial Network for
Artistic Style Transfer
Wenju Xu1 , Chengjiang Long2∗ , Ruisheng Wang3 , Guanghui Wang4 *
OPPO US Research Center, InnoPeak Technology Inc, Palo Alto, CA, USA
2
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
3
Department of Geomatics Engineering, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada
4
Department of Computer Science, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, Canada
1

xuwenju123@gmail.com, cjfykx@gmail.com, ruiswang@ucalgary.ca, wangcs@ryerson.ca

Abstract
The paper proposes a Dynamic ResBlock Generative Adversarial Network (DRB-GAN) for artistic style transfer.
The style code is modeled as the shared parameters for Dynamic ResBlocks connecting both the style encoding network and the style transfer network. In the style encoding network, a style class-aware attention mechanism is
used to attend the style feature representation for generating the style codes. In the style transfer network, multiple Dynamic ResBlocks are designed to integrate the style
code and the extracted CNN semantic feature and then feed
into the spatial window Layer-Instance Normalization (SWLIN) decoder, which enables high-quality synthetic images
with artistic style transfer. Moreover, the style collection
conditional discriminator is designed to equip our DRBGAN model with abilities for both arbitrary style transfer and collection style transfer during the training stage.
No matter for arbitrary style transfer or collection style
transfer, extensive experiments strongly demonstrate that
our proposed DRB-GAN outperforms state-of-the-art methods and exhibits its superior performance in terms of visual quality and efficiency. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/xuwenju123/DRB-GAN .

1. Introduction
Artistic style transfer is to synthesize an image sharing
structure similarity of the content image and reflecting the
style of the artistic style. Here, artistic style implies the
genre of paintings by the artist, and the artistic images refer to a set of images created by the same artist, and each
image has a unique character. As shown in Figure 1, style
image 1 and all the style images in style collection 1 are
* This work was supervised by Chengjiang Long and Guanghui Wang.

Figure 1. Examples of two types of artistic style transfer: (a) arbitrary style transfer and (b) collection style transfer. Note that
the style image 1 and style collection 1 are from the artist Pablo
Picasso, and the style image 2 and style collection 2 are from the
artist Ukiyo-e. Our proposed DRB-GAN experimentally performs
well on both arbitrary style transfer and collection style transfer.

created by Pablo Picasso, in which the style includes color,
brushstroke, form, or use of light. Therefore, an ideal artistic style transfer should be able to synthesize images with
consistent style genre and also take the diverse artworks of
the artist into account.
To facilitate more efficient artistic style transfer, some
prior works have explored arbitrary style transfer [17, 20],
which heavily rely on only one arbitrary style image.
Hence, they are not effective to produce a bunch of results that reflect the understanding of artistic style characterized by color, scale, and stroke size of the artistic work
set. Some recent efforts on generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [55, 41, 55, 41, 5, 36] have succeeded in collection style transfer, which considers each style image in a
style collection as a domain. However, the existing collection style transfer methods only recognize and transfer the
domain dominant style clues and thus lack the flexibility of
exploring style manifold.
In this paper, we propose a Dynamic ResBlock Generative Adversarial Network (DRB-GAN) for artistic style
transfer. As illustrated in Figure 2, it consists of a style
encoding network, a style transfer network, and a style col-

6383

