OSCAR-Net: Object-centric Scene Graph Attention for Image Attribution
Eric Nguyen1 *, Tu Bui2* , Viswanathan Swaminathan1 , John Collomosse1,2
1
Adobe Research, Creative Intelligence Lab — San Jose, CA.
2
CVSSP, University of Surrey, — Guildford, UK
{enguyen | collomos | vishy}@adobe.com, t.v.bui@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Images tell powerful stories but cannot always be
trusted. Matching images back to trusted sources (attribution) enables users to make a more informed judgment of
the images they encounter online. We propose a robust image hashing algorithm to perform such matching. Our hash
is sensitive to manipulation of subtle, salient visual details
that can substantially change the story told by an image.
Yet the hash is invariant to benign transformations (changes
in quality, codecs, sizes, shapes, etc.) experienced by images during online redistribution. Our key contribution is
OSCAR-Net1 (Object-centric Scene Graph Attention for Image Attribution Network); a robust image hashing model inspired by recent successes of Transformers in the visual domain. OSCAR-Net constructs a scene graph representation
that attends to fine-grained changes of every object’s visual
appearance and their spatial relationships. The network is
trained via contrastive learning on a dataset of original and
manipulated images yielding a state of the art image hash
for content fingerprinting that scales to millions of images.

1. Introduction
Fake news and misinformation are centuries-old societal
problems, exacerbated today by the ease with which digital images are manipulated and shared. Matching (or ‘attributing’) an image back to a trusted source, improves user
awareness of its origins (or ‘provenance’) and so enables
more informed trust decisions to be made [17, 45].
Emerging standards for image attribution embed provenance information within metadata [45, 3]. Yet image metadata is commonly stripped by social platforms, and may be
replaced to misattribute an image [12]. One solution is to
visually match images to a trusted database via ‘fingerprinting’; i.e. visual search or content-aware hashing.
This paper contributes a novel object-centric approach
for computing a robust hash from an image, to perform visual matching for image attribution. Images often undergo
‘benign transformations’ during online distribution, such as
* Equal contribution by co-authors
1 Code, data and model available at https://exnx.github.io/oscar/

changes in format, resolution, size, padding, etc. that render
cryptographic hashes[16] unsuitable as fingerprints. Thus
image fingerprints must be made robust to these ‘benign’
transformations.
We propose a representation learning technique that encourages our hashes to exhibit both invariance to benign
transformations and sensitivity to tampering (‘manipulation’) where image content is altered — sometimes quite
subtly — but sufficiently to change meaning. For example,
the editorial changes to introduce particular objects/motifs,
or alterations to salient visual details such as the face, could
substantially change the story told by an image (Fig. 1,2).
Our method generates substantially different hashes in such
cases to avoid corroborating a false story with the provenance information of the original image. Existing perceptual hashes [60, 43, 59, 39, 34]) typically exhibit the opposite desired characteristics (c.f. Sec. 4.5), that is, they are
often invariant to minor changes, and sensitive to benign
transformations (such as noise, or padding) during content
redistribution.
Our core technical contribution is to encode a scene
graph representation of the image via a hybrid network architecture, combining a fully-connected Graph Neural Network (GNN) and Transformer to create a robust binary hash
of the image. Our Object-centric Scene Graph Attention
for Image Attribution Network (OSCAR-Net) decomposes

14499

