Amplitude-Phase Recombination: Rethinking Robustness of Convolutional
Neural Networks in Frequency Domain
Guangyao Chen1 , Peixi Peng1,3∗ , Li Ma1,3 , Jia Li2,3 , Lin Du4 , Yonghong Tian1,3 *
1
2

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University

3

Peng Cheng Laborotory

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University

4

AI Application Research Center, Huawei

{gy.chen, pxpeng, mali hp, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn, jiali@buaa.edu.cn, dulin09@huawei.com

Abstract
Recently, the generalization behavior of Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) is gradually transparent through
explanation techniques with the frequency components decomposition. However, the importance of the phase spectrum of the image for a robust vision system is still ignored. In this paper, we notice that the CNN tends to converge at the local optimum which is closely related to the
high-frequency components of the training images, while
the amplitude spectrum is easily disturbed such as noises
or common corruptions. In contrast, more empirical studies found that humans rely on more phase components to
achieve robust recognition. This observation leads to more
explanations of the CNN’s generalization behaviors in both
robustness to common perturbations and out-of-distribution
detection, and motivates a new perspective on data augmentation designed by re-combing the phase spectrum of
the current image and the amplitude spectrum of the distracter image. That is, the generated samples force the
CNN to pay more attention to the structured information
from phase components and keep robust to the variation of
the amplitude. Experiments on several image datasets indicate that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art
performances on multiple generalizations and calibration
tasks, including adaptability for common corruptions and
surface variations, out-of-distribution detection, and adversarial attack. The code is released on github/iCGY96/APR.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, deep learning has achieved even
surpassed human-level performances in many image recognition/classification tasks [15]. However, the unintuitive
generalization behaviors of neural networks, such as the
vulnerability towards adversarial examples [11], common
corruptions [20], the overconfidence for out-of-distribution
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. More empirical studies found that humans rely on more
phase components to achieve robust recognition However, CNN
without effective training restrictions tends to converge at the local
optimum related to the amplitude spectrum of the image, leading
to generalization behaviors counter-intuitive to humans.

(OOD) [19, 22, 38, 3, 2], are still confused in the community. It also leads that current deep learning models depend
on the ability of training data to faithfully represent the data
encountered during deployment.
To explain the generalization behaviors of neural networks, many theoretical breakthroughs have been made
progressively by different model or algorithm perspectives
[49, 39, 41]. Several works [46, 24] investigate the generalization behaviors of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
from a data perspective in the frequency domain, and
demonstrate that CNN benefits from the high-frequency image components which are not perceivable to humans. Furthermore, a quantitative study is provided in Figure 4 to indicate that the predictions of CNN are more sensitive to the
variation of the amplitude spectrum. The above phenomena
indicate that CNN tends to converge at the local optimum
which is closely related to the high-frequency components
of the training images. Although it is helpful when the test
and training samples come from the identical distribution,
yet the robustness of the CNN will be affected due of the
amplitude spectrum is easily disturbed such as noises or
common corruptions. On the other hand, earlier empirical

458

