THUNDR: Transformer-based 3D HUmaN Reconstruction with Markers
Mihai Zanfir, Andrei Zanfir, Eduard Gabriel Bazavan
{mihaiz, andreiz, egbazavan}@google.com
William T. Freeman, Rahul Sukthankar, Cristian Sminchisescu
{wfreeman, sukthankar, sminchisescu}@google.com

Figure 1: Automatic 3d pose and shape reconstruction results with THUNDR. (Left) Input image. (Middle) Reconstructed 3d
meshes projected on the camera plane and overlayed on the image. (Right) Different viewpoint showing our intermediate
predicted marker representation (in green) and the reconstructed surface geometry. THUNDR provides automatic 3D scene
placement of the reconstructed humans under a perspective camera model.

Abstract
We present THUNDR, a transformer-based deep neural network methodology to reconstruct the 3d pose and
shape of people, given monocular RGB images. Key to
our methodology is an intermediate 3d marker representation, where we aim to combine the predictive power
of model-free-output architectures and the regularizing,
anthropometrically-preserving properties of a statistical human surface model like GHUM—a recently introduced, expressive full body statistical 3d human model, trained endto-end. Our novel transformer-based prediction pipeline can
focus on image regions relevant to the task, supports selfsupervised regimes, and ensures that solutions are consistent
with human anthropometry. We show state-of-the-art results
on Human3.6M and 3DPW, for both the fully-supervised
and the self-supervised models, for the task of inferring 3d
human shape, joint positions, and global translation. Moreover, we observe very solid 3d reconstruction performance
for difficult human poses collected in the wild.

1. Introduction
The significant recent progress in 3d human sensing is
supported by the development of statistical human surface
models and the emergence of different forms of supervised

and self-supervised visual inference methods. The use of
statistical human pose and shape models offers advantages
in the use of an anatomical and semantically meaningful
human body representation, during both learning and inference. Human anthropometry could be used to regularize
a learning and inference process, which, in the absence of
such constraints, and given the ambiguity of 3d lifting from
monocular images, could easily run haywire. This is especially true for unfamiliar and complex poses not previously
seen in a ‘training set’—as they never all are. Semantic
models offer not only correspondences with image detector
responses (specific body keypoints or semantic segmentation maps) which can give essential alignment signals for
3d self-supervision, but can also help rule out 3d solutions
that may otherwise entirely break the symmetry of the body,
the relative proportions of limbs, the consistency of the surface in terms of non self-intersection, or the anatomical joint
angle limits.
The choice of evaluation metrics has an important role,
too. For now, by far the most used representation—perceived
as ‘model-independent’—are the ‘body joints’, a popular
concept, neither by virtue of its anatomical clarity (as that
point idealization could be bio-mechanically argued against),
nor—for computer vision, and more practically—given its
lack of ground-truth observability. In practice, human ‘body
joints’ are obtained either by fitting proprietary articulated

12971

