FMODetect: Robust Detection of Fast Moving Objects
Denys Rozumnyi1,4

Jiřı́ Matas4

Filip Šroubek2

Marc Pollefeys1,3

Martin R. Oswald1

1

2

3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zurich Lab
4
UTIA, Czech Academy of Sciences
Visual Recognition Group, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
We propose the first learning-based approach for fast
moving objects detection. Such objects are highly blurred
and move over large distances within one video frame. Fast
moving objects are associated with a deblurring and matting problem, also called deblatting. We show that the separation of deblatting into consecutive matting and deblurring allows achieving real-time performance, i.e. an order
of magnitude speed-up, and thus enabling new classes of
application. The proposed method detects fast moving objects as a truncated distance function to the trajectory by
learning from synthetic data. For the sharp appearance estimation and accurate trajectory estimation, we propose a
matting and fitting network that estimates the blurred appearance without background, followed by an energy minimization based deblurring. The state-of-the-art methods
are outperformed in terms of recall, precision, trajectory
estimation, and sharp appearance reconstruction. Compared to other methods, such as deblatting, the inference
is of several orders of magnitude faster and allows applications such as real-time fast moving object detection and
retrieval in large video collections.

1. Introduction
Fast moving objects (FMOs) are objects that look significantly blurred in images. Within the aperture of a single
frame, they move at high speed over distances larger than
their size. FMOs typically appear as blurred streaks formed
as a composition of the background and their blurred appearance. Other scenarios include fast rotations of objects
like ventilators or propellers. FMOs are common in everyday scenarios like fast cars, falling objects, flying insects, rain, and hailstorm. They are mainly present in
sports videos such as tennis, football, badminton, or other
games with moving objects. Applications of FMO detection methods are temporal super-resolution, speed measurement, FMO retrieval, tracking, removal, and highlighting.

Figure 1. Examples of automatically detected fast moving objects
(FMOs) by the proposed method on soccer (top) and volleyball
(bottom) videos.

FMOs were introduced in [24], where the authors created the first dataset containing fast moving objects and proposed a proof-of-concept algorithm to detect and track such
objects. The problem of detecting and tracking FMOs has
been unnoticed by the research community, and such objects are not present in standard tracking datasets such as
VOT [15], OTB [28], and ALOV [26]. More precisely,
they may or may not be present, but FMO is never the
object intended for tracking by the ground truth annotation. We highlight this by running FMO retrieval by the
proposed method and detect FMOs in very recent standard
large datasets like GOT-10k [8] and LaSOT [5] and find
unannotated FMOs (Fig. 1, bottom). By processing the
ground truth bounding boxes in more than 5M frames from
both datasets, we noticed that there is a significant overlap
between consecutive bounding boxes in almost all cases,
and the speed is close to zero (Fig. 3). In contrast, the recently proposed TbD dataset [13] with fast moving objects
has almost zero intersection over union between consecutive objects, and the speed is higher.
Apart from [24], there are a few methods that deal with
FMOs. Tracking by Deblatting (TbD) [13] jointly solves an
inverse problem of deblatting (deblurring and matting) and
decouples the input images into trajectory, appearance, and

3541

