Uncertainty-Aware Human Mesh Recovery from Video
by Learning Part-Based 3D Dynamics

1

Gun-Hee Lee1 , Seong-Whan Lee1,2
Department of Computer and Radio Communications Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
{gunhlee, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr

Figure 1: We propose a method that estimates 3D human pose and shape from video using uncertainty information and
part-based 3D dynamics. Our method is able to recover the accurate and smooth 3D motion, achieving the state-of-the-art
performance on standard benchmarks.

Abstract
Despite the recent success of 3D human reconstruction
methods, recovering the accurate and smooth 3D human
motion from video is still challenging. Designing a temporal
model in the encoding stage is not sufficient enough to settle the trade-off problem between the per-frame accuracy
and the motion smoothness. To address this problem, we
approach some of the fundamental problems of 3D reconstruction tasks, simultaneously predicting 3D pose and 3D
motion dynamics. First, we utilize the power of uncertainty
to address the problem of multiple 3D configurations resulting in the same 2D projections. Second, we confirmed that
dividing the body into local regions shows outstanding results for estimating 3D motion dynamics. In this paper, we
propose (i) an encoder that makes two different estimations:
a static feature that presents 2D pose feature as distribution
and a dynamic feature that includes optical flow information and (ii) a decoder that divides the body into five dif-

ferent local regions to estimate the 3D motion dynamics of
each region. We demonstrate how our method recovers the
accurate and smooth motion and achieves the state-of-theart results for both constrained and in-the-wild videos.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing a 3D human mesh can be used for many
applications, including motion analysis, virtual and augmented reality, gaming, and biometrics. However, estimating 3D human pose and shape from a single image or video
is a challenging problem because of the limited 3D scan
data and the ambiguity that multiple 3D configurations can
result in the same 2D projection. To address the above difficulties, Loper et al. [27] introduced a parametric 3D human
mesh model, SMPL, that was learned from thousands of 3D
body scans. Recently, many studies have been proposed to
directly regress the model parameters from the input image
by utilizing the power of the DCNN, which have shown im-

12375

