Discovering Human Interactions with Large-Vocabulary Objects via Query and
Multi-Scale Detection
Suchen Wang† Kim-Hui Yap† Henghui Ding †
†
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Jiyan Wu† Junsong Yuan‡ Yap-Peng Tan†
‡
State University of New York at Buffalo

{wang.sc, ekhyap, ding0093, jiyan.wu, eyptan}@ntu.edu.sg, {jsyuan}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study the problem of human-object interaction (HOI) detection with large vocabulary object categories. Previous HOI studies are mainly conducted in the
regime of limit object categories (e.g., 80 categories). Their
solutions may face new difficulties in both object detection
and interaction classification due to the increasing diversity of objects (e.g., 1000 categories). Different from previous methods, we formulate the HOI detection as a query
problem. We propose a unified model to jointly discover
the target objects and predict the corresponding interactions based on the human queries, thereby eliminating the
need of using generic object detectors, extra steps to associate human-object instances, and multi-stream interaction recognition. This is achieved by a repurposed Transformer unit and a novel cascade detection over multi-scale
feature maps. We observe that such a highly-coupled solution brings benefits for both object detection and interaction classification in a large vocabulary setting. To study
the new challenges of the large vocabulary HOI detection,
we assemble two datasets from the publicly available SWiG
and 100 Days of Hands datasets. Experiments on these
datasets validate that our proposed method can achieve a
notable mAP improvement on HOI detection with a faster
inference speed than existing one-stage HOI detectors. Our
code is available at https://github.com/scwangdyd/
large_vocabulary_hoi_detection.

1. Introduction
Discovering human interactions with objects plays a vital role in human-centric visual understanding and provides
a means to understand human intentions, actions, and activities. The goal is to detect one or multiple tuples <human,
verb, object> to indicate the positions of human and
objects within the image, and through the verb predict how
they interact with each other (e.g., holding something, repairing something, etc.).
While recent studies on human-object interaction (HOI)
detection [1, 23, 52, 46, 9, 16, 20, 43, 40, 27] have achieved
great progress, they have largely focused on the regime with
a limited variety of objects (e.g., 80 COCO objects [26]). In

Figure 1: In this work, we aim to detect the human interactions
with large-vocabulary object categories, where there are a large
number of interactions and only a few data samples available formost categories.

reality, humans can interact with a large variety of objects
in our visual world. We can see various human interactions with daily objects from YouTube videos [8] or Internet
data [36]. Nevertheless, it remains an under-explored problem for HOI detection in the regime of large-vocabulary
object categories, where there are a large number of interactions and only a few data samples available for most interactions. In this setting, existing approaches would face
new difficulties due to the greater diversity of objects and
contexts.
The main goal of this work is to study the new challenges
of discovering human interactions with large-vocabulary
objects. For HOI detection, the common practice is to decompose the problem into two parts: (1) person and object
instances detection; (2) instance matching and interaction
classification. Depending on whether the two parts are conducted sequentially or in parallel, existing works can be further divided into the two-stage solutions [20, 19, 52, 40, 9]
or end-to-end one-stage solutions [7, 23, 46, 17]. Regardless of which type of solutions, existing methods usually instantiate the object detection part as generic detectors, e.g.,
Faster RCNN [34], CenterNet [5], RetineNet [25], etc. As
previous HOI studies are mainly conducted in the same category space as COCO detection [26], it is viable to use

13475

