M3D-VTON: A Monocular-to-3D Virtual Try-On Network
Fuwei Zhao1 , Zhenyu Xie1 , Michael Kampffmeyer2 , Haoye Dong1
Songfang Han3 , Tianxiang Zheng4 , Tao Zhang4 , Xiaodan Liang1∗
1

Shenzhen Campus of SYSU, 2 UiT The Arctic University of Norway, 3 UC San Diego, 4 Momo
{zhaofw@mail2,xiezhy6@mail2,donghy7@mail2,xdliang328@mail}.sysu.edu.cn

michael.c.kampffmeyer@uit.no,s5han@eng.ucsd.edu,{zhengtianxiang1128,allenxuejian}@gmail.com

Clothing

Person

3D Try-On Result

Clothing

Person

3D Try-On Result

Figure 1: Results of the proposed Monocular-to-3D virtual try-on network. Given the target clothing image and the reference
person image, our M3D-VTON can reconstruct the 3D try-on mesh with the clothing changed and person identity retained.

Abstract
Virtual 3D try-on can provide an intuitive and realistic
view for online shopping and has a huge potential commercial value. However, existing 3D virtual try-on methods mainly rely on annotated 3D human shapes and garment templates, which hinders their applications in practical scenarios. 2D virtual try-on approaches provide a
faster alternative to manipulate clothed humans, but lack
the rich and realistic 3D representation. In this paper, we
propose a novel Monocular-to-3D Virtual Try-On Network
(M3D-VTON) that builds on the merits of both 2D and 3D
approaches. By integrating 2D information efficiently and
learning a mapping that lifts the 2D representation to 3D,
we make the first attempt to reconstruct a 3D try-on mesh
only taking the target clothing and a person image as inputs.
The proposed M3D-VTON includes three modules: 1) The
Monocular Prediction Module (MPM) that estimates an
initial full-body depth map and accomplishes 2D clothesperson alignment through a novel two-stage warping proce-

dure; 2) The Depth Refinement Module (DRM) that refines
the initial body depth to produce more detailed pleat and
face characteristics; 3) The Texture Fusion Module (TFM)
that fuses the warped clothing with the non-target body part
to refine the results. We also construct a high-quality synthesized Monocular-to-3D virtual try-on dataset, in which
each person image is associated with a front and a back
depth map. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed M3D-VTON can manipulate and reconstruct the 3D
human body wearing the given clothing with compelling details and is more efficient than other 3D approaches. 1

1. Introduction
3D virtual try-on, the process of fitting a specific clothing
item onto a 3D human shape, has attracted increasing attention due to its promising research and commercial value.
Recently, researchers’ interest has moved from physics1 code will be available at https://github.com/fyviezhao/
M3D-VTON

13239

