Self-Supervised Pretraining of 3D Features on any Point-Cloud
Zaiwei Zhang1,2 *
1

Rohit Girdhar1

Facebook AI Research

2

Armand Joulin1

Ishan Misra1

The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Pretraining on large labeled datasets is a prerequisite to
achieve good performance in many computer vision tasks
like image recognition, video understanding etc. However,
pretraining is not widely used for 3D recognition tasks
where state-of-the-art methods train models from scratch.
A primary reason is the lack of large annotated datasets because 3D data labelling is time-consuming. Recent work
shows that self-supervised learning is useful to pretrain
models in 3D but requires multi-view data and point correspondences. We present a simple self-supervised pretraining method that can work with single-view depth scans acquired by varied sensors, without 3D registration and point
correspondences. We pretrain standard point cloud and
voxel based model architectures, and show that joint pretraining further improves performance. We evaluate our
models on 9 benchmarks for object detection, semantic segmentation, and object classification, where they achieve
state-of-the-art results. Most notably, we set a new state-ofthe-art for object detection on ScanNet (69.0% mAP) and
SUNRGBD (63.5% mAP). Our pretrained models are label
efficient and improve performance for classes with few examples.

1. Introduction
Pretraining visual features on large labeled datasets is a
pre-requisite to achieve good performance when access to
annotations is limited [27, 46, 52, 87]. More recently, selfsupervised pretraining has become a popular alternative to
supervised pretraining especially for tasks where annotations are time-consuming, such as detection and segmentation in images [9, 36, 37, 56, 93] or tracking in videos [41].
In 3D vision too, annotations are difficult to acquire. Labeling a 3D scene composed of thousands of 3D points is timeconsuming and can take around 22 minutes per scene [18].
This cumbersome annotation process results in a lack of
large annotated 3D datasets. However, acquiring 3D data
in the form of single-view depth maps has become easier
than ever due to the advent of consumer grade depth sen* Work done during an internship at Facebook.

Same perf.
~2x fewer labels

Same perf.
~2x fewer labels

Figure 1: Label-efficiency of our self-supervised pretraining.
We finetune detection models from scratch or using our pretraining
as initialization. Our pretraining which uses unlabeled single-view
3D data, outperforms training from scratch, and achieves the same
detection performance with about half the detection labels.

sors, e.g., in phones [24, 73, 83]. While these depth maps
can be leveraged to pretrain self-supervised 3D features,
there is surprisingly little work that can be applied. Recent
work [105] applies self-supervised pretraining to 3D models but uses multi-view depth scans with point correspondences. Since 3D sensors only acquire single-view depth
scans, multi-view depth scans and point correspondences
are typically obtained via 3D reconstruction. Unfortunately,
even with good sensors, 3D reconstruction can fail easily for
a variety of reasons such as non-static environments, fast
camera motion or odometry drift [16].
In this paper, we introduce a simple contrastive framework, DepthContrast, to representations from single-view
depth scans. From a practical perspective, self-supervised
learning from single-view depth scans is more broadly applicable for 3D data. It is also an interesting scientific question whether just using single-view information can provide
benefits for self-supervised learning in 3D. Our approach
is based on the Instance Discrimination method by Wu et
al. [103] applied to depth maps. We side-step the need of
registered point clouds or correspondences, by considering
each depth map as an instance and discriminating between
them, even if they come from the same scene. Since different 3D applications require different 3D scene representa10252

