Robust Trust Region for Weakly Supervised Segmentation
Dmitrii Marin
University of Waterloo, Canada

Yuri Boykov
University of Waterloo, Canada

dmitrii.a.marin@gmail.com

yboykov@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Acquisition of training data for the standard semantic
segmentation is expensive if requiring that each pixel is
labeled. Yet, current methods significantly deteriorate in
weakly supervised settings, e.g. where a fraction of pixels is
labeled or when only image-level tags are available. It has
been shown that regularized losses—originally developed
for unsupervised low-level segmentation and representing
geometric priors on pixel labels—can considerably improve
the quality of weakly supervised training. However, many
common priors require optimization stronger than gradient
descent. Thus, such regularizers have limited applicability in deep learning. We propose a new robust trust region
approach1 for regularized losses improving the state-of-theart results. Our approach can be seen as a higher-order
generalization of the classic chain rule. It allows neural
network optimization to use strong low-level solvers for the
corresponding regularizers, including discrete ones.

1. Introduction
Our paper proposes a higher-order optimization technique for neural network training. While focused on semantic image segmentation, our main algorithmic idea is
simple and general - integrate the standard trust region principle into the context of backpropagation, i.e. the chain rule.
We reinterpret the classic chain rule: instead of the chain of
gradients/derivatives for a composition of functions, we formulate the corresponding chain of hidden optimization subproblems. Then, inspired by the trust region principle, we
can substitute a standard linear approximation solver (gradient descent) at any chain with a better higher-order solver.
In short, we replace the classic differentiation chain rule by
the trust region chain rule in the context of backpropagation.
Our work is motivated by the well-known challenges
presented to the gradient descent by typical regularization
losses or geometric priors/energies ubiquitous in the context of weakly-supervised or unsupervised segmentation.
1 https://github.com/dmitrii-marin/robust_trust_region

To validate our approach, we present semantic segmentation results improving the state-of-the-art in the challenging
setting where the training data has only a fraction of pixels
labeled. The generality of our main principle (trust region
chain rule) and our promising results for a difficult problem
encourage further research. In fact, this work applies trust
region principle only to the last “chain” in the network. We
discuss several promising extensions for future work.
The rest of the introduction is organized as follows. To
create a specific context for our general approach to network training, we review loss functions relevant for weaklysupervised or unsupervised segmentation. First, Sec. 1.1
discusses several standard geometric priors, regularization
energies, clustering criteria, and their powerful solvers originally developed for low-level segmentation or general machine learning. Then, Sec. 1.2 outlines the use of such
regularization objectives as losses for network training in
the context of weakly supervised semantic (high-level) segmentation. We also review the standard trust region principle (Sec. 1.4) and highlight our main contributions (Sec.
1.5) based on the general idea of applying trust region (with
powerful solvers) to network training.

1.1. Regularized energies in low-level segmentation
Assuming discrete segmentation s ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}N
where K is the number of categories and N is the number of image pixels, one common low-level segmentation
energy can be represented as
X
X
E(s) = −
log P (Ii |si ) +
wij [si 6= sj ] (1)
i

{i,j}∈N

where Ii is a low-level feature (e.g. intensity, color, texture) at pixel i with distribution functions P (·|k) for each
category k, neighborhood system N describes any pairwise connectivity (typically 4-, 8-grid [5] or denser [34]),
weights wij represent given pairwise affinities (typically
Gaussian kernel for low-level features Ii and Ij [7, 5, 54,
34]), and [·] is the Iverson bracket operator returning 1 if the
argument is true and 0 otherwise. The energy above combines the log-likelihoods term enforcing consistency with
given (low-level) feature distributions and a pairwise reg-

6608

