Hierarchical Disentangled Representation Learning for Outdoor Illumination
Estimation and Editing
Piaopiao Yu1 , Jie Guo1,†, Fan Huang1 , Cheng Zhou1 , Hongwei Che2 , Xiao Ling2 , Yanwen Guo1,†
1
National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Guangdong OPPO Mobile Telecommunications Corp Ltd, China
turmikey@163.com, {guojie, ywguo}@nju.edu.cn
{mf20330031, zc}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {chehongwei, lingxiao}@oppo.com

Abstract
Data-driven sky models have gained much attention in
outdoor illumination prediction recently, showing superior
performance against analytical models. However, naively
compressing an outdoor panorama into a low-dimensional
latent vector, as existing models have done, causes two major problems. One is the mutual interference between the
HDR intensity of the sun and the complex textures of the
surrounding sky, and the other is the lack of fine-grained
control over independent lighting factors due to the entangled representation. To address these issues, we propose
a hierarchical disentangled sky model (HDSky) for outdoor illumination prediction. With this model, any outdoor
panorama can be hierarchically disentangled into several
factors based on three well-designed autoencoders. The
first autoencoder compresses each sunny panorama into a
sky vector and a sun vector with some constraints. The second autoencoder and the third autoencoder further disentangle the sun intensity and the sky intensity from the sun
vector and the sky vector with several customized loss functions respectively. Moreover, a unified framework is designed to predict all-weather sky information from a single
outdoor image. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed model significantly improves the
accuracy of outdoor illumination prediction. It also allows users to intuitively edit the predicted panorama (e.g.,
changing the position of the sun while preserving others),
without sacrificing physical plausibility.

1. Introduction
Outdoor illumination prediction based on a single input image is a key task for many applications ranging from
scene understanding and reconstruction to augmented reality (AR). However, the diverse weather conditions and the
† Corresponding authors.

HDSky Predictor

HDSky Editor
Sky
Position
Intensity

HDSky

𝑠𝑘𝑦
𝑠𝑢𝑛 𝑧
𝑧𝑤𝑒𝑎 𝑧𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑧𝑝𝑜𝑠 𝑧𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠

Weather Sky
Predicted

Sun

𝑧𝑠𝑢𝑛
Edited

Figure 1. We propose HDSky, the first disentangled data-driven
model for all-weather outdoor illumination. As the learned latent
vector is disentangled into several independent and meaningful
factors, state-of-the-art performance on outdoor illumination prediction can be achieved, leading to consistent shading and shadows in AR rendering and enabling intuitive illumination editing
with physical plausibility.

complex interaction between illumination and other scene
properties (e.g., surface reflectance and geometric variations) make this problem highly challenging.
Due to the success of deep learning, learning-based
methods [9, 4, 33, 8] have emerged recently and achieved
state-of-the-art performance by employing powerful deep
neural networks to automatically learn the mapping between an image of limited field-of-view (FoV) and a given

15313

