Matching in the Dark: A Dataset for Matching Image Pairs of Low-light Scenes
Wenzheng Song1 Masanori Suganuma1,2 Xing Liu1
Noriyuki Shimobayashi1 Daisuke Maruta3 Takayuki Okatani1,2
1
2
3
GSIS, Tohoku University
RIKEN Center for AIP
Socionext Inc.
{song,suganuma,ryu,nshimobayashi,okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp
maruta.daisuke@socionext.com

Abstract
This paper considers matching images of low-light
scenes, aiming to widen the frontier of SfM and visual
SLAM applications. Recent image sensors can record the
brightness of scenes with more than eight-bit precision,
available in their RAW-format image. We are interested in
making full use of such high-precision information to match
extremely low-light scene images that conventional methods cannot handle. For extreme low-light scenes, even if
some of their brightness information exists in the RAW format images’ low bits, the standard raw image processing
on cameras fails to utilize them properly. As was recently
shown by Chen et al.[14], CNNs can learn to produce images with a natural appearance from such RAW-format images. To consider if and how well we can utilize such information stored in RAW-format images for image matching,
we have created a new dataset named MID (matching in the
dark). Using it, we experimentally evaluated combinations
of eight image-enhancing methods and eleven image matching methods consisting of classical/neural local descriptors
and classical/neural initial point-matching methods. The
results show the advantage of using the RAW-format images
and the strengths and weaknesses of the above component
methods. They also imply there is room for further research.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-motion (SfM) [24, 58] and visual SLAM
(simultaneous localization and mapping) [38, 53] have been
used for real-world applications for a while. The mainstream methods use point correspondences between multiple views of a scene. They first detect keypoints and extract the descriptor of the local feature at each keypoint
[31, 35, 2, 44]. They then find initial point correspondences
between images and eliminate outliers from them, finally
estimating the geometric parameters such as camera poses,
etc.

SfM and visual SLAM have the potential to widen their
application fields. One important target is the application to
extremely low-light environments, such as outdoor scenes
at night under moonlight or indoor scenes with insufficient
illumination. Making it possible to use SfM and visual
SLAM in these environments is essential for real-world applications, such as autonomous vehicles that can operate at
night.
Owing to the advancement of image sensors, they can
record incoming light with more than eight bits (e.g., 14
bits). However, standard raw image processing employed
on many cameras cannot make full use of the information
existing in the lower bits of the sensor signal; it reduces
mosaic artifacts on the sensor signal, adjusts the white balance and contrast, and then converts the processed signal
into the standard format of eight-bit RGB images (we will
refer to this raw image processing as RIP in this paper).
This limitation arguably comes from the requirement for
versatility against all sorts of scenes with various lighting
conditions in addition to reducing the number of bits. In
extreme low-light scenes, even when some details of the
scenes’ brightness are stored in the low bits of their RAW
signals, the standard RIP often yields mostly black images.
The study of SID (see-in-the-dark) [14] well proves such
limitation of the image pipeline, in which the authors show
that a CNN can learn to convert such RAW-format images
of dark scenes into brightened images with a natural appearance.
It is very likely that we can do the same with SfM and
visual SLAM applied to low-light scenes, i.e., extracting the
information present in the lower bits of the RAW signals
to make SfM/visual SLAM work. The question is how to
do this. It is noteworthy that the goal is not to generate
natural looking bright images as SID does but to achieve
the optimal performance for SfM and visual SLAM.
There are potentially several directions to achieve the
goal. One is to develop a keypoint detector and a feature
descriptor that work directly on the RAW-format images.
Even if keypoint detectors and descriptors are not good

6029

