Speech Drives Templates:
Co-Speech Gesture Synthesis with Learned Templates
Shenhan Qian1 * Zhi Tu1 * Yihao Zhi1 * Wen Liu1

Shenghua Gao1,2,3†

1

ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Energy Efficient and Custom AI IC
2

Abstract
Co-speech gesture generation is to synthesize a gesture
sequence that not only looks real but also matches with the
input speech audio. Our method generates the movements
of a complete upper body, including arms, hands, and the
head. Although recent data-driven methods achieve great
success, challenges still exist, such as limited variety, poor
fidelity, and lack of objective metrics. Motivated by the fact
that the speech cannot fully determine the gesture, we design a method that learns a set of gesture template vectors
to model the latent conditions, which relieve the ambiguity.
For our method, the template vector determines the general appearance of a generated gesture sequence, while the
speech audio drives subtle movements of the body, both indispensable for synthesizing a realistic gesture sequence.
Due to the intractability of an objective metric for gesturespeech synchronization, we adopt the lip-sync error as a
proxy metric to tune and evaluate the synchronization ability of our model. Extensive experiments show the superiority of our method in both objective and subjective evaluations on fidelity and synchronization. 1

1. Introduction
We humans have always been enthusiastic about making
replicas of ourselves. Many successes have been achieved
in generation of explicit behaviours, such as lip syncing
[30], face swapping [32], or pose re-targeting [8]. But synthesizing implicit behaviors of humans, which plays a key
role in synthesizing realistic digital humans, is far less explored. Co-speech gesture is such a kind of implicit behavior, referring to the movement of body parts when someone is speaking, which conveys rich non-verbal information
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/ShenhanQian/SpeechDrivesTemplates

template
vector

speech
audio

head up
hands up

head down
hands down

template
vector

Figure 1: Our method generates realistic gesture sequences
from a piece of speech audio. With various template vectors, our method produces two different gesture sequences
from the same audio, but the movements are synchronized
for the hands, heads, and lips.

such as emotion, attitude, and intention.
Early attempts on co-speech gesture synthesis are mainly
rule-based [7, 21, 34], which suffer from poor naturalness
because the non-verbal information is too delicate to be described by rules. Later efforts [24, 15, 22, 14, 12, 36] go beyond by learning human behaviors from collected data. A
non-negligible barrier for data-driven methods is the multimodal essence of the mapping from speech audio to the possible gestures. This means that for the same input audio,
there exist multiple feasible solutions so that directly regressing to the ground-truth gesture casts an inconsistently
biased mapping, preventing the model from learning the divergence in the dataset. In recent methods, a common way
to cope with this challenge is adversarial learning [14, 1, 36]
with discriminators narrowing the gap between generated
and real ones. However, this can only improve the real-

11077

