Prototypical Matching and Open Set Rejection for Zero-Shot Semantic
Segmentation
Hui Zhang*
Henghui Ding*†
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Seen Classes

Abstract

In semantic segmentation [8, 13, 14, 12] which aims to
classify each pixel in a given image, great challenges are
induced by the demand for massive training samples with
pixel-wise annotations. In the field of image recognition
facing the same dilemma, zero-shot learning (ZSL) [32,
41, 18] is proposed, where the classification model is
trained to accommodate unseen objects using knowledge
learnt from seen classes. Similarly, zero-shot segmentation (ZSS) [47, 5, 20, 31, 36, 26, 21] is also proposed in
semantic segmentation. The goal of ZSS is to generate segmentation mask for objects of both seen (with annotated instances) and unseen categories (that have never been seen
* Equal contribution.
† Henghui Ding is the corresponding author.

...

Training

...

1. Introduction

Inductive Setting:

No Image Samples
No Semantic Information

Transductive Setting:
person sofa chair
Semantic
Information :
bicycle bird ...

Images w/o Annotations
Semantic motorbike
Information: cow ...

seen

Testing

The DCNN methods in addressing semantic segmentation demand vast amount of pixel-wise annotated training
samples. In this work, we present zero-shot semantic segmentation, which aims to identify not only the seen classes
contained in training but also the novel classes that have
never been seen. We adopt a stringent inductive setting
in which only the instances of seen classes are accessible
during training. We propose an open-aware prototypical
matching approach to accomplish the segmentation. The
prototypical way extracts the visual representations by a
set of prototypes, making it convenient and flexible to add
new unseen classes. A prototype projection is trained to
map the semantic representations towards prototypes based
on seen instances, and will generate prototypes for unseen
classes. Moreover, an open-set rejection is utilized to detect objects that do not belong to any seen classes, which
greatly reduces the misclassification of unseen objects into
seen classes due to the lack of seen training instances. We
apply the framework on two segmentation datasets, Pascal
VOC 2012 and Pascal Context, and achieve impressively
state-of-the-art performance.

Unseen Classes

Many Annoted Image Samples

person
unseen

?

Classify both
seen & unseen

cow

Auxiliary Semantic : person cow bird
Information
motorbike chair ...

Figure 1. Zero-shot Semantic Segmentation (ZSS). The purpose
of ZSS is to transfer knowledge learnt from seen classes to unseen
classes (i.e., never-seen in training). In testing, ZSS classifies each
pixel to one of the seen classes or newly-added unseen classes.

in training), as shown in Figure 1.
The preliminary ZSL setting does not need to distinguish
between the seen and unseen classes, which is unrealistic
and contradicts the real-world conditions of recognition. A
practical generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) [42] is then
proposed since image samples from seen and unseen classes
often appear together and it is important to recognize both
groups simultaneously. Zero-shot segmentation (ZSS) is
naturally an analogue of GZSL, since the given image for
segmentation already contains diverse categories. “ZSS” in
this paper stands for the generalized case.
In ZSS, an important source of information is the semantic representation - semantic information encoded by highdimensional vectors. The semantic information can include
automatically-extracted word vectors, manually-defined attribute vectors, context-based embedding, or their combinations. Each class (either seen or unseen) has its own semantic representation. The ways of utilizing unseen information
separates ZSS into two settings: inductive setting and transductive setting (see Figure 1). In inductive training, the visual features and semantic representations of only the seen
classes are available; while in transductive training, one can

6974

