Multimodal Clustering Networks for
Self-supervised Learning from Unlabeled Videos
Brian Chen 1 Andrew Rouditchenko2 Kevin Duarte 3 Hilde Kuehne4,6 Samuel Thomas5,6
Angie Boggust2 Rameswar Panda5,6 Brian Kingsbury5,6 Rogerio Feris5,6
David Harwath7 James Glass2 Michael Picheny8 Shih-Fu Chang1
1

Columbia University, 2 MIT CSAIL, 3 University of Central Florida, 4 Goethe University Frankfurt,
5

IBM Research AI, 6 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 7 UT Austin, 8 NYU-Courant CS & CDS,

{bc2754,sc250}@columbia.edu,{roudi,aboggust,glass}@mit.edu,kevin duarte@knights.ucf.edu
{kuehne,rpanda}@ibm.com,{sthomas,rsferis,bedk}@us.ibm.com, harwath@cs.utexas.edu, map22@nyu.edu

Abstract
Multimodal self-supervised learning is getting more and
more attention as it allows not only to train large networks
without human supervision but also to search and retrieve
data across various modalities. In this context, this paper proposes a framework that, starting from a pre-trained
backbone, learns a common multimodal embedding space
that, in addition to sharing representations across different
modalities, enforces a grouping of semantically similar instances. To this end, we extend the concept of instance-level
contrastive learning with a multimodal clustering step in
the training pipeline to capture semantic similarities across
modalities. The resulting embedding space enables retrieval
of samples across all modalities, even from unseen datasets
and different domains. To evaluate our approach, we train
our model on the HowTo100M dataset and evaluate its
zero-shot retrieval capabilities in two challenging domains,
namely text-to-video retrieval, and temporal action localization, showing state-of-the-art results on four different
datasets.

1. Introduction
To robustly learn visual events and concepts, humans seldom rely on visual inputs alone. Instead, a rich multimodal
environment is utilized for understanding by combining multiple sensory signals along with various language representations. Many recent techniques have attempted to mimic
this paradigm to train efficient computer vision models, especially those that learn from videos where multiple modalities
are naturally present [1, 2, 36].
Learning on multimodal video data has both benefits and
challenges. It is beneficial that each video instance has infor-

Figure 1: The Multimodal Clustering Network (MCN) combines a contrastive loss that learns feature representations to
be close across different modalities such as video, audio, and
text (blue box), with a clustering loss that draws instances
that are semantically related together, e.g., scenes depicting
the same semantic concept (e.g., chopping or frying) from
different videos or different clips. (yellow box).
mation available in multiple modalities. Textual information
corresponding to the spoken narrations in the video, for example, provides a valuable language modality in addition to
the visual and audio modalities [7, 21, 25]. In this work, we
18012

