Consistency-Sensitivity Guided Ensemble Black-Box Adversarial Attacks in
Low-Dimensional Spaces
Jianhe Yuan and Zhihai He
University of Missouri, Columbia MO
yuanjia, hezhi@missouri.edu

Abstract
Black-box attacks aim to generate adversarial noise to
fail the victim deep neural network in the black box. The
central task in black-box attack method design is to estimate
and characterize the victim model in the high-dimensional
model space based on feedback results of queries submitted
to the victim network. The central performance goal is to
minimize the number of queries needed for successful attack. Existing attack methods directly search and refine the
adversarial noise in an extremely high-dimensional space,
requiring hundreds or even thousands queries to the victim
network. To address this challenge, we propose to explore a
consistency and sensitivity guided ensemble attack (CSEA)
method in a low-dimensional space. Specifically, we estimate the victim model in the black box using a learned linear composition of an ensemble of surrogate models with
diversified network structures. Using random block masks
on the input image, these surrogate models jointly construct
and submit randomized and sparsified queries to the victim
model. Based on these query results and guided by a consistency constraint, the surrogate models can be trained using a very small number of queries such that their learned
composition is able to accurately approximate the victim
model in the high-dimensional space. The randomized and
sparsified queries also provide important information for us
to construct an attack sensitivity map for the input image,
with which the adversarial attack can be locally refined to
further increase its success rate. Our extensive experimental results demonstrate that our proposed approach significantly reduces the number of queries to the victim network
while maintaining very high success rates, outperforming
existing black-box attack methods by large margins.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are sensitive to adversarial attacks
[26, 2]. A very small amount of adversarial noise added to
the input image can successfully fool the state-of-art clas-

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed idea for consistencysensitivity guided ensemble attack in a low-dimensional space.

sifier with a very high probability. There are two types of
adversarial attacks, white-box attacks which have full access to the victim network under attack and black-box attacks which have no knowledge about the network. In this
work, we focus on black-box attacks which remain an open
and very challenging problem. In black-box attacks, it is
assumed that the attacker can only query the victim network and obtain its output score for a given input image
[19]. There are two major performance metrics, the number of queries to the victim network and the attack success
rate, used to evaluate the performance of black-box attacks
[9]. In black box attack research, the objective is to minimize the number of queries submitted to the victim network
while achieving a very high attack success rate.
Two major approaches have been explored in the literature for black-box attacks. The first one is the transferbased approach which uses a trained surrogate network to
generate attacks based on the white-box approach, hoping
this attack noise can be effectively transferred to the unknown target network [7, 12]. This approach often suffers
from low success rates since the adversarial attack is a very
sophisticated error accumulation process depending on the
specific parameter settings of victim model and the input
image. The second one is the query-based approach which
queries the target network continuously, searches or modi-

7778

