A Lazy Approach to Long-Horizon Gradient-Based Meta-Learning
Muhammad Abdullah Jamal† Liqiang Wang† Boqing Gong]
†
University of Central Florida ] Google

Abstract
Gradient-based meta-learning first trains task-specific
models by an inner loop and then backpropagates metagradients through the loop to update the meta-model. To
avoid high-order gradients, existing methods either take a
small number of inner steps or approximate the meta-updates
for the situations that the meta-model and task models lie in
the same space. To enable long inner horizons for more general meta-learning problems, we instead propose an intuitive
teacher-student strategy. The key idea is to employ a student network to adequately explore the search space of taskspecific models, followed by a teacher’s “leap” toward the
regions probed by the student. The teacher not only arrives
at a high-quality model but also defines a lightweight computational graph for the meta-gradients. Our approach is
generic; it performs well when applied to four meta-learning
algorithms over three tasks: few-shot learning, long-tailed
object recognition, and adversarial blackbox attack.

1. Introduction
Humans can quickly learn the skills needed for new tasks
by drawing from a fund of prior knowledge and experience.
To grant machine learners this level of intelligence, metalearning studies how to leverage past learning experiences
to more efficiently learn for a new task [48]. A hallmark
experiment design provides a meta-learner a variety of fewshot learning tasks (meta-training) and then desires it to solve
previously unseen and yet related few-shot learning tasks
(meta-test). This design enforces “learning to learn” because
the few-shot training examples are insufficient for a learner
to achieve high accuracy on any task in isolation.
Recent meta-learning methods focus on deep neural networks. Some learn recurrent neural networks as an update
rule to a model [36, 2]. Some transfer attention schemes
across tasks [30, 49]. Gradient-based meta-learning gains
momenta recently following the seminal work [14]. It is
model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML), learning a global
model initialization from which a meta-learner can quickly
derive task-specific models by using a few training examples.
In its core, MAML is a bilevel optimization problem [10].

The upper level searches for the best global initialization,
and the lower level optimizes individual models, which all
share the common initialization, for particular tasks sampled
from a task distribution. This problem is hard to solve. [14]
instead propose a “greedy” algorithm, which comprises two
loops. The inner loop samples tasks and updates the taskspecific models by k steps using the tasks’ training examples.
The k-step updates write a differentiable computation graph.
The outer loop updates the common initialization by backpropagating meta-gradients through the computation graph.
This method is “greedy” in that the number of inner steps
is often small (e.g., k = 1). The outer loop takes actions
before the inner loop sufficiently explores its search space.
This “greedy” algorithm is due to practical constraints
that backpropagating meta-gradients through the inner loop
incurs high-order derivatives, big memory footprints, and the
risk of vanishing or exploding gradients. For the same reason,
some related work also turns to greedy strategies, such as
meta-attack [13] and learning to reweigh examples [38].
To this end, two questions arise naturally. Would a less
greedy gradient-based meta-learner (say, k>10 inner steps)
achieve better performance? How to make it less greedy?
Some first-order algorithms [14, 32, 15] have provided an
affirmative answer to the first question above. [35] proposed
a less “greedy” MAML by regularizing the inner loop. However, they are highly tailored in that the meta-model and task
models lie in the same space, preventing them from tackling
other meta-learning problems, for example, the long-tailed
classification described later.
To answer the questions for more general meta-learning
scenarios, we provide some preliminary results by introducing a lookahead optimizer [55] into the inner loop. It can
be viewed as a teacher-student scheme. We use a student
neural network to explore the search space for a given task
adequately (by a large number k of updates), and a teacher
network then takes a “leap” toward the regions visited by
the student. As a result, the teacher network not only arrives at a high-performing model but also defines a very
lightweight computational graph for the outer loop. In contrast to the traditionally “greedy” meta-learning framework
used in MAML [14], meta-attack [13], learning to reweigh
examples [38], etc., the teacher is “lazy”. It sends a student

6577

