When Pigs Fly: Contextual Reasoning in Synthetic and Natural Scenes
Philipp Bomatter1,* , Mengmi Zhang2,3,* , Dimitar Karev4 , Spandan Madan3,5 ,
Claire Tseng4 , and Gabriel Kreiman2,3
1

ETH Zürich
Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
3
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
4
Harvard College, Harvard University
5
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
*
Equal contribution
2

Address correspondence to gabriel.kreiman@tch.harvard.edu

Figure 1: Images under normal context and out-of-context conditions were generated in the VirtualHome environment
[27] using the Unity 3D simulation engine [19]. The same target object (a mug, red bounding box) is shown in different
context conditions: normal context (a, b) and out-of-context conditions including gravity ((c), target object is floating in
the air), change in object co-occurrence statistics (d), combination of both gravity and object co-occurrence statistics (e),
enlarged object size (f), and no context with uniform grey pixels as background (g).

Abstract
Context is of fundamental importance to both human
and machine vision; e.g., an object in the air is
more likely to be an airplane than a pig. The rich
notion of context incorporates several aspects including
physics rules, statistical co-occurrences, and relative object
sizes, among others. While previous work has focused
on crowd-sourced out-of-context photographs from the
web to study scene context, controlling the nature and
extent of contextual violations has been a daunting task.
Here we introduce a diverse, synthetic Out-of-Context
Dataset (OCD) with fine-grained control over scene
context. By leveraging a 3D simulation engine, we
systematically control the gravity, object co-occurrences
and relative sizes across 36 object categories in a
virtual household environment. We conducted a series of

experiments to gain insights into the impact of contextual
cues on both human and machine vision using OCD.
We conducted psychophysics experiments to establish a
human benchmark for out-of-context recognition, and
then compared it with state-of-the-art computer vision
models to quantify the gap between the two.
We
propose a context-aware recognition transformer model,
fusing object and contextual information via multi-head
attention. Our model captures useful information for
contextual reasoning, enabling human-level performance
and better robustness in out-of-context conditions compared
to baseline models across OCD and other out-of-context
datasets.
All source code and data are publicly
available at https://github.com/kreimanlab/
WhenPigsFlyContext

255

