iMAP: Implicit Mapping and Positioning in Real-Time
Edgar Sucar1 Shikun Liu1 Joseph Ortiz2 Andrew J. Davison1
1
Dyson Robotics Lab, Imperial College London
2
Robot Vision Lab, Imperial College London
{e.sucar18, shikun.liu17, j.ortiz, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We show for the ﬁrst time that a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) can serve as the only scene representation in a realtime SLAM system for a handheld RGB-D camera. Our network is trained in live operation without prior data, building a dense, scene-speciﬁc implicit 3D model of occupancy
and colour which is also immediately used for tracking.
Achieving real-time SLAM via continual training of a
neural network against a live image stream requires signiﬁcant innovation. Our iMAP algorithm uses a keyframe
structure and multi-processing computation ﬂow, with dynamic information-guided pixel sampling for speed, with
tracking at 10 Hz and global map updating at 2 Hz. The
advantages of an implicit MLP over standard dense SLAM
techniques include efﬁcient geometry representation with
automatic detail control and smooth, plausible ﬁlling-in of
unobserved regions such as the back surfaces of objects.

Figure 1: Room reconstruction from real-time iMAP with
an Azure Kinect RGB-D camera, showing watertight scene
model, camera tracking and automatic keyframe set.

1. Introduction
A real-time Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
(SLAM) system for an intelligent embodied device must incrementally build a representation of the 3D world, to enable both localisation and scene understanding. The ideal
representation should precisely encode geometry, but also
be efﬁcient, with the memory capacity available used adaptively in response to scene size and complexity; predictive,
able to plausibly estimate the shape of regions not directly
observed; and ﬂexible, not needing a large amount of training data or manual adjustment to run in a new scenario.
Implicit neural representations are a promising recent
advance in off-line reconstruction, using a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to map a query 3D point to occupancy or
colour, and optimising it from scratch to ﬁt a speciﬁc scene.
An MLP is a general implicit function approximator, able
to represent variable detail with few parameters and without quantisation artifacts. Even without prior training, the
inherent priors present in the network structure allow it to
make watertight geometry estimates from partial data, and

plausible completion of unobserved regions.
In this paper, we show for the ﬁrst time that an MLP
can be used as the only scene representation in a real-time
SLAM system using a hand-held RGB-D camera. Our
randomly-initialised network is trained in live operation and
we do not require any prior training data. Our iMAP system
is designed with a keyframe structure and multi-processing
computation ﬂow reminiscent of PTAM [11]. In a tracking
process, running at over 10 Hz, we align live RGB-D observations with rendered depth and colour predictions from the
MLP scene map. In parallel, a mapping process selects and
maintains a set of historic keyframes whose viewpoints span
the scene, and uses these to continually train and improve
the MLP, while jointly optimising the keyframe poses.
In both tracking and mapping, we dynamically sample
the most informative RGB-D pixels to reduce geometric
uncertainty, achieving real-time speed. Our system runs
in Python, and all optimisation is via a standard PyTorch
framework [20] on a single desktop CPU/GPU system.
16229

