From Continuity to Editability: Inverting GANs with Consecutive Images
Yangyang Xu1 , Yong Du2 , Wenpeng Xiao1 , Xuemiao Xu1,3,4,5∗ and Shengfeng He1,5∗
2
South China University of Technology
Ocean University of China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information
4
State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
5
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot

← Gender →

Reconstruction

1

(a) Inputs

(b) I2S [1]

(c) I2S++ [2]

(d) pSp [18]

(e) InD [24]

(f) Ours

Figure 1: We propose an alternative GAN inversion method that jointly considers multiple consecutive images. We leverage
the inborn continuity between inputs, to simultaneously maximize the reconstruction fidelity (top row) and editability (bottom
row) of the inverted latent code. Our method jointly inverts three images from (a), we only show the result of the first one
with the red box.

Abstract
Existing GAN inversion methods are stuck in a paradox that the inverted codes can either achieve high-fidelity
reconstruction, or retain the editing capability. Having
only one of them clearly cannot realize real image editing. In this paper, we resolve this paradox by introducing
consecutive images (e.g., video frames or the same person
with different poses) into the inversion process. The rationale behind our solution is that the continuity of consecutive images leads to inherent editable directions. This inborn property is used for two unique purposes: 1) regularizing the joint inversion process, such that each of the
inverted codes is semantically accessible from one of the
other and fastened in an editable domain; 2) enforcing
inter-image coherence, such that the fidelity of each inverted code can be maximized with the complement of other
images. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our alternative significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in terms of reconstruction fidelity and editability on both
the real image dataset and synthesis dataset. Furthermore,
∗ Corresponding authors ({xuemx,hesfe}@scut.edu.cn).

our method provides the first support of video-based GAN
inversion and an interesting application of unsupervised
semantic transfer from consecutive images. Source code
can be found at: https://github.com/cnnlstm/
InvertingGANs_with_ConsecutiveImgs.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [5, 9, 10]
has demonstrated versatile image editing capability, especially by discovering the spontaneously learned interpretable directions that can manipulate corresponding image attributes [17, 8, 19, 4, 22]. Concretely, given a random
latent code w, image editing can be achieved by pushing the
latent vector along a specific semantic direction (e.g., age,
gender):
→
I 0 = G(w + α × n),
(1)
where I 0 is the edited image, G is the generator, α is a scal→
ing factor, and n is the interpretable direction.
As a consequence, recent attempts [1, 2, 18, 24] aim to
migrate this power to real image editing by inverting an image to the latent code w. There are two keys for this task,

13910

