HDR Video Reconstruction: A Coarse-to-fine Network and A Real-world
Benchmark Dataset
Guanying Chen1,2
1

Chaofeng Chen1 Shi Guo2,3 Zhetong Liang2,3
Kwan-Yee K. Wong1 Lei Zhang2,3

Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

EV+2

Abstract

EV-2

EV+0

EV+2

High dynamic range (HDR) video reconstruction from
sequences captured with alternating exposures is a very
challenging problem. Existing methods often align low dynamic range (LDR) input sequence in the image space using
optical flow, and then merge the aligned images to produce
HDR output. However, accurate alignment and fusion in
the image space are difficult due to the missing details in
the over-exposed regions and noise in the under-exposed
regions, resulting in unpleasing ghosting artifacts. To enable more accurate alignment and HDR fusion, we introduce a coarse-to-fine deep learning framework for HDR
video reconstruction. Firstly, we perform coarse alignment
and pixel blending in the image space to estimate the coarse
HDR video. Secondly, we conduct more sophisticated alignment and temporal fusion in the feature space of the coarse
HDR video to produce better reconstruction. Considering
the fact that there is no publicly available dataset for quantitative and comprehensive evaluation of HDR video reconstruction methods, we collect such a benchmark dataset,
which contains 97 sequences of static scenes and 184 testing pairs of dynamic scenes. Extensive experiments show
that our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods. Our code and dataset can be found at https://
guanyingc.github.io/DeepHDRVideo.

...

1. Introduction

Conventional reconstruction pipeline along this direction often consists of two steps [25]. In the first step,
neighboring frames with different exposures are aligned
to the current frame using optical flow. In the second
step, the aligned images are fused to produce the HDR
image. However, accurate alignment and fusion are difficult to achieve for LDR images with different exposures as
there are saturated pixel values in the over-exposed regions,
and noise in the under-exposed regions. Recently, Kalantari and Ramamoorthi [23] proposed to estimate the optical flow with a deep neural network, and used another net-

Compared with low dynamic range (LDR) images, high
dynamic range (HDR) images can better reflect the visual
details of a scene in both bright and dark regions. Although significant progress has been made in HDR image
reconstruction using multi-exposure images [22, 57, 59],
the more challenging problem of HDR video reconstruction
is still less explored. Different from HDR image reconstruction, HDR video reconstruction has to recover the HDR
for every input frame (see Fig. 1), but not just for a single

Ours

Kalantari [23]

...

Figure 1. HDR video reconstruction from sequences captured with
three alternating exposures. Row 1 shows four input LDR frames.
Rows 2–3 are the reconstructed (tonemapped) HDR frames.

reference frame (e.g., the middle exposure image). Existing successful HDR video reconstruction techniques often
rely on costly and specialized hardware (e.g., scanline exposure/ISO or internal/external beam splitter) [55, 30, 62],
which hinders their wider applications among ordinary consumers. A promising direction for low-cost HDR video reconstruction is to utilize video sequences captured with alternating exposures (e.g., videos with a periodic exposure
of {EV-3, EV+3, EV-3, . . . }). This is practical as many offthe-shelf cameras can alternate exposures during recording.

12502

