MultiSports: A Multi-Person Video Dataset of Spatio-Temporally Localized
Sports Actions
Yixuan Li
Lei Chen
Runyu He
Zhenzhi Wang
Gangshan Wu
Limin WangB
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
Spatio-temporal action detection is an important and
challenging problem in video understanding. The existing action detection benchmarks are limited in aspects of
small numbers of instances in a trimmed video or low-level
atomic actions. This paper aims to present a new multiperson dataset of spatio-temporal localized sports actions,
coined as MultiSports. We first analyze the important ingredients of constructing a realistic and challenging dataset for
spatio-temporal action detection by proposing three criteria: (1) multi-person scenes and motion dependent identification, (2) with well-defined boundaries, (3) relatively finegrained classes of high complexity. Based on these guidelines, we build the dataset of MultiSports v1.0 by selecting
4 sports classes, collecting 3200 video clips, and annotating 37701 action instances with 902k bounding boxes. Our
datasets are characterized with important properties of high
diversity, dense annotation, and high quality. Our MultiSports, with its realistic setting and detailed annotations,
exposes the intrinsic challenges of spatio-temporal action
detection. To benchmark this, we adapt several baseline
methods to our dataset and give an in-depth analysis on
the action detection results in our dataset. We hope our
MultiSports can serve as a standard benchmark for spatiotemporal action detection in the future. Our dataset website
is at https://deeperaction.github.io/multisports/.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal human action detection in untrimmed
videos is of great importance for many applications, such as
surveillance and sports analysis. Recently, recognizing actions from short trimmed videos has achieved considerable
progress [44, 3, 40, 35, 41, 42], but these classification models can not be directly applied for video analysis in a multiperson scene. Meanwhile, although temporal action detection methods [56, 26, 25, 50, 53] for untrimmed videos can
distinguish intervals of human actions from background,
B: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

they are still unable to spatially detect multiple concurrent
human actions, which is important in real-world applications of video analysis.
Current spatio-temporal action detection benchmarks
can be mainly classified into two categories: 1) Densely
annotated high-level actions such as J-HMDB [17] and
UCF101-24 [38]. Their clips only have a single person
doing some semantically simple and temporally repeated
actions. Typically, the scene context can provide enough
cues for recognizing these coarse-grained action categories.
Thus, these benchmarks might be impractical for real-world
applications such as surveillance, where it is required to
deal with more fine-grained actions in a multi-person scene;
2) Sparsely annotated atomic actions such as AVA [12].
They fail to provide clear temporal action boundaries, and
simply focus on frame-level spatial localization of atomic
actions. This setting removes the requirements of temporal localization for action detection algorithms. Meanwhile,
their atomic actions rarely require the complex reasoning
over the actors and their surrounding environment.
Based on the analysis above, we argue that a new
benchmark is necessary to advance the research of spatiotemporal action detection. The benchmark should satisfy
several important requirements to cover the realistic challenges of this task. 1) There should be multiple persons
performing different actions concurrently in the same scene,
where the background information is not sufficient for action recognition and motion itself of the actor plays a significant role. 2) To address the inherently confusing human
action boundaries in time, actions should be both semantically and temporally well-defined with a consensus among
humans. 3) Considering the complexity of real-world applications, actions should be fine-grained which requires accurate human pose and motion information, long-term temporal structure, possible interactions between humans, objects
and scenes, and reasoning over their relations.
Following the above guidelines, we develop the MultiSports dataset, short for Multi-person Sports Actions. The
dataset is large-scale, high-quality, multi-person, and contains fine-grained action categories with precise and dense
annotations in both spatial and temporal domains. The ac-

13536

