Image Retrieval on Real-life Images with Pre-trained
Vision-and-Language Models
Zheyuan Liu1

Cristian Rodriguez-Opazo2 Damien Teney2,3 Stephen Gould1
1
Australian National University
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide 3 Idiap Research Institute
{zheyuan.liu, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au
cristian.rodriguezopazo@adelaide.edu.au, damien.teney@idiap.ch

Abstract
We extend the task of composed image retrieval, where
an input query consists of an image and short textual description of how to modify the image. Existing methods have
only been applied to non-complex images within narrow domains, such as fashion products, thereby limiting the scope
of study on in-depth visual reasoning in rich image and language contexts. To address this issue, we collect the Compose Image Retrieval on Real-life images (CIRR) dataset,
which consists of over 36,000 pairs of crowd-sourced,
open-domain images with human-generated modifying text.
To extend current methods to the open-domain, we propose CIRPLANT, a transformer based model that leverages
rich pre-trained vision-and-language (V&L) knowledge for
modifying visual features conditioned on natural language.
Retrieval is then done by nearest neighbor lookup on the
modified features. We demonstrate that with a relatively
simple architecture, CIRPLANT outperforms existing methods on open-domain images, while matching state-of-theart accuracy on the existing narrow datasets, such as fashion. Together with the release of CIRR, we believe this work
will inspire further research on composed image retrieval.
Our dataset, code and pre-trained models are available at
https://cuberick-orion.github.io/CIRR/.

1. Introduction
We study the task of composed image retrieval, that is,
finding an image from a large corpus that best matches a
user query provided as an image-language pair. Unlike traditional content-based [38] or text-based [24, 42] image retrieval where a single modality is used to describe the target
image, composed image retrieval involves both visual and
textual modalities to specify the user’s intent. For humans
the advantage of a bi-modal query is clear: some concepts
and attributes are more succinctly described visually, others

Reference Image

Target Image #1

Target Image #2

Modification text for #1: “Be a same breed dog with his puppy running”
Modification text for #2: “Two dogs of the same breed on the floor”

Figure 1. Example of composed image retrieval from the proposed
CIRR dataset. The input is composed of a reference image and a
modifying text, to which the model must find a close match. A
major challenge is the inherent ambiguity and underspecification
of visual aspects to be preserved or modified. Our dataset includes
open-domain images with rich contexts to facilitate the study of
such challenge.

through language. By cross-referencing the two modalities,
a reference image can capture the general gist of a scene,
while the text can specify finer details. The challenge is the
inherent ambiguity in knowing what information is important (typically one object of interest in the scene) and what
can be ignored (e.g., the background and other irrelevant
objects). However, existing datasets for this task fall short
of allowing us to adequately study this problem.
Consider the example in Fig. 1. Real-life images usually contain rich object interactions on various scales. In
each case, to readily identify the relevant aspects to keep or
change and pay less attention elsewhere (e.g., the color of
the dog’s fur and background objects), a model must develop in-depth visual reasoning ability and infer implicit
human agreements within both the visual and language contexts. However, existing datasets are constrained to domains
such as fashion products [4, 12, 13] or synthetic objects [40]
with relatively simple image contents. We argue that the
current datasets are insufficient for exploring the unique research opportunity mentioned above.
Motivated by this problem, we collect the Compose Im-

2125

