A Simple Baseline for Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation
with Strong Data Augmentation*
Jianlong Yuan1 ,
Yifan Liu2 ,
1
Alibaba Group

Chunhua Shen2 ,
Zhibin Wang1 ,
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Hao Li1

Abstract
Recently, significant progress has been made on semantic segmentation. However, the success of supervised semantic segmentation typically relies on a large amount of
labeled data, which is time-consuming and costly to obtain. Inspired by the success of semi-supervised learning
methods for image classification, here we propose a simple yet effective semi-supervised learning framework for
semantic segmentation. We demonstrate that the devil is
in the details: a set of simple designs and training techniques can collectively improve the performance of semisupervised semantic segmentation significantly. Previous
works [3, 25] fail to effectively employ strong augmentation in pseudo-label learning, as the large distribution disparity caused by strong augmentation harms the batch normalization statistics. We design a new batch normalization,
namely distribution-specific batch normalization (DSBN) to
address this problem and show the importance of strong
augmentation for semantic segmentation. Moreover, we design a self-correction loss, which is effective in terms of
noise resistance. We conduct a series of ablation studies
to show the effectiveness of each component. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art results in the semi-supervised settings on the Cityscapes and Pascal VOC datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation/pixel labelling is one of the core
tasks in visual understanding, which is widely used in scene
parsing, human body parsing, and many downstream applications. It is a per-pixel classification problem, which classifies each pixel in the image into a predefined set of categories. In the past few years, semantic segmentation methods based on deep convolution neural networks (CNNs)
have made tremendous progress [7,11]. Note that, the common prerequisite for all these successes is the availability
of a massive amount of pixel-level labeled data. Unfortunately, labeling such datasets is very expensive and time* JY and YL contributed equally to this work.

(a) mean

(b) variance

Figure 1 – Distribution mismatch of BN statistics between weak
augmentation and strong augmentation. Red and blue lines denote BN statistics trained with weak and strong data augmentation, respectively.

consuming, especially in dense prediction problems, such
as semantic segmentation.
Recent research reveals that semi-supervised learning
(SSL), which uses a large amount of unlabeled data together with a small amount of labeled data, is greatly beneficial to classification [1, 2, 5, 6, 14, 28, 36]. These methods
can be grouped into consistency methods [1, 2, 28], pseudolabelling methods [36], representation learning [14]. A few
works attempted to apply SSL to semantic segmentation.
The naive student [3] uses a large model to generate the
pseudo-labels with unlabeled video sequences, and applies
iterative training for further improvement. They only consider the pseudo-labels with the original input images without perturbations. Recent work [25] considers adding perturbations to the images for semantic segmentation. They
forward images with different perturbations in different subdecoders and enforce the consistency between sub-decoders
and the main decoder. Other work pays attention to generative methods [17, 23, 29]. AdvSemiSeg [17] and the
work in [23] both employ Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) and train the model with a discriminative loss over
unlabeled data and a supervised loss over labeled data.
Here, we propose an effective and efficient framework
to apply SSL to semantic segmentation. We employ strong
augmentation to make better use of the unlabeled data. Previous works based on consistency learning [1, 6, 35] have
shown that adding noise in the procedure of learning, the
pseudo-labels help improve the performance in image clas-

8229

