StyleFormer: Real-time Arbitrary Style Transfer via
Parametric Style Composition

1

Xiaolei Wu1∗ , Zhihao Hu1∗ , Lu Sheng1† , Dong Xu2
2
College of Software, Beihang University, China
The University of Sydney, Australia
{wuxiaolei,huzhihao,lsheng}.buaa.edu.cn, dong.xu@sydney.edu.au

Figure 1. Results of our proposed StyleFormer, which can faithfully transfer various styles to the content images.

Abstract
In this work, we propose a new feed-forward arbitrary
style transfer method, referred to as StyleFormer, which
can simultaneously fulfill fine-grained style diversity and
semantic content coherency. Specifically, our transformerinspired feature-level stylization method consists of three
modules: (a) the style bank generation module for sparse
but compact parametric style pattern extraction, (b) the
transformer-driven style composition module for contentguided global style composition, and (c) the parametric
content modulation module for flexible but faithful stylization. The output stylized images are impressively coherent with the content structure, sensitive to the detailed style
variations, but still holistically adhere to the style distributions from the style images. Qualitative and quantitative
comparisons as well as comprehensive user studies demonstrate that our StyleFormer outperforms the existing SOTA
methods in generating visually plausible stylization results
with real-time efficiency.

1. Introduction
Arbitrary style transfer aims to re-render the content of
one natural image by using the style of an arbitrary artwork.
* First two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: Lu Sheng.

The early work from Gatys et al. [1] discovered that the
features extracted from a well-trained deep convolutional
neural network can indicate the content structures, and their
statistical distributions capture the style patterns, which inspired a line of works with advanced style and content descriptions [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Despite remarkable results have
been achieved, these methods are usually formulated as a
complex optimization problem, whereby the losses over a
deep network must be minimized for every image pair, leading to high computational cost.
A large number of works [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]
have been proposed to balance among stylization quality,
generalization ability and execution efficiency. A common
paradigm is to pretrain a feed-forward network with a feature transfer module to “universally” produce stylized results by using a single forward pass. This module should
be able to simultaneously produce diversified style patterns
redistributed from the style image and preserve coherent
structures with the content image. The existing attempts
either tried to adjust the holistic statistics of the content features with that of the style features [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23], or non-locally swap the relevant style features in order
to match the content features [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31].
While these methods are significantly faster than those optimization based works, they may not generalize well to unseen images, which inevitably degrades stylization quality
or distorts content structures.

14618

