Cross-Patch Graph Convolutional Network for Image Denoising
Yao Li, Xueyang Fu, Zheng-Jun Zha∗
University of Science and Technology of China, China
xslx@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep learning-based image denoising methods have achieved significant improvements over traditional methods. Due to the hardware limitation, most deep
learning-based image denoising methods utilize cropped
small patches to train a convolutional neural network to
infer the clean images. However, the real noisy images
in practical are mostly of high resolution rather than the
cropped small patches and the vanilla training strategies
ignore the cross-patch contextual dependency in the whole
image. In this paper, we propose Cross-Patch Net (CPNet),
which is the first deep- learning-based real image denoising method for HR (high resolution) input. Furthermore,
we design a novel loss guided by the noise level map to obtain better performance. Compared with the vanilla patchbased training strategies, our approach effectively exploits
the cross-patch contextual dependency. Besides, owing to
the difficulty in capturing real noisy and noise-free image
paired training data, we propose an effective method to generate realistic sRGB noisy images from their corresponding
clean sRGB images for denoiser training. Denoising experiments on real-world sRGB images show the effectiveness
of the proposed method. More importantly, our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on practical sRGB
noisy image denoising.

1. Introduction
Since image denoising can help downstream computer
vision tasks [44, 28, 43, 27, 26, 32], it has attracted extensive interest in related fields. The majority of denoising methods take the cropped small patches as the training dataset due to the hardware storage limitation like GPU
memory. However, these methods trained with the cropped
patches may fail when denoising the real noisy images in
the practical situation. Nowadays, the images captured by
the cameras always have high-resolution and there exists
context consistency between the patches in a whole image.
∗ Corresponding author.

𝛽𝛽𝑠𝑠 = 1.113 × 10−3
𝛽𝛽𝑟𝑟 = 1.002 × 10−5
𝜎𝜎 = 5.1

𝛽𝛽𝑠𝑠 = 1.089 × 10−3
𝛽𝛽𝑟𝑟 = 0.956 × 10−5
𝜎𝜎 = 4.2

𝛽𝛽𝑠𝑠 = 1.462 × 10−3
𝛽𝛽𝑟𝑟 = 1.073 × 10−5
𝜎𝜎 = 7.1

𝛽𝛽𝑠𝑠 = 1.594 × 10−3
𝛽𝛽𝑟𝑟 = 1.259 × 10−5
𝜎𝜎 = 7.2

Figure 1. An example of the patch-wise noise consistency in SIDD
[1]. The four similar patches have almost the same NLFs (βs and
βr for noise level function – see Section 3.1). The NLFs and the
Gaussian noise level are estimated by using the method proposed
by [13]and [8], respectively.

A large number of denoising methods can achieve considerable performance when they adopt the cropped real noisy
image patches as training data set dealing with the Gaussian
noise. Nevertheless, there exist virtual differences between
the Gaussian noise and the real noise. The noise levels of
patches in a Gaussian noisy image are the same which is the
fixed variance. Therefore, it is unnecessary to consider the
context consistency between Gaussian noisy patches.
It is quite different from the real noise. The real sRGB
noise is generated by the raw image noise through the image
processing pipeline (ISP). The raw noise can be divided into
two categories: shot noise and read noise[13, 29], which
obey Poisson distribution and Gaussian distribution respectively. Poisson noise is highly relevant to the image pixel
values. Besides, the noise on each pixel is affected by the
pixels in the adjacent region when the raw image is converted to an sRGB image. As a result, similar patches generate similar noise distribution. Figure 1 gives an example of
this phenomenon, illustrating that the high-resolution noisy
images consist of a series of similar patches, and the noise
level functions (NLFs) are almost the same (shot noise σs
and read noise σr ). All the NLFs are estimated by using
the SIDD[1] raw noisy images with the NLFs estimation
method [13]. Therefore, It is essential to take the cross-

4651

