Domain Generalization via Gradient Surgery
Lucas Mansilla

Rodrigo Echeveste

Diego H. Milone

Enzo Ferrante

Research Institute for Signals, Systems and Computational Intelligence, sinc(i)
CONICET, UNL, Santa Fe, Argentina
{lmansilla, recheveste, dmilone, eferrante}@sinc.unl.edu.ar

PACS

Abstract
In real-life applications, machine learning models often face scenarios where there is a change in data distribution between training and test domains. When the aim
is to make predictions on distributions different from those
seen at training, we incur in a domain generalization problem. Methods to address this issue learn a model using data
from multiple source domains, and then apply this model
to the unseen target domain. Our hypothesis is that when
training with multiple domains, conflicting gradients within
each mini-batch contain information specific to the individual domains which is irrelevant to the others, including the
test domain. If left untouched, such disagreement may degrade generalization performance. In this work, we characterize the conflicting gradients emerging in domain shift
scenarios and devise novel gradient agreement strategies
based on gradient surgery to alleviate their effect. We validate our approach in image classification tasks with three
multi-domain datasets, showing the value of the proposed
agreement strategy in enhancing the generalization capability of deep learning models in domain shift scenarios.

Art

Cartoon

Caltech101

LabelMe

Art

Clipart

Photo

Sketch

SUN09

VOC2007

VLCS

Ofﬁce-Home
Product

Real-World

Figure 1. Example images extracted from three multi-domain
datasets: PACS [15], VLCS [6] and Office-Home [29]. The goal
of domain generalization is to train a model that performs well
on data sampled from domains different from those seen during
training.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have shown remarkable results
in diverse application areas such as image understanding
[13, 28], speech recognition [10, 19] and natural language
processing [24, 26]. Such models are typically trained under the standard supervised learning paradigm, assuming
that training and test data come from the same distribution.
However, in real life, training and test conditions may differ by several factors, such as a change in data acquisition
device or target population. This makes models perform
poorly when applied to test data whose distribution differs
from the training data and, therefore, limits their implementation in such real scenarios. The goal is then to develop
deep learning models that generalize outside the training
distribution, under domain shift conditions.

Learning a model with data from different domains and
then applying it to a new domain not seen during training
entails a domain generalization (DG) problem [8]. In the
DG literature, training domains are often called source domains, while the test domain is referred as target. The problem itself is highly challenging, since not even unlabeled
data from the target domain is accessible during training.
Thus, the model must be trained without information about
the target domain. In the particular case of image classification, for example, different domains may differ in their
visual characteristics, e.g. photographic images or more abstract representations, such as paintings and sketches (see
Figure 1 for visual examples). In this scenario, the main
challenge is how to guide the learning process in order to

6630

