ECS-Net: Improving Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation by Using
Connections Between Class Activation Maps

1

Kunyang Sun1,2 , Haoqing Shi1,2 , Zhengming Zhang1,2 , Yongming Huang1,2,*
National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University
2
Pervasive Communication Research Center, Purple Mountain Laboratories
1
Nanjing 210096, China
2
Nanjing 211111, China

Sunky@seu.edu.cn, shihaoqing619@seu.edu.cn, zmzhang@seu.edu.cn, huangym@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-level weakly supervised semantic segmentation is
a challenging task. As classification networks tend to capture notable object features and are insensitive to overactivation, class activation map (CAM) is too sparse and
rough to guide segmentation network training. Inspired by
the fact that erasing distinguishing features force networks
to collect new ones from non-discriminative object regions,
we using relationships between CAMs to propose a novel
weakly supervised method. In this work, we apply these features, learned from erased images, as segmentation supervision, driving network to study robust representation. In
specifically, object regions obtained by CAM techniques are
erased on images firstly. To provide other regions with segmentation supervision, Erased CAM Supervision Net (ECSNet) generates pixel-level labels by predicting segmentation
results of those processed images. We also design the rule
of suppressing noise to select reliable labels. Our experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset show that without
data annotations except for ground truth image-level labels, our ECS-Net achieves 67.6% mIoU on test set and
66.6% mIoU on val set, outperforming previous state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, with the goal of assigning a
category label to each pixel on the image, is one of the
fundamental computer vision tasks. Due to the rapid development of Fully Convolutional Network (FCN), fully
supervised semantic segmentation (FSSS) methods [5, 6],
widely applied to applications like assisted driving and
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
under Grant 2018YFB1800801
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. The deficiency of spatial dimension annotations leads the
network to focus too much on salient object regions and reduce
the sensitivity to the edges of objects (left). Our method makes the
network not omit another valuable region, and can better capture
the edges (right).

medical imaging, have achieved excellent performance over
a short period. However, as training those algorithms requires datasets equipped with pixel-level annotations, existing datasets suffer from the severe time consuming and
numerous workforce investment. Aware of these difficulties, a line of research takes a weakly supervised strategy.
前后
Those methods usually follow a two-stage paradigm: (1)
Generating reliable pseudo labels by low degree supervision like bounding boxes [16, 20], scribbles [19, 28], points
as well as image-level annotations [17, 2]. (2) Training existing fully-supervised semantic segmentation approaches
by treating these pseudo labels as ground truth annotations.
Obviously, generating more accurate pseudo labels can enhance the performance of algorithms in (2). Compared with
other weak supervisions, image-level annotation, which can
even be gotten directly from almost all existing datasets enjoys lowest time and labour costs. Therefore, we choose

7283

