Dual Path Learning for Domain Adaptation of Semantic Segmentation
Yiting Cheng1 Fangyun Wei* 2 Jianmin Bao2 Dong
Chen2 Fang Wen2 Wenqiang Zhang* 1
S
𝑌s (GT Label)
1
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Microsoft Research Asia Seg. Model
{ytcheng18, wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn

{fawe, jianbao, doch, fangwen}@microsoft.com
𝑀s
𝑌"T !
T

T′

𝐺T→s

(Pseudo
Label)

Abstract
Domain adaptation for semantic segmentation enables
to alleviate the need for large-scale pixel-wise annotations.
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) with a combination of image-to-image translation shows great effectiveness
in adaptive segmentation. The most common practice is
to perform SSL along with image translation to well align
a single domain (the source or target). However, in this
single-domain paradigm, unavoidable visual inconsistency
raised by image translation may affect subsequent learning. In this paper, based on the observation that domain
adaptation frameworks performed in the source and target domain are almost complementary in terms of image
translation and SSL, we propose a novel dual path learning
(DPL) framework to alleviate visual inconsistency. Concretely, DPL contains two complementary and interactive
single-domain adaptation pipelines aligned in source and
target domain respectively. The inference of DPL is extremely simple, only one segmentation model in the target domain is employed. Novel technologies such as dual
path image translation and dual path adaptive segmentation are proposed to make two paths promote each other in
an interactive manner. Experiments on GTA5→Cityscapes
and SYNTHIA→Cityscapes scenarios demonstrate the superiority of our DPL model over the state-of-the-art methods. The code and models are available at: https:
//github.com/royee182/DPL.

1. Introduction
In the past decades, significant progress [45, 4, 38, 35,
43, 31, 20] in semantic segmentation has been achieved
with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. The empirical
observation [25, 39] demonstrates that the leading performance is partially attributed to a large volume of training
data, thus dense pixel-level annotations are required in supervised learning, which is laborious and time-consuming.
To avoid this painstaking task, researchers resort to train
* Corresponding author

S

𝐺s→T

T

S′

𝑌s

(GT Seg. Model
Label)
𝑀T

𝑌"T (Pseudo Label)
(a) Illustration of adaptation in domain-T .

S

𝑌s (GT Label)
𝑌"T !

T

T′

𝐺T→s

Seg. Model

𝑀s

(Pseudo
Label)

(b) Illustration of adaptation in domain-S.
Figure 1: Illustration of single-domain adaptation pipelines. S is source
image with ground-truth label YS , and T is target image. GS→T rep𝑌s and vice versa.
S
resents image translation from S ′
domain-S to domain-T
T
(GT Seg.
S ′ = GS→T (S) and T𝐺′s→=
GT →S (T ) are translated
images
in the
Model
corresponding domain. MS and MT are semantic Label)
segmentation
𝑀Tmodels
in T
domain-S and domain-T , respectively.
ŶT and ŶT ′ represent the cor𝑌" (Pseudo Label)
responding pseudo labels of T Tand T ′ . Red dash rectangles denote that
visual inconsistency raised by image translations disturbs domain adaptation learning in either supervised part or SSL part.

segmentation models on synthetic but photo-realistic largescale datasets such as GTA5 [26] and SYNTHIA [27]
with computer-generated annotations. However, due to the
cross-domain differences, these well-trained models usually
undergo significant performance drops when tested on realistic datasets (e.g., Cityscapes [6]). Therefore, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods have been widely
adopted to align the domain shift between the rich-labeled
source data (synthetic images) and the unlabeled target data
(real images).
Two commonly used paradigms in unsupervised domain
adaptive segmentation are image-to-image translation based
methods [21, 9] and self-supervised learning (SSL) based
methods [50, 49, 44, 12]. The most common practice for
image-to-image translation based methods is to translate
synthetic data from source domain (denote as domain-S)
to target domain (denote as domain-T ) [9, 2] to reduce the
visual gap between different domains. Then adaptive seg-

9082

