DAE-GAN: Dynamic Aspect-aware GAN for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Shulan Ruan1†, Yong Zhang2 *, Kun Zhang3 , Yanbo Fan2 , Fan Tang4 , Qi Liu1 , Enhong Chen1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2

Tencent AI Lab, 3 Hefei University of Technology, 4 Jilin University

slruan@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhangyong201303, zhang1028kun, fanyanbo0124, tfan.108}@gmail.com, {qiliuql, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn

Text

Abstract
Text-to-image synthesis refers to generating an image
from a given text description, the key goal of which lies in
photo realism and semantic consistency. Previous methods
usually generate an initial image with sentence embedding
and then refine it with fine-grained word embedding. Despite the significant progress, the ‘aspect’ information (e.g.,
red eyes) contained in the text, referring to several words
rather than a word that depicts ‘a particular part or feature of something’, is often ignored, which is highly helpful
for synthesizing image details. How to make better utilization of aspect information in text-to-image synthesis still
remains an unresolved challenge. To address this problem, in this paper, we propose a Dynamic Aspect-awarE
GAN (DAE-GAN) that represents text information comprehensively from multiple granularities, including sentencelevel, word-level, and aspect-level. Moreover, inspired by
human learning behaviors, we develop a novel Aspectaware Dynamic Re-drawer (ADR) for image refinement, in
which an Attended Global Refinement (AGR) module and
an Aspect-aware Local Refinement (ALR) module are alternately employed. AGR utilizes word-level embedding
to globally enhance the previously generated image, while
ALR dynamically employs aspect-level embedding to refine
image details from a local perspective. Finally, a corresponding matching loss function is designed to ensure the
text-image semantic consistency at different levels. Extensive experiments on two well-studied and publicly available
datasets (i.e., CUB-200 and COCO) demonstrate the superiority and rationality of our method.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image synthesis requires an agent to generate a
photo-realistic image according to the given text description. Due to its significant potential in many applications
† Work done during an internship in Tencent AI Lab.
* Corresponding Authors.

The black bird is medium sized and has red eyes.

DM-GAN

Text
Aspect

The black bird is medium sized and has red eyes.
the black bird

red eyes

DAE-GAN

Figure 1. Comparisons between DM-GAN [45] and our DAEGAN. DM-GAN first generates a low-resolution image with
sentence-level information and then refines it with word-level features. DAE-GAN refines images from both global and local perspectives with word-level and aspect information contained.

such as art generation [41] and computer-aided design [2]
but challenging nature, it is arousing extensive research attention in recent years.
In the past few years, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [5] have been proved tremendously successful for this task [20]. Most existing methods make efforts
on the two-stage framework by first generating initial lowresolution images and then refining them to high-resolution
ones [38, 39, 36]. Among all these methods, the proposal
of AttnGAN [36] plays an extremely important role. At
the initial stage, sentence-level information is employed to
generate a low-resolution image. Then, at the refinement
stage, AttnGAN utilizes word-level features to refine the
previously generated image by repeatedly adopting attention mechanism to select important words. Based on AttnGAN, text-to-image synthesis has been pushed by a large
step forward [45, 4, 18]. A synthesis example by DMGAN [45] is presented at the top of Figure 1.
Although remarkable performance has been accomplished with these efforts, there still exist several limitations to be unresolved. For example, most previous methods only employ sentence-level and word-level features, ignoring the ‘aspect-level’ features. ‘Aspect’ here refers to
several words rather than a word that depicts ‘a particu-

13960

