Occlude Them All: Occlusion-Aware Attention Network for
Occluded Person Re-ID
Peixian Chen1,3 , Wenfeng Liu1 , Pingyang Dai1 ,* Jianzhuang Liu2 ,
Qixiang Ye4 , Mingliang Xu5 , Qi’an chen1 , Rongrong Ji1
1
Xiamen University, China, 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, 3 Tencent YouTu Lab
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, 5 Zhengzhou University, China,
pxchen@stu.xmu.edu.cn, wenfengliu.xmu.edu.cn, pydai@xmu.edu.cn, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com,
qxye@ucas.ac.cn, iexumingliang@zzu.edu.cn, cheer@xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn,

Abstract
Person Re-Identification (ReID) has achieved remarkable performance along with the deep learning era. However, most approaches carry out ReID only based upon
holistic pedestrian regions. In contrast, real-world scenarios involve occluded pedestrians, which provide partial visual appearances and destroy the ReID accuracy. A
common strategy is to locate visible body parts by auxiliary model, which however suffers from significant domain
gaps and data bias issues. To avoid such problematic models in occluded person ReID, we propose the OcclusionAware Mask Network (OAMN). In particular, we incorporate an attention-guided mask module, which requires
guidance from labeled occlusion data. To this end, we
propose a novel occlusion augmentation scheme that produces diverse and precisely labeled occlusion for any holistic dataset. The proposed scheme suits real-world scenarios
better than existing schemes, which consider only limited
types of occlusions. We also offer a novel occlusion unification scheme to tackle ambiguity information at the test
phase. The above three components enable existing attention mechanisms to precisely capture body parts regardless
of the occlusion. Comprehensive experiments on a variety
of person ReID benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of
OAMN over state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) aims to identify the
same pedestrian captured by different cameras under varying viewpoints, lights, and locations. Along with the deep
learning era, ReID approaches based on Convolution Neu* Corresponding author.

(a) Occluded
pedestrians

(b) RGA-S

(c) Ours

Figure 1: Examples of occluded pedestrians and illustrations of introducing attentions. (a) shows examples of occluded pedestrians. (b) and (c) illustrate the attention introduced by RGA-S [33] and our proposed OAMN. (b) may
erroneously focus on the occlusion, but (c) does not.

ral Networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable performance [2, 32, 14, 12]. However, these approaches carry
out ReID only based upon the holistic pedestrian regions,
which ignore the occlusion that happens frequently in realworld scenarios as shown in Figure 1a.
Identifying occluded pedestrians faces essential challenges. In particular, the occluded pedestrian contains fewer
distinguishable features from the pedestrian itself, while introducing ambiguity information from the occluded regions.
Such ambiguity, like rich texture and noise, misleads the appearance representation. Existing approaches typically employ auxiliary models to obtain information for occluded
body parts to assist the learning procedure, such as capturing body-part features with Human parsing [10], separating

11833

