Dynamic Dual Gating Neural Networks
Fanrong Li1,2 , Gang Li1 , Xiangyu He1 , Jian Cheng1,2,3∗
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
lifanrong2017@ia.ac.cn, gangli0426@gmail.com, {xiangyu.he, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
In dynamic neural networks that adapt computations to
different inputs, gating-based methods have demonstrated
notable generality and applicability in trading-off the model
complexity and accuracy. However, existing works only
explore the redundancy from a single point of the network, limiting the performance. In this paper, we propose dual gating, a new dynamic computing method, to reduce the model complexity at run-time. For each convolutional block, dual gating identifies the informative features along two separate dimensions, spatial and channel. Specifically, the spatial gating module estimates which
areas are essential, and the channel gating module predicts the salient channels that contribute more to the results. Then the computation of both unimportant regions
and irrelevant channels can be skipped dynamically during
inference. Extensive experiments on a variety of datasets
demonstrate that our method can achieve higher accuracy
under similar computing budgets compared with other dynamic execution methods. In particular, dynamic dual gating can provide 59.7% saving in computing of ResNet50
with 76.41% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet, which has advanced the state-of-the-art. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/lfr-0531/DGNet.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have made great success in various computer vision
tasks, including image recognition [10, 33], object detection [28, 30], and segmentation [25, 40]. However, CNNs
achieve impressive accuracy at the cost of huge computational complexity and intensive memory footprint, which
pose challenges to the deployment of state-of-the-art models on resource-constrained devices.
Various methods have been proposed to improve the
∗ Corresponding author.

Channel Gating
Module
0

1

0

1

Convolution
0 1 0 1

Spatial
1 1 0 1
Gating
0 0 1 1
Module
0 1 0 0

Figure 1: Illustration of dual gating. In each convolutional
block, spatial and channel gating modules use the intermediate feature maps to predict the informative features along
two separate dimensions. Then the unimportant computations can be skipped at run-time.
.
computational efficiency of CNN inference. Pruning is a
common approach to reduce the model size and computations. Most of the existing methods discard the computations of redundant weights or filters by following specific
criteria [13, 26, 18, 43, 41, 11, 12]. However, such methods execute the same calculation for different inputs. This
seems to be suboptimal because “hard” inputs usually require more computations. Therefore, dynamic computing
has also attracted a number of researchers. Unlike the static
pruning methods, these techniques allocate different calculations to different inputs to save computations on those
“easy” samples and keep a high accuracy of the overall
model. In dynamic computing, methods based on the gating functions are general and flexible approaches and have
achieved a good trade-off between computation and accuracy [37, 7, 36, 1, 39].
However, there are limitations in the existing methods.
The convolutions extract informative features across spatial
and channel dimensions, but previous works only leverage
the redundancy from a single point of the networks, affecting the performance. Besides, simply combining those two
dimensions can not get a good result, and it is still a challenge to integrate the spatial and channel redundancies for
better efficiency. In this paper, we propose dual gating, a
new dynamic computing method to reduce the model com-

5330

