On the Limits of Pseudo Ground Truth in Visual Camera Re-localisation
Eric Brachmann1 Martin Humenberger2 Carsten Rother3 Torsten Sattler4
1
Niantic 2 NAVER LABS Europe 3 Visual Learning Lab, HCI/IWR, Heidelberg University
4
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
Benchmark datasets that measure camera pose accuracy have driven progress in visual re-localisation research.
To obtain poses for thousands of images, it is common
to use a reference algorithm to generate pseudo ground
truth. Popular choices include Structure-from-Motion (SfM)
and Simultaneous-Localisation-and-Mapping (SLAM) using additional sensors like depth cameras if available.
Re-localisation benchmarks thus measure how well each
method replicates the results of the reference algorithm.
This begs the question whether the choice of the reference
algorithm favours a certain family of re-localisation methods. This paper analyzes two widely used re-localisation
datasets and shows that evaluation outcomes indeed vary
with the choice of the reference algorithm. We thus question common beliefs in the re-localisation literature, namely
that learning-based scene coordinate regression outperforms classical feature-based methods, and that RGB-Dbased methods outperform RGB-based methods. We argue
that any claims on ranking re-localisation methods should
take the type of the reference algorithm, and the similarity
of the methods to the reference algorithm, into account.

1. Introduction
The availability of benchmark datasets [14,34,38,39,43,
56, 64, 69, 72, 74, 77, 82] has been a driving factor for research on visual re-localisation, a core technology to make
autonomous robots [40], self-driving cars [28], and augmented / mixed reality (AR / MR) systems [1, 10, 42] a reality. These benchmarks provide camera poses for a set of
training and test images. The training images can be used
to create a scene representation, and the test images serve
as queries to determine the 3D position and 3D orientation
(6DoF pose) of the camera with respect to the scene. Due
to the challenge of jointly estimating the poses of thousands
or more images, benchmark datasets are typically generated by a reference algorithm such as SfM or (RGB-)D
SLAM [34, 38, 39, 64, 74]. As such, benchmarks measure
how well visual re-localisation methods are able to replicate the results of the reference algorithm.
Ideally, the choice of reference algorithm should not

RGB-D SLAM Pseudo Ground Truth
Accuracy @ 1cm,1°

0%

50%

100%

Pseudo Ground Truth
Active Search
DSAC* (RGB)
DSAC* (RGB-D)

0%

50%

100%

SfM Pseudo Ground Truth

Figure 1. Visualisation of the same scene reconstructed by two
different reference algorithms. We show the trajectories of test
images estimated by state-of-the-art visual localisation algorithms
(left) and the percentage of images localised within 1cm and 1◦
of error w.r.t. the pseudo ground truth (right, higher is better).
While the underlying 3D scene models are very similar, the relative ranking of methods is inverted. In this paper, we show that
the reference algorithm used to create the pseudo ground truth has
a significant impact on which method achieves the best results.

matter as long as it faithfully estimates the camera poses
of the training and test images. In particular, the choice of
reference algorithm should not affect the ranking of methods on a benchmark. In practice however, different reference algorithms optimise different cost functions, e.g., reprojection errors of sparse point clouds for SfM [60, 80] or
alignment errors in 3D space for depth-based SLAM methods [16, 30, 47, 62], leading to different local minima. We
ask to what degree the choice of reference algorithm impacts the ranking of methods on a benchmark. This is an
important question as it pertains to whether or not we can
draw absolute conclusions, e.g., algorithm A is better than
algorithm B or using component C improves accuracy. Interestingly, to the best of our knowledge, this question has
not received much attention in the re-localisation literature.
The main focus of this paper is to investigate how

6218

