BiaSwap: Removing Dataset Bias with Bias-Tailored Swapping Augmentation
Eungyeup Kim*
KAIST

Jihyeon Lee*
KAIST

Jaegul Choo
KAIST

eykim94@kaist.ac.kr

jihyeonlee@kaist.ac.kr

jchoo@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep neural networks often make decisions based on
the spurious correlations inherent in the dataset, failing
to generalize in an unbiased data distribution. Although
previous approaches pre-define the type of dataset bias to
prevent the network from learning it, recognizing the bias
type in the real dataset is often prohibitive. This paper proposes a novel bias-tailored augmentation-based approach,
BiaSwap, for learning debiased representation without requiring supervision on the bias type. Assuming that the
bias corresponds to the easy-to-learn attributes, we sort the
training images based on how much a biased classifier can
exploits them as shortcut and divide them into bias-guiding
and bias-contrary samples in an unsupervised manner. Afterwards, we integrate the style-transferring module of the
image translation model with the class activation maps of
such biased classifier, which enables to primarily transfer the bias attributes learned by the classifier. Therefore,
given the pair of bias-guiding and bias-contrary, BiaSwap
generates the bias-swapped image which contains the bias
attributes from the bias-contrary images, while preserving
bias-irrelevant ones in the bias-guiding images. Given such
augmented images, BiaSwap demonstrates the superiority
in debiasing against the existing baselines over both synthetic and real-world datasets. Even without careful supervision on the bias, BiaSwap achieves a remarkable performance on both unbiased and bias-guiding samples, implying the improved generalization capability of the model.

1. Introduction
Recent deep neural networks have shown remarkable
performances in computer vision tasks including classification and object detection. However, these models often
achieve their goals by erroneously relying on the peripheral
features that have spurious correlations with their labels, socalled dataset bias [1]. For instance, imagine a classifier for
recognizing a camel, when most of the camels in the training images appear in the desert. This unintended correlation
causes the classifier to overly rely on the attributes of the
desert, failing to recognize the camel standing on the road.

In other words, the classifier trained on the biased dataset
often shows drastic failures for the images without such
bias, which raises a question on its generalization capability
in unbiased image classification.
Existing methods attempt to address this issue by using an explicit definition of the bias type in their debiasing
strategies. Some approaches [2, 3, 4] assume the texture bias
in the image classification task and propose a hand-crafted
module for such bias type. Similarly, textual modality, i.e.,
question and answer, are pre-defined as the bias [5, 6] in visual question answering task and resolved by leveraging the
question-only network.
However, assuming an already-known bias is quite unrealistic in that bias attributes can vary according to the composition of the training dataset. Moreover, unlike synthetic
datasets where bias attributes are manually designated, e.g.,
color is set as bias in Colored MNIST as shown in Figure 2(a), it is highly demanding to acquire the prior knowledge
on the bias that inherently exists in the real-world dataset.
Therefore, an unsupervised debiasing with no definition in
advance is an appropriate approach for learning generalized
representations over various datasets. Moreover, maintaining the classification ability for biased samples as well as
unbiased samples needs to be considered crucial for a desirable representation, which has been overlooked by the
previous studies [6, 7].
This paper mainly focuses on 1) removing the dataset
bias without explicit supervision by leveraging the biastailored swapping augmentation, and 2) achieving superior performance on bias-contrary as well as bias-guiding
samples against other baselines. We propose an image translation-based augmentation framework, BiaSwap,
which transfers the attributes appearing on the regions of
the image where the classifier often exploits as a shortcut for
prediction. To this end, we first exploit the reasonable observation that the biased classifier often learns to exploit easyto-learn attributes in the early learning phase, proposed in
Nam et al. [7] This enables us to obtain the class activation map (CAM) [8] which indicates the bias-relevant regions for each image without requiring an explicit definition of the bias type in advance. By integrating the CAM

* indicates equal contribution

14992

