DeepCAD: A Deep Generative Network for Computer-Aided Design Models
Rundi Wu

Chang Xiao
Changxi Zheng
Columbia University

{rundi, chang, cxz}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Deep generative models of 3D shapes have received a
great deal of research interest. Yet, almost all of them generate discrete shape representations, such as voxels, point
clouds, and polygon meshes. We present the first 3D generative model for a drastically different shape representation—
describing a shape as a sequence of computer-aided design (CAD) operations. Unlike meshes and point clouds,
CAD models encode the user creation process of 3D shapes,
widely used in numerous industrial and engineering design
tasks. However, the sequential and irregular structure of
CAD operations poses significant challenges for existing
3D generative models. Drawing an analogy between CAD
operations and natural language, we propose a CAD generative network based on the Transformer. We demonstrate the
performance of our model for both shape autoencoding and
random shape generation. To train our network, we create
a new CAD dataset consisting of 178,238 models and their
CAD construction sequences. We have made this dataset
publicly available to promote future research on this topic.

1. Introduction
It is our human nature to imagine and invent, and to express our invention in 3D shapes. This is what the paper and
pencil were used for when Leonardo da Vinci sketched his
mechanisms; this is why such drawing tools as the parallel
bar, the French curve, and the divider were devised; and this
is wherefore, in today’s digital era, the computer aided design (CAD) software have been used for 3D shape creation
in a myriad of industrial sectors, ranging from automotive
and aerospace to manufacturing and architectural design.
Can the machine also invent 3D shapes? Leveraging the
striking advance in generative models of deep learning, lots
of recent research efforts have been directed to the generation
of 3D models. However, existing 3D generative models
merely create computer discretization of 3D shapes: 3D
point clouds [6, 52, 53, 8, 30], polygon meshes [17, 42, 31],
and levelset fields [12, 33, 29, 50, 11]. Still missing is the
ability to generate the very nature of 3D shape design—the
drawing process.

Figure 1. A gallery of generated CAD designs. Our generative
network is able to produce a diverse range of CAD designs. Each
CAD model consists of a sequence of CAD operations with specific parameters. The resulting 3D shapes are clean, have sharp
geometric features, and can be readily user-edited.

We propose a deep generative network that outputs a sequence of operations used in CAD tools (such as SolidWorks
and AutoCAD) to construct a 3D shape. Generally referred
as a CAD model, such an operational sequence represents the
“drawing” process of shape creation. Today, almost all the industrial 3D designs start with CAD models. Only until later
in the production pipeline, if needed, they are discretized
into polygon meshes or point clouds.
To our knowledge, this is the first work toward a generative model of CAD designs. The challenge lies in the
CAD design’s sequential and parametric nature. A CAD
model consists of a series of geometric operations (e.g.,
curve sketch, extrusion, fillet, boolean, chamfer), each controlled by certain parameters. Some of the parameters are
discrete options; others have continuous values (more discussion in Sec. 3.1). These irregularities emerge from the
user creation process of 3D shapes, and thus contrast starkly
to the discrete 3D representations (i.e., voxels, point clouds,

6772

