Mining Latent Classes for Few-shot Segmentation
Lihe Yang1

Wei Zhuo2 * Lei Qi3,1

Yinghuan Shi1 *† Yang Gao1

1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Tencent
3
Key Lab of Computer Network and Information Integration (Ministry of Education), Southeast University
lihe.yang.cs@gmail.com

weizhuo@tencent.com

qilei@seu.edu.cn

Support Mask

Abstract
Few-shot segmentation (FSS) aims to segment unseen
classes given only a few annotated samples. Existing methods suffer the problem of feature undermining, i.e., potential novel classes are treated as background during training phase. Our method aims to alleviate this problem and
enhance the feature embedding on latent novel classes. In
our work, we propose a novel joint-training framework.
Based on conventional episodic training on support-query
pairs, we introduce an additional mining branch that exploits latent novel classes via transferable sub-clusters, and
a new rectification technique on both background and foreground categories to enforce more stable prototypes. Over
and above that, our transferable sub-cluster has the ability to leverage extra unlabeled data for further feature enhancement. Extensive experiments on two FSS benchmarks
demonstrate that our method outperforms previous stateof-the-art by a large margin of 3.7% mIOU on PASCAL-5i
and 7.0% mIOU on COCO-20i at the cost of 74% fewer parameters and 2.5x faster inference speed. The source code
is available at https://github.com/LiheYoung/
MiningFSS.

1. Introduction
Advanced by fully convolutional neural networks, semantic segmentation has achieved impressive progress [25,
60, 4, 19, 54]. Nevertheless, fully-supervised semantic segmentation demands a large amount of pixel-wise annotations which are exhaustive to acquire. This problem urges
the need for few-shot segmentation where only a handful
of annotations are required for novel classes. In this setting,
however, methods with conventional training paradigm [25]
* Corresponding author.
† The work of Yinghuan Shi and Lihe Yang was supported by National

Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFC0118300).
The work of Lei Qi was supported by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project (2021M690609).

{syh, gaoy}@nju.edu.cn

Support Image

Support Features
Support Prototypes

Query Image

Pre-trained
Backbone Query Features

Prediction

Feature
Matching

horse: base class
person: latent class

Mining
Latent Classes

Figure 1. Illustration of the few-shot segmentation framework and
the latent novel classes in the background. Typical FSS setting is
only concerned about the current support class, and treats other
latent classes as background in each episode of the training. The
latent classes, however, are fundamentally different from the real
backgrounds, and deserve better exploitation.

easily suffer overfitting. In view of this, recent FSS works
aim to learn a generic manner from seen classes and adapt
to the unseen classes via the few shots, namely supports.
The recent research on few-shot segmentation [38, 59,
50, 24, 47] has gained some progress. Shaban et al. [38]
first proposed a siamese network on support-query pairs and
alleviated the overfitting problem. Later works developed
non-parametric bidirectional alignment mechanisms [50],
fine-grained part-aware prototypes [24], multi-scale feature
enhancement modules [47] etc.
Despite their success, we notice that these methods
rarely exploit the inherent problems of FSS, namely the feature undermining problem and the prototype bias problem:
1) the feature undermining problem is that embeddings of
the latent novel classes are over-smoothed when learnt as
the background in typical FSS. As shown in Figure 1, only
current support class is concerned about in each episode,

8721

