Densely Guided Knowledge Distillation using Multiple Teacher Assistants
Wonchul Son, Jaemin Na, Junyong Choi, Wonjun Hwang
Ajou University, Republic of Korea
{dnjscjf92, osial46, chldusxkr, wjhwang}@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract
With the success of deep neural networks, knowledge distillation which guides the learning of a small student network from a large teacher network is being actively studied for model compression and transfer learning. However, few studies have been performed to resolve the poor
learning issue of the student network when the student and
teacher model sizes significantly differ. In this paper, we
propose a densely guided knowledge distillation using multiple teacher assistants that gradually decreases the model
size to efficiently bridge the large gap between the teacher
and student networks. To stimulate more efficient learning
of the student network, we guide each teacher assistant to
every other smaller teacher assistants iteratively. Specifically, when teaching a smaller teacher assistant at the next
step, the existing larger teacher assistants from the previous step are used as well as the teacher network. Moreover,
we design stochastic teaching where, for each mini-batch, a
teacher or teacher assistants are randomly dropped. This
acts as a regularizer to improve the efficiency of teaching of the student network. Thus, the student can always
learn salient distilled knowledge from the multiple sources.
We verified the effectiveness of the proposed method for a
classification task using CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet. We also achieved significant performance improvements with various backbone architectures such as ResNet,
WideResNet, and VGG. 1

1. Introduction
While deep learning-based methods [11, 16, 10, 2], e.g.,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have achieved very
impressive results in terms of accuracy, there have been
many trials [9, 15, 34, 14] to apply them to many applications such as classification, detection, and segmentation. Among these attempts, Knowledge Distillation (KD)
[14, 28] transfers the knowledge of a teacher model (e.g.,
a deeper or wider network) in the form of soft prob1 Our code is available at https://github.com/wonchulSon/DGKD.

Figure 1. Problem definition of the large gap between a teacher
and a student network. (a) In general, the difference between
layers at KD is approximately 1.8 times, but (b) we are interested
in the challenging problem of layer differences of more than 5
times. For solving this problem, TAKD [23] has been proposed.
However, (c) TAKD has a fundamental limitation such as the error avalanche problem. Assuming that a unique error occurs one
by one when a higher-level teacher assistant (TA) teaches a lowerlevel TA. The error case continues to increase whenever teaching
more TAs. Meanwhile, in (d), the proposed densely guided knowledge distillation can be relatively free from this error avalanche
problem because it does not teach TAs at each level alone.

ability (e.g., logits) to improve the accuracy of a lessparameterized student model (e.g., a shallower network)
during a learning procedure. Specifically, the soft logits of
the teacher network can train the student network more efficiently than the softmax based on the class label of the student network itself. Many studies [14, 28, 40, 36, 42, 33, 3]
on the KD method have been proposed, most of which focused on effectively guiding a teacher’s soft probability or
outputs to a student. Recently, there have been ensemblebased attempts [4, 41, 38, 22] to train a student network
based on many peers or students without considering the
single teacher network, which is a slight lack of consider-

9395

