PoinTr: Diverse Point Cloud Completion with Geometry-Aware Transformers
Xumin Yu,* Yongming Rao,* Ziyi Wang, Zuyan Liu, Jiwen Lu†, Jie Zhou
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
yuxm20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; raoyongming95@gmail.com;
{wziyi20, liuzuyan19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Point clouds captured in real-world applications are often incomplete due to the limited sensor resolution, single
viewpoint, and occlusion. Therefore, recovering the complete point clouds from partial ones becomes an indispensable task in many practical applications. In this paper, we
present a new method that reformulates point cloud completion as a set-to-set translation problem and design a new
model, called PoinTr that adopts a transformer encoderdecoder architecture for point cloud completion. By representing the point cloud as a set of unordered groups of
points with position embeddings, we convert the point cloud
to a sequence of point proxies and employ the transformers for point cloud generation. To facilitate transformers
to better leverage the inductive bias about 3D geometric
structures of point clouds, we further devise a geometryaware block that models the local geometric relationships
explicitly. The migration of transformers enables our model
to better learn structural knowledge and preserve detailed
information for point cloud completion. Furthermore, we
propose two more challenging benchmarks with more diverse incomplete point clouds that can better reflect the
real-world scenarios to promote future research. Experimental results show that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art methods by a large margin on both the new benchmarks and the existing ones. Code is available at https:
//github.com/yuxumin/PoinTr.

Figure 1: PoinTr is designed for point cloud completion task. It
takes the downsampled partial point clouds as inputs (gray points),
and predicts the missing parts and upsamples the known parts simultaneously (blue points). We propose to formulate the point
cloud completion task as a set-to-set translation task and use a
transformer encoder-decoder architecture to learn the complex dependencies among the point groups. Furthermore, we design two
new benchmarks with more diverse tasks (i.e., upsampling and
completion of point cloud), more diverse categories (i.e., from 8
categories to 55 categories), more diverse viewpoints (i.e., from 8
viewpoints to all possible viewpoints) and more diverse levels of
incompleteness (i.e., missing 25% to 75% points of the groundtruth point clouds) to better reflect the real-world scenarios and
promote future research.

1. Introduction
Recent developments in 3D sensors largely boost researches in 3D computer vision. One of the most commonly used 3D data format is the point cloud, which requires less memory to store but convey detailed 3D shape
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

information. However, point cloud data from existing 3D
sensors are not always complete and satisfactory because
of inevitable self-occlusion, light reflection, limited sensor
resolution, etc. Therefore, recovering complete point clouds
from partial and sparse raw data becomes an indispensable
task with ever-growing significance.
Over the years, researchers have tried many approaches
12498

