A Light Stage on Every Desk
Soumyadip Sengupta

Brian Curless
Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman
University of Washington

Steve Seitz

Figure 1: (a) A light stage is a large spherical rig used to capture and relight subjects using multiple lights and cameras [21]. (b) We show
how any monitor can be used as a light stage by capturing a user’s facial appearance as they watch a YouTube video to learn a person
specific relighting model. Webcam is on top of the monitor. (c) Captured and (d) synthetically re-lit image with previously unseen lighting.

Abstract
Every time you sit in front of a TV or monitor, your face is
actively illuminated by time-varying patterns of light. This
paper proposes to use this time-varying illumination for
synthetic relighting of your face with any new illumination
condition. In doing so, we take inspiration from the light
stage work of Debevec et al. [4], who first demonstrated
the ability to relight people captured in a controlled lighting environment. Whereas existing light stages require expensive, room-scale spherical capture gantries and exist in
only a few labs in the world, we demonstrate how to acquire useful data from a normal TV or desktop monitor. Instead of subjecting the user to uncomfortable rapidly flashing light patterns, we operate on images of the user watching a YouTube video or other standard content. We train a
deep network on images plus monitor patterns of a given
user and learn to predict images of that user under any
target illumination (monitor pattern). Experimental evaluation shows that our method produces realistic relighting
results. Video results are available at grail.cs.washington.
edu/projects/Light_Stage_on_Every_Desk/.

1. Introduction
A light stage, first introduced by Debevec et al. [4], is
an instrument to capture and render human subjects under
almost any illumination condition. Most light stages consist
of room-scale, spherical arrays of brightly-flashing colored

lights and cameras. They are used widely for movie special
effects [5, 2, 1, 21, 15], volumetric media [25, 6], presidential portraits [12], and to provide rich data for training computer vision relighting algorithms [18, 24, 19, 9, 13, 20, 10].
Unfortunately, very few researchers have access to a
light stage, as only a few exist in the world. Furthermore, light stage datasets (necessary to train relighting algorithms) are not publicly available. The goal of this paper
is to democratize light stage capture and the development of
new relighting algorithms.
Our key insight is that the simple act of watching video
on a monitor or TV sends patterns of light across your face.
By analyzing these patterns, we can achieve face relighting
in a manner similar to a light stage. The ability to capture
“light stage” data from displays we use everyday and from
the content we already watch dramatically broadens the access and applicability of light stage and relighting research.
For example, imagine improving how your face is lit in a
video call, by analyzing the changes in your facial appearance via monitor lighting over the last 10 minutes. However, it comes with some new challenges, namely:
1. passive vs. active lighting: we wish to avoid forcing the
user to watch flashing light patterns, and instead operate on
the natural, time-varying content people normally watch.
2. motion: user head motion combined with time-varying
light patterns complicate the registration problem (in contrast to traditional light stage techniques, which send white
frames to enable optical flow).
12420

