Attentional Pyramid Pooling of Salient Visual Residuals for Place Recognition
Guohao Peng1 , Jun Zhang1 , Heshan Li2 , Danwei Wang2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
1

2

{peng0086,jzhang061}@e.ntu.edu.sg,

{heshan.li,edwwang}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
The core of visual place recognition (VPR) lies in how to
identify task-relevant visual cues and embed them into discriminative representations. Focusing on these two points,
we propose a novel encoding strategy named Attentional
Pyramid Pooling of Salient Visual Residuals (APPSVR). It
incorporates three types of attention modules to model the
saliency of local features in individual, spatial and cluster
dimensions respectively. (1) To inhibit task-irrelevant local features, a semantic-reinforced local weighting scheme
is employed for local feature refinement; (2) To leverage
the spatial context, an attentional pyramid structure is constructed to adaptively encode regional features according
to their relative spatial saliency; (3) To distinguish the different importance of visual clusters to the task, a parametric normalization is proposed to adjust their contribution to image descriptor generation. Experiments demonstrate APPSVR outperforms the existing techniques and
achieves a new state-of-the-art performance on VPR benchmark datasets. The visualization shows the saliency map
learned in a weakly supervised manner is largely consistent
with human cognition.

(a) Original image

(b) Attention in local refinement

(c) Attention in global integration

(d) Overall attention

Figure 1. APPSVR consists of two main steps: local refinement
and global integration. Refining the prior knowledge of “preserving the semantics of buildings”, local refinement (b) can adaptively
highlight billboards and inhibit repeated structures on buildings.
Certain visual cues improperly retained in (b) (e.g., vehicle parts
that look like architectural windows) can be suppressed in the subsequent global integration (c). Finally, the overall attention (d)
of APPSVR is consistent with human perception habit of valuing
static structures and omitting misleading visual elements.

1. Introduction
Visual place recognition (VPR) has become the core
technique of many promising applications in the field of
computer vision [1,2,5,39,41,45] and robotics [7,10,11,25],
such as autonomous driving [6,24,28], geo-localization [22,
23, 40], 3D reconstruction [9] and virtual reality [26].
VPR in large-scale environments is typically solved as
an instance retrieval task [1, 2, 18, 19, 40, 41, 45], where the
goal is to find the most visually similar database images
for a given query image. The main challenge is different
viewpoints, weather and illumination may cause dramatic
changes in the appearance of the same scene. Partial occlusion and dynamic objects also bring additional challenges
to the task. Therefore, how to construct powerful image
representations has raised widespread concerns in the field.
In the exploratory work carried out over the past decades,

VLAD [3] and its variants [1, 19, 48] stand out from other
counterparts by introducing residual that can better characterize the nuances of local details. Drawing on their wisdom, we follow the basic idea of aggregating cluster-wise
residuals for feature embedding. Considering that not every
visual element in the image is helpful to the VPR task, it is
necessary to emphasize the task-relevant ones in the image
representation.
With similar motivations, early attempts [2, 20, 39] have
been made to accentuate task-relevant local features. Following the pace of deep learning, the recent attention-aware
methods for VPR can be broadly divided into two categories. The data-driven methods [19, 31, 51] usually integrate trainable attention modules into the encoding network. Through end-to-end learning, these modules essen-

885

