Distillation-guided Image Inpainting
A. N. Rajagopalan1
Maitreya Suin1
Kuldeep Purohit2 *
1
2
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Michigan State University

Abstract
Image inpainting methods have shown significant improvements by using deep neural networks recently. However, many of these techniques often create distorted structures or blurry inconsistent textures. The problem is rooted
in the encoder layers’ ineffectiveness in building a complete and faithful embedding of the missing regions from
scratch. Existing solutions like course-to-fine, progressive
refinement, structural guidance, etc. suffer from huge computational overheads owing to multiple generator networks,
limited ability of handcrafted features, and sub-optimal utilization of the information present in the ground truth. We
propose a distillation-based approach for inpainting, where
we provide direct feature level supervision while training.
We deploy cross and self-distillation techniques and design a dedicated completion-block in encoder to produce
more accurate encoding of the holes. Next, we demonstrate
how an inpainting network’s attention module can improve
by leveraging a distillation-based attention transfer technique and further enhance coherence by using a pixeladaptive global-local feature fusion. We conduct extensive
evaluations on multiple datasets to validate our method.
Along with achieving significant improvements over previous SOTA methods, the proposed approach’s effectiveness
is also demonstrated through its ability to improve existing
inpainting works.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting is aimed at filling damaged or substituting undesired areas of images with plausible and finegrained contents. It has a broad range of applications in
fields of restoring damaged photographs, retouching pictures, etc. Early conventional works typically use low-level
features hand-crafted from the incomplete input image and
resort to priors (e.g., image statistics) or auxiliary data (e.g.,
external image databases). They either propagate low-level
features from surroundings to the missing regions following
a diffusive process [33, 2] or fill holes by searching and fusing similar patches from the same image or external image
* Work done while at Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India.

databases [29]. Although these methods have good effects
in the completion of repeating structures, they are restricted
by the available image statistics and cannot produce novel
image contents. In recent years, deep learning based methods have been reported to surmount these limitations by utilizing large volumes of training images. However, many of
these methods suffer from the severe ill-posedness of the
task. The hole regions are entirely empty, and without sufficient guidance, neural networks struggle to reconstruct the
missing contents from scratch satisfactorily.
Works like [28, 15, 18] deploy a single generative model
to solve the task. To handle the inherent ill-posedness, a
large majority of works uses some form of guidance at inference time. We can broadly divide these methods into
two categories: (a) Coarse-to-fine: One group of works
[47, 48, 22] deploys a two-stage architecture to do content
formation and texture refinement separately in a step-bystep manner. These methods typically produce an intermediate coarse image with recovered structures in the first
stage and send it to the second stage for texture generation.
Another group of works tries to inpaint the missing region
in a progressive manner using a single network [11, 17, 51].
(b) Structural guidance: Recently, [26] used edge generator
within the two-stage architecture. [44] proposed a contour
generator instead of edge. Such methods suffer from several limitations: (a) It takes many more parameters to deploy two generators. Methods like [44] require even more
parameters for the structure prediction branch. Progressive
or recurrent approaches typically suffer from slow inference
speed or high computational cost. (b) Although structural
knowledge improves performance, it is still limited due to
the handcrafted choice of the auxiliary information. For example, the optimal structure information might vary from
one scene to another (edge vs. contour).
The inpainted image quality depends heavily on the
coarse network, and [35] experimentally verified that if we
remove the coarse network and train end-to-end only the
final network of such two-stage methods, it results in a notable drop in performance. In this work, we argue that the
root cause lies in how existing networks are trained. We
empirically show that when training a single network, using
the ground-truth image as the only supervision at the end

2481

