Interpolation-Aware Padding for 3D Sparse Convolutional Neural Networks
Yu-Qi Yang1,2
Peng-Shuai Wang2
Yang Liu2
1
2
Tsinghua University
Microsoft Research Asia
yangyq18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{penwan,yangliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Sparse voxel-based 3D convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) are widely used for various 3D vision tasks. Sparse
voxel-based 3D CNNs create sparse non-empty voxels from
the 3D input and perform 3D convolution operations on
them only. We propose a simple yet effective padding scheme
— interpolation-aware padding to pad a few empty voxels
adjacent to the non-empty voxels and involve them in the 3D
CNN computation so that all neighboring voxels exist when
computing point-wise features via the trilinear interpolation.
For fine-grained 3D vision tasks where point-wise features
are essential, like semantic segmentation and 3D detection,
our network achieves higher prediction accuracy than the
existing networks using the nearest neighbor interpolation or
the normalized trilinear interpolation with the zero-padding
or the octree-padding scheme. Through extensive comparisons on various 3D segmentation and detection tasks, we
demonstrate the superiority of 3D sparse CNNs with our
padding scheme in conjunction with feature interpolation.

1. Introduction
Effective 3D representations for 3D deep learning like
voxels [2, 30], point sets [19, 12], and polygonal meshes [25,
11], have been actively studied in recent years. Among
them, voxel-based representations are natural extensions
from 2D pixels and are compatible with regular-grid-based
convolutional operations and suitable for fast GPU processing. However, due to the high cost of memory storage and
CNN computation on dense 3D grids, dense-voxel-based
3D CNNs are limited to coarse resolution inputs like 323
grids, and cannot handle and generate high-resolution 3D
contents. To overcome this limitation, sparse-voxel-based
CNNs [26, 21, 9, 3] are proved to be a computational and
memory-efficient solution, where only voxels around 3D
shapes are created for storing feature channels. With regard
to the prediction accuracy on 3D tasks, spare-voxel-based
CNNs dominate several large-scale benchmarks, including
ScanNet segmentation [6], KITTI segmentation [1], and
ScanNet detection [18].

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Various padding schemes for a 2D point set (upper)
and a 3D point set (bottom). (a): sparse pixels/voxels without
padding, i.e. , zero padding; (b): with 1-ring padding; (c): with
quadtree-padding or octree-padding; (d): with our interpolationaware padding. Red circles present 2D points sampled from a 2D
bunny shape, 3D points are omitted here as they are hidden inside
the voxels.

Sparse-voxel-based CNNs can be used naturally for extracting features for each discrete voxel. However, pointwise features are essential for fine-grained tasks, like 3D
segmentation and detection. A common practice in sparsevoxel-based CNNs is to assign the feature of the nearest
voxel to the point, i.e. , using the nearest neighbor interpolation [26, 9]. To extract distinguishable point features
within the same voxel, voxel-based trilinear interpolation
can be adopted. The trilinear interpolation requires querying features from the nearby eight voxels, whereas some
nearby voxels may not exist due to the sparse-voxel representation. Specifically, octree-based 3D CNNs [26, 27]
perform the CNN computation on 8 sibling octants of nonempty octants (see Fig. 1-(c)); the recent sparse-voxel-based
CNNs [9, 3, 22] use Hash tables to index the non-empty
voxels, and perform the CNN computation only in the nonempty voxels (see Fig. 1-(a)). To do the interpolation, existing works either assign zero features to those non-existing
voxels [3], or use normalized interpolation weights to compromising the missing voxels [28, 23].
We observe that current interpolation schemes are

7467

