Learning Deep Local Features with Multiple Dynamic Attentions for
Large-Scale Image Retrieval
Hui Wu1
1

Min Wang2∗

Wengang Zhou1,2∗

Houqiang Li1,2

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
wh241300@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wangmin@iai.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In image retrieval, learning local features with deep convolutional networks has been demonstrated effective to improve the performance. To discriminate deep local features,
some research efforts turn to attention learning. However,
existing attention-based methods only generate a single attention map for each image, which limits the exploration
of diverse visual patterns. To this end, we propose a novel
deep local feature learning architecture to simultaneously
focus on multiple discriminative local patterns in an image.
In our framework, we first adaptively reorganize the channels of activation maps for multiple heads. For each head, a
new dynamic attention module is designed to learn the potential attentions. The whole architecture is trained as metric learning of weighted-sum-pooled global image features,
with only image-level relevance label. After the architecture training, for each database image, we select local features based on their multi-head dynamic attentions, which
are further indexed for efficient retrieval. Extensive experiments show the proposed method outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods on the Revisited Oxford and Paris datasets.
Besides, it typically achieves competitive results even using
local features with lower dimensions. Code will be released
at https://github.com/CHANWH/MDA.

1. Introduction
Given a large image corpus, instance image retrieval [32,
27, 17, 38, 18, 9, 10, 19] aims to effectively identify images
containing the same object or describing the same scene as
the query image. This task is challenging due to the various
conditions observed in large-scale datasets, such as lighting
variation, occlusion, viewpoint changes, etc. To this end,
many research efforts are devoted to image representation
with descriptive and discriminative local features.
Given an image, the extraction of local feature usually
*Corresponding Author: Min Wang and Wengang Zhou.

(a) DELF

(b) HOW

(c) Ours
Figure 1. Attention maps of three methods. (a) and (b): attention
maps generated by DELF [23] and HOW [37]. (c): attention maps
generated by our method. HOW and DELF only generate a single attention map focusing on limited patterns, while our method
focuses on diverse patterns by generating multiple attention maps.

involves local region detection and image patch description, where the former identifies salient regions of interest
in the image which is further described into a vector of predefined dimension by the latter. Before the advent of deep
learning, local visual features are designed in a hand-crafted
way [20, 2], which is also regarded as a kind of shallow feature. With the introduction of deep learning to computer
vision, tremendous progress [35, 21, 7, 6, 37, 23] has been
made on local feature learning in a data-driven paradigm.
Early works on deep local feature ignores the local region detection. Some works [35, 21, 7] assume the im-

11416

