Condensing a Sequence to One Informative Frame for Video Recognition
Zhaofan Qiu† , Ting Yao† , Yan Shu§ , Chong-Wah Ngo‡ , and Tao Mei†
†
§

JD AI Research, Beijing, China
‡

University of Science and Techology of China, Hefei, China

Singapore Management University, Singapore

{zhaofanqiu, tingyao.ustc, shuy.ustc}@gmail.com, cwngo@smu.edu.sg, tmei@jd.com

Abstract

Input Video

Recently, the development of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) convincingly demonstrates high capability of
CNN in image-domain visual recognition. For instance, an
ensemble of residual nets [9] achieves 3.5% top-5 error on
the ImageNet test set, which is even lower than 5.1% of
the reported human-level performance. Nevertheless, it is
not trivial to apply a 2D CNN for video recognition. Since
video is a temporal sequence with large variations and complexities, performing 2D CNN on individual frame cannot

...

1. Introduction

2D CNN

Late Fusion

2D CNN

Video is complex due to large variations in motion and
rich content in fine-grained visual details. Abstracting useful information from such information-intensive media requires exhaustive computing resources. This paper studies a two-step alternative that first condenses the video sequence to an informative “frame” and then exploits off-theshelf image recognition system on the synthetic frame. A
valid question is how to define “useful information” and
then distill it from a video sequence down to one synthetic
frame. This paper presents a novel Informative Frame Synthesis (IFS) architecture that incorporates three objective
tasks, i.e., appearance reconstruction, video categorization,
motion estimation, and two regularizers, i.e., adversarial
learning, color consistency. Each task equips the synthetic
frame with one ability, while each regularizer enhances its
visual quality. With these, by jointly learning the frame synthesis in an end-to-end manner, the generated frame is expected to encapsulate the required spatio-temporal information useful for video analysis. Extensive experiments are
conducted on the large-scale Kinetics dataset. When comparing to baseline methods that map video sequence to a
single image, IFS shows superior performance. More remarkably, IFS consistently demonstrates evident improvements on image-based 2D networks and clip-based 3D
networks, and achieves comparable performance with the
state-of-the-art methods with less computational cost.

Input Video

2D CNN

3D CNN

2D CNN

(a) Late fusion
Input Video

(b) Slow fusion
Synthetic Frame

2D CNN

Informative Frame Synthesis

(c) Early fusion by frame synthesis

Figure 1. Modeling temporal evolution for video recognition by
(a) aggregating 2D representations from sampled frames by late
fusion, (b) slow fusing the input frames by 3D CNN and (c) condensing the input video to one frame as early fusion.

model temporal evolution across frames.
Extensive progresses have been made to model the temporal sequence for video recognition. These works can
be grouped into three categories according to which stage
temporal information is aggregated, as shown in Figure 1.
The first one is late fusion [12, 20, 27, 38, 44, 45], which
first extracts the image representation from 2D CNN for
each frame and then aggregates the feature sequence for
video recognition. Despite being straightforward by employing 2D CNN on video data, pixel-level temporal evolution over frames is overlooked. The second is slow fusion
[2, 6, 10, 12, 21, 22, 23, 24, 31, 33], which feeds entire video
clip into a network (e.g., 3D CNN) for spatio-temporal convolution. This type of networks builds temporal connections among pixels across space and time at the expense of
computational cost. For example, the de facto ResNet-101
[9] requires 10G floating-number operations (FLOPs) for
single crop on image data. When transferring this backbone
to 3D CNN for 128-frame clip, the number of FLOPs is
increased to 234G for SlowFast networks [6].
This paper addresses a new direction that early fuses the
information from video sequence to one synthetic frame.
Despite being a 2D image, the frame captures motion dy-

16311

