Understanding Robustness of Transformers for Image Classification
Srinadh Bhojanapalli∗ , Ayan Chakrabarti∗ , Daniel Glasner∗ , Daliang Li∗ , Thomas Unterthiner∗ , Andreas Veit∗
Google Research
{bsrinadh, ayanchakrab, dglasner, daliangli, unterthiner, aveit}@google.com

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
long been the architecture of choice for computer vision
tasks. Recently, Transformer-based architectures like Vision
Transformer (ViT) have matched or even surpassed ResNets
for image classification. However, details of the Transformer architecture ±such as the use of non-overlapping
patches± lead one to wonder whether these networks are
as robust. In this paper, we perform an extensive study of
a variety of different measures of robustness of ViT models
and compare the findings to ResNet baselines. We investigate robustness to input perturbations as well as robustness
to model perturbations. We find that when pre-trained with
a sufficient amount of data, ViT models are at least as robust
as the ResNet counterparts on a broad range of perturbations. We also find that Transformers are robust to the removal of almost any single layer, and that while activations
from later layers are highly correlated with each other, they
nevertheless play an important role in classification.

1. Introduction
Convolutions have served as the building blocks of
computer vision algorithms in nearly every application
domainÐwith their property of spatial locality and translation invariance mapping naturally to the characteristics
of visual information. Neural networks for vision tasks
adopted the use of convolutional layers quite early on
[11, 31], and since their resurgence with Krizhevsky et al.’s
work [29], all modern networks for vision have been convolutional [41, 44, 17, 22, 25, 24, 47]Ðwith innovations
such as residual [17] connections being applied to a backbone of convolutional layers. Given their extensive use,
convolutional networks have been the subject of significant
analysisÐboth empirical [45] and analytical [13, 1].
Recently, after seeing tremendous success in language
tasks [49, 7, 3], researchers have been exploring a variety of avenues for deploying attention-based Transformer
* All authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Transformers vs. ResNets. While they achieve similar performance for image classification, Transformer and ResNet
architectures process their inputs very differently. Shown here
are adversarial perturbations computed for a Transformer and a
ResNet model, which are qualitatively quite different.

networks [4, 9, 48, 27]Ðand other attention-based architectures [53, 52, 40, 32, 54]Ðin computer vision. Transformers are also gaining popularity in vision and language
tasks [42, 33, 46, 5, 34, 39].
In this paper, we focus on one particular Transformer architectureÐthe Visual Transformer (ViT) introduced by Dosovitskiy et al. [9]Ðbecause it was shown
to achieve better performance than state-of-the-art residual networks (ResNets) [17] of similar capacity, when both
are pre-trained on sufficiently large datasets [28], such as
JFT-300M [43]. We also focus on ViT because, unlike other
Transformer models for vision, their architecture consists
solely of Transformer layers.
Dosovitskiy et al.’s results [9] tell us that such an architecture is preferable in terms of performance, given enough
training data to overcome the lack of an inductive bias
through convolutions. But, the pure attention-based mechanism by which ViT models process their inputs is a significant departure from the familiar decade-long ubiquitous use
of convolution networks for computer vision. In this paper,
we seek to gain a better understanding of how these architectures behaveÐin terms of their robustness against perturbations to inputs and to the model parameters themselvesÐ
and build up an understanding of these models that parallels
our knowledge about convolution.
We begin with an exhaustive set of experiments comparing the performance of various ViT model variants, under
different perturbations to their image inputs, to similarly

10231

