A Style and Semantic Memory Mechanism for Domain Generalization∗
Yang Chen† , Yu Wang‡ , Yingwei Pan‡ , Ting Yao‡ , Xinmei Tian† , and Tao Mei‡
†

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡

JD AI Research, Beijing, China

cheny01@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {feather1014, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn, tmei@jd.com

Abstract
Mainstream state-of-the-art domain generalization algorithms tend to prioritize the assumption on semantic invariance across domains. Meanwhile, the inherent intradomain style invariance is usually underappreciated and
put on the shelf. In this paper, we reveal that leveraging
intra-domain style invariance is also of pivotal importance
in improving the efficiency of domain generalization. We
verify that it is critical for the network to be informative on
what domain features are invariant and shared among instances, so that the network sharpens its understanding and
improves its semantic discriminative ability. Correspondingly, we also propose a novel “jury” mechanism, which
is particularly effective in learning useful semantic feature
commonalities among domains. Our complete model called
STEAM can be interpreted as a novel probabilistic graphical model, for which the implementation requires convenient constructions of two kinds of memory banks: semantic
feature bank and style feature bank. Empirical results show
that our proposed framework surpasses the state-of-the-art
methods by clear margins.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are usually deployed in scenarios where the test data are unknown beforehand. This phenomenon can lead to dangerous consequences especially
when the predictions are used for life-threatening occasions
such as medical diagnosis. The prediction might be seriously erroneous due to the distributional gap between training data and test data. It is therefore critical for machine
learning algorithms to maintain safe and reliable predictions
that generalize well across domains. The goal of domain
generalization (DG) approaches [20, 21, 41, 55] is to solve
this issue by leveraging labeled data from multiple training
domains. However, we observed that mainstream state-ofthe-art DG algorithms tend to only prioritize the semantic
∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

invariance assumption across domains, while the style invariance within each domain is usually ignored. In this paper, we reveal that intra-domain style invariance is also of
pivotal importance to improve DG approaches. Particularly,
we propose a novel model to incorporate both intra-domain
style invariance and inter-domain semantic invariance for
DG tasks. The proposed framework is called STEAM,
which relies on a STyle and sEmAntic Memory mechanism
to practically implement our proposed assumptions.
In contrast to existing DG works [7, 53, 55], STEAM
further benefits from the hypothesis that instances from the
same domain should share style information. The motivation is that the simple constraint helps efficiently disentangle the style feature, and therefore eases the search for
true semantic feature with a reduced degree of freedom. To
reach this goal, we resort to the recently prevailing selfsupervised learning paradigm that makes our assumptions
practically accessible. Our first objective is to achieve intradomain style invariance by conveniently resorting to contrastive loss. Given the invariance assumption, style features corresponding to each domain are discovered, and the
network can further learn semantic features along the directions mostly orthogonal to the domain styles. Since the semantic feature is considered as the true causal factor affecting the instance category, STEAM effectively helps reduce
overfitting to the domain styles through the above mechanisms. Most importantly, we also force the network to respect the conventional semantic invariance among domains.
Specifically, we require that each pair of samples from the
same class to compute a similarity score with all the semantic features in “memory”. These two samples need to reach
a consensus on every such similarity score when sweeping
through all the stored semantic features. We name this procedure “jury” mechanism, and we elaborate the mathematical net effect of such mechanism in the paper.
To summarize, our contributions in this paper include: 1.
We explore the assumption of instance level intra-domain
style invariance and justify the empirical advantage by incorporating such assumptions into the DG framework. 2.
We propose a “jury” mechanism, which efficiently learns

9164

