OMNet: Learning Overlapping Mask for Partial-to-Partial
Point Cloud Registration
Hao Xu1,2

Shuaicheng Liu1,2∗
1

Guangfu Wang2

Bing Zeng1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Megvii Technology

Abstract

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is a fundamental task that has
been widely used in various computational fields, e.g., augmented reality [2, 6, 4], 3D reconstruction [14, 19] and autonomous driving [38, 10]. It aims to predict a 3D rigid
transformation aligning two point clouds, which may be potentially obscured by partiality and contaminated by noise.

Ratio=0.5

Ratio=0.2

Error(R)=0.98

Error(R)=1.52

Error(R)=4.85

Error(t)=0.02

Error(t)=0.03

Error(t)=0.05

Inputs

Ratio=0.8

Outputs

Point cloud registration is a key task in many computational fields. Previous correspondence matching based
methods require the inputs to have distinctive geometric
structures to fit a 3D rigid transformation according to
point-wise sparse feature matches. However, the accuracy
of transformation heavily relies on the quality of extracted
features, which are prone to errors with respect to partiality and noise. In addition, they can not utilize the geometric knowledge of all the overlapping regions. On the other
hand, previous global feature based approaches can utilize
the entire point cloud for the registration, however they ignore the negative effect of non-overlapping points when aggregating global features. In this paper, we present OMNet, a global feature based iterative network for partialto-partial point cloud registration. We learn overlapping
masks to reject non-overlapping regions, which converts the
partial-to-partial registration to the registration of the same
shape. Moreover, the previously used data is sampled only
once from the CAD models for each object, resulting in the
same point clouds for the source and reference. We propose
a more practical manner of data generation where a CAD
model is sampled twice for the source and reference, avoiding the previously prevalent over-fitting issue. Experimental
results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to traditional and deep learning based
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/megviiresearch/OMNet.

* Corresponding author

Guanghui Liu1 *

Figure 1. Our OMNet shows robustness to the various overlapping
ratios of inputs. All inputs are transformed by the same 3D rigid
transformation. Error(R) and Error(t) are isotropic errors.

Iterative Closest Point (ICP) [3] is a well-known algorithm for the registration problem, where 3D transformations are estimated iteratively by singular value decomposition (SVD) given the correspondences obtained by the closest point search. However, ICP easily converges to local
minima because of the non-convexity problem. For this
reason, many methods [23, 9, 28, 5, 20, 35] are proposed to
improve the matching or search larger transformation space,
and one prominent work is the Go-ICP [35], which uses a
branch-and-bound algorithm to cross the local minima. Unfortunately, it is much slower than the original ICP. All these
methods are sensitive to the initial positions.
Recently, several deep learning (DL) based approaches
are proposed [32, 1, 33, 27, 36, 13, 17, 37] to handle
the large rotation angles. Roughly, they could be divided into two categories: correspondence matching based
methods and global feature based methods. Deep Closest Point (DCP) [32] determines the correspondences from
learned features. DeepGMR [37] integrates Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to learn pose-invariant point-to-GMM

3132

