Visual Relationship Detection Using
Part-and-Sum Transformers with Composite Queries
Qi Dong Zhuowen Tu Haofu Liao Yuting Zhang Vijay Mahadevan Stefano Soatto
Amazon Web Services
{qdon,ztu,liahaofu,yutingzh,vmahad,soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
CNN

Computer vision applications such as visual relationship
detection and human object interaction can be formulated
as a composite (structured) set detection problem in which
both the parts (subject, object, and predicate) and the sum
(triplet as a whole) are to be detected in a hierarchical fashion. In this paper, we present a new approach, denoted Partand-Sum detection Transformer (PST), to perform end-toend visual composite set detection. Different from existing Transformers in which queries are at a single level,
we simultaneously model the joint part and sum hypotheses/interactions with composite queries and attention modules. We explicitly incorporate sum queries to enable better
modeling of the part-and-sum relations that are absent in
the standard Transformers. Our approach also uses novel
tensor-based part queries and vector-based sum queries,
and models their joint interaction. We report experiments
on two vision tasks, visual relationship detection and human
object interaction and demonstrate that PST achieves state
of the art results among single-stage models, while nearly
matching the results of custom designed two-stage models.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study problems such as visual relationship detection (VRD) [29, 21] and human object interaction (HOI) [11, 35, 4] where a composite set of a two-level
(part-and-sum) hierarchy is to be detected and localized in
an image. In both VRD and HOI, the output consists of a set
of entities. Each entity, referred to as a “sum”, represents a
triplet structure composed of parts: the parts are (subject,
object, predicate) in VRD and (human, interaction, object)
in HOI. The sum-and-parts structure naturally forms a twolevel hierarchical output - with the sum at the root level and
the parts at the leaf level. In the general setting for composite set detection, the hierarchy consists of two levels, but the
number of parts can be arbitrary.
Many existing approaches in VRD [29, 16, 30, 54, 54]

Part-and-Sum
Transformer
Decoder

Transformer
Encoder

…

(a) Pipeline overview.
Sum decoding

Person-Next to-Person

…

Part-Sum
Interaction

Parts

Composite queries

Person-wear-shirt

…

Sum

…
Part decoding

Subject Predicate

Object

Subject Predicate Object

Structure data prediction

(b) Part-and-Sum Transformer Decoder.

Figure 1: Overview of visual composite set detection by Partand-Sum Transformer (PST).

and HOI [36, 4, 24, 14, 10] are based on two stage processes in which some parts (e.g. the subject and the object
in VRD) are detected first, followed by detection of the association (sum) and the additional part (the predicate). Single stage approaches [50, 49, 15, 19] with end-to-end learning for VRD and HOI also exist. In practice, two-stage
approaches produce better performance while single-stage
methods are easier to train and use.
The task for an object detector is to detect and localize all valid objects in an input image, making the output
a set. Though object detectors such as FasterRCNN [33]
are considered end-to-end trainable, they perform instance
level predictions, and require post-processing using nonmaximum suppression to recover the entire set of objects in
an image. Recent developments in Transformers [44] and
their extensions to object detection [3] enable set-level endto-end learning by eliminating anchor proposals and nonmaximum suppression.
In this paper, we formulate the visual relationship detection (VRD) [29, 21] and human object interaction (HOI)
[11, 35, 4] as composite set (two-level hierarchy) detection
problems and propose a new approach, part-and-sum Transformers (PST) to solve them. PST is different from existing detection transformers where each object is represented
by a vector-based query in either a one-level set [3]. We
show the importance of establishing an explicit “sum” representation for the triplet as a whole to be simultaneously

3550

