Differentiable Surface Rendering via Non-Differentiable Sampling
Forrester Cole1

Kyle Genova1
Avneesh Sud1
1
Google Research

Daniel Vlasic1
2
MIT

Zhoutong Zhang1,2

Abstract
We present a method for differentiable rendering of 3D
surfaces that supports both explicit and implicit representations, provides derivatives at occlusion boundaries, and
is fast and simple to implement. The method first samples
the surface using non-differentiable rasterization, then applies differentiable, depth-aware point splatting to produce
the final image. Our approach requires no differentiable
meshing or rasterization steps, making it efficient for large
3D models and applicable to isosurfaces extracted from implicit surface definitions. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method for implicit-, mesh-, and parametric-surfacebased inverse rendering and neural-network training applications. In particular, we show for the first time efficient,
differentiable rendering of an isosurface extracted from a
neural radiance field (NeRF), and demonstrate surfacebased, rather than volume-based, rendering of a NeRF.

1. Introduction
Computing the derivatives of rendered surfaces with respect to the underlying scene parameters is of increasing
interest in graphics, vision, and machine learning. Triangle
meshes are the predominant shape representation in many
industries, but mesh-based derivatives are undefined at occlusions or when changing topology. As a result, volumetric representations have risen in prominence for computer vision applications, notably Neural Radiance Fields
or NeRF [27]. So far, these volumetric shape representations have been rendered using volume rendering. Volume
rendering is naturally differentiable, but is expensive and
unnecessary if the underlying shape can be represented well
by a surface.
This paper proposes a method to render both explicit
(e.g., mesh) and implicit (e.g., isosurface) representations
and produce accurate, smooth derivatives, including at occlusion boundaries. Our method uses a non-differentiable
rasterization step to sample the surface and resolve occlusions, then splats the samples using a depth-aware, differentiable splatting operation. Because the sampling operation
need not be differentiable, any conventional surface extraction and rasterization method (e.g., Marching Cubes [24])

Figure 1. Our method provides efficient, differentiable rendering
for explicit and implicit surface representations. Examples include a textured triangle mesh (YCB toy airplane [4]), a cubic Bspline surface, and an isosurface of a density volume (Lego from
NeRF [27]). The Lego is rendered by turning a pretrained NeRF
into a surface light field. Since surface light fields only require
one evaluation per pixel, we achieve a 128× speed up for rendering compared with the original NeRF.

may be used. The splats provide smooth derivatives of the
image w.r.t. the surface at occlusion boundaries. Splatting is
performed on a fixed-size pixel grid and is easily expressed
using automatic-differentiation, avoiding the need for custom gradients. Since no custom gradients are needed, both
forward- and reverse-mode differentiation are immediately
supported. We term this method rasterize-then-splat (RtS).
In between the rasterization and splatting steps, the surface samples may be shaded by any differentiable function
evaluated on a rasterized image buffer – not the original surface – using deferred shading [9]. Since the complexity of
the shading and splatting computation is bounded by the
number of pixels, not the complexity of the surface, RtS is
able to scale to highly detailed scenes.
One example of a differentiable shading function is a
NeRF network: given a position in space and a viewing direction, it outputs the corresponding radiance. While NeRF
is trained using volume rendering, our method can convert
a pretrained NeRF into a surface light field [28, 39], removing the need for expensive raymarching. We represent the
surface as an isosurface of the density field extracted from
a pretrained NeRF, shade it with the NeRF color prediction

6088

