AD-NeRF: Audio Driven Neural Radiance Fields for Talking Head Synthesis
Yudong Guo*1,2
1

Keyu Chen1,2

Sen Liang3

Yong-Jin Liu4

Hujun Bao3

Juyong Zhang†1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Beijing Dilusense Technology Corporation
3
Zhejiang University 4 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Generating high-fidelity talking head video by fitting
with the input audio sequence is a challenging problem that
receives considerable attentions recently. In this paper, we
address this problem with the aid of neural scene representation networks. Our method is completely different from
existing methods that rely on intermediate representations
like 2D landmarks or 3D face models to bridge the gap between audio input and video output. Specifically, the feature
of input audio signal is directly fed into a conditional implicit function to generate a dynamic neural radiance field,
from which a high-fidelity talking-head video corresponding
to the audio signal is synthesized using volume rendering.
Another advantage of our framework is that not only the
head (with hair) region is synthesized as previous methods
did, but also the upper body is generated via two individual
neural radiance fields. Experimental results demonstrate
that our novel framework can (1) produce high-fidelity and
natural results, and (2) support free adjustment of audio
signals, viewing directions, and background images. Code
is available at https://github.com/YudongGuo/AD-NeRF.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing high-fidelity audio-driven facial video sequences is an important and challenging problem in many
applications like digital humans, chatting robots, and virtual video conferences. Regarding the talking-head generation process as a cross-modal mapping from audio to visual
faces, the synthesized facial images are expected to perform
natural speaking styles while synchronizing photo-realistic
streaming results as same as the original videos.
Currently, a wide range of approaches have been proposed for this task. Earlier methods built upon professional
artist modelling [12, 60] or complicated motion capture system [6, 54] are limited in high-end areas of the movie and
* This work was done when Yudong Guo and Keyu Chen were intern at
Dilusense.
† Corresponding author: juyong@ustc.edu.cn.

game industry. Recently, many deep-learning-based techniques [35, 42, 10, 58, 7, 43, 48, 59, 21, 57] are proposed to
learn the audio-to-face translation by generative adversarial
networks (GANs). However, resolving such a problem is
highly challenging because it is non-trivial to faithfully relate the audio signals and face deformations, including expressions and lip motions. Therefore, most of these methods utilize some intermediate face representations including
reconstructing explicit 3D face shapes [55] and regressing
expression coefficients [43] or 2D landmarks [41, 47]. Due
to the information loss caused by the intermediate representation, it might lead to semantic mismatches between original audio signals and the learned face deformations. Moreover, existing audio-driven methods suffer from several limitations, such as only rendering the mouth part [41, 43]
or fixed by static head pose [35, 42, 10, 7], thus are not
suitable for advanced talking head editing tasks, like posemanipulation and background-replacement.
To address these issues of existing talking head methods,
we turn attention to recent developed neural radiance fields
(NeRF). We present AD-NeRF, an audio-driven neural radiance fields model that can handle the cross-modal mapping problem without introducing extra intermediate representation. Different from existing methods which rely
on 3D face shape, expression coefficient or 2D landmarks
to encode the facial image, we adopt the neural radiance
field (NeRF) [30] to represent the scenes of talking heads.
Inspired by dynamic NeRF [16] for modeling appearance
and dynamics of a human face, we directly map the corresponding audio features to dynamic neural radiance fields
to represent the target dynamic subject. Thanks to the neural rendering techniques which enable a powerful ray dispatching strategy, our model can well represent some finescale facial components like teeth and hair, and achieves
better image qualities than existing GAN-based methods.
Moreover, the volumetric representation provides a natural
way to freely adjust the global deformation of the animated
speakers, which can not be achieved by traditional 2D image generation methods. Furthermore, our method takes the
head pose and upper body movement into consideration and
is capable of producing vivid talking-head results for real-

5784

