PARTS: Unsupervised segmentation with slots, attention and independence
maximization
Daniel Zoran*

Rishabh Kabra*

Alexander Lerchner
DeepMind
London, UK

Danilo J. Rezende

{danielzoran,rkabra,lerchner,danilor}@deepmind.com

Abstract
From an early age, humans perceive the visual world
as composed of coherent objects with distinctive properties
such as shape, size, and color. There is great interest in building models that are able to learn similar structure, ideally in
an unsupervised manner. Learning such structure from complex 3D scenes that include clutter, occlusions, interactions,
and camera motion is still an open challenge. We present
a model that is able to segment visual scenes from complex
3D environments into distinct objects, learn disentangled
representations of individual objects, and form consistent
and coherent predictions of future frames, in a fully unsupervised manner. Our model (named PARTS) builds on
recent approaches that utilize iterative amortized inference
and transition dynamics for deep generative models. We
achieve dramatic improvements in performance by introducing several novel contributions. We introduce a recurrent
slot-attention like encoder which allows for top-down influence during inference. We argue that when inferring scene
structure from image sequences it is better to use a fixed
prior which is shared across the sequence rather than an
auto-regressive prior as often used in prior work. We demonstrate our model’s success on three different video datasets
(the popular benchmark CLEVRER; a simulated 3D Playroom environment; and a real-world Robotics Arm dataset).
Finally, we analyze the contributions of the various model
components and the representations learned by the model.

1. Introduction
Object-level perception plays a key role in human vision
[13]. People interpret scenes as consisting of discrete, independent and coherent objects and a broad set of experiments
has shown this ability is developed very early in life [16].
While most present computer vision models lack any explicit
object-level structure [7], there is an ongoing effort to create
models that would, at least in some sense, represent scenes

Figure 1. Unsupervised segmentation outputs from PARTS (above).
The model is able to extract meaningful segments of complex,
cluttered and partially observable scenes. It is also able to predict
future frames along with their corresponding segmentation (below).

in terms of their constituent objects [1, 5, 2, 10].
There are good reasons why this is worth pursuing.
Object-level representations are inherently combinatorial,
allowing complex scenes to be explained by different combinations of simpler elements. Such representations may
also allow better generalization by learning general rules
related to what objects are, how they move and how they
interact. Finally, objects may help in building models that
allow planning, take into account actions and their effect
on the environment and produce future predictions that are
useful and actionable for agents.
Most current models that push in this direction introduce
a structural inductive bias in the form of slots. These are

10439

