Exploiting Multi-Object Relationships for Detecting Adversarial Attacks in
Complex Scenes
Mingjun Yin, Shasha Li, Zikui Cai, Chengyu Song,
M. Salman Asif, Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury, and Srikanth V. Krishnamurthy
University of California, Riverside, USA
{myin013, sli057, zcai032}@ucr.edu, csong@cs.ucr.edu,
{sasif, amitrc}@ece.ucr.edu, krish@cs.ucr.edu

Abstract
Vision systems that deploy Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. Recent research has shown that checking the intrinsic consistencies in the input data is a promising way to
detect adversarial attacks (e.g., by checking the object cooccurrence relationships in complex scenes). However, existing approaches are tied to specific models and do not offer generalizability. Motivated by the observation that language descriptions of natural scene images have already
captured the object co-occurrence relationships that can be
learned by a language model, we develop a novel approach
to perform context consistency checks using such language
models. The distinguishing aspect of our approach is that
it is independent of the deployed object detector and yet offers very high accuracy in terms of detecting adversarial
examples in practical scenes with multiple objects. Experiments on the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO datasets show
that our method can outperform state-of-the-art methods in
detecting adversarial attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely used in vision
tasks such as object detection and classification, for their
ability to achieve state-of-the art (SOTA) performance in
such tasks. DNN-based vision systems are also known to be
vulnerable to adversarial examples [13, 38, 14, 20, 4, 1, 31];
specifically, it is possible to add (quasi-)imperceptible perturbations that can cause DNN-based vision systems to output incorrect results, while projecting high confidence with
regard to the results. For example, adversarial examples
can misclassify STOP signs to speed limit signs [10] and a
school bus to an ostrich [38].
One promising defense strategy proposed recently is to
capture the intrinsic dependencies within the input data, and

to check for violations of such dependencies to detect adversarial examples. For instance, in scene images with multiple
objects, the intrinsic relationships between objects, commonly known as the context of the scene, can be used to
detect adversarial attacks [21]. Similarly, the dependencies between video frames can be used to detect adversarial
frames in video classification [18, 41]. To illustrate, let us
consider the STOP sign attack as an example. A STOP sign
is a part of a road intersection scene wherein it typically coexists with a stop line and/or a street name sign; in contrast,
a speed limit sign is rarely, if ever, seen at intersections and
thus does not co-exist with the latter objects.
While context has been used extensively for object
recognition problems and scene understanding, there is little
work with respect to detection of adversarial attacks using
context. In our previous work [21], we proposed modeling context as a fully connected graph, where each node is
an object proposal from a Region Proposal Network (RPN),
and edges encode how other regions (including the background and the whole scene) affect the current node in its
feature space. Then we train a bank of auto-encoders (each
corresponds to a category of objects) to check for consistency with respect to the distribution of context features.
While this approach performs well, it is deeply coupled
with Faster R-CNN [36] and cannot be applied to singlestage detectors like YOLO [35]; besides, it requires retraining when there is any change to the Faster R-CNN model
(e.g., when switching to another CNN model). In summary,
while prior approaches have tried to utilize context to detect
adversarial attacks, they do so in a way that intricately ties
the context to the model in use, which limits their applicability.
In this paper, we propose a novel model-agnostic adversarial attack detector based on object co-occurrence. Our
observation is that the language description of a natural
scene image (i.e., of the output of an object detection network) can readily capture the dependencies between ob-

7858

