R-SLAM: Optimizing Eye Tracking from Rolling Shutter Video of the Retina
Jay Shenoy*, James Fong*, Jeffrey Tan, Austin Roorda, and Ren Ng
University of California, Berkeley
{jayshenoy, james.fong, tanjeffreyz02, aroorda, ren}@berkeley.edu
* Equal contribution.

Abstract
We present a method for optimization-based recovery of
eye motion from rolling shutter video of the retina. Our approach formulates eye tracking as an optimization problem
that jointly estimates the retina’s motion and appearance
using convex optimization and a constrained version of gradient descent. By incorporating the rolling shutter imaging model into the formulation of our joint optimization, we
achieve state-of-the-art accuracy both offline and in realtime. We apply our method to retina video captured with an
adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscope (AOSLO),
demonstrating eye tracking at 1 kHz with accuracies below one arcminute—over an order of magnitude higher than
conventional eye tracking systems.

1. Introduction
Eye tracking is the process of determining the eye’s
gaze direction over time, often using specialized optics
and software. In the real-time setting, precise tracking
is hindered by the constant and often ballistic motion of
the eye, consisting of drift, microsaccades, and saccades
[22, 25]. Studying these ballistic movements in the offline setting requires accurate, high-frequency motion estimation algorithms, which are useful in ophthalmology
and biomedicine. A precise model of these high-frequency
movements is also relevant to computer vision because it
could inform the development of new algorithms that aim
to replicate cognitive tasks such as object recognition and
scene understanding; for instance, microsaccades have been
linked to complex visual tasks in humans like reading [11].
Unfortunately, most eye tracking systems are only accurate
to 0.5 degrees of visual angle, making the exact dynamics
of microsaccades and saccades an open question.
Eye trackers that infer gaze direction using measurements from the eye’s cornea, pupil and lens have both accuracy and precision limitations due to their reliance on individual subjective calibration procedures, and from gaze
estimation errors caused by changes in pupil size or wobble

of the crystalline lens.
In principle, eye tracking approaches based on imaging
the retina can overcome these limits. Further, they add information by linking gaze with retinal structures. The adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscope (AOSLO) is a
device that images the retina at high resolution, with current systems capturing 30 FPS rolling shutter video that can
resolve individual photoreceptor cells.
The AOSLO has mainly been applied in ophthalmology
settings for recording videos of the retina, and existing approaches demonstrate real-time eye tracking speeds of 1
kHz [35]. These methods register strips of incoming retinal video against a pre-computed retina map, which in turn
is generated by stabilizing a previously-recorded AOSLO
video using offline eye tracking algorithms. Unfortunately,
these offline techniques often produce distorted maps because they fail to completely correct for the entanglement
of eye motion with the rolling shutter capture process.
In this paper, we introduce a principled approach to disentangling eye motion from the rolling shutter video. We
formulate and solve a holistic optimization problem that simultaneously computes retina motion and a map of retina
appearance that faithfully explain the recorded AOSLO
video. Jointly solving for this motion and retina map has
not been attempted before because it is an under-determined
problem; much like in visual SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and Mapping [33]), there is an inherent ambiguity
between the moving location of the retina/eye and the underlying map of the retina’s appearance. Our method, RSLAM (for retina-based SLAM) consists of two stages (see
Figure 1): first, we use convex optimization to compute an
initial estimate of the motion. Formulating this initial step
in a convex fashion offers guarantees about the existence
and uniqueness of the optimal motion solution, as well as
efficient algorithms to find this solution. Second, we perform joint refinement of the retina map and initial motion
estimate, aiming to reconstruct the input video using gradient descent. Our contributions include:
• Formulation of eye-tracking from rolling-shutter retina
video as an optimization problem.

4852

