Class-Incremental Learning for Action Recognition in Videos
Jaeyoo Park
Minsoo Kang
Bohyung Han
ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University
{bellos1203,kminsoo,bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
⋯

We tackle catastrophic forgetting problem in the context of class-incremental learning for video recognition,
which has not been explored actively despite the popularity of continual learning. Our framework addresses this
challenging task by introducing time-channel importance
maps and exploiting the importance maps for learning the
representations of incoming examples via knowledge distillation. We also incorporate a regularization scheme in
our objective function, which encourages individual features obtained from different time steps in a video to be uncorrelated and eventually improves accuracy by alleviating
catastrophic forgetting. We evaluate the proposed approach
on brand-new splits of class-incremental action recognition
benchmarks constructed upon the UCF101, HMDB51, and
Something-Something V2 datasets, and demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm in comparison to the existing
continual learning methods that are originally designed for
image data.

1. Introduction
Human activity recognition in a large-scale video dataset
is a crucial step for high-level video understanding, and
various approaches have been studied actively in the computer vision community [2, 17, 21, 36, 40]. If the videos
containing unseen classes of actions are presented in a sequential manner, where the examples in the previously observed classes are either inaccessible or accessible in limited amounts, one needs to adapt the current model to
the new data without forgetting critical knowledge of the
seen examples learned in the past. The machine learning paradigm to handle such challenges is called classincremental learning, and Figure 1 illustrates a training data
stream for the learning framework.
While researchers have been studying action recognition
problems using deep neural networks [2, 17, 21, 36, 40],
continual learning in videos has not been studied actively.
It is natural to claim that video-based recognition tasks are
also prone to suffer from catastrophic forgetting [23] for the

⋯

Figure 1: Illustration of class-incremental learning scenario.
At each incremental step, the model learns the knowledge
of new classes that are disjoint from the classes it has seen
so far. Simultaneously, the model learns not to forget the
knowledge of old classes that are either completely inaccessible or accessible in limited amounts.
knowledge learned from training data provided in the past,
as in the image domain. Actually, the catastrophic forgetting problem is particularly problematic in video-learning
tasks because deep neural networks with shared parameters
are typically applied to multiple segments or frames, resulting in acceleration of the forgetting issue and it is difficult
to store many video exemplars in memory to preserve the
information about the previous tasks effectively.
Despite critical needs for class-incremental learning in
the video domain, existing approaches [3, 6, 15, 20, 30, 43]
have focused on static images only, which fails to model
temporal variations and dynamics across spatial features. A
single action instance is often composed of multiple subactions and the feature dynamics aligned with the subactions are indeed critical information for action recognition.
For example, Figure 2 demonstrates that both of Pole Vault
and Javelin Throw share a subaction of running with a long
stick at the beginning but become distinct by whether the
actor jumps or not at the end. This observation leads to a
fundamental question about how to maintain crucial spatiotemporal information within individual videos using limited

13698

