LIRA: Learnable, Imperceptible and Robust Backdoor Attacks
Khoa Doan, Yingjie Lao, Weijie Zhao, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{khoadoan106, laoyingjie, zhaoweijie12, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, machine learning models have demonstrated to
be vulnerable to backdoor attacks, primarily due to the lack
of transparency in black-box models such as deep neural
networks. A third-party model can be poisoned such that
it works adequately in normal conditions but behaves maliciously on samples with specific trigger patterns. However,
the trigger injection function is manually defined in most existing backdoor attack methods, e.g., placing a small patch
of pixels on an image or slightly deforming the image before
poisoning the model. This results in a two-stage approach
with a sub-optimal attack success rate and a lack of complete stealthiness under human inspection.
In this paper, we propose a novel and stealthy backdoor attack framework, LIRA, which jointly learns the optimal, stealthy trigger injection function and poisons the
model. We formulate such an objective as a non-convex,
constrained optimization problem. Under this optimization
framework, the trigger generator function will learn to manipulate the input with imperceptible noise to preserve the
model performance on the clean data and maximize the attack success rate on the poisoned data. Then, we solve
this challenging optimization problem with an efficient, twostage stochastic optimization procedure. Finally, the proposed attack framework achieves 100% success rates in several benchmark datasets, including MNIST, CIFAR10, GTSRB, and T-ImageNet, while simultaneously bypassing existing backdoor defense methods and human inspection.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models, especially deep neural networks (DNNs), have recently achieved state-of-the-art performance in various applications and tasks, ranging from
conventional research topics such as computer vision [24,
22] and natural language processing [13, 16] to distant fields
such as games [44, 6], computational advertising [57, 54],
and structural biology [1, 14]. However, along with the evolution, recent works have shown DNN models are vulnera-

ble to various categories of adversarial attacks [37, 46, 29],
which might be attributed to the lack of model transparency and explainability. Among these attacks, evasion
attacks such as adversarial examples [7, 34] attempt to
fool a trained model by manipulating the inputs in the inference phase, while causative attacks including poisoning [35, 43, 58] and backdoor attacks [32, 30, 10, 20] seek
to maliciously alter the model in the training phase.
Recently, the backdoor attack has attracted a lot of attention. The increasing complexity of model building that
promoted training outsourcing and machine learning as a
service (MLaaS) has also yielded security deficiencies in
the supply chain [12, 55]. Existing literature on backdoor
attacks [32, 30, 10, 20] has demonstrated that by injecting a backdoor trigger (usually a specific pattern such as
a small square) to a small portion of the training data, the
trained DNN induces misclassifications while facing inputs
with the presence of this trigger. In addition, the model behaves normally on clean inputs, which makes this type of
attack hard to detect. As this field of research has evolved,
the strength and capabilities of these attacks have increased,
leading to methodologies that work with stealthier triggers [51] or compromise extended scenarios [4, 53].
Aligning with the research direction of adversarial examples [23, 33, 52], one property of interest for the backdoor attack is also to improve the fidelity of poisoned images that are used to inject the backdoor and hence reduce
the perceptual detectability by human observers. To this
end, several works have indeed adopted adversarial example generation in crafting poisoned images that have improved visual quality or indistinguishability from vanilla
training data [47, 26]. Blended and other novel trigger
patterns have also been investigated [30, 5, 31]. Still, although the attacker carefully crafts the backdoor triggers
in these works before poisoning the model, their trigger
patterns can be detected by visual inspection. A very recent work, WaNet [36], creates stealthier backdoor images
with manually designed warping transformation triggers
and achieves state-of-the-art results in both attack success

11966

