Cross-Descriptor Visual Localization and Mapping
Mihai Dusmanu 1
1

Ondrej Miksik 2

Johannes L. Schönberger 2

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich

2

Marc Pollefeys 1, 2

Microsoft MR & AI Lab, Zürich

Abstract
Visual localization and mapping is the key technology
underlying the majority of mixed reality and robotics systems. Most state-of-the-art approaches rely on local features to establish correspondences between images. In this
paper, we present three novel scenarios for localization
and mapping which require the continuous update of feature representations and the ability to match across different
feature types. While localization and mapping is a fundamental computer vision problem, the traditional setup supposes the same local features are used throughout the evolution of a map. Thus, whenever the underlying features
are changed, the whole process is repeated from scratch.
However, this is typically impossible in practice, because
raw images are often not stored and re-building the maps
could lead to loss of the attached digital content. To overcome the limitations of current approaches, we present the
first principled solution to cross-descriptor localization and
mapping. Our data-driven approach is agnostic to the feature descriptor type, has low computational requirements,
and scales linearly with the number of description algorithms. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach on state-of-the-art benchmarks for a variety of handcrafted and learned features.

1. Introduction
Mixed reality and robotics blend the physical and digital worlds to unlock the next evolution in human, machine,
and environment interaction. This promise largely relies on
the technical capability to build and localize against maps
of the environment. For example, collaborative experiences
require co-localization of multiple devices into the same coordinate space. Similarly, re-localization against existing
maps enables persistence and retrieval of digital content attached to the real world. Most systems build upon localization and mapping pipelines predominantly based on vision
sensors using local features for image matching.
Traditionally, these systems run in real-time on the device, but the industry has been increasingly moving localization and mapping capabilities to the cloud (e.g., Facebook LiveMaps [2], Google VPS [42], Magic Leap’s Mag-

Figure 1: Mixed reality and robotics systems typically do
not store raw images. This complicates deployment of new
feature representations for visual localization and mapping.
Our approach enables the continuous update of feature representations and the ability to match across heterogeneous
devices using different features.
icverse [3], or Microsoft Azure Spatial Anchors [23]). This
is for a variety of reasons, such as reducing on-board
compute or enabling collaborative experiences and crowdsourced mapping. In most settings, images are typically not
shared across devices or uploaded to the cloud primarily
due to privacy reasons [25], but also to reduce bandwidth
and storage requirements. Instead, image features are computed locally on the device and only the extracted keypoints
and descriptors are shared. In other words, it is impossible
to re-extract features whenever a different representation is
required, as the images are no longer available.
There are two fundamental limitations of existing systems. First, they cannot adopt new feature algorithms because incompatibilities of feature representations make relocalization against maps built using older features impossible. In a world of continuous progress on local features
in the research community, this severely limits progress
on localization and mapping. One might argue for sim16058

