Learning to Reduce Defocus Blur by Realistically Modeling Dual-Pixel Data
Abdullah Abuolaim1 *

Mauricio Delbracio2
Damien Kelly2
Peyman Milanfar2
1
2
York University
Google Research

Abstract

1. Introduction and related work
Defocus blur occurs in scene regions captured outside
the camera’s depth of field (DoF). Although the effect can
be intentional (e.g., the bokeh effect in portrait photos), in
many cases defocus blur is undesired as it impacts image
quality due to the loss of sharpness of image detail (e.g.,
Fig. 1, second row). Recovering defocused image details
is challenging due to the spatially varying nature of the
defocus point spread function (PSF) [25, 41], which not
only is scene depth dependent, but also varies based on the
camera aperture, focal length, focus distance, radial dis* This work was done while Abdullah was an intern at Google.

Pixel
smartphone

Canon
DSLR

Input
Dual-pixel images
with defocus blur
(Only a single DP
view is shown)

Deblurred results [1]
Encoder

Decoder

DNN trained with
Canon data only
Our results
Encoder

RCN

Encoder

RCN

Decoder

…

Recent work has shown impressive results on datadriven defocus deblurring using the two-image views available on modern dual-pixel (DP) sensors. One significant
challenge in this line of research is access to DP data. Despite many cameras having DP sensors, only a limited number provide access to the low-level DP sensor images. In
addition, capturing training data for defocus deblurring involves a time-consuming and tedious setup requiring the
camera’s aperture to be adjusted. Some cameras with DP
sensors (e.g., smartphones) do not have adjustable apertures, further limiting the ability to produce the necessary
training data. We address the data capture bottleneck by
proposing a procedure to generate realistic DP data synthetically. Our synthesis approach mimics the optical image formation found on DP sensors and can be applied to
virtual scenes rendered with standard computer software.
Leveraging these realistic synthetic DP images, we introduce a recurrent convolutional network (RCN) architecture
that improves deblurring results and is suitable for use with
single-frame and multi-frame data (e.g., video) captured by
DP sensors. Finally, we show that our synthetic DP data is
useful for training DNN models targeting video deblurring
applications where access to DP data remains challenging.

Cameras

Michael S. Brown1

Decoder
Decoder

Our RCN trained with
our synthetic data

Figure 1. Deblurring results on images from a Pixel 4 smartphone
and a Canon 5D Mark IV. Third row: results of the DNN proposed in [1] trained with DP data from the Canon camera. Last
row: results from our proposed network trained on synthetically
generated data only.

tortion, and optical aberrations. Most existing deblurring
methods [6, 20, 23, 31, 38] approach the defocus deblurring problem by first estimating a defocus image map. The
defocus map is then used with an off-the-shelf non-blind
deconvolution method (e.g., [7, 22]). This strategy to defocus deblurring is greatly limited by the accuracy of the
estimated defocus map.
Recently, work in [1] was the first to propose an interesting approach to the defocus deblurring problem by leveraging information available on dual-pixel (DP) sensors found
on most modern cameras. The DP sensor was originally
designed to facilitate auto-focusing [2, 3, 19]; however, researchers have found DP sensors to be useful in broader applications, including depth map estimation [10, 30, 34, 47],
defocus deblurring [4, 43, 24, 30], reflection removal [35],
and synthetic DoF [44]. DP sensors consist of two photo-

2289

