PixelSynth: Generating a 3D-Consistent Experience from a Single Image
Chris Rockwell

David F. Fouhey
University of Michigan

Abstract

Justin Johnson

Synthesized Scene

Recent advancements in differentiable rendering and 3D
reasoning have driven exciting results in novel view synthesis from a single image. Despite realistic results, methods are limited to relatively small view change. In order
to synthesize immersive scenes, models must also be able
to extrapolate. We present an approach that fuses 3D reasoning with autoregressive modeling to outpaint large view
changes in a 3D-consistent manner, enabling scene synthesis. We demonstrate considerable improvement in singleimage large-angle view synthesis results compared to a variety of methods and possible variants across simulated and
real datasets. In addition, we show increased 3D consistency compared to alternative accumulation methods.

Input Image

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Single-Image Scene Synthesis. Our framework fuses
the complementary strengths of 3D reasoning and autoregressive
modeling to create an immersive scene from a single image.

Imagine that you walk into the ofﬁce shown in Figure 1.
What will you see if you turn right? Is there a door onto
a patio? What if you step backward then look left? While
the image itself does not contain this information, you can
imagine a rich world behind the image due to your experience of other rooms. This task of single-image scene synthesis promises to bring arbitrary photos to life, but requires
solving several key challenges. First, handling large view
changes involves extrapolation far beyond the input pixels.
Second, generating multiple outputs from the same input requires consistency: turning left by 10◦ or 20◦ should reveal
progressively more of a single underlying world. Finally,
modeling view changes requires 3D-awareness to properly
capture perspective changes.
Prior methods for view synthesis fall short of these goals.
There has been great progress at interpolating between
many input views of a single scene [29, 28, 43, 44, 48, 50];
while these 3D-aware methods generate consistent outputs, they do not attempt to extrapolate beyond their input views. Prior approaches to single-image view synthesis [15, 47, 53] can extrapolate to small rotations and translations, but fail to model viewpoint changes at this scale.
For example, we show that naı̈vely retraining SynSin [53]

for larger angles leads to collapse.
In parallel, autoregressive models have shown impressive results for image generation and completion [4, 30, 35,
40, 49]. These methods are very successful at extrapolating
far beyond the boundaries of an input image; however they
make no attempt to explicitly model a consistent 3D world
behind their generated images.
In this paper we present an approach for single-image
scene synthesis that addresses these challenges by fusing
the complementary strengths of 3D reasoning and autoregressive modeling. We achieve extrapolation using an autoregressive model to complete images when faced with
large view changes. Generating all output views independently would give inconsistent outputs. Instead, we identify a support set at the extremes of views to be generated
(shown at the boundaries of Figure 1). Generated images
for the support set are then lifted to 3D and added to a consistent scene representation. Intermediate views can then be
re-rendered from the scene representation instead of generated from scratch, ensuring consistency among all outputs.
Producing a system that can both do extreme view syn-

14104

