Efficient Action Recognition via Dynamic Knowledge Propagation
Hanul Kim1,2 ,

Mihir Jain1 , Jun-Tae Lee1 , Sungrack Yun1 , Fatih Porikli1
1
Qualcomm AI Research*
2
Seoul National University of Science and Technology
hukim@seoultech.ac.kr, {mijain, juntlee, sungrack, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Efficient action recognition has become crucial to extend
the success of action recognition to many real-world applications. Contrary to most existing methods, which mainly
focus on selecting salient frames to reduce the computation cost, we focus more on making the most of the selected frames. To this end, we employ two networks of
different capabilities that operate in tandem to efficiently
recognize actions. Given a video, the lighter network processes more frames while the heavier one only processes
a few. In order to enable the effective interaction between
the two, we propose dynamic knowledge propagation based
on a cross-attention mechanism. This is the main component of our framework that is essentially a student-teacher
architecture, but as the teacher model continues to interact with the student model during inference, we call it a
dynamic student-teacher framework. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of each component of our framework. Our method outperforms competing
state-of-the-art methods on two video datasets: ActivityNetv1.3 and Mini-Kinetics.

1. Introduction
Video action recognition is one of the fundamental problems for video understanding. Consequently, several methods have been proposed and significant progress has been
made over the last decade thanks to advances in deep learning. Recent state-of-the-art methods mostly use 3D-CNN
that takes as input a video clip of several frames [9, 13].
Many of these methods densely sample clips from each
video and aggregate the activations to achieve excellent results. However, they require high computational costs, making it challenging to apply to practical applications. In this
paper, we are interested in the problem of efficient video
recognition, to achieve better performance and computa* Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1: mAP vs. GFLOPs curves on ActivityNet-v1.3 [5]:
The proposed dynamic student-teacher framework performs
similar to or better than the recent state-of-the-art methods [11, 22, 26, 44, 45] at a much lower computational cost.
More experimental results are available in Section 4.

tional cost trade-off as shown in Figure 1.
Multiple approaches have been proposed for efficient action recognition in recent years with focus on two aspects:
(a) more efficient CNNs and (b) salient frame/clip selection. On the first aspect, methods have been proposed to
design efficient versions of 3D-CNN [21, 29, 35, 36, 46],
such as the temporally separable convolution that reduces
the computational cost per clip. But the more successful
way has been to simply switch to the lighter 2D-CNNs instead [8, 24], often in conjunction with RNN/LSTM models [3, 11, 44]. Even with more efficient networks, computation would be high for longer videos if all the frames are
processed. So, the second aspect of frame selection based
on saliency complements the first one and has led to most
success too [3, 11, 22, 44]. These methods rely on learning
a policy that decides how a particular frame should be pro-

13719

