Exploiting Scene Graphs for Human-Object Interaction Detection
Tao He1 , Lianli Gao2 , Jingkuan Song2 , Yuan-Fang Li1 ∗
1
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University
2
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{tao.he,yufang.li}@monash.edu, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn,jingkuan.song@gmail.com

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a fundamental visual task aiming at localizing and recognizing interactions between humans and objects. Existing works focus on the visual and linguistic features of the humans and
objects. However, they do not capitalise on the high-level
and semantic relationships present in the image, which provides crucial contextual and detailed relational knowledge
for HOI inference. We propose a novel method to exploit
this information, through the scene graph, for the HumanObject Interaction (SG2HOI) detection task. Our method,
SG2HOI, incorporates the SG information in two ways:
(1) we embed a scene graph into a global context clue,
serving as the scene-specific environmental context; and
(2) we build a relation-aware message-passing module to
gather relationships from objects’ neighborhood and transfer them into interactions. Empirical evaluation shows that
our SG2HOI method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on two benchmark HOI datasets: V-COCO and HICODET. Code will be available at https://github.com/
ht014/SG2HOI.

1. Introduction
Recently, Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection [5,
14] aims at detecting the types of interactions of humanobject pairs. It has gained increasing attention in the computer vision community as it has a wide range of practical applications, e.g., action recognition [11] and HumanComputer Interaction (CHI) [8]. Formally, the goal of HOI
is to detect and localize all the interaction triples in an image, i.e. <human, interaction, object>. HOI is a challenging problem—an image typically contains multiple humans
and objects in a complex scene, while the majority of all
the human-object pairs are non-relation. Therefore, some
works [25, 28, 27] that are solely based on visual features
cannot learn good discriminative patterns for HOIs.
∗ Corresponding author.

man_2

near

table

on

near

fork

hold

glass

man_1

of

hand

food

Scene Graph

man_1
eat_at

SG2HOI
man_2

table
HOIs

Figure 1. An illustration of our Scene Graph to Human-Object Interaction method, where we consider the scene graph between objects as external knowledge to facilitate the prediction of HOIs
in two ways: scene graph embedding (green arrow) described in
Sec. 3.1 and relation-aware message passing (red arrow) described
in Sec. 3.2.

It is intuitive to turn to external knowledge, e.g., the
well-known knowledge graph ConceptNet [23], to mitigate the limitation of visual appearance features. However, as such knowledge graphs are often general-purpose,
most of retrieved results are redundant. Thus, such external
knowledge may not provide sufficiently informative cues
for HOIs. Instead, we turn to another closely-related task,
i.e. Scene Graph Generation (SGG), to generate a tiny relation (knowledge) graph for each image, serving as the external knowledge to make up the visual cues.
SGG [17, 18, 29] and HOI [5, 28] both aim at identifying spatial and other types of relations between objects in
an image. Figure 1 illustrates a scene graph and the HOI
graph of the same image. There are two main differences
between the two tasks: (1) in SGG, subjects can be of any
type (humans, cars, etc.), while in HOI they are fixed as humans, which results in more edges in the SG; and (2) the
predicates of HOI only consist of interaction verbs, while
in SGG many types of relations may exist, including locative prepositions (e.g., on) and semantic actions (e.g., play
with). Simply speaking, an SG is a general relation graph
whereas an HOI graph is a human-focused subject graph,
which can be considered a subgraph extracted from the SG.
Thus, we believe that the scene graph can provide more detailed cues for HOI detection and improve the performance
of an HOI model. Specifically, incorporating the SG in the

15984

