Virtual light transport matrices for non-line-of-sight imaging
Julio Marco1 Adrian Jarabo1 Ji Hyun Nam2 Xiaochun Liu2
Miguel Ángel Cosculluela1 Andreas Velten2 Diego Gutierrez1
1

Universidad de Zaragoza, I3A

2

University of Wisconsin – Madison
Hidden scene

Abstract

A

The light transport matrix (LTM) is an instrumental
tool in line-of-sight (LOS) imaging, describing how light
interacts with the scene and enabling applications such
as relighting or separation of illumination components.
We introduce a framework to estimate the LTM of nonline-of-sight (NLOS) scenarios, coupling recent virtual forward light propagation models for NLOS imaging with the
LOS light transport equation. We design computational
projector-camera setups, and use these virtual imaging systems to estimate the transport matrix of hidden scenes. We
introduce the specific illumination functions to compute the
different elements of the matrix, overcoming the challenging wide-aperture conditions of NLOS setups. Our NLOS
light transport matrix allows us to (re)illuminate specific
locations of a hidden scene, and separate direct, first-order
indirect, and higher-order indirect illumination of complex
cluttered hidden scenes, similar to existing LOS techniques.

1. Introduction
The light transport matrix (LTM) [26] is a fundamental tool to understand how a scene transports incident light,
describing the linear response of the scene for a given illumination. It has become the cornerstone of many applications such as dual photography [36], image-based relighting [30, 41], acquisition of material properties [5, 35], separation of global illumination components [25, 32], or robust depth estimation [29]. To acquire the LTM, a cameraprojector setup is used, capturing the scene under varying
coded illumination conditions.
On the other hand, recent works on non-line-of-sight
(NLOS) imaging have shown the potential to significantly advance many fields including medical imaging, autonomous driving, rescue operations, or defense and security, to name a few. The key idea is to leverage the scattered
radiance on a secondary relay surface to infer information
about the hidden scene [39, 10, 23]. However, NLOS imag-

B

Direct (volume)

Direct (front)

C

0.0

3.2

Indirect (front)
A

0.9

0.0

A

0.1m - 0.4m
B
C

B

0.0

0.25

1.1m - 1.4m

C

0.0

0.6

2.0m - 2.3m

Figure 1: We introduce a framework to compute virtual
light transport matrices (LTM) of NLOS scenes. Probing
the virtual LTM of a hidden scene allows us to extract its direct illumination (first row), the indirect components when
illuminating a single point in the scene (second row, each
point corresponds to a column in the LTM), or decomposing near-, middle-, and far-field indirect components (third
row) when illuminating specific points in the hidden scene.
The insets show the probed elements from the virtual LTM
for each image.
ing is still on its infancy, and many well-established capabilities of traditional line-of-sight (LOS) imaging modalities
cannot yet be applied in NLOS conditions.
In this work we take steps towards bridging this gap between LOS and NLOS imaging modalities, introducing a
computational framework to obtain the LTM of a hidden
scene. In particular, we build on the recent wave-based
phasor fields framework [21], which poses NLOS as a forward wave transport problem, creating virtual (computa-

2440

