CrossNorm and SelfNorm for Generalization under Distribution Shifts
Zhiqiang Tang
Amazon Web Services

Yunhe Gao
Rutgers University

Yi Zhu
Amazon Web Services

zqtang@amazon.com

yunhe.gao@rutgers.edu

yzaws@amazon.com

Zhi Zhang
Amazon Web Services

Mu Li
Amazon Web Services

Dimitris Metaxas
Rutgers University

zhiz@amazon.com

mli@amazon.com

dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract

two respects: enlarging training distribution and reducing
test distribution.

Traditional normalization techniques (e.g., Batch Normalization and Instance Normalization) generally and simplistically assume that training and test data follow the
same distribution. As distribution shifts are inevitable in
real-world applications, well-trained models with previous
normalization methods can perform badly in new environments. Can we develop new normalization methods to improve generalization robustness under distribution shifts?
In this paper, we answer the question by proposing CrossNorm and SelfNorm. CrossNorm exchanges channel-wise
mean and variance between feature maps to enlarge training distribution, while SelfNorm uses attention to recalibrate the statistics to bridge gaps between training and
test distributions. CrossNorm and SelfNorm can complement each other, though exploring different directions in
statistics usage. Extensive experiments on different fields
(vision and language), tasks (classification and segmentation), settings (supervised and semi-supervised), and distribution shift types (synthetic and natural) show the effectiveness. Code is available at https://github.com/
amazon-research/crossnorm-selfnorm

First, enlarging the training distribution is not in line with
the conventional purpose of normalization which is to stabilize and accelerate training. So, can we employ normalization for a different goal–augmenting training data? Our
inspiration comes from a simple observation that exchanging the RGB mean and variance between two images can
transfer style between them, as shown in Figure 1 (a). For
many tasks such as CIFAR image classification [24], style,
encoded by channel-wise mean and variance, is usually less
critical in recognizing the object than other information,
such as object shape. Therefore, augmenting style is safe
enough that content labels remain unchanged. To augment
style, we propose CrossNorm, which swaps channel-wise
mean and variance of feature maps in training so that the
model becomes more robust to changes in appearance.

1. Introduction
Normalization methods, e.g., Batch Normalization [22],
Layer Normalization [1], and Instance Normalization [46],
play a pivotal role in training deep neural networks by making training more stable and convergence faster, assuming
that training and test data come from the same distribution.
However, distribution shifts in various real-world scenarios
[15, 38, 16] make traditional normalization techniques impractical. For instance, a driving scene segmentation model
trained on one city usually does not generalize well to another city. In this paper, we aim to explore how normalization can improve generalization under distribution shifts.
Specifically, we tackle the distribution shift problem from

Even with the augmented training data, a model will still
encounter data with unforeseen appearances in deployment.
Hence, another question comes: how to make normalization reduce test data distribution, i.e., bridging distribution
gaps between training and test data? Similarly, our method
is motivated by an observation illustrated in Figure 1 (b).
Given one image in different styles, we can reduce the style
discrepancy when adjusting the RGB means and variances
properly. Intuitively, style recalibration can reduce appearance variance so that training and test data will share more
consistent styles. To this end, we propose SelfNorm by using attention [19] to adjust channel-wise mean and variance.
It is interesting to analyze the distinction and connection
between CrossNorm and SelfNorm. At first glance, they
take opposite actions (style augmentation vs. style reduction). Even so, they use the same tool: channel-wise statistics and pursue the same goal: generalization robustness.
Additionally, CrossNorm can increase the capacity of SelfNorm by letting SelfNorm learn from more diverse styles in
training. Overall, the key contributions are three-fold:

52

