ACDC: The Adverse Conditions Dataset with Correspondences
for Semantic Driving Scene Understanding
Christos Sakaridis1 , Dengxin Dai1,2 , and Luc Van Gool1,3
1

ETH Zürich, 2 MPI for Informatics, 3 KU Leuven
https://acdc.vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Level 5 autonomy for self-driving cars requires a robust
visual perception system that can parse input images under
any visual condition. However, existing semantic segmentation datasets are either dominated by images captured under normal conditions or are small in scale. To address this,
we introduce ACDC, the Adverse Conditions Dataset with
Correspondences for training and testing semantic segmentation methods on adverse visual conditions. ACDC consists of a large set of 4006 images which are equally distributed between four common adverse conditions: fog,
nighttime, rain, and snow. Each adverse-condition image
comes with a high-quality fine pixel-level semantic annotation, a corresponding image of the same scene taken under normal conditions, and a binary mask that distinguishes
between intra-image regions of clear and uncertain semantic content. Thus, ACDC supports both standard semantic
segmentation and the newly introduced uncertainty-aware
semantic segmentation. A detailed empirical study demonstrates the challenges that the adverse domains of ACDC
pose to state-of-the-art supervised and unsupervised approaches and indicates the value of our dataset in steering
future progress in the field. Our dataset and benchmark are
publicly available.

1. Introduction
Most of the prominent large-scale image-based datasets
for driving scene understanding, including Cityscapes [8],
Vistas [28] and KITTI [13], are dominated by images captured under normal visual conditions, i.e., at daytime and in
clear weather. Yet, vision applications such as autonomous
driving impose a strict requirement on perception algorithms to maintain satisfactory performance in adverse do-

mains. Although there are recent efforts to include adverse visual domains in large-scale datasets, such as Oxford
RobotCar [27] and BDD100K [55], these efforts focus either on localization/mapping tasks [27,49] or on recognition
tasks which do not involve dense pixel-level outputs, such
as object detection [3, 42, 55]. For instance, while a notable
40% of the object detection set of BDD100K pertains to
nighttime, only 3% of the images in its semantic segmentation set, namely 345 images, are captured at nighttime [40].
In addition, the pixel-level annotation process for adversecondition images is kept identical in [55] to the normalcondition case, which leads to errors in the ground truth
and renders it unreliable [40]. In contrast, seminal previous
work [8] has underlined the need for specialized techniques
and datasets for pixel-level semantic scene understanding
in adverse visual conditions, due to the inherent aleatory
uncertainty in images captured in such conditions. These
render entire image regions indiscernible even for humans.
ACDC constitutes a response to this need for a largescale driving dataset specialized to adverse conditions, in
terms of (i) size, (ii) domain adversity, and (iii) featured
tasks. ACDC includes 4006 images with high-quality pixellevel semantic annotations, which are distributed equally
among four common adverse conditions in real-world driving environments, namely fog, nighttime, rain, and snow,
thus featuring a scale of the same order as Cityscapes.
The dataset was deliberately recorded with the respective
adverse conditions clearly present. Thus, a large domain
shift from the normal clear-weather daytime conditions was
achieved. Moreover, for each adverse-condition image, a
corresponding normal-condition image of the same scene
from approximately the same viewpoint is provided, intended for use by weakly supervised methods.
As to the tasks that our dataset supports, apart from standard semantic segmentation, we add the task of uncertaintyaware semantic segmentation. For the latter we intro10765

