WB-DETR: Transformer-Based Detector without Backbone
Fanfan Liu1,2,3,4 ,* Haoran Wei1,2,3,4∗ , Wenzhe Zhao1,2,3,4†, Guozhen Li5 ,
Jingquan Peng1,2,3,4 , Zihao Li1,2,3,4
1
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2
NIST, Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
4
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, UCAS.
5
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China.
(liufanfan19, weihaoran18, pengjingquan19, lizihao191)@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
zwz@mail.ie.ac.cn, lgzh@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Transformer-based detector is a new paradigm in object detection, which aims to achieve pretty-well performance while eliminates the priori knowledge driven components, e.g., anchors, proposals and the NMS. DETR, the
state-of-the-art model among them, is composed of three
sub-modules, i.e., a CNN-based backbone and paired transformer encoder-decoder. The CNN is applied to extract local features and the transformer is used to capture global
contexts. This pipeline, however, is not concise enough. In
this paper, we propose WB-DETR (DETR-based detector
Without Backbone) to prove that the reliance on CNN features extraction for a transformer-based detector is not necessary. Unlike the original DETR, WB-DETR is composed
of only an encoder and a decoder without CNN backbone.
For an input image, WB-DETR serializes it directly to encode the local features into each individual token. To make
up the deficiency of transformer in modeling local information, we design an LIE-T2T (local information enhancement
tokens to token) module to enhance the internal information
of tokens after unfolding. Experimental results demonstrate
that WB-DETR, the first pure-transformer detector without
CNN to our knowledge, yields on par accuracy and faster
inference speed with only half number of parameters compared with DETR baseline.

1. Introduction
CNN-based approaches [18] have dominated object detection tasks [20, 32] for years. In these methods, a common component is the backbone network [12, 13, 14, 35],
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author is Wenzhe Zhao.

Transformer
encoderdecoder

CNN

Image features

(a)

Set of box
predictions

Linear Projection of Flattened Patches

Transformer encoder-decoder

(b)

Set of box
predictions

Figure 1. DETR vs. WB-DETR. (a) DETR first uses a CNN network to extract features, and then utilizes a transformer structure
for object detection. (b) WB-DETR serializes the image and uses
transformer to detect object directly.

acting as extracting image features by a series of convolution and pooling layers. Modern CNN-based detectors
[9, 11, 27, 21, 36, 29, 23, 25, 26, 22] regard the detector design as a modules combination process, which always composed of a backbone, a neck [21] and multiple detection
heads [3]. Among which, the backbone has become a de
facto standard to improve the performance and the design
of various backbones is also a focus of research in the field
of object detection. As we all know, the equipment of a
backbone is essential for existing CNN-based detectors.
To get out of the paradigm of CNN-based design, Carion et al. propose a novel detector named DETR [4]. Unlike previous CNN-based works, DETR is a transformerbased detector [4, 40, 5, 33], which eliminates many handcrafted operations [4], e.g., anchor generation, rule-based
object assignment, non-maximum suppression (NMS) postprocessing, and so on. As shown in Figure 1 (a), DETR

2979

