PCAM: Product of Cross-Attention Matrices
for Rigid Registration of Point Clouds
Anh-Quan Cao2,∗

Gilles Puy1

Alexandre Boulch1

Renaud Marlet1, 3

2
Valeo.ai, Paris, France
Inria, Paris, France†
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
1

3

Abstract
Rigid registration of point clouds with partial overlaps
is a longstanding problem usually solved in two steps: (a)
finding correspondences between the point clouds; (b) filtering these correspondences to keep only the most reliable
ones to estimate the transformation. Recently, several deep
nets have been proposed to solve these steps jointly. We
built upon these works and propose PCAM: a neural network whose key element is a pointwise product of crossattention matrices that permits to mix both low-level geometric and high-level contextual information to find point
correspondences. These cross-attention matrices also permits the exchange of context information between the point
clouds, at each layer, allowing the network construct better matching features within the overlapping regions. The
experiments show that PCAM achieves state-of-the-art results among methods which, like us, solve steps (a) and (b)
jointly via deepnets.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is the problem of estimating the
rigid transformation that aligns two point clouds. It has
many applications in various domains such as autonomous
driving, motion and pose estimation, 3D reconstruction, simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM), and augmented reality. The most famous method to solve this task
is ICP [3], for which several improvements have been proposed, modifying the original optimisation process [40, 45]
or using geometric feature descriptors [32] to match points.
Recently, end-to-end learning-based methods combining
point feature extraction, point matching, and point-pairs filtering, have been developed to solve this task. Deep Closest
Point (DCP) [38], improved by PRNet [37], finds point correspondences via an attention matrix and estimate the trans∗ Most of the work was done during an internship at valeo.ai in 2020.
† Inria, Mines ParisTech, PSL Research University.

formation by solving a least-squares problem. Deep Global
Registration (DGR) [7] tackles partial-to-partial point cloud
registration by finding corresponding points via deep features, computing confidence scores for these pairs, and solving a weighted least-squares problem to estimate the transformation. IDAM [23] considers all possible pairs of points
in a similarity matrix computed using deep or hand-crafted
features, and proposes a learned two-step filter to select
only relevant pairs for transformation estimation. Finally,
[9, 12, 41] use deep networks and the Sinkhorn algorithm
to find and filter corresponding points.
Our observation is that, when matching points between
point clouds, one would like to find correspondences using
both local fine geometric information, to precisely select the
best corresponding point, and high-level contextual information, to differentiate between points with similar local
geometry but from different parts of the scene. The fine geometric information is naturally extracted at the first layers
of a deep convnet, while the context information is found
in the deepest layers. The existing deep registration methods estimate the correspondences between point clouds using features extracted at the deepest layers. Therefore, there
is no explicit control on the amount of fine geometric and
high-level context information encoded in these features.
Instead, we propose to compute point correspondences
at every layer of our deep network via cross-attention matrices, and to combine these matrices via a point-wise multiplication. This simple yet very effective solution naturally ensures that both low-level geometric and high-level
context information are exploited when matching points. It
also permits to remove spurious matches found only at one
scale. Furthermore, we also exploit these cross-attention
matrices to exchange information between the point clouds
at each layer, allowing the network to exploit context information from both point clouds to find the best matching
point within the overlapping regions.
The design of our method is inspired by DGR [7], DCP
[38] and PRNet [37]. We exploit cross-attention matrices to
exchange context information between point clouds, like in

13229

