SUNet: Symmetric Undistortion Network for Rolling Shutter Correction
Bin Fan
Yuchao Dai*
Mingyi He
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
binfan@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn, myhe@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
The vast majority of modern consumer-grade cameras
employ a rolling shutter mechanism, leading to image distortions if the camera moves during image acquisition. In
this paper, we present a novel deep network to solve the
generic rolling shutter correction problem with two consecutive frames. Our pipeline is symmetrically designed
to predict the global shutter image corresponding to the
intermediate time of these two frames, which is difﬁcult
for existing methods because it corresponds to a camera
pose that differs most from the two frames. First, two timesymmetric dense undistortion ﬂows are estimated by using
well-established principles: pyramidal construction, warping, and cost volume processing. Then, both rolling shutter images are warped into a common global shutter one in
the feature space, respectively. Finally, a symmetric consistency constraint is constructed in the image decoder to effectively aggregate the contextual cues of two rolling shutter
images, thereby recovering the high-quality global shutter
image. Extensive experiments with both synthetic and real
data from public benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed approach over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Popular low-budget commercial cameras are generally
built upon CMOS sensors due to their low cost and simplicity in design. Most CMOS cameras employ a rolling
shutter (RS) mechanism. Different from the global shutter
(GS) camera that exposes all pixels at the same time, the
RS camera is exposed in a row-wise manner from top to
bottom. Thus, the images and videos captured by a moving RS camera will have the RS effect (e.g., stretch, wobble). We provide an illustration in Fig. 2 while assuming the
camera has a frame time of τ . The high dynamic sampling
characteristics of the RS mechanism are regarded as an advantage rather than a disadvantage [1], but simply ignoring
the RS effects in 3D geometric vision applications may lead
to erroneous, undesirable and distorted results [5, 18, 3, 9].
* Corresponding author

To mitigate or eliminate the RS effect which is increasingly
becoming a nuisance in photography, a well-known RS correction problem has therefore attracted more and more attention [36, 38, 20]. This challenging problem aims at recovering the GS image corresponding to the camera pose at
a speciﬁc exposure time (e.g., 0 or τ in Fig. 2).
Existing works on RS correction generally fall into
one of two categories: single-frame-based or multi-framebased. It is an ill-posed problem in the case of single-framebased RS correction, where additional prior assumptions
need to be formulated explicitly [26, 17, 24, 23] or implicitly [25, 38]. Following the previous studies [36, 37, 20, 8]
in reducing the ill-posedness, we also focus on the wellposed generic RS correction problem from two consecutive
frames of a video. In particular, since RS cameras are usually time-synchronized with other sensors (e.g., GS camera,
IMU, etc.) in hardware by referring to the ﬁrst scanline time
[29, 13], we deal with a corresponding challenge of correcting the RS images to the GS image corresponding to the
exposure time of the ﬁrst scanline of the second frame (i.e.,
the intermediate time τ of these two frames). This is of both
theoretical interest and great practical importance.
To this end, classical two-frame-based methods [36, 37]
heavily rely on speciﬁc RS motion models and require
nontrivial iterative optimizations, which limits their use in
time-constrained applications. Although the state-of-the-art
learning-based method [20] has achieved promising results
in recovering the GS image corresponding to the middle
time 3τ
2 of the second frame, it is prone to fail to predict
a plausible GS image at time τ , where many image texture
details cannot be well restored (c.f . Fig. 1(d)). Since the
GS image at time 3τ
2 and the second RS image have close
content, their asymmetric network only exploits the limited
information of the second RS image, but ignores the contextual aggregation of both RS frames.
Recently, various image-to-image translation problems
have been tackled with the deep learning pipelines (e.g.,
image correction [20], optical ﬂow estimation [32], depth
estimation [22], video deblurring [31], and image superresolution [19], etc.). However, it still poses a challenge to
learn to produce a satisfactory GS image corresponding to

4541

