Minimal Cases for Computing the Generalized Relative Pose using Affine
Correspondences
Banglei Guan1 , Ji Zhao∗, Daniel Barath2 and Friedrich Fraundorfer3,4
1

College of Aerospace Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, China
2

Computer Vision and Geometry Group, Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
3

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria
4

Remote Sensing Technology Institute, German Aerospace Center, Germany

guanbanglei12@nudt.edu.cn

zhaoji84@gmail.com

dbarath@ethz.ch

fraundorfer@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We propose three novel solvers for estimating the relative pose of a multi-camera system from affine correspondences (ACs). A new constraint is derived interpreting the
relationship of ACs and the generalized camera model. Using the constraint, we demonstrate efficient solvers for two
types of motions assumed. Considering that the cameras
undergo planar motion, we propose a minimal solution using a single AC and a solver with two ACs to overcome the
degenerate case. Also, we propose a minimal solution using
two ACs with known vertical direction, e.g., from an IMU.
Since the proposed methods require significantly fewer correspondences than state-of-the-art algorithms, they can be
efficiently used within RANSAC for outlier removal and initial motion estimation. The solvers are tested both on synthetic data and on real-world scenes from the KITTI odometry benchmark. It is shown that the accuracy of the estimated poses is superior to the state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
Relative pose estimation from two views of a camera, or
a multi-camera system is regarded as a fundamental problem in computer vision [22, 10, 45, 46, 51], which plays
an important role in simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and structure-from-motion (SfM). Thus, improving the accuracy, efficiency and robustness of relative
pose estimation algorithms is always an important research
topic [30, 50, 1, 16, 6, 12, 31]. Motivated by the fact that
multi-camera systems are available in self-driving cars, micro aerial vehicles or AR headsets, this paper investigates
the problem of estimating the relative pose of multi-camera
systems from affine correspondences (ACs), see Fig. 1.
Since a multi-camera system contains multiple individ∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An affine correspondence in camera Ci between consecutive frames k and k +1. The local affine transformation A relates
the infinitesimal patches around point correspondence (xij , x0ij ).

ual cameras connected by being fixed to a single rigid body,
it has the advantage of large field-of-view and high accuracy [47, 14]. The main difference of a multi-camera system and a standard pinhole camera is the absence of a single
projection center [41]. Due to the different camera model,
the relative pose estimation problem of multi-camera systems [24] is different from the monocular cameras [39, 18],
which results in different equations. In order to remove outlier matches, most of the state-of-the-art SLAM and SfM
pipelines using a multi-camera system [21, 23] apply the
relative pose estimation algorithms repeatedly in a robust
estimation framework, e.g. the Random Sample Consensus
(RANSAC) [13]. This outlier removal process has to be efficient, which directly affects the real-time performance of
SLAM and SfM. The computational complexity and, thus,
the processing time of the RANSAC procedure depends exponentially on the number of points required for the relative
pose estimation of multi-camera system.
Therefore, exploring the minimal solutions for relative
pose estimation of multi-camera system is of significant
importance and has received sustained attention [24, 32,
10, 25, 33, 50, 28]. The idea of deriving minimal solu-

6068

