Rethinking Deep Image Prior for Denoising
Yeonsik Jo§
LG AI Research

Se Young Chun
ECE, INMC, Seoul National University

Jonghyun Choi†
GIST, South Korea

yeonsik.jo@lgresearch.ai

sychun@snu.ac.kr

jhc@gist.ac.kr

Abstract

(a) Image

(b) Comparison on CSet9 dataset
0.10

1. Introduction
Deep neural network has been widely used in many computer vision tasks, yielding significant improvements over
conventional approaches since AlexNet [18]. However, image denoising has been one of the tasks in which conventional methods such as BM3D [7] outperformed many early
deep learning based ones [5, 47, 48] until DnCNN [51] outperforms it for synthetic Gaussian noise at the expense of
massive amount of noiseless and noisy image pairs [51].
Requiring no clean and/or noisy image pairs, deep image
prior (DIP) [42, 43] has shown that a randomly initialized
network with hour-glass structure acts as a prior for several
inverse problems including denoising, super-resolution, and
inpainting with a single degraded image. Although DIP exhibits remarkable performance in these inverse problems,
denoising is the particular task that DIP does not perform
well, i.e., a single run yields far lower PSNR than BM3D
even for synthetic Gaussian noise set-up [42, 43]. Further§ : work done while with GIST. † : corresponding author.
Code: https://github.com/gistvision/DIP-denosing

0.11
0.12

LPIPS

Deep image prior (DIP) serves as a good inductive bias
for diverse inverse problems. Among them, denoising is
known to be particularly challenging for the DIP due to
noise fitting with the requirement of an early stopping. To
address the issue, we first analyze the DIP by the notion
of effective degrees of freedom (DF) to monitor the optimization progress and propose a principled stopping criterion before fitting to noise without access of a paired
ground truth image for Gaussian noise. We also propose
the ‘stochastic temporal ensemble (STE)’ method for incorporating techniques to further improve DIP’s performance
for denoising. We additionally extend our method to Poisson noise. Our empirical validations show that given a single noisy image, our method denoises the image while preserving rich textual details. Further, our approach outperforms prior arts in LPIPS by large margins with comparable PSNR and SSIM on seven different datasets.

BM3D
DIP

Ours
S2S

0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18

29.5

30.0

30.5

PSNR

31.0

31.5

Noise
BM3D
S2S
DIP
Ours
20.83/0.56 33.06/0.16 32.83/0.18 30.92/0.18 32.86/0.14

32.0

GT
P ↑ / L↓

Figure 1: Comparison of single image based denoising methods. ‘L↓’ refers to LPIPS and it is lower the better. ‘P↑’ refers to
PSNR and it is higher the better. Our method denoises an image
while preserves rich details; showing the best LPIPS with comparable PSNR to Self2Self (S2S) [30]. Ours shows much better
trade-off in PSNR and LPIPS than all other methods including all
different ensembling attempts of state of the art (S2S). (Numbers
in the circle of S2S denotes number of models in ensemble)

more, for the best performance, one needs to monitor the
PSNR (i.e., the ground-truth clean image is required here)
and stop the iterations before fitting to noise. Deep Decoder
addresses the issue by proposing a strong structural regularization to allow longer iterations for the inverse problems
including denoising [15]. However, it yields worse denoising performance than DIP due to low model complexity.
For better use of DIP for denoising without monitoring
PSNR with a clean image, we first analyze the model complexity of the DIP by the notion of effective degrees of freedom (DF) [10, 12, 41]. Specifically, the DF quantifies the
amount of overfitting (i.e., optimism) of a chosen hypothesis (i.e., a trained neural network model) to the given training data [10]. In other words, when overfitting occurs, the
DF increases. Therefore, to prevent the overfitting of the
DIP network to the noise, we want to suppress the DF over

5087

