Just Ask: Learning to Answer Questions from Millions of Narrated Videos
Antoine Yang1,2 , Antoine Miech1,2,+ , Josef Sivic3 , Ivan Laptev1,2 , Cordelia Schmid1,2
1

Inria Paris

2

Département d’informatique de l’ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University

3

CIIRC CTU Prague

+

Now at DeepMind

https://antoyang.github.io/just-ask.html

Abstract
Recent methods for visual question answering rely on
large-scale annotated datasets. Manual annotation of questions and answers for videos, however, is tedious, expensive and prevents scalability. In this work, we propose to
avoid manual annotation and generate a large-scale training dataset for video question answering making use of automatic cross-modal supervision. We leverage a question
generation transformer trained on text data and use it to
generate question-answer pairs from transcribed video narrations. Given narrated videos, we then automatically generate the HowToVQA69M dataset with 69M video-questionanswer triplets. To handle the open vocabulary of diverse
answers in this dataset, we propose a training procedure
based on a contrastive loss between a video-question multimodal transformer and an answer transformer. We introduce the zero-shot VideoQA task and show excellent results,
in particular for rare answers. Furthermore, we demonstrate our method to significantly outperform the state of
the art on MSRVTT-QA, MSVD-QA, ActivityNet-QA and
How2QA. Finally, for a detailed evaluation we introduce
iVQA, a new VideoQA dataset with reduced language biases and high-quality redundant manual annotations.

1. Introduction
Answering questions about videos requires a detailed understanding of the visual content and its association with the
natural language. Indeed, given the large diversity of questions, methods for Video Question Answering (VideoQA)
should reason about scenes, objects and human actions as
well as their complex temporal interactions.
Current approaches to VideoQA rely on deep fullysupervised models trained on manually annotated datasets
with question and answer pairs [22, 31, 34, 35, 40, 42, 48].
Collecting and annotating VideoQA datasets, however, is
cumbersome, time consuming, expensive and therefore not
scalable. As a result, current VideoQA datasets are relatively small (see Figure 2). This limitation hinders the
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech
Technical University in Prague.

Speech: Fold them in half again, to
make a triangle.

Speech: The sound is amazing on this
piano.

Generated Question: How do
you make a triangle?
Generated Answer: Fold them
in half again

Generated Question: What kind
of instrument is the sound of?
Generated Answer: Piano

Figure 1: Given videos with transcribed narration, we leverage language models and cross-modal supervision to obtain largescale VideoQA data. Above are two examples from our dataset.

progress in the field as state-of-the-art VideoQA models often require a large amount of training data.
In this work, we address the scale issue with a new
approach for automatically generating a VideoQA dataset,
see Figure 1 for examples. The idea is to leverage crossmodal supervision together with text-only tools for question
generation and to automatically annotate VideoQA from
a large amount of readily-available narrated videos. Inspired by the recent progress in language generation using transformer-based language models [10], we leverage
transformers trained on a question-answering text corpus to
generate a diverse set of non-scripted questions and corresponding open-vocabulary answers from text. By applying
these transformers to speech transcripts of narrated videos
from the large-scale HowTo100M dataset [58], we create
HowToVQA69M, an open-ended VideoQA dataset with 69
million video-question-answer triplets and a diverse set of
more than 16M unique answers (see Figure 3). As shown in
Figure 2, our HowToVQA69M is two orders of magnitude
larger compared to prior VideoQA datasets.
Given the limited diversity of existing datasets, current methods typically reduce video question answering to
a classification problem, where frequent answers are assigned to unique classes. Typically, up to 5K unique possible answers are considered. Such an approach, however,
does not scale to the open vocabulary of 16M different answers in our dataset. To address this problem and to enable video question answering with highly diverse questions

1686

