PR-GCN: A Deep Graph Convolutional Network with Point Refinement
for 6D Pose Estimation

1

Guangyuan Zhou1 , Huiqun Wang1,2 , Jiaxin Chen2 and Di Huang1,2 *
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{zhouguangyuan, hqwangscse, jiaxinchen, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
RGB-D based 6D pose estimation has recently achieved
remarkable progress, but still suffers from two major limitations: (1) ineffective representation of depth data and (2) insufficient integration of different modalities. This paper proposes a novel deep learning approach, namely Graph Convolutional Network with Point Refinement (PR-GCN), to simultaneously address the issues above in a unified way. It
first introduces the Point Refinement Network (PRN) to polish 3D point clouds, recovering missing parts with noise removed. Subsequently, the Multi-Modal Fusion Graph Convolutional Network (MMF-GCN) is presented to strengthen
RGB-D combination, which captures geometry-aware intermodality correlation through local information propagation
in the graph convolutional network. Extensive experiments
are conducted on three widely used benchmarks, and stateof-the-art performance is reached. Besides, it is also shown
that the proposed PRN and MMF-GCN modules are well
generalized to other frameworks.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Example object: (a) / (b) are RGB / depth images; (c)/(d)
are generated incomplete noisy point cloud and ground-truth.

1. Introduction
6D pose estimation aims to predict the orientation and location of an object in the 3D space from a canonical frame.
It has received extensive attention in computer vision, since
it is one of the fundamental steps for a wide range of applications, such as robotics grasping [6, 35, 47] and augmented
reality [22, 23]. Traditional methods [10, 11] attempt to accomplish this task based on RGB images only. They adopt
handcraft features (e.g. SIFT [21] and SURF [1]) to establish correspondence between input and canonical images.
Inspired by the great success in detection/recognition, deep
neural networks are recently explored to address this issue,
including the single-stage regression methods [15] and keypoint based methods [13, 32, 36, 35, 26, 25, 20]. Despite the
remarkable promotion in accuracy, RGB-based deep mod* indicates the corresponding author.

els heavily rely on textures; thus sensitive to illumination
variations, severe occlusions, and cluttered backgrounds.
Along with the emergence and innovation of depth sensors, 6D pose estimation on RGB-D data has become popular, expecting to deliver performance gain by adding geometry information. Early works [11, 24, 45] estimate object
poses from RGB images and refine them according to depth
maps. Later studies [38, 17] dedicate to integrating RGB
and depth clues in a more sophisticated way. Particularly,
[41, 31, 30, 38, 9] represent depth images as 3D point clouds
and the models are more efficient in computation and storage than those on original depth maps. By jointly making
use of both modalities, RGB-D based solutions report better
scores, with the superiority in the presence of the difficulties
aforementioned as well as the low-texture case.
However, current RGB-D pose estimation suffers from

2793

