Shallow Bayesian Meta Learning for Real-World Few-Shot Recognition
Xueting Zhang1∗, Debin Meng3∗ , Henry Gouk1 , Timothy Hospedales1,2
1
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
2
Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{xueting.zhang,henry.gouk,t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk, mengdebin16@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Many state-of-the-art few-shot learners focus on developing effective training procedures for feature representations,
before using simple (e.g., nearest centroid) classifiers. We take
an approach that is agnostic to the features used, and focus
exclusively on meta-learning the final classifier layer. Specifically, we introduce MetaQDA, a Bayesian meta-learning
generalisation of the classic quadratic discriminant analysis.
This approach has several benefits of interest to practitioners: meta-learning is fast and memory efficient, without the
need to fine-tune features. It is agnostic to the off-the-shelf
features chosen, and thus will continue to benefit from future
advances in feature representations. Empirically, it leads
to excellent performance in cross-domain few-shot learning, class-incremental few-shot learning, and crucially for
real-world applications, the Bayesian formulation leads to
state-of-the-art uncertainty calibration in predictions.

1. Introduction
Few-shot recognition methods aim to solve classification
problems with limited labelled training data, motivating
a large body of work [62]. Contemporary approaches to
few-shot recognition are characterized by a focus on deep
meta-learning [23] methods that provide data efficient
learning of new categories by using auxiliary data to train
a model designed for rapid adaptation to new categories
[8, 68], or for synthesizing a classifier for new categories in
a feed-forward manner [38, 43]. Most of these meta-learning
methods have been intimately interwoven with the training
algorithm and/or architecture of the deep network that they
build upon. For example, many have relied on episodic
training schemes [52, 59], where few-shot learning problems
are simulated at each iteration of training; differentiable
optimisers [3, 30], or new neural network modules [55, 15]
∗ Xueting and Debin contributed equally to this research, code is available
https://github.com/Open-Debin/Bayesian_MQDA

to facilitate data efficient learning and recognition.
Against this backdrop, a handful of recent studies
[61, 14, 4, 37, 64, 60] have pushed back against deep metalearning. They have observed, for example, that a well tuned
convolutional network pre-trained for multi-class recognition
and combined with a simple linear or nearest centroid classifier can match or outperform state-of-the-art meta-learners.
Even self-supervised pre-training [37] has led to feature extractors that outperform many meta-learners. These analyses
raise the question: is meta-learning indeed beneficial, or is
focusing on improving conventional pre-training sufficient?
We take a position in defense of meta-learning for few-shot
recognition. To disentangle the influences of meta-learning
per-se and feature learning discussed above, we restrict
ourselves to fixed pre-trained features and conduct no feature
learning in this study. It shows that meta-learning, even in
its shallowest form, can boost few-shot learning above and
beyond whatever is provided by the pre-trained features alone.
We take an amortized Bayesian inference approach [15, 21]
to shallow meta-learning. During meta-testing, we infer a
distribution over classifier parameters given the support set;
and during meta-training we learn a feed-forward inference
procedure for these parameters. While the limited recent
work in Bayesian meta-learning is underpinned by amortized
Variational Inference [15], our approach relies instead on conjugacy [12]. Specifically, we build upon the classic Quadratic
Discriminant Analysis (QDA) [9] classifier and extended
it with a Bayesian prior, an inference pipeline for the QDA
parameter posterior given the support set, and gradient-based
meta-training. We term the overall framework MetaQDA.
MetaQDA has several practical benefits for real-world
deployments. Firstly, MetaQDA allows meta-learning to be
conducted in the resource constrained scenario without endto-end training [24], while providing superior performance to
fixed-feature approaches [61, 4, 37]. Furthermore by decomposing representation learning from classifier meta-learning,
MetaQDA is expected to benefit from continued progress
in CNN architectures and training strategies. Indeed our
empirical results show our feature-agnostic strategy benefits

651

