NeuSpike-Net: High Speed Video Reconstruction via
Bio-inspired Neuromorphic Cameras

1

Lin Zhu1,2 Jianing Li1,2 Xiao Wang2 Tiejun Huang1 Yonghong Tian1,2,∗
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{linzhu, lijianing, tjhuang, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn wangxiaocvpr@foxmail.com

Abstract
Neuromorphic vision sensor is a new bio-inspired imaging paradigm that emerged in recent years, which continuously sensing luminance intensity and firing asynchronous
spikes (events) with high temporal resolution. Typically,
there are two types of neuromorphic vision sensors, namely
dynamic vision sensor (DVS) and spike camera. From the
perspective of bio-inspired sampling, DVS only perceives
movement by imitating the retinal periphery, while the spike
camera was developed to perceive fine textures by simulating the fovea. It is meaningful to explore how to combine two types of neuromorphic cameras to reconstruct high
quality image like human vision. In this paper, we propose
a NeuSpike-Net to learn both the high dynamic range and
high motion sensitivity of DVS and the full texture sampling
of spike camera to achieve high-speed and high dynamic
image reconstruction. We propose a novel representation
to effectively extract the temporal information of spike and
event data. By introducing the feature fusion module, the
two types of neuromorphic data achieve complementary to
each other. The experimental results on the simulated and
real datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach is effective to reconstruct high-speed and high dynamic range
images via the combination of spike and event data.

1. Introduction
In recent years, bio-inspired vision sensors have become
very attractive in the field of self-driving cars, unmanned
aerial vehicles, and autonomous mobile robots [23], due to
their significant advantages over conventional frame-based
cameras, such as high dynamic range and high temporal resolution [13, 24].
Generally speaking, there are two ways of bio-inspired
visual sampling manner: temporal contrast sampling and
integral sampling. Among them, dynamic vision sensor (D∗ Corresponding author.

VS) [9, 1], a.k.a. event camera, is the most well-recognized
bio-inspired vision sensor based on temporal contrast sampling, which measures the change of light intensity and outputs high dynamic range events. From the biological point
of view, DVS imitates the periphery of the retina [36] which
is sensitive to motion. However, it is very difficult to reconstruct the texture from DVS. To solve this problem, some
event-based sensors were developed subsequently by combining DVS and a frame-based active-pixel sensor (APS)
such as DAVIS [4], or adding an extra photo-measurement
circuit such as ATIS [30] and CeleX [15]. However, a mismatch exists due to the difference in the sampling time resolution between two kinds of heterogeneous circuits. Recently, many algorithms were designed to reconstruct images
using DVS [33, 31, 25, 34, 38, 44, 6]. There are also some
algorithms that combine image and event to reconstruct texture images [28, 29, 27, 33], which can obtain more texture
information than only using the DVS signal.
Different from DVS, there are a number of spiking image
sensors following the basis of the integrate-and-fire neuron
model [43, 19, 7, 35]. Some variants of spiking image sensors such as asynchronous pixel event tricolor vision sensor [22] and near infrared spiking image sensor [3] were
proposed. Recently, Dong et al. [10, 47] proposed a spike
camera based on fovea-like sampling method, which is with
high spatial (250×400) and temporal resolutions (40,000
Hz). Moreover, there is a portable spike camera, a.k.a. Vidar, with a sampling rate of 20,000 Hz. For the spike camera, the spike firing frequency can be used to estimate light
intensity [47]. Recently, a fovea-like texture reconstruction
framework was proposed to reconstruct images [49]. In addition, some methods based on the spike camera were developed for spike coding [11, 48], tone mapping [16] and
motion deblurring [45].
In human vision system [36], peripheral and foveal vision is not independent, but is directly connected [37]. It is
biologically plausible to the periphery and fovea are complementary. This motivates us to explore a question: how
to combine the two neuromorphic cameras to reconstruct

2400

