Semi-supervised Active Learning for Semi-supervised Models: Exploit
Adversarial Examples with Graph-based Virtual Labels
Jiannan Guo1,2 * Haochen Shi3∗ Yangyang Kang2 Kun Kuang1 Siliang Tang1†
Zhuoren Jiang1 Changlong Sun1,2 Fei Wu1 Yueting Zhuang1
1
Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Group 3 Université de Montréal
{jiannan, kunkuang, siliang, jiangzhuoren, wufei, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn
yangyang.kangyy@alibaba-inc.com, changlong.scl@taobao.com, haochen.shi@umontreal.ca

Abstract
The performance of computer vision models significantly
improves with more labeled data. However, the acquisition
of labeled data is limited by the high cost. To mitigate the
reliance on large labeled datasets, active learning (AL) and
semi-supervised learning (SSL) are frequently adopted. Although current mainstream methods begin to combine SSL
and AL (SSL-AL) to excavate the diverse expressions of unlabeled samples, these methods’ fully supervised task models are still trained only with labeled data. Besides, these
method’s SSL-AL frameworks suffer from mismatch problems. Here, we propose a graph-based SSL-AL framework
to unleash the SSL task models’ power and make an effective SSL-AL interaction. In the framework, SSL leverages
graph-based label propagation to deliver virtual labels to
unlabeled samples, rendering AL samples’ structural distribution and boosting AL. AL finds samples near the clusters’
boundary to help SSL perform better label propagation by
exploiting adversarial examples. The information exchange
in the closed-loop realizes mutual enhancement of SSL and
AL. Experimental results show that our method outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods against classification and segmentation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The development of deep learning brings prosperity to
the field of computer vision [23, 39, 3, 5, 57, 53, 54, 55, 56,
26, 25, 27]. However, these data-hungry models still need
to be fed with a large amount of labeled data, the acquisition
of which is limited by the expensive cost of annotation [58].
This dilemma between performance and cost brings massive research and practical value to achieve a higher performance of the task models with limited labeled data.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

With awareness of this problem, active learning
(AL) [52, 50, 29, 34] is introduced to unleash the potential of labeling procedures for budget-limited annotation.
Despite the progress achieved, most AL algorithms suffer from data wasting problems as they ignore that utilizing AL in real-world scenarios means that the majority of
data remains unlabeled, which could further empower AL
with semi-supervised learning (SSL) in the following three
ways: 1) (SSL Task Model) When numerous unlabeled data
are used in conjunction with a bunch of labeled data, it
is very natural and practical to further improve the performance of the task models by SSL without introducing
any further annotation cost. 2) (SSL→AL) The success of
SSL [20, 41, 4, 42, 46] proves that it is feasible to improve
performance by modeling the relation (intra-class similarity and inter-class distinguishability) among samples with
SSL. Thus AL could assess samples’ annotation value more
accurately, being guided by the prior knowledge of SSLmodeled relation. 3) (AL→SSL) Since the initial samples’
relations modeled by SSL can hardly be completely correct. AL could confirm precise relations and rectify wrong
relations by labeling specific samples. Finally, the mutual
enhancement of AL and SSL is achieved in such a loop.
Although several works combine SSL and AL (SSLAL) [52, 19, 40], these methods suffer from the two problems: 1) Their fully supervised task models are subjected
to data-wasting problems. 2) These works [40, 19, 52] are
based on the VAE-GAN structure and conduct AL on the
latent representation of samples, which is learned through a
mini-max game on samples’ labeling states. As is illustrated
in Figure 1, this kind of method suffers from the mismatch
problem, which decreases AL’s efficiency.
Based on the above insights, we propose a novel gRaphbasEd VIrtual adVersarial Active Learning (REVIVAL)
framework for semi-supervised models. The REVIVAL is
free of the above two deficiencies and realizes the mutual
enhancement of AL and SSL. This framework mainly con-

2896

