Learning Hierarchical Graph Neural Networks for Image Clustering
Yifan Xing*
Wei Xia

Tong He*
Tianjun Xiao
Yongxin Wang
David Wipf
Zheng Zhang

Yuanjun Xiong
Stefano Soatto

Amazon Web Services
{yifax, htong, tianjux, yongxinw, yuanjx, wxia, daviwipf, zhaz, soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
We propose a hierarchical graph neural network (GNN)
model that learns how to cluster a set of images into an unknown number of identities using a training set of images
annotated with labels belonging to a disjoint set of identities. Our hierarchical GNN uses a novel approach to merge
connected components predicted at each level of the hierarchy to form a new graph at the next level. Unlike fully unsupervised hierarchical clustering, the choice of grouping and
complexity criteria stems naturally from supervision in the
training set. The resulting method, Hi-LANDER, achieves
an average of 49% improvement in F-score and 7% increase
in Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) relative to current GNN-based clustering algorithms. Additionally, stateof-the-art GNN-based methods rely on separate models to
predict linkage probabilities and node densities as intermediate steps of the clustering process. In contrast, our unified
framework achieves a three-fold decrease in computational
cost. Our training and inference code are released 1 .

1. Introduction
Clustering is a pillar of unsupervised learning. It consists of grouping data points according to a manually specified criterion. Without any supervision, the problem is selfreferential, with the outcome being defined by the choice
of grouping criterion. Different criteria yield different solutions, with no independent validation mechanism. Even
within a given criterion, clustering typically yields multiple
solutions depending on a complexity measure, and a separate model selection criterion is introduced to arrive at a
unique solution. A large branch of unsupervised clustering
methods follow the hierarchical/agglomerative framework
[41, 42, 44], which gives a tree of cluster partitions with
varying granularity of the data, but they still require a model
*Indicates equal contribution.
1 https://github.com/dmlc/dgl/tree/master/

examples/pytorch/hilander

selection criterion for the final single grouping. Rather than
engineering the complexity and grouping criteria, we wish
to learn them from data.2 Clearly, this is not the data we
wish to cluster, for we do not have any annotations for
them. Instead, it is a different set of training data, the metatraining set, for which cluster labels are given, corresponding to identities that are disjoint from those expected in the
test set. For example, the test set might be an untagged collection of photos by a particular user, for which there exists
a true set of discrete identities that we wish to discover, say
their family members. While those family members have
never been seen before, the system has access to different
photo collections, tagged with different identities, during
training. Our goal is to leverage the latter labeled training
set to learn how to cluster different test sets with unknown
numbers of different identities. This is closely related to
“open-set” or “open universe” classification [40, 26].
We present the first hierarchical/agglomerative clustering method using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). GNNs
are a natural tool for learning how to cluster [51, 57, 56], as
they provide a way of predicting the connectivity of a graph
using training data. In our case, the graph describes the
connectivity among test data, with connected components
ultimately determining the clusters.
Our hierarchical GNN uses a novel approach to merge
connected components predicted at each level of the hierarchy to form a new graph at the next level. We employ a
GNN to predict connectivity at each level, and iterate until
convergence. While in unsupervised agglomerative clustering convergence occurs when all clusters are merged to
a single node [42, 44], or when an arbitrary threshold of
an arbitrary model complexity criterion is reached, in our
case convergence is driven by the training set, and occurs
when no more edges are added to the graph by the GNN.
There is no need to define an arbitrary model selection criterion. Instead, the “natural granularity” of the clustering
2 Of course, every unsupervised inference method requires inductive biases. Ours stems naturally from supervision in the meta-training set and
density in the inferred clusters.

3467

