CaT: Weakly Supervised Object Detection with Category Transfer
Tianyue Cao1 Lianyu Du1 Xiaoyun Zhang1 * Siheng Chen1,2 Ya Zhang1,2 Yan-Feng Wang1,2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University1 Shanghai AI Laboratory2
{vanessa , dulianyu, xiaoyun.zhang, sihengc, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
A large gap exists between fully-supervised object detection and weakly-supervised object detection. To narrow this gap, some methods consider knowledge transfer
from additional fully-supervised dataset. But these methods do not fully exploit discriminative category information in the fully-supervised dataset, thus causing low mAP.
To solve this issue, we propose a novel category transfer
framework for weakly supervised object detection. The intuition is to fully leverage both visually-discriminative and
semantically-correlated category information in the fullysupervised dataset to enhance the object-classification ability of a weakly-supervised detector. To handle overlapping category transfer, we propose a double-supervision
mean teacher to gather common category information and
bridge the domain gap between two datasets. To handle
non-overlapping category transfer, we propose a semantic
graph convolutional network to promote the aggregation of
semantic features between correlated categories. Experiments are conducted with Pascal VOC 2007 as the target weakly-supervised dataset and COCO as the source
fully-supervised dataset. Our category transfer framework
achieves 63.5% mAP and 80.3% CorLoc with 5 overlapping
categories between two datasets, which outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods. Codes are avaliable at https:
//github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/CaT .

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the most fundamental tasks in
computer vision [44]. In the past decade, based on deep
neural networks, many methods [16, 26, 27] have achieved
great success. However, most methods follow the fully supervised setting, which requires a huge number of highquality annotations, including the precise bounding boxes
of objects and their corresponding category labels. This set* Xiaoyun Zhang is the corresponding author.

This work was supported in part by Chinese National Key R&D Program (2019YFB1804304), National Natural Science Foundation of China
(61771306),State Key Laboratory of UHD Video and Audio Production
and Presentation, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing
and Transmissions(STCSM 18DZ2270700) and 111 plan(BP0719010).

fully-supervised
dataset
dog

cat

fully-supervised
student

dog

overlapping
category transfer

teacher
category label: dog, chair

non-overlapping
category transfer

weakly-supervised
student
weakly-supervised
dataset

double-supervised
mean teacher network

kid
dog
chair

car
cat
person

person

semantic graph
convolutional network

Figure 1. The sketch map of our category transfer framework. We
use the double-supervised mean teacher network to transfer overlapping category and objectness knowledge; and use the semantic
graph convolutional network to transfer non-overlapping category
knowledge. The final prediction is generated by the teacher.

ting usually costs extensive amount of time and resources
to acquire such annotations. To reduce the annotation
cost, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) are proposed [2, 32, 33] to train detection models with only imagelevel category labels. However, the lack of bounding-boxlevel supervision leads to significant issues, such as instance
ambiguity and low-quality proposals. Therefore, a large
performance gap still exists between fully-supervised object
detection (89.1% mAP, SOTA [10]) and weakly-supervised
object detection (56.8% mAP, SOTA [13]).
To narrow this gap, some previous methods consider
knowledge transfer from additional data. There are two
main approaches: the objectness transfer approach and the
semi-supervised approach. For example, [18, 29, 43] train
a generic object detector on source data and apply it to target data; however, this objectness transfer methods ignores
the category information in the source dataset, causing the
decline of classification. [11, 37, 35, 15] follow the semisupervised setting with partial fully annotated data, and
transform an image classifier to an object detector. Such
a semi-supervised method leverages both box and category
information, but it usually can not solve the domain gap
between datasets, especially the category inconsistency be-

3070

