Focal Frequency Loss for Image Reconstruction and Synthesis
Liming Jiang1
Bo Dai1
Wayne Wu2
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{liming002, bo.dai, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

wuwenyan@sensetime.com

fake

real

fake

Vanilla AE

real

fake

real

fake

VAE

real

GAN (pix2pix)

Image reconstruction and synthesis have witnessed remarkable progress thanks to the development of generative
models. Nonetheless, gaps could still exist between the real
and generated images, especially in the frequency domain.
In this study, we show that narrowing gaps in the frequency
domain can ameliorate image reconstruction and synthesis quality further. We propose a novel focal frequency loss,
which allows a model to adaptively focus on frequency components that are hard to synthesize by down-weighting the
easy ones. This objective function is complementary to existing spatial losses, offering great impedance against the
loss of important frequency information due to the inherent bias of neural networks. We demonstrate the versatility
and effectiveness of focal frequency loss to improve popular
models, such as VAE, pix2pix, and SPADE, in both perceptual quality and quantitative performance. We further show
its potential on StyleGAN2. 1, 2

Chen Change Loy1
2
SenseTime Research

1. Introduction
We have seen remarkable progress in image reconstruction and synthesis along with the development of generative
models [19, 34, 15, 32, 56], and the progress continues with
the emergence of various powerful deep learning-based approaches [31, 43, 44, 55]. Despite their immense success,
one could still observe the gaps between the real and generated images in certain cases.
These gaps are sometimes manifested in the form of artifacts that are discernible. For instance, upsampling layers using transposed convolutions tend to produce checkerboard artifacts [42]. The gaps, in some other cases, may
only be revealed through the frequency spectrum analysis.
Recent studies [59, 72, 22] in media forensics have shown
some notable periodic patterns in the frequency spectra of
manipulated images, which may be consistent with artifacts
in the spatial domain. In Figure 1, we show some paired examples of real images and the fake ones generated by typical generative models for image reconstruction and synthesis. It is observed that the frequency domain gap between
1 GitHub: https://github.com/EndlessSora/focal-frequency-loss.
2 Project page: https://www.mmlab-ntu.com/project/ffl/index.html.

Figure 1. Frequency domain gaps between the real and the generated images by typical generative models in image reconstruction
and synthesis. Vanilla AE [19] loses important frequencies, leading to blurry images (Row 1 and 2). VAE [34] biases to a limited spectrum region (Row 3), losing high-frequency information
(outer regions and corners). Unnatural periodic patterns can be
spotted on the spectra of images generated by GAN (pix2pix) [23]
(Row 4), consistent with the observable checkerboard artifacts
(zoom in for view). In some cases, a frequency spectrum region
shift occurs to GAN-generated images (Row 5).

the real and fake images may be a common issue for these
methods, albeit in slightly different forms.
The observed gaps in the frequency domain may be imputed to some inherent bias of neural networks when applied to reconstruction and synthesis tasks. Fourier analysis highlights a phenomenon called spectral bias [48,
40, 54], a learning bias of neural networks towards lowfrequency functions. Thus, generative models tend to eschew frequency components that are hard to synthesize,
i.e., hard frequencies, and converge to an inferior point. FPrinciple [67] shows that the priority of fitting certain fre-

13919

