Dual Projection Generative Adversarial Networks for Conditional Image
Generation
Ligong Han,1 Martin Renqiang Min,2 Anastasis Stathopoulos,1
Yu Tian,1 Ruijiang Gao,3 Asim Kadav,2 Dimitris Metaxas1
1
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University 2 NEC Labs America
3
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin
lh599@rutgers.edu, renqiang@nec-labs.com, as2947@cs.rutgers.edu
yt219@cs.rutgers.edu, ruijiang@utexas.edu, asim@nec-labs.com, dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (cGANs)
extend the standard unconditional GAN framework to
learning joint data-label distributions from samples, and
have been established as powerful generative models capable of generating high-fidelity imagery. A challenge of
training such a model lies in properly infusing class information into its generator and discriminator. For the discriminator, class conditioning can be achieved by either (1)
directly incorporating labels as input or (2) involving labels
in an auxiliary classification loss. In this paper, we show
that the former directly aligns the class-conditioned fakeand-real data distributions P (image|class) (data matching), while the latter aligns data-conditioned class distributions P (class|image) (label matching). Although class separability does not directly translate to sample quality and
becomes a burden if classification itself is intrinsically difficult, the discriminator cannot provide useful guidance for
the generator if features of distinct classes are mapped to
the same point and thus become inseparable. Motivated by
this intuition, we propose a Dual Projection GAN (P2GAN)
model that learns to balance between data matching and label matching. We then propose an improved cGAN model
with Auxiliary Classification that directly aligns the fake
and real conditionals P (class|image) by minimizing their
f -divergence. Experiments on a synthetic Mixture of Gaussian (MoG) dataset and a variety of real-world datasets including CIFAR100, ImageNet, and VGGFace2 demonstrate
the efficacy of our proposed models.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7] are an algorithmic framework that allows implicit generative modeling of data distribution from samples [29]. It has at-

tracted great attention due to its ability to model very highdimensional data, such as images or videos and to produce
sharp and faithful samples [16, 38, 3]. Conditional GAN
(cGAN) [25, 33, 28] is an extension of GAN that utilizes
the label information and aims to learn the joint distribution
of data and label. Thanks to its ability to control over the
generative process by conditioning on labels, it has been
widely adopted in real-world problems including classconditional image generation [31, 33, 5], text-to-image generation [35, 39], image-to-image generation [14, 40], textto-video synthesis [22, 1, 10, 9], domain adaptation [13, 26]
etc.
Different conditional GANs differ in the way how data
and labels are incorporated in the discriminator. Class conditioning can be achieved by either (1) conditioning the discriminator directly on labels or their embeddings [25, 14,
28], or by (2) incorporating an auxiliary classification loss
in the objective, as in (T)AC-GANs[25, 6]. Recently, cGAN
has received a major update that changed the label from
being concatenated [25, 35, 39] to being projected [28].
The projection discriminator takes the inner product between the label embedding and the data/image embedding,
and remains to be the choice of many state-of-the-art methods [38, 3].
In this paper, we first give insights on projection discriminators. We point out that the success of projection
can be explained by its flexible form. By tying real and
fake class embeddings as their difference, a projection discriminator can ideally realize two extremes in a single form:
(1) matching conditional label distributions P (class|image)
(label matching), and (2) matching conditional data distributions P (image|class) (data matching). Moreover, the
visualization of data embeddings of trained projection discriminators does not show obvious patterns of class clustering. This suggests that projection may bias towards conditional data matching. Although label matching does not

14438

