Social Fabric: Tubelet Compositions for Video Relation Detection
Shuo Chen, Zenglin Shi, Pascal Mettes, and Cees G. M. Snoek
University of Amsterdam
a person swordfighting with another person

"greet"

"approach"

"run"

"clash"

"fall"

an adult chasing a child

Figure 1: Social Fabric encodes compositions of interaction primitives defined over tubelet pairs. The primitives are data
driven and may correspond to interactions like “greet”, “clash” and “fall”. Using the primitives, our two-stage network can
classify, detect, and search for complex relations across entire videos.

Abstract
This paper strives to classify and detect the relationship between object tubelets appearing within a video as
a 〈subject-predicate-object〉 triplet. Where existing works
treat object proposals or tubelets as single entities and
model their relations a posteriori, we propose to classify and
detect predicates for pairs of object tubelets a priori. We
also propose Social Fabric: an encoding that represents a
pair of object tubelets as a composition of interaction primitives. These primitives are learned over all relations, resulting in a compact representation able to localize and classify relations from the pool of co-occurring object tubelets
across all timespans in a video. The encoding enables our
two-stage network. In the first stage, we train Social Fabric
to suggest proposals that are likely interacting. We use the
Social Fabric in the second stage to simultaneously finetune and predict predicate labels for the tubelets. Experiments demonstrate the benefit of early video relation modeling, our encoding and the two-stage architecture, leading
to a new state-of-the-art on two benchmarks. We also show
how the encoding enables query-by-primitive-example to
search for spatio-temporal video relations. Code: https:
//github.com/shanshuo/Social-Fabric.

1. Introduction
To understand what is happening where in videos, it is
necessary to detect and recognize relationships between individual instances. Effectively capturing these relationships
could improve captioning [55], video retrieval [41], visual question answering [1] and many other visual-language
tasks. In this paper, we strive to classify and detect the
relationship between object tubelets appearing throughout
a video as a 〈subject-predicate-object〉 triplet, like 〈dogchase-child〉 or 〈horse-stand behind-person〉.
Shang et al. [38, 39] pioneered this challenging problem
by their definition of video datasets with dense bounding
box annotations, temporal bounds, and relationship-triplet
labels. Following their guidance, a leading approach to date
is to generate proposals for individual objects on short video
snippets, encode the proposals, predict a relation and associate the relations over the entire video, e.g. [34, 42, 53]. To
better detect long-term interactions, Liu et al. [30] forego
the need for snippets by first localizing individual object
tubelets throughout the entire video, filter out unlikely pairs
and predict predicates for the remaining ones. Different
from all these existing works on video relation prediction,
which treat object proposals or tubelets as single entities
and model their relations a posteriori, we propose to clas13485

