UNISURF: Unifying Neural Implicit Surfaces and
Radiance Fields for Multi-View Reconstruction

1

Michael Oechsle1,2,3 Songyou Peng1,4 Andreas Geiger1,2
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
University of Tübingen
3
4
ETAS GmbH, Stuttgart
ETH Zurich
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Neural implicit 3D representations have emerged as a
powerful paradigm for reconstructing surfaces from multiview images and synthesizing novel views. Unfortunately,
existing methods such as DVR or IDR require accurate perpixel object masks as supervision. At the same time, neural radiance fields have revolutionized novel view synthesis.
However, NeRF’s estimated volume density does not admit
accurate surface reconstruction. Our key insight is that implicit surface models and radiance fields can be formulated
in a unified way, enabling both surface and volume rendering using the same model. This unified perspective enables
novel, more efficient sampling procedures and the ability
to reconstruct accurate surfaces without input masks. We
compare our method on the DTU, BlendedMVS, and a synthetic indoor dataset. Our experiments demonstrate that we
outperform NeRF in terms of reconstruction quality while
performing on par with IDR without requiring masks.

1. Introduction
Capturing the geometry and appearance of 3D scenes
from a set of images is one of the cornerstone problems in
computer vision. Towards this goal, coordinate-based neural models have emerged as a powerful tool for 3D reconstruction of geometry and appearance within the last years.
Many recent methods employ continuous implicit functions parameterized with neural networks as 3D representations of geometry [3, 8, 12, 31, 32, 37, 41, 43, 47, 57] or appearance [34, 38, 39, 40, 47, 52, 61]. These neural 3D representations have shown impressive performance on geometry reconstruction and novel view synthesis from multi-view
images. Besides the choice of the 3D representation (e.g.,
occupancy field, unsigned or signed distance field), one key
element for neural implicit multi-view reconstruction is the
rendering technique. While some of these works represent
the implicit surface as level set and hence render the appearance from surfaces [38, 52, 61], others integrate densities by

Figure 1: Illustration. Implicit models based on surface
rendering [38, 61] require input masks and radiance fields
[34] do not optimize implicit surfaces directly. UNISURF
provides a principled unified formulation, enabling accurate
surface reconstruction from images without input masks.
drawing samples along the viewing rays [22, 34, 49].
In existing work, surface rendering techniques have
shown impressive performance in 3D reconstruction [38,
61]. However, they require per-pixel object masks as input
and an appropriate network initialization since surface rendering techniques only provide gradient information locally
where a surface intersects with a ray. Intuitively speaking,
optimizing wrt. local gradients can be seen as an iterative
deformation procedure applied to an initial neural surface
which is often initialized as a sphere. Additional constraints
such as mask supervision are necessary for converging to a
valid surface, see Fig. 2 for an illustration. Due to their
reliance on masks, surface rendering methods are limited to
object-level reconstruction and do not scale to larger scenes.
On contrary, volume rendering methods like NeRF [34]
have shown impressive results for novel view synthesis, also
for larger scenes. However, surfaces extracted as level sets
of the underlying volume density are usually non-smooth

5589

