Generative Compositional Augmentations for Scene Graph Prediction
Boris Knyazev*,1,2 Harm de Vries3 Cătălina Cangea4
Graham W. Taylor1,2 Aaron Courville5,6 Eugene Belilovsky5,7
1
School of Engineering, University of Guelph 2 Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Element AI 4 University of Cambridge 5 Mila 6 Université de Montréal 7 Concordia University

Abstract

woman has hair
dog wearing shirt

woman on surfboard

Inferring objects and their relationships from an image
in the form of a scene graph is useful in many applications
at the intersection of vision and language. We consider a
challenging problem of compositional generalization that
emerges in this task due to a long tail data distribution. Current scene graph generation models are trained on a tiny
fraction of the distribution corresponding to the most frequent compositions, e.g. <cup, on, table>. However, test
images might contain zero- and few-shot compositions of
objects and relationships, e.g. <cup, on, surfboard>. Despite each of the object categories and the predicate (e.g.
‘on’) being frequent in the training data, the models often fail
to properly understand such unseen or rare compositions.
To improve generalization, it is natural to attempt increasing the diversity of the training distribution. However, in
the graph domain this is non-trivial. To that end, we propose a method to synthesize rare yet plausible scene graphs
by perturbing real ones. We then propose and empirically
study a model based on conditional generative adversarial
networks (GANs) that allows us to generate visual features
of perturbed scene graphs and learn from them in a joint
fashion. When evaluated on the Visual Genome dataset, our
approach yields marginal, but consistent improvements in
zero- and few-shot metrics. We analyze the limitations of our
approach indicating promising directions for future research.

1. Introduction
Reasoning about the world in terms of objects and relationships between them is an important aspect of human
and machine cognition [21]. In our environment, we can
often observe frequent compositions such as “person on a
surfboard” or “person next to a dog”. When we are faced
with a rare or previously unseen composition such as “dog
* This work was partially done while the author was an intern at Mila.
Correspondence to: bknyazev@uoguelph.ca

dog on surfboard
man on surfboard

(a)

man in shirt

cup on surfboard

surfboard with ﬂower

Recall=41%

Recall=4.5%

ear of dog

(b)

Triplets in
the dataset
Other
plausible
triplets
All

possible Unlikely
triplets triplets

bear has helmet

ﬂag on bear

dog laying on skateboard
wheel on skateboard

bear has leg

Figure 1. (a) The triplet distribution in Visual Genome [38] is
extremely long-tailed, with numerous few- and zero-shot compositions (highlighted in red and yellow respectively). (b) The training
set contains a tiny fraction (3%) of all possible triplets, while many
other plausible triplets exist. We aim to “hallucinate” such compositions using GANs to increase the diversity of training samples
and improve generalization. Recall results are from [67].

on a surfboard”, to understand the scene we need to understand the concepts of ‘person’, ‘dog’, ‘surfboard’ and
‘on’. While such unbiased reasoning about concepts is easy
for humans, for machines this task has remained extremely
challenging [3, 32, 4, 35, 40]. Learning-based models tend
to capture spurious statistical correlations in the training
data [2, 52], e.g. ‘person’ rather than ‘dog’ has always occurred on a surfboard. When the evaluation is explicitly
focused on compositional generalization – ability to recognize novel or rare combinations of objects and relationships
– such models then can fail remarkably [3, 45, 67, 36].
Predicting compositions of objects and the relationships
between them from images is part of the scene graph generation (SGG) task. SGG is important, because accurately
inferred scene graphs can improve downstream results in
tasks, such as VQA [83, 29, 7, 41, 63, 26, 12], image captioning [78, 22, 42, 72, 48], retrieval [33, 5, 67, 69, 62] and
others [1, 75]. However, inferring scene graphs accurately is

15827

