Grafit: Learning fine-grained image representations with coarse labels
Hugo Touvron1,2

Alexandre Sablayrolles 1
1

Matthijs Douze 1
2

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of learning a finer representation than the one provided by training labels. This
enables fine-grained category retrieval of images in a collection annotated with coarse labels only.
Our network is learned with a nearest-neighbor classifier objective, and an instance loss inspired by selfsupervised learning. By jointly leveraging the coarse labels
and the underlying fine-grained latent space, it significantly
improves the accuracy of category-level retrieval methods.
Our strategy outperforms all competing methods for retrieving or classifying images at a finer granularity than
that available at train time. It also improves the accuracy
for transfer learning tasks to fine-grained datasets.

1. Introduction
Image classification now achieves a performance that
meets many application needs [27, 37, 54]. However, in
practice, datasets and labels available at training time do
not necessarily correspond to those needed in subsequent
applications [17]. The granularity of the training-time concepts may not suffice for fine-grained downstream tasks.
This has encouraged the development of specialized classifiers offering a more precise representation. Fine-grained
classification datasets [29] have been developed for specific
domains, for instance to distinguish different plants [13] or
bird species [59].
Gathering a sufficiently large collection with finegrained labels is difficult by itself, as it requires to find
enough images of rare classes, and annotating them precisely requires domain specialists with in-domain expertise.
This is evidenced by the Open Images construction annotation protocol [38] that states that: “Manually labeling a
large number of images with the presence or absence of
19,794 different classes is not feasible”. For this reason
they resorted to computer-assisted annotation, at the risk of
introducing biases due to the assisting algorithm.
To circumvent this issue, we propose in this paper a strategy to get strong classification and image retrieval perfor-

Matthieu Cord 2

Hervé Jégou 1

Sorbonne University

mance on fine concepts using only coarse labels at training.
Our work leverages two intuitions. First, in order to improve the granularity beyond the one provided by image labels, we need to exploit another signal than just the labels.
For this purpose, we build upon recent works [3, 62] that
exploit two losses to address both image classification and
instance recognition, leveraging the “free” annotations provided by multiple data augmentations of a same instance, in
the spirit of self-supervised learning [6, 9, 10, 25].
The second intuition is that it is better to explicitly infer
coarse labels even when classifying at a finer granularity.
For this purpose, we propose a simple method that exploits
both a coarse classifier and image embeddings to improve
fine-grained category-level retrieval. This strategy outperforms existing works that exploit coarse labels at training
time but do not explicitly rely on them when retrieving finergrained concepts [61].
By these ways our method liberates the data collection
process from the quirks of a rigid fine-grained taxonomy as
previously discussed. To validate our strategy, we investigate two challenging use-cases:
On-the-fly classification. For this task, the fine-grained
labels are available at test time only, and we use a nonparametric kNN classifier [61] for on-the-fly classification,
i.e. without training on the fine-grained labels.
Category-level Retrieval. Given a collection of images
annotated with coarse labels, like a product catalog, we aim
at ranking these images according to their fine-grained semantic similarity to a new query image outside the collection, as illustrated by Figure 1. We believe that this new
task better is more realistic than the on-the-fly classification
setting.
In summary, in this context of coarse-to-fine representation learning, our paper makes the following contributions:
• We propose Grafit, a method to learn image representations at a finer granularity than the one offered by the
annotation at training time. Inspired by the recent selfsupervised BYOL [25] instance learning approach, we

874

