TokenPose: Learning Keypoint Tokens for Human Pose Estimation
*
Yanjie Li∗1,2
Shoukui Zhang2 Zhicheng Wang2 Sen Yang∗2,3
Wankou Yang3 Shu-Tao Xia†1, 4 Erjin Zhou2
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
MEGVII Technology 3 Southeast University
4
PCL Research Center of Networks and Communications, Peng Cheng Laboratory

lyj20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{yangsenius, wkyang}@seu.edu.cn

{zhangshoukui, wangzhicheng}@megvii.com
xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Human pose estimation deeply relies on visual clues and
anatomical constraints between parts to locate keypoints.
Most existing CNN-based methods do well in visual representation, however, lacking in the ability to explicitly learn
the constraint relationships between keypoints. In this paper, we propose a novel approach based on Token representation for human Pose estimation (TokenPose). In detail, each keypoint is explicitly embedded as a token to
simultaneously learn constraint relationships and appearance cues from images. Extensive experiments show that
the small and large TokenPose models are on par with
state-of-the-art CNN-based counterparts while being more
lightweight. Specifically, our TokenPose-S and TokenPose-L
achieve 72.5 AP and 75.8 AP on COCO validation dataset
respectively, with significant reduction in parameters (↓
80.6% ; ↓ 56.8%) and GFLOPs (↓ 75.3%; ↓ 24.7%). Code
is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
2D human pose estimation aims to localize human
anatomical keypoints which deeply relies on both visual cue
and keypoints constraint relationships. It is a fundamental
task in computer vision, which has attracted extensive attention from academia and industry.
Over the past decade, deep convolutional neural networks have achieved impressive performances on human
pose estimation due to their powerful capacity in visual representation and recognition [8, 29, 22, 21, 38, 12, 37, 24].
Since heatmap representation has become the standard la* This work was done when Yanjie and Sen Yang were interns at
MEGVII Tech.
† Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/leeyegy/TokenPose

zej@megvii.com

VISUAL cue – attention map between the ankle(l) token and visual tokens.
…
Layer #1

TokenPose

Layer #2

Layer #3

Layer #N-2 Layer #N-1 Layer #N

CONSTRAINT cue

ankle(l)

no. ey.(l) ey.(r) ea.(l) ea.(r) sh.(l) sh.(r) el.(l) el.(r) wr.(l) wr.(r) hi.(l) hi.(r) kn.(l) kn.(r) an.(r)

Figure 1. The process of predicting the location of the left ankle.
For visual cue learning, the proposed TokenPose focuses on the
global context in the first few layers, and then gradually converges
to some local regions as the network goes deeper. In the last few
layers, TokenPose has considered hip and knee in turn which are
close to the target keypoint, and finally localizes the position of
the left ankle. For constraint cue learning, TokenPose shows that
localizing the left ankle mostly relies on the left knee and right
ankle, corresponding to adjacency constraint and symmetric constraint respectively.

bel representation to encode the positions of keypoints,
most existing models tend to use fully convolutional layers to maintain the 2D-structure of feature maps until the
network output. Nevertheless, there are usually no concrete
variables abstracted by such CNN models to directly represent the keypoint entities, which limits the ability of the
model to explicitly capture constraint relationships between
parts.
Recently, Transformer [35] and its variants that originated from natural language processing (NLP) have merged
as new choices for various vision tasks. Its ability of modeling global dependencies is more powerful than CNN, which
points out a promising way to efficiently capture relation-

11313

