Accelerating Atmospheric Turbulence Simulation via Learned
Phase-to-Space Transform
Zhiyuan Mao, Nicholas Chimitt, Stanley H. Chan
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana USA
{mao114,nchimitt,stanchan@purdue.edu}

Abstract
Fast and accurate simulation of imaging through atmospheric turbulence is essential for developing turbulence
mitigation algorithms. Recognizing the limitations of previous approaches, we introduce a new concept known as
the phase-to-space (P2S) transform to significantly speed
up the simulation. P2S is built upon three ideas: (1) reformulating the spatially varying convolution as a set of invariant convolutions with basis functions, (2) learning the
basis function via the known turbulence statistics models,
(3) implementing the P2S transform via a light-weight network that directly converts the phase representation to spatial representation. The new simulator offers 300× – 1000×
speed up compared to the mainstream split-step simulators
while preserving the essential turbulence statistics.

24.36 sec / frame (GPU)
(a) Hardie et al. [11]

0.026 sec / frame (GPU)
(b) Ours

Figure 1. This paper presents a new turbulence simulator that is
substantially (1000×) faster than the prior art, while preserving
the essential turbulence statistics.

1. Introduction
Despite several decades of research, imaging through atmospheric turbulence remains an open problem in optics
and image processing. The challenge is not only in reconstructing images from a stack of distorted frames but also
in a less known image formation model that can be used
to formulate and evaluate image reconstruction algorithms
such as deep neural networks. Simulating images distorted
by atmospheric turbulence has received considerable attention in the optics community [29, 3, 11, 24], but using these
simulators to develop deep learning image reconstruction
algorithms remains a challenge as there is no physically justifiable approach to synthesize large-scale datasets at a low
computational cost for training and testing.
Recognizing the demand for a fast, accurate, and opensource simulator, we present a new method to generate a
dense-grid image distorted by turbulence with theoretically
verifiable statistics. The simulator consists of mostly optics/signal processing steps and a lightweight shallow neural network to perform a new concept called the Phase-toSpace (P2S) transform. By parallelizing the computation

(a) Input (real)

(b) [17]+U-Net

(c) Ours+U-Net

Figure 2. Using our simulator to synthesize training set for training an image reconstruction network (U-Net [28]) offers a considerable amount of improvement in image quality. The network is
identical for both (b) and (c); only the simulator used to synthesize
the training data is different.

across the pixels, the simulator offers a 1000× speed-up
compared to the mainstream approach as shown in Figure 1.
When using the new simulator to synthesize training data to
train a deep neural network image reconstruction model, the
resulting network outperforms the same architecture trained
with data synthesized by a less sophisticated simulator, as
illustrated in Figure 2.
An overview of the proposed simulator is illustrated in
Figure 3. Our proposed approach is based on linking the
following two ideas:
• Convolution via basis functions (Section 3.1). While
conventional approaches model the turbulence distortion as a spatially varying convolution, we reformu-

14759

