Parallel Detection-and-Segmentation Learning for
Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation
Yunhang Shen1,2 , Liujuan Cao1 *, Zhiwei Chen1 , Baochang Zhang3
Chi Su4 , Yongjian Wu2 , Feiyue Huang2 , Rongrong Ji1,5,6
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China, 2 Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
KingSoft Cloud Co. Ltd., Beijing, China, 5 Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China, 6 Peng Cheng Laborotory, Shenzhen, China
{odysseyshen, littlekenwu, garyhuang}@tencent.com, {caoliujuan, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn
zhiweichen.xmu@gmail.com, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, suchi@kingsoft.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised instance segmentation (WSIS) with
only image-level labels has recently drawn much attention. To date, bottom-up WSIS methods refine discriminative cues from classifiers with sophisticated multi-stage
training procedures, which also suffer from inconsistent
object boundaries. And top-down WSIS methods are formulated as cascade detection-to-segmentation pipeline, in
which the quality of segmentation learning heavily depends
on pseudo masks generated from detectors. In this paper,
we propose a unified parallel detection-and-segmentation
learning (PDSL) framework to learn instance segmentation
with only image-level labels, which draws inspiration from
both top-down and bottom-up instance segmentation approaches. The detection module is the same as the typical design of any weakly supervised object detection, while
the segmentation module leverages self-supervised learning
to model class-agnostic foreground extraction, following by
self-training to refine class-specific segmentation. We further design instance-activation correlation module to improve the coherence between detection and segmentation
branches. Extensive experiments verify that the proposed
method outperforms baselines and achieves the state-ofthe-art results on PASCAL VOC and MS COCO.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation [1, 2] is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision, which aims to simultaneously
localize bounding boxes, classify target categories and es* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: The overall flowchart of PDSL framework.

timate segmentation masks of object instances in images.
Despite its significant progress in recent years, the dominant paradigms require a large number of training images
with instance-level pixel-wise human annotations. However, collecting such fully-labelled training data is laborintensive [3] and restricts applicability of instance segmentation in many downstream high-level vision tasks, ranging
from autonomous driving, pose estimation to image synthesis. Thus, it has motivated the exploration of weakly supervised instance segmentation (WSIS), especially the setting
where only image-level labels are used during training.
WSIS is an extremely challenging task with only a few
attempts in previous literature. The bottom-up WSIS methods [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] used classification networks to identify object instances from discriminative localization cues
in the images. While this is a promising line of works,
the initial localization cues are quite coarse and not consistent with object boundaries [10], which over-concentrates
on discriminative parts of objects and under-estimates small
instances [11]. Moreover, those methods suffer from sophisticated and multi-stage training processes to refine in-

8198

