Modulated Graph Convolutional Network for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Zhiming Zou and Wei Tang*
University of Illinois at Chicago
{zzou6, tangw}@uic.edu

Abstract
The graph convolutional network (GCN) has recently
achieved promising performance of 3D human pose estimation (HPE) by modeling the relationship among body
parts. However, most prior GCN approaches suffer from
two main drawbacks. First, they share a feature transformation for each node within a graph convolution layer. This
prevents them from learning different relations between different body joints. Second, the graph is usually defined according to the human skeleton and is suboptimal because
human activities often exhibit motion patterns beyond the
natural connections of body joints. To address these limitations, we introduce a novel Modulated GCN for 3D HPE.
It consists of two main components: weight modulation
and affinity modulation. Weight modulation learns different
modulation vectors for different nodes so that the feature
transformations of different nodes are disentangled while
retaining a small model size. Affinity modulation adjusts
the graph structure in a GCN so that it can model additional edges beyond the human skeleton. We investigate
several affinity modulation methods as well as the impact
of regularizations. Rigorous ablation study indicates both
types of modulation improve performance with negligible
overhead. Compared with state-of-the-art GCNs for 3D
HPE, our approach either significantly reduces the estimation errors, e.g., by around 10%, while retaining a small
model size or drastically reduces the model size, e.g., from
4.22M to 0.29M (a 14.5× reduction), while achieving comparable performance. Results on two benchmarks show
our Modulated GCN outperforms some recent states of the
art. Our code is available at https://github.com/
ZhimingZo/Modulated-GCN .

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) aims to accurately recover the 3D locations of body joints in the camera coordinate system from a single image. It plays an important role
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison of the performance and model size between the proposed Modulated GCN and state-of-the-art GCNs
designed for 3D HPE, i.e., SemGCN [57], Local-to-Global Net
[3], and Weight Unsharing [28]. A lower MPJPE value indicates
better performance. All methods are evaluated on Human3.6M
[15] with ground truth 2D joints as input.

in several valuable applications such as human-computer
interaction, action recognition, and intelligent surveillance.
However, 3D HPE remains a challenging problem due to its
ill-posed nature. Multiple valid 3D body configurations can
be projected to the same 2D pose in the image space.
State-of-the-art 3D HPE systems are built on deep neural networks [20] due to their strong capability to learn effective feature representations from data. Some approaches
[61, 35, 44, 37, 43, 54, 23, 4] regress 3D joint coordinates
or heat maps directly from a monocular image via a convolutional neural network (CNN) [21, 19]. Recent works
decompose the problem into two subtasks, i.e., 2D HPE followed by 2D-to-3D pose lifting [31, 3, 6, 57, 38, 30, 50, 52,
5, 63, 29, 48]. For example, Martinez et al. [31] construct
a simple fully connected network taking only 2D keypoints
as input and yield promising 3D HPE performance.
Recently, graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have
been applied for 3D HPE [57, 3, 6, 28] to model the correlation between body joints. They repeatedly transform
and aggregate features of neighboring nodes to obtain more
powerful feature representations. Their superior performance over the fully connected networks proves that relational reasoning is critical to mitigate the depth ambiguity.
However, most previous GCNs suffer from two limita-

11477

