Visual Distant Supervision for Scene Graph Generation
Yuan Yao1 * , Ao Zhang1∗ , Xu Han1 , Mengdi Li2 ,
Cornelius Weber2 , Zhiyuan Liu1† , Stefan Wermter2 , Maosong Sun1
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
2
Knowledge Technology Group, Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
yuan-yao18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhanga6@outlook.com

Abstract

Visual Genome Annotation
riding

Scene graph generation aims to identify objects and their
relations in images, providing structured image representations that can facilitate numerous applications in computer
vision. However, scene graph models usually require supervised learning on large quantities of labeled data with
intensive human annotation. In this work, we propose visual distant supervision, a novel paradigm of visual relation learning, which can train scene graph models without
any human-labeled data. The intuition is that by aligning
commonsense knowledge bases and images, we can automatically create large-scale labeled data to provide distant
supervision for visual relation learning. To alleviate the
noise in distantly labeled data, we further propose a framework that iteratively estimates the probabilistic relation labels and eliminates the noisy ones. Comprehensive experimental results show that our distantly supervised model
outperforms strong weakly supervised and semi-supervised
baselines. By further incorporating human-labeled data in
a semi-supervised fashion, our model outperforms state-ofthe-art fully supervised models by a large margin (e.g., 8.3
micro- and 7.8 macro-recall@50 improvements for predicate classification in Visual Genome evaluation). We make
the data and code for this paper publicly available at
https://github.com/thunlp/VisualDS.

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation aims to identify objects and their
relations in real-world images. For example, the scene
graph shown in Figure 1 depicts the image with several relational triples, such as (person, riding, horse) and (horse,
standing on, beach). Such structured representations
*
†

indicates equal contribution
Corresponding author: Z.Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn)

person

standing on

horse

covering

beach

rock

Caption
A person riding a horse on the shore of an ocean.

Visual Distant Supervision
covering

standing on
walking on

person
riding
sitting on
watching

sitting on
lying on

beach

wave

standing on
covering

horse

covered in

rock

Figure 1. An example from Visual Genome [22] based on the refined relation schemes from Chen et al. [5], where human annotation from Visual Genome, weak supervision information from
the corresponding caption, and raw relation labels from distant supervision are shown respectively. Correct relation labels are highlighted in bold. By aligning commonsense knowledge bases and
images, visual distant supervision can create large-scale labeled
data without any human efforts to facilitate visual relation learning. Best viewed in color.

provide deep understanding of the semantic content of images, and have facilitated state-of-the-art models in numerous applications in computer vision, such as visual question
answering [17, 42], image retrieval [21, 38], image captioning [50, 12] and image generation [20].
Tremendous efforts have been devoted to generating
scene graphs from images [48, 26, 49, 29, 57]. However, scene graph models usually require supervised learning on large quantities of human-labeled data. Manually
constructing large-scale datasets for visual relation learning
is extremely labor-intensive and time-consuming [29, 22].
Moreover, even with the human-labeled data, scene graph
models usually suffer from the long-tail relation distribu-

15816

