Learning from Noisy Data with Robust Representation Learning
Junnan Li Caiming Xiong Steven C.H. Hoi
Salesforce Research
{junnan.li,cxiong,shoi}@salesforce.com

Abstract
Learning from noisy data has attracted much attention,
where most methods focus on label noise. In this work, we
propose a new learning framework which simultaneously
addresses three types of noise commonly seen in real-world
data: label noise, out-of-distribution input, and input corruption. In contrast to most existing methods, we combat
noise by learning robust representation. Specifically, we
embed images into a low-dimensional subspace, and regularize the geometric structure of the subspace with robust
contrastive learning, which includes an unsupervised consistency loss and a supervised mixup prototypical loss. We also
propose a new noise cleaning method which leverages the
learned representation to enforce a smoothness constraint on
neighboring samples. Experiments on multiple benchmarks
demonstrate state-of-the-art performance of our method and
robustness of the learned representation. Code is available
at https://github.com/salesforce/RRL/.

1. Introduction
Data in real life is noisy. However, deep models with
remarkable performance are mostly trained on clean datasets
with high-quality human annotations. Manual data cleaning and labeling is an expensive process that is difficult
to scale. On the other hand, there exists almost infinite
amount of noisy data online. It is crucial that deep neural networks (DNNs) could harvest noisy training data. However,
it has been shown that DNNs are susceptible to overfitting
to noise [43].
As shown in Figure 1, a real-world noisy image dataset often consists of multiple types of noise. Label noise refers to
samples that are wrongly labeled as another class (e.g. flower
labeled as orange). Out-of-distribution input refers to samples that do not belong to any known classes. Input corruption refers to image-level distortion (e.g. low brightness) that
causes data shift between training and test.
Most of the methods in literature focus on addressing
the more detrimental label noise. Two dominant approaches
include: (1) find clean samples as those with smaller loss and

Label Noise

Out-of-distribution Input

Input Corruption

Figure 1. Google search images from WebVision [22] dataset with
keyword “orange”.

assign larger weights to them [6, 42, 32, 1]; (2) relabel noisy
samples using model’s predictions [31, 25, 34, 41, 23, 18].
Previous methods that focus on addressing label noise do
not consider out-of-distribution input or input corruption,
which limits their performance in real-world scenarios. Furthermore, using a model’s own prediction to relabel samples
could cause confirmation bias, where the prediction error
accumulates and harms performance.
We propose a new direction for effective learning from
noisy data. Different from existing methods, our method
learns noise-robust low-dimensional representations, and performs noise cleaning by enforcing a smoothness constraint
on neighboring samples. Specifically, our algorithmic contributions include:
• We propose noise-robust contrastive learning, which introduces two contrastive losses. The first is an unsupervised
consistency contrastive loss. It enforces inputs with perturbations to have similar normalized embeddings, which
helps learn robust and discriminative representation.
• Our second contrastive loss is a weakly-supervised prototypical contrastive loss. We compute class prototypes as
normalized mean embeddings, and enforces each sample’s
embedding to be closer to its class prototype. Inspired by
Mixup [44], we construct virtual training samples as linear interpolation of inputs, and encourage the same linear
relationship w.r.t the class prototypes.
• We propose a new noise cleaning method which leverages the learned representations to enforce a smoothness
constraint on neighboring samples. For each sample, we
aggregate information from its top-k neighbors to create
a pseudo-label. A subset of training samples with confi-

9485

