Deep Matching Prior: Test-Time Optimization for Dense Correspondence
Sunghwan Hong
Korea University

Seungryong Kim∗
Korea University

sung hwan@korea.ac.kr

seungryong kim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Conventional techniques to establish dense correspondences across visually or semantically similar images focused on designing a task-specific matching prior, which
is difficult to model in general. To overcome this, recent
learning-based methods have attempted to learn a good
matching prior within a model itself on large training data.
The performance improvement was apparent, but the need
for sufficient training data and intensive learning hinders
their applicability. Moreover, using the fixed model at test
time does not account for the fact that a pair of images may
require their own prior, thus providing limited performance
and poor generalization to unseen images.
In this paper, we show that an image pair-specific prior
can be captured by solely optimizing the untrained matching networks on an input pair of images. Tailored for such
test-time optimization for dense correspondence, we present
a residual matching network and a confidence-aware contrastive loss to guarantee a meaningful convergence. Experiments demonstrate that our framework, dubbed Deep
Matching Prior (DMP), is competitive, or even outperforms, against the latest learning-based methods on several
benchmarks for geometric matching and semantic matching, even though it requires neither large training data nor
intensive learning. With the networks pre-trained, DMP attains state-of-the-art performance on all benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Establishing dense correspondences across visually or
semantically similar images facilitates a variety of computer
vision applications [45, 44, 28, 37]. Unlike sparse correspondence [48, 5, 76] that detects sparse points and finds
matches across them, dense correspondence [45, 6, 35, 37]
aims at finding matches at each pixel and thus can benefit
from prior1 knowledge about matches among nearby pixels.
Typically, stereo matching [32, 6] and optical flow [24,
65] modeled the prior term that makes the correspondence
∗ Corresponding author
1 It can also be called a smoothness or a regularizer in literature.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 1. Visualization of DMP results: (a) source image, (b) target image, results of (c) winner-takes-all (WTA) and (d) learningbased method (e.g., GLU-Net [70]). As the iteration evolves (e),
(f), (g), and (h), DMP with untrained networks estimates more optimal correspondence fields by optimizing the networks on a single
pair of images, while learning-based methods utilize pre-trained
and fixed networks at test time, thus providing limitation.

smooth while aligning discontinuities to image boundaries.
Some methods [45, 67, 19, 38] for semantic matching also
exploited this to regularize the correspondence within a local neighborhood. Although they can be formulated in various ways, these optimization-based methods [45, 67, 19,
38] formulate an objective function with explicitly defined
matching data and prior terms and minimize the objective
on a single image pair. These methods are capable of making corrections to the estimated correspondence during optimization, but they require a task-specific prior, which is
complex to formulate.
Unlike these learning-free methods [45, 67, 19, 38],
recent methods [55, 66, 61, 49, 70] cast this task as
a learning problem, seeking to learn a matching model
to directly regress the correspondence. The model, often implemented based on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [64, 22], is generally trained on large datasets of
image pairs, based on the belief that an optimal matching
prior can be learned from such observations. As proven
in literature [49, 70], these learning-based methods outperform traditional optimization-based methods [45, 19, 38],

9907

