Gaussian Fusion: Accurate 3D Reconstruction via Geometry-Guided
Displacement Interpolation
Duo Chen1,2 , Zixin Tang1 , Zhenyu Xu1 , Yunan Zheng1 ,Yiguang Liu1∗
1
Sichuan University, 2 Chongqing University of Education
duochen3@gmail.com liuyg@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing delicate geometric details with consumer
RGB-D sensors is challenging due to sensor depth and
poses uncertainties. To tackle this problem, we propose
a unique geometry-guided fusion framework: 1) First,
we characterize fusion correspondences with the geodesic
curves derived from the mass transport problem, also
known as the Monge-Kantorovich problem. Compared with
the depth map back-projection methods, the geodesic curves
reveal the geometric structures of the local surface. 2) Moving the points along the geodesic curves is the core of our
fusion approach, guided by local geometric properties, i.e.,
Gaussian curvature and mean curvature. Compared with
the state-of-the-art methods, our novel geometry-guided
displacement interpolation fully utilizes the meaningful geometric features of the local surface. It makes the reconstruction accuracy and completeness improved. Finally,
a significant number of experimental results on real object data verify the superior performance of the proposed
method. Our technique achieves the most delicate geometric details on thin objects for which the original depth map
back-projection fusion scheme suffers from severe artifacts
(See Fig.1).

1. Introduction
With the increasing availability of active optical techniques, RGB-D sensors have become more practical and affordable. For instance, time of flight (ToF) based RGB-D
sensors have been extensively integrated into smartphones
and tablets. They are popular due to their high frame rate
and excellent portability. Many seminal works leverage
these features to reconstruct the indoor scenes in real-time
[26, 15, 17, 35, 42]. However, the resolution and accuracy
of depth maps are usually limited by cost and size. The pose
estimation heavily relies on visual odometry, constrained by
matching accuracy. In all, it is difficult to reconstruct the
delicate geometric details through consumer RGB-D sen-

Figure 1. The state-of-the-art depth map back-projection fusion
methods vs. our geometry-guided displacement interpolation approach on real object data (Ragnaros, see Tab.2 for reconstruction
details). Our approach achieves the most delicate geometric details.

sors.
The fusion strategy directly decides reconstruction results. Moreover, most state-of-the-art methods employ a
depth map back-projection fusion strategy, which differs
by data representation. There are two popular representations to reconstruct one 3D model from observed RGBD data [45]. One is to gather the spatial coordinates in a
3D voxel grid. e.g., InfiniTAM [17], Kinect Fusion[26],
and [27] average the truncated signed distance function
(TSDF) [5] value if the projection on the depth map is
verified. An alternative one to voxel-based representation
is surfel/point-based model [30, 19, 42, 31]. Keller et al.
[19, 42, 31] perform a weighted average between measurements and their back-projections to eliminate the poses and
the measurements uncertainties. However, the depth map
back-projection strategy only considers single-surfel/point
information and ignores the meaningful geometric structure. Thus, it usually suffers from severe artifacts on reconstructing delicate geometric details. So that, we conclude

5916

