Multiple Pairwise Ranking Networks for Personalized Video Summarization
Yassir Saquil1
1

Da Chen* 2

University of Bath

Yuan He2
2

Chuan Li3

Alibaba Group

3

Yong-Liang Yang1

Lambda Labs

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate video summarization in the
supervised setting. Since video summarization is subjective to the preference of the end-user, the design of a unique
model is limited. In this work, we propose a model that
provides personalized video summaries by conditioning the
summarization process with predefined categorical user labels referred to as preferences. The underlying method is
based on multiple pairwise rankers (called Multi-ranker),
where the rankers are trained jointly to provide local summaries as well as a global summarization of a given video.
In order to demonstrate the relevance and applications of
our method in contrast with a classical global summarizer,
we conduct experiments on multiple benchmark datasets,
notably through a user study and comparisons with the
state-of-art methods in the global video summarization task.

1. Introduction
Video summarization is an important subfield of video
understanding. It aims to provide the end-user with a synopsis of the original video capturing only the relevant content. Various applications can benefit from video summarization, including semantic video editing and content filtering in particular. Moreover, the summary can also be
used as a preprocessing step by excluding the unnecessary
content and thus reducing the length and processing time of
the video for downstream tasks such as action recognition.
Video summarization is often intertwined with highlight
detection, which can be formulated as a subset selection
problem based on a learnt model that assigns an importance
score for each video frame or segment. In contrast, video
summarization seeks a synopsis that not only contains the
video highlight, but also satisfies other criteria, such as the
diversity, representativeness, visual and semantic coherence
of the summary. In addition, the ability for storytelling and
adaptability to the context is often considered. A substan* corresponding author

Figure 1. Given the test video 9 from TVSum dataset and its framelevel importance scores (gray), our Multi-ranker method trained
with 4 preferences (cyan, magenta, yellow, black) can generate
local/personalized summaries according to a subset of preferences
and a global summary akin to classical summarization methods.

tial work has been done in different topics in this research
area notably in highlight detection and video summarization. Many of these works are based on a novel specific
key insight or heuristic that takes into consideration one
or more of summarization criteria [38, 13, 12, 73, 57, 51]
along with a particular model setting such as supervised
[15, 67, 11, 39], weakly supervised [19, 25, 37, 42] and
unsupervised [62, 33, 73, 23] learning.
In practice, what is meaningful in a video is a subjective matter that depends on the end user perspective, which
represents one of the main challenges in this research topic
[48, 53]. However, few works in the literature were interested in exploring the possibility of customizing the generated summary [10, 41, 46, 54]. Since there is no consensus
on what constitutes a global summary, suggesting a model
that generates a unique summary is restrictive for general
users due to the diversity of their perspectives and opinions.
Instead, designing a model that can provide a set of summaries for the users to select is likely to satisfy specific user
preferences. For instance, in a basketball match video containing many play actions (shooting, dribbling, slam dunk,

1718

