Dynamic Network Quantization for Efficient Video Inference
Ximeng Sun1
Rameswar Panda2
Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen2
Aude Oliva2,3
Rogerio Feris2
Kate Saenko1,2
1
2
Boston University, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 MIT

Abstract
Deep convolutional networks have recently achieved
great success in video recognition, yet their practical realization remains a challenge due to the large amount of
computational resources required to achieve robust recognition. Motivated by the effectiveness of quantization for
boosting efficiency, in this paper, we propose a dynamic
network quantization framework, that selects optimal precision for each frame conditioned on the input for efficient
video recognition. Specifically, given a video clip, we train a
very lightweight network in parallel with the recognition
network, to produce a dynamic policy indicating which
numerical precision to be used per frame in recognizing
videos. We train both networks effectively using standard
backpropagation with a loss to achieve both competitive performance and resource efficiency required for video recognition. Extensive experiments on four challenging diverse
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed approach
provides significant savings in computation and memory usage while outperforming the existing state-of-the-art methods. Project page: https://cs-people.bu.edu/
sunxm/VideoIQ/project.html.

1. Introduction
With the availability of large-scale video datasets [5, 36],
deep learning models based on 2D/3D convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [6, 52, 48, 28, 17] have dominated the
field of video recognition. However, despite impressive
performance on standard benchmarks, efficiency remains a
great challenge for many resource constrained applications
due to the heavy computational burden of deep CNN models.
Motivated by the need of efficiency, existing research
efforts mainly focus on either designing compact models [41, 49, 11] or sampling of salient frames for efficient
recognition [60, 57, 34]. While these methods have shown
promising results, they all use 32-bit precision for processing all the frames in a given video, limiting their achievable
efficiency. Specifically, orthogonal to the network design,
the computational cost of a CNN is directly affected by the

32-bit

32-bit

32-bit

32-bit

32-bit

Traditional Video Recognition

4-bit

2-bit

32-bit

Skip

2-bit

VideoIQ (Ours)

Figure 1: A conceptual overview of our approach. Instead of
processing all the video frames with the same 32-bit precision,
VideoIQ learns to dynamically select optimal quantization precision conditioned on input clips for efficient video recognition. It is
computationally very efficient to process more informative frames
with high precision and less informative ones with lower precision,
without sacrificing accuracy. Best viewed in color.

bit-width of weights and activations [16, 68, 8], which surprisingly as another degree of freedom for efficient video
inference, is almost overlooked in previous works. To illustrate this, let us consider the video in Figure 1, represented by
five uniformly sampled frames. A quick glance on the video
clearly shows that only the third frame can be processed
using 32-bit precision as this is the most informative frame
for recognizing the action “Long Jump”, while the rest can
be processed at very low precision or even skipped (i.e., precision set to zero) without sacrificing the accuracy (Bottom),
resulting in large computational savings compared to processing all frames with same 32-bit precision, as generally
done in mainstream video recognition methods (Top).
Inspired by this observation, we introduce Video
Instance-aware Quantization (VideoIQ), which for the first
time advocates a novel input-dependent dynamic network
quantization strategy for efficient video recognition. While
dynamic network quantization looks trivial and handy at the
first glance, we need to address two challenges: (1) how to
efficiently determine what quantization precision to use per
target instance; and (2) given instance-specific precisions,
how can we flexibly quantize the weights and activations

7375

