Student Customized Knowledge Distillation: Bridging the Gap Between Student
and Teacher
Yichen Zhu, Yi Wang
Midea Group
zhuyc25, wangyi55@midea.com

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) transfers the dark knowledge from cumbersome networks (teacher) to lightweight
(student) networks and expects the student to achieve more
promising performance than training without the teacher’s
knowledge. However, a counter-intuitive argument is that
better teachers do not make better students due to the capacity mismatch. To this end, we present a novel adaptive
knowledge distillation method to complement traditional
approaches. The proposed method, named as Student Customized Knowledge Distillation (SCKD), examines the capacity mismatch between teacher and student from the perspective of gradient similarity. We formulate the knowledge distillation as a multi-task learning problem so that
the teacher transfers knowledge to the student only if the
student can benefit from learning such knowledge. We validate our methods on multiple datasets with various teacherstudent configurations on image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art results in a variety of applications such as computer vision [20], speech recognition [1], and natural language processing [6, 30]. Although it is established that introducing more computational costs often improves the performance of the models, big models are computationally too
expensive to be deployed on devices, which only limited
computational resources are available such as mobile devices and embedded devices. Model compression techniques have emerged to address such issues, and knowledge
distillation [12] has proven to be a promising way to obtain
a small model without significant performance loss among
those techniques. It works by encouraging a lightweight
student model to mimic the behavior learns by a cumbersome teacher model.
For the success of knowledge distillation, some re-

Figure 1: Best view in color. Top: The gradient similarity of knowledge distillation and student loss at different
iterations in the gradient space. Middle: Prior approaches.
The knowledge distillation process between two networks
is stationary in different iterations. Bottom: Our approach
automatically decides to switch on or switch off the knowledge distillation loss based on their corresponding relative
gradient direction to student loss.

searchers have focused on the relation between students
and teachers. These works challenge a common intuition that better teachers make better students. Mirzadeh
et.al. [24] found out that students distilled from a bigger
teacher, one with more parameters and higher accuracy,

5057

