MSR-GCN: Multi-Scale Residual Graph Convolution Networks for Human
Motion Prediction
Lingwei Dang1 , Yongwei Nie1* , Chengjiang Long2 , Qing Zhang3 and Guiqing Li1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
JD Finance America Corporation, USA
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China

Abstract
Human motion prediction is a challenging task due to
the stochasticity and aperiodicity of future poses. Recently,
graph convolutional network has been proven to be very effective to learn dynamic relations among pose joints, which
is helpful for pose prediction. On the other hand, one can
abstract a human pose recursively to obtain a set of poses at
multiple scales. With the increase of the abstraction level,
the motion of the pose becomes more stable, which benefits
pose prediction too. In this paper, we propose a novel MultiScale Residual Graph Convolution Network (MSR-GCN)
for human pose prediction task in the manner of end-to-end.
The GCNs are used to extract features from fine to coarse
scale and then from coarse to fine scale. The extracted features at each scale are then combined and decoded to obtain the residuals between the input and target poses. Intermediate supervisions are imposed on all the predicted
poses, which enforces the network to learn more representative features. Our proposed approach is evaluated on two
standard benchmark datasets, i.e., the Human3.6M dataset
and the CMU Mocap dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches. Code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/Droliven/MSRGCN.

1. Introduction
Human motion prediction plays a critical role in many
fields, such as human-computer interaction, autonomous
driving, and video completion. Simple periodic motion patterns can be tackled by traditional methods such as hidden Markov model [3], linear dynamic system [36], restricted Boltzmann machine [43], Gaussian process latent
* Corresponding author: nieyongwei@scut.edu.cn

Figure 1. A human pose can be abstracted step by step to obtain a
series of poses from fine to coarse scale, by grouping joints in close
proximity together and replacing the group with a single joint.

variable models [45] and random forests [24], while more
complex motion is intractable for these methods. The latest
approaches are almost all data-driven methods with deep
learning. However, considering the stochasticity and aperiodicity of human motion, it still remains a challenging task
to predict accurate future motion in long term giving observed arbitrary poses. The main difficulty is how to model
the spatiotemporal dependencies of human poses.
Lots of prior efforts with Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [49, 28], Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [9,
34, 41, 42, 37, 11, 5, 2], and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [53, 10, 21, 12, 6, 44, 23], have been
made for tackling the challenging task. However, they
neglect the inner-frame kinematic dependencies between
body joints. Although they have achieved success in some
cases, the prediction accuracy depends on the size of convolution filters and the stability of the frame-by-frame prediction. Nowadays, Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs)
have been widely used in various fields as well as in the
task of human motion prediction [33, 27, 7, 25, 29, 52, 39],
which work very well for non-grid graph-structured data especially for skeleton-based 3D human pose sequences. Recently, Mao et al. [33] jointly model spatial structure by

11467

