Human Pose Regression with Residual Log-likelihood Estimation
Jiefeng Li1 Siyuan Bian1 Ailing Zeng2 Can Wang3
Bo Pang1 Wentao Liu3 Cewu Lu1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 SenseTime Research

Abstract
Heatmap-based methods dominate in the field of human pose estimation by modelling the output distribution through likelihood heatmaps. In contrast, regressionbased methods are more efficient but suffer from inferior
performance. In this work, we explore maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) to develop an efficient and effective
regression-based method. From the perspective of MLE,
adopting different regression losses is making different assumptions about the output density function. A density function closer to the true distribution leads to a better regression performance. In light of this, we propose a novel regression paradigm with Residual Log-likelihood Estimation (RLE) to capture the underlying output distribution.
Concretely, RLE learns the change of the distribution instead of the unreferenced underlying distribution to facilitate the training process. With the proposed reparameterization design, our method is compatible with off-theshelf flow models. The proposed method is effective, efficient and flexible. We show its potential in various human pose estimation tasks with comprehensive experiments.
Compared to the conventional regression paradigm, regression with RLE bring 12.4 mAP improvement on MSCOCO
without any test-time overhead. Moreover, for the first
time, especially on multi-person pose estimation, our regression method is superior to the heatmap-based methods.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Jeff-sjtu/resloglikelihood-regression.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has been extensively studied
in the area of computer vision [21, 22, 1, 29, 19]. Recently, with deep convolutional neural networks, significant
progress has been achieved. Existing methods can be divided into two categories: heatmap-based [57, 56, 62, 4,
64, 54, 46, 52] and regression-based [58, 5, 53, 70, 42, 61].
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing
Yuan Research Institute, Qi Zhi Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial
Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.

CNN

CNN

(a) Heatmap-based

CNN

µ̂

1

or

2

(b) Standard Regression Paradigm

RLE


− log PΘ (x|I)x=µ

g

(c) Regression with RLE

Figure 1: Illustrasion of (a) heatmap-based method, (b)
standard regression paradigm, and (c) regression with the
proposed RLE.
Heatmap-based methods are dominant in the field of human pose estimation. These methods generate a likelihood
heatmap for each joint and locate the joint as the point
with the argmax [56, 64, 46] or soft-argmax [40, 31, 54]
operations. Despite the excellent performance, heatmapbased methods suffer from high computation and storage
demands. Expanding the heatmap to 3D or 4D (spatial +
temporal) will be costly. Additionally, it is hard to deploy
heatmap in modern one-stage methods.
Regression-based methods directly map the input to the
output joints coordinates, which is flexible and efficient for
various human pose estimation tasks and real-time applications, especially on edge devices. A standard heatmap
head (3 deconv layers) costs 1.4× FLOPs of the ResNet50 backbone, while the regression head costs only 1/20000
FLOPs of the same backbone. Nevertheless, regression suffers from inferior performance. In challenging cases like
occlusions, motion blur, and truncations, the ground-truth
labels are inherently ambiguous. Heatmap-based methods
are robust to these ambiguities by leveraging the likelihood
heatmap. But current regression methods are vulnerable to
these noisy labels.
In this work, we facilitate human pose regression by exploring maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) to model
the output distribution. From the perspective of MLE, standard Euclidean distance loss (ℓ1 or ℓ2 ) can be viewed as a
particular assumption that the output conforms to a distribu-

11025

