Deep Reparametrization of Multi-Frame Super-Resolution and Denoising
Martin Danelljan
Fisher Yu
Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Radu Timofte

RAW Burst SR

Goutam Bhat

DBSR

Ours

Ground Truth

Burst Denoising

RAW LR Burst Input

Noisy Burst Input
BPN
Ours
Ground Truth
Figure 1. We propose a deep reparametrization of the classical MAP objective (1) for multi-frame image restoration. Our general formulation minimizes a learned reconstruction error in a deep latent space. The proposed approach outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods
DBSR [2] and BPN [64] on the RAW burst super-resolution (top) and burst denoising (bottom) tasks, respectively.

Abstract
We propose a deep reparametrization of the maximum a
posteriori formulation commonly employed in multi-frame
image restoration tasks. Our approach is derived by introducing a learned error metric and a latent representation
of the target image, which transforms the MAP objective to
a deep feature space. The deep reparametrization allows
us to directly model the image formation process in the latent space, and to integrate learned image priors into the
prediction. Our approach thereby leverages the advantages
of deep learning, while also benefiting from the principled
multi-frame fusion provided by the classical MAP formulation. We validate our approach through comprehensive
experiments on burst denoising and burst super-resolution
datasets. Our approach sets a new state-of-the-art for both
tasks, demonstrating the generality and effectiveness of the
proposed formulation.

1. Introduction
Multi-frame image restoration (MFIR) is a fundamental
computer vision problem with a wide range of important applications, including burst photography [2, 24, 39, 63] and

remote sensing [12, 32, 46]. Given multiple degraded and
noisy images of a scene, MFIR aims to reconstruct a clean,
sharp, and often higher-resolution output image. By effectively leveraging the information contained in different input images, MFIR approaches are able to reconstruct richer
details that cannot be recovered from a single image.
As a widely embraced paradigm [15, 17, 36, 47], MFIR
is addressed by firstmodelling the image formation process
as, xi = H φmi (y) + ηi . In this model, the original image
y is affected by the scene motion φmi , image degradation
H, and noise ηi , resulting in the observed image xi . Assuming the noise ηi follows an i.i.d. Gaussian distribution,
the original image y is reconstructed from the set of noisy
observations {xi }N
1 by finding the maximum a posteriori
(MAP) estimate,
ŷ = arg min
y

N
X

xi − H (φmi (y))

2
+ R(y) ,
2

(1)

i=1

where R(y) is the imposed prior regularization.
While the MAP formulation (1) has enjoyed much popularity, there are several challenges when employing it in
real-world settings. The formulation (1) assumes that the
degradation operator H is known, which is not often the
case. Moreover, it requires manually tuning the regular-

2460

