SGPA: Structure-Guided Prior Adaptation for
Category-Level 6D Object Pose Estimation
Kai Chen and Qi Dou
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{kaichen, qdou}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

w/o Prior
adaptation

Abstract
Category-level 6D object pose estimation aims to predict
the position and orientation for unseen objects, which plays
a pillar role in many scenarios such as robotics and augmented reality. The signiﬁcant intra-class variation is the
bottleneck challenge in this task yet remains unsolved so far.
In this paper, we take advantage of category prior to overcome this problem by innovating a structure-guided prior
adaptation scheme to accurately estimate 6D pose for individual objects. Different from existing prior based methods, given one object and its corresponding category prior,
we propose to leverage their structure similarity to dynamically adapt the prior to the observed object. The prior
adaptation intrinsically associates the adopted prior with
different objects, from which we can accurately reconstruct
the 3D canonical model of the speciﬁc object for pose estimation. To further enhance the structure characteristic of
objects, we extract low-rank structure points from the dense
object point cloud, therefore more efﬁciently incorporating
sparse structural information during prior adaptation. Extensive experiments on CAMERA25 and REAL275 benchmarks demonstrate signiﬁcant performance improvement.
Project homepage: https://www.cse.cuhk.edu.
hk/˜kaichen/projects/sgpa/sgpa.html.

1. Introduction
Category-level 6D object pose estimation is increasingly
studied and plays a pillar role in many real-world applications such as robotic manipulation [9], augmented reality [24], and 3D scene understanding [7, 18]. The goal is
to predict position and orientation for novel objects of the
same category, so as to achieve robust applicability. Different from conventional instance-level [12, 20, 30, 35] object pose estimation, which gives instance CAD models and
predicts poses for the instances that have been seen during
training, category-level task requires capturing the general
properties while accounting for the large variation of differ-

w/ Prior
adaptation

Camera
Instance I
Prior Point
Cloud

Camera
Instance II

Figure 1. Pose estimation results of two camera instances with different structures. (i) Instance I is similar to the categorical prior,
method w/o prior adaptation can handle pose estimation for such
cases. (ii) Instance II is very different from the prior in structure,
method w/o prior adaptation fails to associate the prior with the instance, leading to inaccurate pose estimation. Our proposed prior
adaptation method can overcome this challenge with accurate pose
estimation for various novel objects (noting the orientation axis).

ent instances within a category.
Current methods for this challenging problem are still
limited so far. First of all, to address intra-class variation
of objects, a canonical object space has been resorted as a
uniﬁed coordinate system [4, 26, 32, 33]. In this normalized space, a 3D structural model is reconstructed for each
object with the same size and orientation. However, such
normalization lacks explicit representation of shape variations across different objects of the same category, therefore
limiting the accuracy of 6D pose estimation. Later on, to
overcome this problem, SPD [26] is proposed to reconstruct
canonical object models with category-level shape priors.
A point cloud prior is built for each category, and further
deformed to reconstruct the canonical 3D model for a new
object.
However, such category-level prior is static and therefore
not adaptable to individual instances, i.e., the same prior is
applied to all instances of the same category. This greatly
hinders the generalization ability of the method, especially

2773

