A Weakly Supervised Amodal Segmenter with Boundary Uncertainty Estimation
Khoi Nguyen and Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
{nguyenkh,sinisa}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses weakly supervised amodal instance
segmentation, where the goal is to segment both visible
and occluded (amodal) object parts, while training provides only ground-truth visible (modal) segmentations. Following prior work, we use data manipulation to generate
occlusions in training images and thus train a segmenter
to predict amodal segmentations of the manipulated data.
The resulting predictions on training images are taken as
the pseudo-ground truth for the standard training of MaskRCNN, which we use for amodal instance segmentation
of test images. For generating the pseudo-ground truth,
we specify a new Amodal Segmenter based on Boundary
Uncertainty estimation (ASBU) and make two contributions. First, while prior work uses the occluder’s mask,
our ASBU uses the occlusion boundary as input. Second,
ASBU estimates an uncertainty map of the prediction. The
estimated uncertainty regularizes learning such that lower
segmentation loss is incurred on regions with high uncertainty. ASBU achieves significant performance improvement relative to the state of the art on the COCOA and
KINS datasets in three tasks: amodal instance segmentation, amodal completion, and ordering recovery.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses weakly supervised amodal instance
segmentation (WAIS). Our goal is to segment both visible and occluded (amodal) parts of object instances in
images. The weak supervision in training provides only
ground-truth visible (modal) instance segmentations. Important applications of amodal segmentation include autonomous driving and robot path planning, where identifying the whole spatial extents of partially occluded objects is
critical. Considering this problem under weak supervision
is also important because human annotators often cannot
provide reliable ground truth. For example, different annotators are likely to have very different and sometimes poor
guesses of occluded object parts.

There is scant prior work on WAIS. Following recent
PCNet [36], our training consists of two stages. First, we
use data augmentation to train a common image segmenter
– UNet [32] – on manipulated training images to predict
their amodal segmentations. As input to UNet, we use the
available ground-truth modal segmentation and information
about where the data augmentation generated the occlusion
in the training image. In the second training stage, UNet’s
amodal segmentations are taken as a pseudo-ground truth
for learning a standard instance segmenter – Mask-RCNN
[13], as in [36]. On test images with occlusions, MaskRCNN trained on the pseudo-ground truth is expected to
output correct amodal instance segmentation.
Our contributions are aimed at advancing the first training stage, and include: (1) a new way to exploit the weak
supervision for training of UNet; and (2) enabling UNet to
estimate uncertainty of the predicted amodal segmentation,
and enforcing the training of UNet to explicitly minimize
this uncertainty.
Our first contribution is motivated by the following limitation of PCNet [36]. For manipulating training images,
as illustrated in Fig. 1, PCNet randomly places an occluder
object onto an occludee object based on their ground-truth
modal segmentation masks, and in this way artificially generates the occluded mask of the occludee. Then, as three
inputs to UNet, PCNet uses the manipulated training image, the occluded mask of the occludee, and the occluder’s
mask. However, using the occluder’s mask as input to UNet
puts the restrictive constraint that the occluder itself cannot
be occluded by another object. To address this limitation,
PCNet estimates an object ordering graph in the image, and
for the occluder selects a union of all objects estimated as
closer to the camera than the occludee (i.e., a union of multiple occluders). Our novelty is in replacing the occluder’s
mask with the occlusion boundary in the input to UNet, as
depicted in Fig. 1. Thus, our occluders are allowed to be
themselves partially occluded by some other objects. This
reduces complexity of estimating the pseudo-ground-truth
amodal segmentation, as we do not need to estimate the object ordering graph.

7396

