TF-Blender: Temporal Feature Blender for Video Object Detection
Yiming Cui1 ,* Liqi Yan2∗ , Zhiwen Cao3 , Dongfang Liu4†
1
University of Florida, USA
2
Fudan University, China
3
Purdue University, USA
4
Rochester Institute of Technology, USA
cuiyiming@ufl.edu, yanliqi@westlake.edu.cn, cao270@purdue.edu, dongfang.liu@rit.edu

Abstract
Video objection detection is a challenging task because
isolated video frames may encounter appearance deterioration, which introduces great confusion for detection. One
of the popular solutions is to exploit the temporal information and enhance per-frame representation through aggregating features from neighboring frames. Despite achieving improvements in detection, existing methods focus on
the selection of higher-level video frames for aggregation
rather than modeling lower-level temporal relations to increase the feature representation. To address this limitation, we propose a novel solution named TF-Blender,
which includes three modules: 1) Temporal relation models the relations between the current frame and its neighboring frames to preserve spatial information. 2). Feature adjustment enriches the representation of every neighboring feature map; 3) Feature blender combines outputs from the first two modules and produces stronger features for the later detection tasks. For its simplicity, TFBlender can be effortlessly plugged into any detection network to improve detection behavior. Extensive evaluations on ImageNet VID and YouTube-VIS benchmarks indicate the performance guarantees of using TF-Blender
on recent state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/goodproj13/TF-Blender.

1. Introduction
With the progress of learning-based computer vision, recent research efforts have been extended from image tasks
to the more challenging video domains. Video tasks, such
as object detection [11], video instance segmentation [40],
and multi-object tracking and segmentation [33], hold valuable potentials for real-world applications [24, 33, 25, 26]
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Visualization of feature aggregation process

(b) Current
methods

aggregation (c) Our aggregation methods

Figure 1. Comparison of feature aggregation methods. (a) Features
from the neighboring frames are weighted equally during aggregation. (b) The current aggregation methods only reason the relations
between the current frame and neighboring frames. (c) Our proposed method computes every pair of frames in the neighborhood
in the aggregation process.

(i.e., autonomous driving or video surveillance ).
A primary challenge of video object detection is to tackle
the feature degradation on video frames caused by camera jitter or fast motion. Under the circumstance, detection algorithms for still images are ill-posed for video tasks.
Nonetheless, the video has rich temporal information, on
which the same object may appear in multiple frames for
a certain time span. The value of such temporal information is explored in prior studies using the post-processing
paradigm [16, 19, 19, 21]. These methods firstly perform
still-image detection on single frames and then assemble the
detection results across temporal dimensions using a disjoint post-processing step (i.e., motion estimation and object tracking). None of the above methods, therefore, oper-

8138

