Intrinsic-Extrinsic Preserved GANs for Unsupervised 3D Pose Transfer
Haoyu Chen1 Hao Tang2 Henglin Shi1 Wei Peng1 Nicu Sebe3 Guoying Zhao1, *
1
CMVS, University of Oulu 2 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 3 DISI, University of Trento
{chen.haoyu, henglin.shi, wei.peng, guoying.zhao}@oulu.fi
hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch

nicu.sebe@unitn.it

Abstract
With the strength of deep generative models, 3D pose
transfer regains intensive research interests in recent years.
Existing methods mainly rely on a variety of constraints to
achieve the pose transfer over 3D meshes, e.g., the need
for manually encoding for shape and pose disentanglement. In this paper, we present an unsupervised approach
to conduct the pose transfer between any arbitrate given 3D
meshes. Specifically, a novel Intrinsic-Extrinsic Preserved
Generative Adversarial Network (IEP-GAN) is presented
for both intrinsic (i.e., shape) and extrinsic (i.e., pose) information preservation. Extrinsically, we propose a cooccurrence discriminator to capture the structural/pose invariance from distinct Laplacians of the mesh. Meanwhile,
intrinsically, a local intrinsic-preserved loss is introduced
to preserve the geodesic priors while avoiding heavy computations. At last, we show the possibility of using IEP-GAN
to manipulate 3D human meshes in various ways, including
pose transfer, identity swapping and pose interpolation with
latent code vector arithmetic. The extensive experiments on
various 3D datasets of humans, animals and hands qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate the generality of our
approach. Our proposed model produces better results and
is substantially more efficient compared to recent state-ofthe-art methods. Code is available: https://github.
com/mikecheninoulu/Unsupervised_IEPGAN

1. Introduction
Efficient 3D mesh manipulation with high-fidelity generative models is crucial in the computer graphics field
and enjoys great potential in various practical applications,
ranging from 3D human activity understanding, 3D augmented reality to robotics. In this work, the focus is made to
transfer the 3D pose style from the source mesh to the target
mesh in an unsupervised manner. Although a few attempts
have been proposed for this task, due to several issues, limitations still exist in the state-of-the-art methods.
* Corresponding Author.

Figure 1: Visualized latent pose space distribution learned
by our IEP-GAN. Dots in each color stands for a latent
code of a pose class from FAUST dataset [2]. We observe
the clusters in the latent space fit their pose representations,
suggesting that the IEP-GAN has generalized the cohesive
ability of projection.
To date, strict constraints of re-enforced correspondences of meshes are inevitable in almost all the existing
methods [26, 8]. However, to provide those correspondences needs either extra manual efforts or specific requirements for data. Although some existing works claimed that
they can achieve 3D pose deformation in an unsupervised
setting, a constraint on the training datasets is still needed
that different poses performed by the same subject should
be given to successfully disentangle the shape and pose information [4, 39]. This constraint actually serves as a strong
supervision with manually labeled prior. Thus a real unsupervised setting for pose transfer learning is not achieved
in any existing work yet. Besides, compared to 2D images that have fixed rigid permutation [29, 38, 27, 28], 3D
meshes are embedded in continuous space with arbitrating orders and complex geometric attributes, which makes
the task more challenging. This innately structural dif-

8630

