Building-GAN: Graph-Conditioned Architectural Volumetric Design Generation
Kai-Hung Chang* 1 Chin-Yi Cheng* 1 Jieliang Luo1 Shingo Murata2 Mehdi Nourbakhsh1 Yoshito Tsuji2
1
Autodesk Research, United States , 2 Obayashi AI Design Lab, Japan

Abstract
Volumetric design is the first and critical step for professional building design, where architects not only depict
the rough 3D geometry of the building but also specify the
programs to form a 2D layout on each floor. Though 2D
layout generation for a single story has been widely studied,
there is no developed method for multi-story buildings. This
paper focuses on volumetric design generation conditioned
on an input program graph. Instead of outputting dense 3D
voxels, we propose a new 3D representation named voxel
graph that is both compact and expressive for building geometries. Our generator is a cross-modal graph neural
network that uses a pointer mechanism to connect the input program graph and the output voxel graph, and the
whole pipeline is trained using the adversarial framework.
The generated designs are evaluated qualitatively by a user
study and quantitatively using three metrics: quality, diversity, and connectivity accuracy. We show that our model
generates realistic 3D volumetric designs and outperforms
previous methods and baselines.

1. Introduction
Volumetric design (also called massing design or
schematic design) is the first step when an architect designs
a building on a given land site. Based on the local building
codes applied to the site, the building can only be designed
within a valid design space, which is usually not a regular
cuboid. For instance, the daylight restrictions prevent the
building from casting too much shadow over its neighboring
building by drawing a slant line as upper bound. Within the
valid design space, a volumetric design not only depicts the
volumetric 3D shape of the building, but also produces 2D
program layouts for each story. An example is illustrated in
Figure 2. The architect then uses the finalized volumetric
design to gradually develop all the details for construction,
including façade design, interior design, structure systems,
etc. While volumetric design is the foundation of the design
* Contributed equally. chin-yi.cheng@autodesk.com

Figure 1. Our model takes in a program graph (also called bubble
diagram) and a design space in voxel graph representation, and
outputs a variety of volumetric designs. Professional architects
can convert the output into detailed building design efficiently.

and construction process, making a good volumetric design
usually requires a significant amount of time and effort. An
efficient pipeline to generate volumetric design will bring a
great impact on the architecture and construction industry.
Generating realistic 2D room layouts has been a popular topic for many years. Existing methods include
optimization-based [15, 1] and learning-based [30, 18, 12,
5] approaches. Recently, researchers start looking at how to
integrate program graphs into layout generation tasks using
graph neural networks (GNNs) [18, 12, 5]. Program graph,
also called bubble diagram, is a graph that illustrates the
relations between programs or rooms and is a common representation used by professional architects to explore design
ideas. Similar to House-GAN [18], this paper also focuses
on the graph-conditioned layout generation task. The task

11956

