From Goals, Waypoints & Paths To Long Term Human Trajectory Forecasting
Karttikeya Mangalam†∗
†

Yang An§∗

UC Berkeley

§

Harshayu Girase†

Jitendra Malik†

Technical University of Munich

Figure 1: We tackle the problem of long term human trajectory forecasting. Given the past motion of an agent (blue) on a
scene over the last five seconds, we aim to predict the multimodal future motion over the next minute ➀. To achieve this, we
propose factorizing overall multimodality into its epistemic and aleatoric factors. The epistemic factor is modeled with an
estimated distribution over the long term goals ➁ while the aleatoric factor is modeled as a distribution over the intermediate
waypoints ➂ and trajectory ➃ for each goal separately. This is repeated for multiple goals and waypoints for scene-compliant
multimodal human trajectory forecasting ➄. Each color indicates predicted trajectories for a different sampled goal.

Abstract
Human trajectory forecasting is an inherently multimodal problem. Uncertainty in future trajectories stems
from two sources: (a) sources that are known to the agent
but unknown to the model, such as long term goals and (b)
sources that are unknown to both the agent and the model,
such as the intent of other agents and irreducible randomness in decisions. We propose to factorize this uncertainty
into its epistemic and aleatoric sources. We model the epistemic uncertainty through multimodality in long term goals
and the aleatoric uncertainty through multimodality in waypoints and paths. To exemplify this dichotomy, we also propose a novel long term trajectory forecasting setting, with
prediction horizons up to a minute, up to an order of magnitude longer than prior works. Finally, we present Y-net, a
scene compliant trajectory forecasting network that exploits
the proposed epistemic and aleatoric structure for diverse
trajectory predictions across long prediction horizons. Ynet significantly improves previous state-of-the-art performance on both (a) The short prediction horizon setting on
the Stanford Drone (31.7% in FDE) and ETH/UCY datasets
(7.4% in FDE) and (b) The proposed long horizon setting
on the re-purposed Stanford Drone and Intersection Drone
datasets.

1. Introduction
Sequence prediction is a fundamental problem in several engineering disciplines such as signal processing, pattern recognition, control engineering, and in virtually any
domain concerned with temporal measurements. From the
seminal work of A. A. Markov [29] on predicting the next
syllable in the poem Eugene Onegin with Markov chains,
to modern day autoregressive descendants like GPT-3 [6],
next element prediction in a sequence has a long standing
history. Time series forecasting is a key instantiation of
the sequence prediction problem in the setting where the
sequence is formed by elements sampled in time. Several classic techniques such as Autoregressive Moving Average Models (ARMA) [43] have been incorporated in deep
learning architectures [41, 16] in modern day state-of-theart time series forecasting methods [37].
However, humans are not inanimate Newtonian entities,
slaves to predetermined physical laws and forces. Predicting the future motion of a billiard ball smoothly rolling on a
pool table under friction and physical constraints is a problem of different nature from forecasting human motion and
∗ indicates equal contribution.

15233

