Towards Better Explanations of Class Activation Mapping
Hyungsik Jung
Youngrock Oh
Samsung SDS
{hs89.jung,y52.oh}@samsung.com

Abstract
Increasing demands for understanding the internal behavior of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have led to
remarkable improvements in explanation methods. Particularly, several class activation mapping (CAM) based methods, which generate visual explanation maps by a linear
combination of activation maps from CNNs, have been proposed. However, the majority of the methods lack a clear
theoretical basis on how they assign the coefficients of the
linear combination. In this paper, we revisit the intrinsic
linearity of CAM with respect to the activation maps; we
construct an explanation model of CNN as a linear function of binary variables that denote the existence of the corresponding activation maps. With this approach, the explanation model can be determined by additive feature attribution methods in an analytic manner. We then demonstrate the adequacy of SHAP values, which is a unique solution for the explanation model with a set of desirable properties, as the coefficients of CAM. Since the exact SHAP
values are unattainable, we introduce an efficient approximation method, LIFT-CAM, based on DeepLIFT. Our proposed LIFT-CAM can estimate the SHAP values of the activation maps with high speed and accuracy. Furthermore, it
greatly outperforms other previous CAM-based methods in
both qualitative and quantitative aspects.

1. Introduction
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved excellent performance in various real-world vision
tasks. However, it is difficult to explain their predictions
due to a lack of understanding of their internal behavior.
To grasp why a model makes a certain decision, numerous
saliency methods have been proposed. The methods generate visual explanation maps that represent pixel-level importances for which regions in an input image are responsible for the model’s decision and which are not. Towards
better comprehension of CNNs, class activation mapping
(CAM) based methods, which utilize the responses of a convolutional layer for explanations, have been widely used.

CAM-based methods [3, 4, 7, 14, 18, 20] (abbreviated
as CAMs in the remainder of this paper) linearly combine
activation maps to produce visual explanation maps. Since
the activation maps are fixed for a given input image and a
model pair, the coefficients of a linear combination govern
the performance of the methods. Therefore, it is critical to
design a reasonable method of determining the coefficients.
However, the majority of CAMs rely on heuristic conjectures for coefficient assignment without a clear theoretical
basis. Specifically, the underlying linearity of CAM w.r.t.
the activation maps is not fully taken into account. In addition, they do not set rigorous standards of which properties
are expected to be satisfied in a good explanation model.
In this work, we leverage the linearity of CAM to analytically determine the coefficients beyond heuristics. Focusing on the fact that CAM defines an explanation map
using a linear combination of activation maps, we formulate an explanation model as a linear function of the binary
variables denoting the existence of the associated activation maps. Under this scheme, each activation map can
be seen as an individual feature in additive feature attribution methods [2, 10, 12, 16]. Notably, SHapley Additive
exPlanations (SHAP) [10] provides SHAP values as a unified measure of feature importance that satisfies three desirable properties (described in Sec. 2.2). Thus, the coefficients can be determined by the SHAP values of the corresponding activation maps. However, the exact SHAP values are not computable. To solve this, we propose a novel
saliency method using Deep Learning Important FeaTures
(DeepLIFT) [16], called LIFT-CAM, which efficiently approximates the SHAP values of the activation maps. Our
contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel framework of determining a plausible visual explanation map of CAM, by reframing
the problem as determining a reliable solution for the
explanation model using additive feature attribution
methods. The recent Ablation-CAM [4] can be reinterpreted by this framework.
• We formulate the SHAP values of the activation maps
as a unified solution for the proposed framework and

1336

