Continual Prototype Evolution:
Learning Online from Non-Stationary Data Streams
Matthias De Lange & Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven
{matthias.delange,tinne.tuytelaars}@kuleuven.be

Abstract
Attaining prototypical features to represent class distributions is well established in representation learning. However, learning prototypes online from streaming data proves
a challenging endeavor as they rapidly become outdated,
caused by an ever-changing parameter space during the
learning process. Additionally, continual learning does not
assume the data stream to be stationary, typically resulting
in catastrophic forgetting of previous knowledge. As a first,
we introduce a system addressing both problems, where prototypes evolve continually in a shared latent space, enabling
learning and prediction at any point in time. To facilitate
learning, a novel objective function synchronizes the latent
space with the continually evolving prototypes. In contrast to
the major body of work in continual learning, data streams
are processed in an online fashion without task information
and can be highly imbalanced, for which we propose an
efficient memory scheme. As an additional contribution, we
propose the learner-evaluator framework that i) generalizes
existing paradigms in continual learning, ii) introduces data
incremental learning, and iii) models the bridge between continual learning and concept drift. We obtain state-of-the-art
performance by a significant margin on eight benchmarks,
including three highly imbalanced data streams. Code is
publicly available.1

1. Introduction
The prevalence of data streams in contemporary applications urges systems to learn in a continual fashion. Autonomous vehicles, sensory robot data, and video streaming
yield never-ending streams of data, with abrupt changes in
the observed environment behind every vehicle turn, robot
entering a new room, or camera cut to a subsequent scene.
Alas, learning from streaming data is far from trivial due to
these changes, as learning schemes for neural networks have
been developed assuming identically and independently dis1 https://github.com/mattdl/ContinualPrototypeEvolution

Evaluator
evaluate

optimize

Learner

Figure 1: Overview of the learner-evaluator framework,
overcoming the static training and testing paradigms by
explicitly modelling continual optimization and evaluation
from data streams in the learner and evaluator. The framework generalizes to both continual learning and concept drift
with resources transparently defined as the horizon D and
operational memory M.
tributed (iid) data. When this assumption is violated, catastrophic forgetting of previously acquired knowledge occurs
[11], emanating a trade-off between neural stability to retain
the current state of knowledge and neural plasticity to swiftly
adopt the new knowledge [14]. The search for this delicate
balance is considered the main hurdle for continual learning
systems.
Although a lot of progress has been established in the
literature, often strong assumptions apply [9], impeding applicability for real-world systems. Static training and testing
paradigms prevail, whereas a true continual learner should
enable both training and testing simultaneously and independently. Therefore, we propose the learner-evaluator
framework, redefining perspective on existing paradigms in
the field. Within this framework, we introduce data incremental learning, enabling completely task-free learning and
evaluation.
Furthermore, we introduce Continual Prototype Evolution (CoPE), a new online data incremental learner with
prototypes perpetually representing the most salient features
of the class population, shifting the catastrophic forgetting

8250

