Predicting with Confidence on Unseen Distributions
Devin Guillory
UC Berkeley

Vaishaal Shankar
Amazon

Sayna Ebrahimi
UC Berkeley

dguillory@berkeley.edu

vaishaal@amazon.com

sayna@berkeley.edu

Trevor Darrell *
UC Berkeley

Ludwig Schmidt *
Toyota Research Institute

trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu

ludwigschmidt2@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent work has shown that the accuracy of machine
learning models can vary substantially when evaluated on a
distribution that even slightly differs from that of the training data. As a result, predicting model performance on previously unseen distributions without access to labeled data
is an important challenge with implications for increasing
the reliability of machine learning models. In the context of
distribution shift, distance measures are often used to adapt
models and improve their performance on new domains,
however accuracy estimation is seldom explored in these
investigations. Our investigation determines that common
distributional distances such as Frechet distance or Maximum Mean Discrepancy, fail to induce reliable estimates of
performance under distribution shift. On the other hand,
we find that our proposed difference of confidences (DoC)
approach yields successful estimates of a classifier’s performance over a variety of shifts and model architectures. Despite its simplicity, we observe that DoC outperforms other
methods across synthetic, natural, and adversarial distribution shifts, reducing error by (> 46%) on several realistic
and challenging datasets such as ImageNet-Vid-Robust and
ImageNet-Rendition.

1. Introduction
Even under the best of conditions, machine learning
models are still susceptible to large variations in performance whenever the test data does not come from the same
distribution as the training data. For instance, recent dataset
replication studies have shown that despite concerted efforts
to closely mirror the data generating process of the training
set, model accuracy still changed substantially on the new
test sets [43, 63, 37]. Machine learning models deployed in
* equal contribution

Figure 1: The average confidence (AC) over a distribution is a natural predictor of a model’s accuracy. Models are often poorly calibrated, and while AC provides an
overly optimistic prediction of accuracy, the difference of
confidences (DoC) between distributions provides a useful estimate of accuracy changes. (Left) Confidence histograms of a ResNet-101 over the ImageNet validation
set and ImageNet-Sketch. Average confidences (AC) are
higher than the corresponding accuracies. Our method, difference of confidences (DoC) can be computed from AC
over the validation set and ImageNet-Sketch. (Right) shows
the average confidences (AC) as predictors of accuracy over
various natural distribution shifts, contrasted with difference of confidences (DoC). DoC consistently improves
over the baseline.

real-world environments invariably encounter different data
distributions. Hence reliable estimates of how well a model
will perform on a new test set are critical. For instance, if
a practitioner wants to use an X-ray classifier on data from
a new hospital, they require a good estimate of their classifier’s performance on this previously unseen distribution
to have confidence in the results. In some settings it maybe

1134

