Instance-wise Hard Negative Example Generation for Contrastive Learning in
Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation
Weilun Wang 1 , Wengang Zhou 1,2 ,* Jianmin Bao 3 , Dong Chen 3 , Houqiang Li 1,2†
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
2
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Microsoft Research Asia

wwlustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, {jianbao, doch}@microsoft.com

Source Image

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation aims to transfer images from
the source domain to the target domain with the content information preserved, which is of signiﬁcant importance on
various applications such as style transfer [13, 24, 29, 37],
domain adaption [4, 19, 20, 33, 51] and image colorization [2, 48, 58, 60]. Due to the inconvenience of collecting paired training data, recent methods are usually based
on the unpaired setting. In that case, cycle-consistency loss
has been widely used to preserve the consistency between
the source images and generated images, for instance, CycleGAN [61], StarGAN [7], UNIT [34] and MUNIT [22].
* Corresponding author: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li.

Sampling

Generating

}
Neg

NEGCUT Result

Source Image

}
Pos

Query

Neg

Pos

Query

Frequency

Contrastive learning shows great potential in unpaired
image-to-image translation, but sometimes the translated
results are in poor quality and the contents are not preserved consistently. In this paper, we uncover that the negative examples play a critical role in the performance of
contrastive learning for image translation. The negative examples in previous methods are randomly sampled from the
patches of different positions in the source image, which are
not effective to push the positive examples close to the query
examples. To address this issue, we present instance-wise
hard Negative Example Generation for Contrastive learning in Unpaired image-to-image Translation (NEGCUT).
Speciﬁcally, we train a generator to produce negative examples online. The generator is novel from two perspectives:
1) it is instance-wise which means that the generated examples are based on the input image, and 2) it can generate
hard negative examples since it is trained with an adversarial loss. With the generator, the performance of unpaired
image-to-image translation is signiﬁcantly improved. Experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that
the proposed NEGCUT framework achieves state-of-the-art
performance compared to previous methods.

CUT Result

Query-Neg Cosine Similarity

Figure 1. We visualize the generated images along with the distribution of cosine similarity between query and negative samples in
CUT [41] and our method. The blue histogram refers to the distribution in CUT while the orange histogram refers to the distribution
in our method.

The recently proposed method CUT [41] introduces contrastive learning in unpaired image-to-image translation and
achieves better performance over methods [31, 34, 61] that
use cycle-consistency loss. In this paper, we aim to further improve the performance of contrastive learning for
unpaired image-to-image translation. We uncover that the
performance of contrastive learning relies heavily on the
hardness of negative samples. As shown in Figure 1, the
negative samples in the method [41] are randomly sampled
from the patches of different positions in the image, which
sometimes leads to the translated results in poor quality and
the contents not preserved consistently. Also we calculate
the cosine similarities between the query patches and negative patches, and we can ﬁnd that their cosine similarities
are around 0. In other words, these negative patches are not
challenging enough to push the positive examples close to
the query examples, which will result in the framework not
taking full advantage of contrastive learning.

14020

