Visual Scene Graphs for Audio Source Separation
Moitreya Chatterjee1
Jonathan Le Roux2
Narendra Ahuja1
Anoop Cherian2
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61820, USA
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
metro.smiles@gmail.com

leroux@merl.com

n-ahuja@illinois.edu

cherian@merl.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art approaches for visually-guided audio
source separation typically assume sources that have characteristic sounds, such as musical instruments. These approaches often ignore the visual context of these sound
sources or avoid modeling object interactions that may be
useful to better characterize the sources, especially when
the same object class may produce varied sounds from distinct interactions. To address this challenging problem, we
propose Audio Visual Scene Graph Segmenter (AVSGS), a
novel deep learning model that embeds the visual structure of the scene as a graph and segments this graph into
subgraphs, each subgraph being associated with a unique
sound obtained by co-segmenting the audio spectrogram. At
its core, AVSGS uses a recursive neural network that emits
mutually-orthogonal sub-graph embeddings of the visual
graph using multi-head attention. These embeddings are
used for conditioning an audio encoder-decoder towards
source separation. Our pipeline is trained end-to-end via a
self-supervised task consisting of separating audio sources
using the visual graph from artificially mixed sounds.
In this paper, we also introduce an “in the wild” video
dataset for sound source separation that contains multiple
non-musical sources, which we call Audio Separation in the
Wild (ASIW). This dataset is adapted from the AudioCaps
dataset, and provides a challenging, natural, and daily-life
setting for source separation. Thorough experiments on the
proposed ASIW and the standard MUSIC datasets demonstrate state-of-the-art sound separation performance of our
method against recent prior approaches.

1. Introduction
Real-world events often encompass spatio-temporal interactions of objects, the signatures of which leave imprints
both in the visual and auditory domains when captured as
videos. Knowledge of these objects and the sounds that
they produce in their natural contexts are essential when designing artificial intelligence systems to produce meaningful

…

…

Figure 1. A schematic illustration of our Audio Visual Scene Graph
Segmenter (AVSGS) framework on frames from our Audio Separation in the Wild (ASIW) dataset. Given an input video and
the associated audio, our method builds a spatio-temporal (fullyconnected) visual scene graph spanning across the video frames,
and learns alignments between sub-graphs of this scene graph and
the respective audio regions. The use of the scene graph allows
rich characterization of the objects and their interactions, allowing
effective identification of the sound sources for better separation.

deductions. For example, the sound of a cell phone ringing
is drastically different from that of one dropping on the floor;
such distinct sounds of objects and their contextual interactions may be essential for an automated agent to assess
the scene. The importance of having algorithms with such
audio-visual capabilities is far reaching, with applications
such as audio denoising, musical instrument equalization,
audio-guided visual surveillance, or even in navigation planning for autonomous cars, for example by visually localizing
the sound of an ambulance.
Recent years have seen a surge in algorithms at the intersection of visual and auditory domains, among which
visually-guided source separation – the problem of separating sounds from a mixture using visual cues – has made
significant strides [5, 9, 58, 57]. State-of-the-art algorithms
for this task [54, 58, 57] typically restrict the model design
to only objects with unique sounds (such as musical instruments [5, 57]) or consider settings where there is only a
single sound source, and the models typically lack the richness to capture spatio-temporal audio-visual context. For
example, for a video with “a guitar being played by a per-

1204

