Contrastive Multimodal Fusion with TupleInfoNCE
Yunze Liu1,7

Qingnan Fan3

Shanghang Zhang4

Hao Dong5,6,8

Thomas Funkhouser2

Li Yi1,2

IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Google Research 3 Stanford University
4
UC Berkeley 5 CFCS, CS Dept., Peking University 6 AIIT, Peking University
7
Xidian University 8 Peng Cheng Laboratory
1

Abstract
This paper proposes a method for representation learning
of multimodal data using contrastive losses. A traditional
approach is to contrast different modalities to learn the information shared among them. However, that approach could
fail to learn the complementary synergies between modalities that might be useful for downstream tasks. Another
approach is to concatenate all the modalities into a tuple and
then contrast positive and negative tuple correspondences.
However, that approach could consider only the stronger
modalities while ignoring the weaker ones. To address these
issues, we propose a novel contrastive learning objective,
TupleInfoNCE. It contrasts tuples based not only on positive and negative correspondences, but also by composing
new negative tuples using modalities describing different
scenes. Training with these additional negatives encourages
the learning model to examine the correspondences among
modalities in the same tuple, ensuring that weak modalities
are not ignored. We provide a theoretical justiﬁcation based
on mutual-information for why this approach works, and we
propose a sample optimization algorithm to generate positive and negative samples to maximize training efﬁcacy. We
ﬁnd that TupleInfoNCE signiﬁcantly outperforms previous
state of the arts on three different downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Human perception of the world is naturally multimodal.
What we see, hear, and feel all contain different kinds of
information. Various modalities complement and disambiguate each other, forming a representation of the world.
Our goal is to train machines to fuse such multimodal inputs
to produce such representations in a self-supervised manner
without manual annotations.
An increasingly popular self-supervised representation
learning paradigm is contrastive learning, which learns feature representations via optimizing a contrastive loss and
solving an instance discrimination task [21, 10, 4]. Recently

Tuple Augmentation Hyper-parameter Updates

Tuple
Augmentation

Positive Samples

Multimodal
Feature Encoder
Shared Weights

Multimodality Inputs
Anchor Samples

Multimodal
Feature Encoder

TupleInfoNCE

Shared Weights
Tuple
Disturbing

Negative Samples

Multimodal
Feature Encoder

Tuple Disturbing Hyper-parameter Updates

Unsupervised
Feature Evaluation

Figure 1. Overview of sample-optimized TupleInfoNCE.

several works have explored contrastive learning for multimodal representation learning [28, 1, 18]. Among them,
the majority [28, 1] learn a crossmodal embedding space –
they contrast different modalities to capture the information
shared across modalities. However, they do not examine
the fused representation of multiple modalities directly, failing to fully leverage multimodal synergies. To cope with
this issue, [18] proposes an RGB-D representation learning framework to directly contrast pairs of point-pixel pairs.
However, it is restricted to two modalities only.
Instead of contrasting different data modalities, we propose to contrast multimodal input tuples, where each tuple
element corresponds to one modality. We learn representations so that tuples describing the same scene (set of multimodal observations) are brought together while tuples from
different scenes are pushed apart. This is more general than
crossmodal contrastive learning. It not only supports extracting the shared information across modalities, but also allows
modalities to disambiguate each other and to keep their speciﬁc information, producing better-fused representations.
However, contrasting tuples is not as straightforward as
contrasting single elements, especially if we want the learned
representation to encode the information from each element
in the tuple and to fully explore the synergies among them.
The core challenge is: “which tuple samples to contrast?”
Previously researchers [34, 18] have observed that always
contrasting tuples containing corresponding elements from

754

