EgoRenderer: Rendering Human Avatars from Egocentric Camera Images
Tao Hu1∗, Kripasindhu Sarkar2 , Lingjie Liu2 , Matthias Zwicker1 , Christian Theobalt2
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park
2 Max Plank Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
We present EgoRenderer, a system for rendering fullbody neural avatars of a person captured by a wearable,
egocentric fisheye camera that is mounted on a cap or a
VR headset. Our system renders photorealistic novel views
of the actor and her motion from arbitrary virtual camera
locations. Rendering full-body avatars from such egocentric images come with unique challenges due to the topdown view and large distortions. We tackle these challenges
by decomposing the rendering process into several steps,
including texture synthesis, pose construction, and neural
image translation. For texture synthesis, we propose EgoDPNet, a neural network that infers dense correspondences
between the input fisheye images and an underlying parametric body model, and to extract textures from egocentric
inputs. In addition, to encode dynamic appearances, our
approach also learns an implicit texture stack that captures
detailed appearance variation across poses and viewpoints.
For correct pose generation, we first estimate body pose
from the egocentric view using a parametric model. We then
synthesize an external free-viewpoint pose image by projecting the parametric model to the user-specified target viewpoint. We next combine the target pose image and the textures into a combined feature image, which is transformed
into the output color image using a neural image translation
network. Experimental evaluations show that EgoRenderer
is capable of generating realistic free-viewpoint avatars of a
person wearing an egocentric camera. Comparisons to several baselines demonstrate the advantages of our approach.

1. Introduction
The goal of this work is to render full-body avatars with
realistic appearance and motion of a person wearing an egocentric fisheye camera from arbitrary external camera viewpoints (Figure 1). Such egocentric capture and rendering
∗ Work partly conducted during TH’s internship at MPI-INF

Figure 1: Based on a wearable fisheye camera setup (a), we
propose EgoRenderer, which is trained for a single person
and can produce full-body avatars of the person from new
viewpoints and in new poses (c)(d) by taking as input an
egocentric image (b) captured by the fisheye camera.
enables new applications in sport performance analysis or
health care. Real-time free-viewpoint rendering of selfembodied avatars is also important in virtual reality (VR)
and augmented reality (AR) applications, notably telepresence. A key advantage of our approach is that it uses a
lightweight and compact sensor that could be mounted to
glasses, headsets or caps, and that it is fully mobile. Therefore, actors can freely roam and are not limited to stay in
confined spaces visible to external multi-camera setups.
We approach free-viewpoint neural avatar rendering
from our egocentric view by a combination of new solutions for egocentric pose estimation, appearance transfer,
and free-viewpoint neural rendering; each of these need
to be tailored to the challenging egocentric top-down fisheye perspective with strong distortions and self-occlusions.
Most established pose estimation methods employ external
outside-in camera views [27, 28, 37, 7, 9] and are not directly applicable to our setting.
Some recent approaches are designed to estimate 3D
skeletal pose from head-mounted fisheye cameras [54, 49].
However, our setting requires a denser pixel wise estimation
of egocentric pose and shape, as dense correspondences are
prerequisite to transfer the texture appearance of a person
from egocentric to external views (Figure 3). Similarly, re-

14528

