Spatial Uncertainty-Aware Semi-Supervised Crowd Counting
Yanda Meng1 , Hongrun Zhang1 , Yitian Zhao2 , Xiaoyun Yang3 , Xuesheng Qian4 , Xiaowei Huang5 ,
Yalin Zheng1
yalin.zheng@liverpool.ac.uk
1
Department of Eye and Vision Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
2
Cixi Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, China
3
Remark AI UK Limited, London, United Kingdom
4
China Science IntelliCloud Technology Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom

Abstract
Semi-supervised approaches for crowd counting attract
attention, as the fully supervised paradigm is expensive and
laborious due to its request for a large number of images
of dense crowd scenarios and their annotations. This paper
proposes a spatial uncertainty-aware semi-supervised approach via regularized surrogate task (binary segmentation)
for crowd counting problems. Different from existing semisupervised learning-based crowd counting methods, to exploit the unlabeled data, our proposed spatial uncertaintyaware teacher-student framework focuses on high confident
regions’ information while addressing the noisy supervision
from the unlabeled data in an end-to-end manner. Specifically, we estimate the spatial uncertainty maps from the
teacher model’s surrogate task to guide the feature learning of the main task (density regression) and the surrogate
task of the student model at the same time. Besides, we
introduce a simple yet effective differential transformation
layer to enforce the inherent spatial consistency regularization between the main task and the surrogate task in
the student model, which helps the surrogate task to yield
more reliable predictions and generates high-quality uncertainty maps. Thus, our model can also address the task-level
perturbation problems that occur spatial inconsistency between the primary and surrogate tasks in the student model.
Experimental results on four challenging crowd counting
datasets demonstrate that our method achieves superior
performance to the state-of-the-art semi-supervised methods. Code is available at : https://github.com/
smallmax00/SUA_crowd_counting

Yalin Zheng 1 is the corresponding author.

1. Introduction
The task of crowd counting in computer vision is to infer the number of people in images or videos. There is
an ever-increasing demand for automated crowd counting
techniques in various applications such as public safety, security alerts, transport management etc. .
With the help of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)’s
feature learning ability, current state-of-the-art methods
[1, 56, 52, 63, 44, 41] gained excellent counting performance by regressing the corresponding density maps of the
input images, where the summed value in a density map
gives the total count numbers. To train a robust and accurate crowd counting estimator, most of the existing methods
[21, 39, 25, 20, 10, 38] relied on substantial labeled images,
where head centres must be annotated for training. However, the annotation process can be labour-intensive and
time-consuming. For example, JHU-Crowd [47] dataset
contains labels of 1.51 millions people whilst NWPUCrowd [53] dataset contains annotations of 2.13 millions
people, which takes 3000 human hours in total. Hence, reducing annotation efforts while maintaining good counting
performance is our goal in this paper. More specifically, we
study the counting estimator in a semi-supervised manner
where limited labeled data is used; on the other hand, the
unlabeled data is leveraged to improve our model’s robustness and performance.
Previous semi-supervised crowd counting methods tend
to minimize the expensive label work through active learning [67, 23], synthetic images [54, 55], or pseudo-ground
truth [45, 24]. However, they did not consider the unlabeled
data or synthetic data’s intrinsic noisy supervision due to
the inherent data uncertainties [32]. Uncertainty estimation
has been explored in other computer vision tasks, such as
segmentation [13, 58, 2] or detection [62, 8], \emph {etc}\onedot . There
are two significant types of uncertainty [12]: epistemic un-

15549

