Vision-Language Navigation with Random Environmental Mixup
Chong Liu 1,2 * Fengda Zhu 3 * Xiaojun Chang 4 Xiaodan Liang5 Zongyuan Ge3 Yi-Dong Shen 1†
1
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
4
RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
5
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
liuchong@ios.ac.cn

fengda.zhu@monash.edu

xdliang328@gmail.com

zongyuan.ge@monash.edu

Abstract
Vision-language Navigation (VLN) tasks require an
agent to navigate step-by-step while perceiving the visual
observations and comprehending a natural language instruction. Large data bias, which is caused by the disparity ratio between the small data scale and large navigation space, makes the VLN task challenging. Previous
works have proposed various data augmentation methods
to reduce data bias. However, these works do not explicitly
reduce the data bias across different house scenes. Therefore, the agent would overfit to the seen scenes and achieve
poor navigation performance in the unseen scenes. To
tackle this problem, we propose the Random Environmental Mixup (REM) method, which generates cross-connected
house scenes as augmented data via mixuping environment.
Specifically, we first select key viewpoints according to the
room connection graph for each scene. Then, we crossconnect the key views of different scenes to construct augmented scenes. Finally, we generate augmented instructionpath pairs in the cross-connected scenes. The experimental
results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that our augmentation data via REM help the agent reduce its performance gap between the seen and unseen environment and
improve the overall performance, making our model the
best existing approach on the standard VLN benchmark.

1. Introduction
Recently, there is a surge of research interests in VisionLanguage Navigation (VLN) [4] tasks, in which an agent
learns to navigate by following a natural language instruction. The agent begins at a random point and goes towards
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author

xiaojun.chang@rmit.edu.au
ydshen@ios.ac.cn

Leave the bedroom; go into the
room across the hall. Turn right in
the room. Wait inside the bedroom.

Scene 1

Path of scene 1
Path of scene 2

Cross
Scenes

Scene 2

Leave the living room and go down
the hall. Enter the left bedroom.
Stop once you enter the room.

Leave the bedroom; go into the room
across the hall. Enter the left bedroom.
Stop once you enter the room.

Figure 1. REM mixes up two scenes and generates data triplets
(environment, path, instruction). We divide the two scenes and
recombine them to construct a new cross-connected scene, and reconstruct the corresponding paths and instructions.

a goal via actively exploring the environments. Before the
navigation starts, the agent receives a language instruction.
At every step, the agent can get the surrounding visual information. The key to this task is to perceive the visual scene
and comprehend natural language instructions sequentially
and make actions step-by-step.
Recent advances made by deep learning works in the
domains of feature extraction [19, 3, 40, 43], attention [3,
15, 35] and multi-modal grounding [5, 34, 50] facilitate the
agent to understand the environment. Moreover, many reinforcement learning works [41, 26, 48] help the agent to obtain a robust navigation policy. Benefited from these works,
previous attempts in the field of Vision-Language Navigation have made great progress in improving the ability to
perceive the vision and language inputs [17, 16, 56, 55],
and learning a robust navigation policy [62, 18, 23]. However, the VLN task still contains large bias due to the dis-

1644

