Video Instance Segmentation with a Propose-Reduce Paradigm
Huaijia Lin1 * Ruizheng Wu1 * Shu Liu2 Jiangbo Lu2 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SmartMore
{linhj, rzwu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS), proposed in [53], is
a task to segment all instances of the predefined classes
in each frame. Segmented instances are linked in the entire video. It is important in the field of video understanding, and can be applied to video editing, autonomous driving, etc. Unlike image-level instance segmentation, VIS requires not only detection and segmentation of each frame,
but also tracking of objects in the video, which make it a
very challenging task.
Recently, several approaches were proposed for this
task [53, 7, 1, 2, 29]. Based on the patterns of generating instance sequences, existing frameworks can be
roughly categorized into two paradigms: ‘Track-by-Detect’
(Fig. 1(a)) and ‘Clip-Match’ (Fig. 1(b)). The ‘Track-byDetect’ paradigm detects and segments instances for each
individual frame, followed by obtaining instance sequences
with frame-by-frame tracking [53, 7]. Differently, ‘Clip* Equal Contribution.

Match

Track

Detect

…

…

…

…

(a)

(b)

…

Propagate

…
(c)

Reduce

Video instance segmentation (VIS) aims to segment and
associate all instances of predefined classes for each frame
in videos. Prior methods usually obtain segmentation for
a frame or clip first, and merge the incomplete results by
tracking or matching. These methods may cause error accumulation in the merging step. Contrarily, we propose
a new paradigm – Propose-Reduce, to generate complete
sequences for input videos by a single step. We further
build a sequence propagation head on the existing imagelevel instance segmentation network for long-term propagation. To ensure robustness and high recall of our proposed framework, multiple sequences are proposed where
redundant sequences of the same instance are reduced. We
achieve state-of-the-art performance on two representative
benchmark datasets – we obtain 47.6% in terms of AP on
YouTube-VIS validation set and 70.4 % for J&F on DAVISUVOS validation set.

{sliu, jiangbo}@smartmore.com

…
(d)

Figure 1. Four paradigms of generating instance sequences in VIS.
(a) Track-by-Detect links detected instances via frame-by-frame
tracking. (b) Clip-Match matches overlapped sub-sequences between video-clips. (c) An alternative propagates detected instances from one key frame to the rest of a video. (d) Our proposed
paradigm, named Propose-Reduce, generates instance sequence
proposals based on multiple key frames and reduces redundant sequences of the same instances.

Match’ adopts the divide-and-conquer strategy. It divides
an entire video into multiple short overlapped clips, and
obtains VIS results for each clip and generates instance
sequences with clip-by-clip matching [2, 1]. Both of the
paradigms need two independent steps to generate a complete sequence. They both generate multiple incomplete sequences (i.e., frames or clips) from a video, and merge (or
complete) them by tracking/matching at the second stage.
Intuitively, these paradigms are vulnerable to error accumulation in the process of merging sequences, especially when
occlusion or fast motion exists.
To avoid error accumulation brought by merging incomplete sequences, one intuitive solution is to generate a complete instance sequence for an entire video with only one
step. As shown in Fig. 1(c), starting from any key frame of
a video, we can obtain instance sequences by propagating
the instance segmentation results from this frame to all others. However, the propagation quality from different start-

1739

