Sampling Network Guided Cross-Entropy Method for Unsupervised Point Cloud
Registration

Haobo Jiang , Yaqi Shen , Jin Xie∗ , Jun Li , Jianjun Qian∗ , and Jian Yang
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{jiang.hao.bo, syq, csjxie, junli, csjqian, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, by modeling the point cloud registration
task as a Markov decision process, we propose an end-toend deep model embedded with the cross-entropy method
(CEM) for unsupervised 3D registration. Our model consists of a sampling network module and a differentiable
CEM module. In our sampling network module, given a
pair of point clouds, the sampling network learns a prior
sampling distribution over the transformation space. The
learned sampling distribution can be used as a ªgoodº initialization of the differentiable CEM module. In our differentiable CEM module, we first propose a maximum consensus criterion based alignment metric as the reward function
for the point cloud registration task. Based on the reward
function, for each state, we then construct a fused score
function to evaluate the sampled transformations, where
we weight the current and future rewards of the transformations. Particularly, the future rewards of the sampled
transforms are obtained by performing the iterative closest
point (ICP) algorithm on the transformed state. By selecting the top-k transformations with the highest scores, we
iteratively update the sampling distribution. Furthermore,
in order to make the CEM differentiable, we use the sparsemax function to replace the hard top-k selection. Finally, we
formulate a Geman-McClure estimator based loss to train
our end-to-end registration model. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the good registration performance
of our method on benchmark datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/Jiang-HB/CEMNet.

∗ Corresponding authors

Haobo Jiang, Yaqi Shen, Jin Xie, Jun Li, Jianjun Qian and Jian Yang
are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for
High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key
Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, China.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is the problem of finding the optimal rigid transformation (i.e., a rotation matrix and a translation vector) that can align the source point cloud to the
target precisely. It plays important roles in a variety of 3D
vision applications such as 3D reconstruction [1, 38, 20],
Lidar SLAM [12, 57], 3D object location [14, 46, 31]. However, various challenges such as outliers and noise interference still hinder its application in the real world.
Owing to discriminative feature extraction of deep neural
networks, deep point cloud registration methods [48, 49, 28]
have shown impressive performance. Nevertheless, most of
their success mainly depends on large amounts of groundtruth transformations for supervised point cloud registration, which greatly increases their training costs. To avoid
it, recent efforts have been devoted to developing an unsupervised registration model. For example, cycle consistency
is used as the self-supervision signal to train the registration
models in [19, 54]. However, the cycle-consistency loss
may not be able to deal with the partially-overlapping case
well, since the outliers cannot form a closed loop. In addition, unsupervised point cloud registration methods [47, 25]
learn the transformation by minimizing the alignment error (e.g., Chamfer metric) between the transformed source
point cloud and the target point cloud. Nevertheless, for a
pair of point clouds with complex geometry, the optimization of the alignment error between them may be difficult
and prone to sticking into the local minima.
Inspired by the model based reinforcement learning (RL)
[22, 21], in this paper, we propose a novel sampling network
guided cross-entropy method for unsupervised point cloud
registration. By formulating the 3D registration task as a
Markov decision process (MDP), it is expected to heuristically search for the optimal transformation by gradually
narrowing its interest transformation region through trial
and error. Our deep unsupervised registration model consists of two modules, i.e., sampling network module and differentiable cross-entropy method (CEM) module. Given a

6128

