GANcraft: Unsupervised 3D Neural Rendering of Minecraft Worlds
Zekun Hao˚: , Arun Mallya˚ , Serge Belongie: , Ming-Yu Liu˚
˚
NVIDIA, : Cornell University
{hz472, sjb344}@cornell.edu, {amallya, mingyul}@nvidia.com

Figure 1: Given a semantically-labeled block world as input (insets), GANCraft generates high-resolution view-consistent
realistic outputs. It unsupervisedly learns to translate the input world to a realistic-looking world in the absence of paired
training data across these two worlds. Click on image to play video in web browser.

Abstract
We present GANcraft, an unsupervised neural rendering
framework for generating photorealistic images of large 3D
block worlds such as those created in Minecraft. Our method
takes a semantic block world as input, where each block is
assigned a semantic label such as dirt, grass, or water. We
represent the world as a continuous volumetric function and
train our model to render view-consistent photorealistic images for a user-controlled camera. In the absence of paired
ground truth real images for the block world, we devise a
training technique based on pseudo-ground truth and adversarial training. This stands in contrast to prior work on neural rendering for view synthesis, which requires ground truth
images to estimate scene geometry and view-dependent appearance. In addition to camera trajectory, GANcraft allows
user control over both scene semantics and output style. Experimental results with comparison to strong baselines show
the effectiveness of GANcraft on this novel task of photorealistic 3D block world synthesis. The project website is available at https://nvlabs.github.io/GANcraft/.

1. Introduction
Imagine a world where every Minecrafter is a 3D painter!
Advances in 2D image-to-image translation [3, 22, 49]
have enabled users to paint photorealistic images by drawing simple sketches similar to those created in Microsoft
Paint. Despite these innovations, creating a realistic 3D

scene remains a painstaking task, out of the reach of most
people. It requires years of expertise, professional software,
a library of digital assets, and a lot of development time.
In contrast, building 3D worlds with blocks, say physical
LEGOs or their digital counterpart, is so easy and intuitive
that even a toddler can do it. Wouldn’t it be great if we could
build a simple 3D world made of blocks representing various
materials (like Fig. 1 (insets)), feed it to an algorithm, and
receive a realistic looking 3D world featuring tall green trees,
ice-capped mountains, and the blue sea (like Fig. 1)? With
such a method, we could perform world-to-world translation
to convert the worlds of our imagination to reality. Needless
to say, such an ability would have many applications, from
entertainment and education, to rapid prototyping for artists.
In this paper, we propose GANcraft, a method that produces realistic renderings of semantically-labeled 3D block
worlds, such as those from Minecraft (www.minecraft.
net). Minecraft, the best-selling video game of all time with
over 200 million copies sold and over 120 million monthly
users [2], is a sandbox video game in which a user can explore a procedurally-generated 3D world made up of blocks
arranged on a regular grid, while modifying and building
structures with blocks. Minecraft provides blocks representing various building materials—grass, dirt, water, sand,
snow, etc. Each block is assigned a simple texture, and the
game is known for its distinctive cartoonish look. While
one might discount Minecraft as a simple game with simple
mechanics, Minecraft is, in fact, a very popular 3D content

14072

