Joint Visual and Audio Learning for Video Highlight Detection
Taivanbat Badamdorj1 , Mrigank Rochan2 , Yang Wang2,3 , and Li Cheng1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Canada
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Canada
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Manitoba, Canada

Highlight clip

Abstract

1. Introduction
We have witnessed an explosion of online video content in recent years, which may be partly attributed to the
rapid adoption of video based social networks like Instagram and TikTok. This has led to increasing demands
for video highlight detection, which aims to automatically
detect interesting moments (called “highlights”) within a
video. Highlight detection is important due to its broad
range of downstream applications including video summarization, recommendation, editing, and browsing. In consequence, there has been significant progress in the field in
recent years [37, 12, 46, 50, 17, 49, 7, 44, 31, 15, 42].
However, the majority of existing research efforts focus
on visual highlight detection. Audio-visual highlight detection is largely unexplored territory. In this paper, we
posit that interesting moments can be identified from both

Audio classification probabilities

probability

In video highlight detection, the goal is to identify the
interesting moments within an unedited video. Although
the audio component of the video provides important cues
for highlight detection, the majority of existing efforts focus almost exclusively on the visual component. In this paper, we argue that both audio and visual components of a
video should be modeled jointly to retrieve its best moments.
To this end, we propose an audio-visual network for video
highlight detection. At the core of our approach lies a bimodal attention mechanism, which captures the interaction
between the audio and visual components of a video, and
produces fused representations to facilitate highlight detection. Furthermore, we introduce a noise sentinel technique
to adaptively discount a noisy visual or audio modality. Empirical evaluations on two benchmark datasets demonstrate
the superior performance of our approach over the state-ofthe-art methods.

time

Figure 1. Audio-visual highlight detection: audio can be informative about which part of the video is a highlight. In this video, a
car crashes during a race in front of a large crowd. The highlight
(in green) is the crash, and we also show the top three audio class
probabilities from a pre-trained audio classification network [22].
The class probabilities (speech, cheering, and crowd) show that the
cheering and crowd noise dies out during the crash, while talking
increases. Intuitively, we understand that if people stop cheering
suddenly, something must have happened. In this work, we learn
to utilize such audio cues.

visual and audio information. For example, Fig. 1, shows
a video of a car crashing during a race. We may identify
the interesting part of the video by seeing the crash. On the
other hand, hearing people stop cheering and start talking
could also be an indicator that the moment is interesting.
While we can process the visual and audio information separately, our insight is that they also interact with each other.
We can imagine that if we were in the crowd depicted in
Fig. 1, we would look to see what had happened if everybody suddenly stopped cheering. It can also work the other
way around: what we hear can reinforce our beliefs that
the given moment is interesting. These observations moti-

8127

