Stacked Homography Transformations for Multi-View Pedestrian Detection
Liangchen Song1 , Jialian Wu1 , Ming Yang2 , Qian Zhang2 , Yuan Li3 , and Junsong Yuan1
1
University at Buffalo 2 Horizon Robotics, Inc. 3 Google, Inc.
{lsong8,jialianw,jsyuan}@buffalo.edu

Input: Multi-view Images

Abstract
Multi-view pedestrian detection aims to predict a bird’s
eye view (BEV) occupancy map from multiple camera views.
This task is confronted with two challenges: how to establish the 3D correspondences from views to the BEV map
and how to assemble occupancy information across views.
In this paper, we propose a novel Stacked HOmography
Transformations (SHOT) approach, which is motivated by
approximating projections in 3D world coordinates via a
stack of homographies. We first construct a stack of transformations for projecting views to the ground plane at different height levels. Then we design a soft selection module so that the network learns to predict the likelihood of
the stack of transformations. Moreover, we provide an indepth theoretical analysis on constructing SHOT and how
well SHOT approximates projections in 3D world coordinates. SHOT is empirically verified to be capable of estimating accurate correspondences from individual views to
the BEV map, leading to new state-of-the-art performance
on standard evaluation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Multi-view detection, a.k.a. multi-camera detection [20,
1], aims to detect objects from a set of synchronized images
from different sensing viewpoints of a scene. Compared
with the single view detection, multi-view object detection
enables to aggregate the information across multiple viewpoints and infer 3D structures of the scene [8, 5], hence is
generally robust to occlusions, which is a major challenge
to single-view detection in crowded scenes. In this paper, as
shown in Figure 1, we focus on detecting pedestrians from
multi-view images, where the input is a batch of images
from different viewpoints and the output is an occupancy
map from the bird’s eye view (BEV) of the plane.
Estimating the occupancy map from a set of multi-view
images is challenging in two aspects. First, due to the
change of view point, occlusions and ambiguities in object
appearances often present in different views, therefore it is
not a trivial problem to match the features of pedestrians ac-

Output:
Bird's-eye View
Occupancy Map

Figure 1. The task of multi-view pedestrian detection: Given a
batch of synchronized images captured from different view angles,
our goal is to predict an occupancy map of the scene.

curately among input views. Second, even if the correspondences are adequately estimated, one view only provides an
incomplete representation for the whole scene, bringing difficulties in assembling the knowledge of occupancy across
all views. For example, due to occlusions, an area may be
only visible in one view, so we have to identify that view
and exclude the distractions from other views according to
the pre-established correspondences.
To optimize the correspondence and feature extraction
jointly in an end-to-end manner, recent work [13, 12] proposed to project the features extracted from 2D images to
a shared space for aggregating information from all views,
while keep the framework differentiable. However, previous works either project the features to large 3D grids [13],
or only project the features to the ground plane [12]. The
full 3D projection proposed by [13] is expensive since 3D
convolutions are involved in dealing with the projected features. Meanwhile, 2D projection used in [12] is not accurate
due to misalignments.
In this paper, for the first challenge of establishing the
3D correspondence, we propose to project the feature maps
onto different height levels according to different semantic
parts of the pedestrian. As illustrated in Figure 2, our mo-

6049

