Cross-category Video Highlight Detection via Set-based Learning
Minghao Xu1 Hang Wang1 Bingbing Ni1 * Riheng Zhu2 Zhenbang Sun2 Changhu Wang2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China 2 ByteDance AI Lab
{xuminghao118, wang–hang, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn
{zhuriheng, sunzhenbang, wangchanghu}@bytedance.com
Abstract
Autonomous highlight detection is crucial for enhancing the efﬁciency of video browsing on social media platforms. To attain this goal in a data-driven way, one
may often face the situation where highlight annotations
are not available on the target video category used in
practice, while the supervision on another video category
(named as source video category) is achievable. In such
a situation, one can derive an effective highlight detector on target video category by transferring the highlight
knowledge acquired from source video category to the target one. We call this problem cross-category video highlight detection, which has been rarely studied in previous
works. For tackling such practical problem, we propose a
Dual-Learner-based Video Highlight Detection (DL-VHD)
framework. Under this framework, we ﬁrst design a Setbased Learning module (SL-module) to improve the conventional pair-based learning by assessing the highlight extent of a video segment under a broader context. Based on
such learning manner, we introduce two different learners
to acquire the basic distinction of target category videos
and the characteristics of highlight moments on source
video category, respectively. These two types of highlight
knowledge are further consolidated via knowledge distillation. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed SL-module,
and the DL-VHD method outperforms ﬁve typical Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) algorithms on various
cross-category highlight detection tasks. Our code is available at https://github.com/ChrisAllenMing/
Cross_Category_Video_Highlight.

1. Introduction
In current days, people show growing interests in sharing
the videos recording their daily life on the social media platforms like YouTube and Instagram. Among all these videos,
the well-edited ones that summarize the highlights of spe*Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

KLJKOLJKWVHJPHQW

QRQKLJKOLJKWVHJPHQW

XQODEHOHGVHJPHQW

6RXUFHFDWHJRU\ ZLWKDQQRWDWLRQ  surfing

7DUJHWFDWHJRU\ XVHLQSUDFWLFH skiing
Figure 1. The situation in which the target video category used in
practice lacks supervision, while another video category, i.e. the
source one, possesses annotation.

ciﬁc events are apparently more attractive to the audience.
However, in most cases, the original video of a real-world
event contains many contents unrelated to its gist, and it is
an onerous and time-consuming task to pick out the highlight parts of the video manually. Therefore, in order to enhance the efﬁciency of video content reﬁnement, it is desirable to develop a machine learning model for autonomous
video highlight detection.
To endow a model with the capability of identifying the
highlight segments within a video, existing works have explored various ways of supervision, including the explicit
highlight annotations [10, 49, 15], the frequent occurrence
of speciﬁc video segments [23, 48, 21], the duration of a
video [41], etc. These approaches generally focused on
training a highlight detector for a speciﬁc video category
(e.g. surﬁng, skiing, parkour, etc.), while the transferability
of a highlight detection model across different video categories has been less studied in previous works.
As a matter of fact, in practical applications, one can face
the situation where supervisory signal is lacked on the target video category intended to be used in practice, while
the supervision on another video category is available, just
as shown in Fig. 1. Under such situation, we consider the
problem of Cross-category Video Highlight Detection. The
setting of this problem is analogous to that of Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA) [20] in which one seeks to adapt

7970

