Deep Hough Voting for Robust Global Registration
Junha Lee

Seungwook Kim

Minsu Cho

Jaesik Park

POSTECH CSE & GSAI
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/DHVR

Abstract
Point cloud registration is the task of estimating the rigid
transformation that aligns a pair of point cloud fragments.
We present an efficient and robust framework for pairwise
registration of real-world 3D scans, leveraging Hough voting in the 6D transformation parameter space. First, deep
geometric features are extracted from a point cloud pair
to compute putative correspondences. We then construct
a set of triplets of correspondences to cast votes on the
6D Hough space, representing the transformation parameters in sparse tensors. Next, a fully convolutional refinement module is applied to refine the noisy votes. Finally,
we identify the consensus among the correspondences from
the Hough space, which we use to predict our final transformation parameters. Our method outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on 3DMatch and 3DLoMatch benchmarks
while achieving comparable performance on KITTI odometry dataset. We further demonstrate the generalizability
of our approach by setting a new state-of-the-art on ICLNUIM dataset, where we integrate our module into a multiway registration pipeline.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is one of the fundamental tasks
in modern 3D computer vision, aiming to estimate the rigid
transformation parameter to align a partially overlapping
pair of point cloud fragments. It plays a vital role in autonomous driving, robotics, augmented reality, and other
various applications. The objective function of pairwise
point cloud registration can be formulated as:
E(R, t) =

1
N

X

kq − Rp − tk2 ,

(1)

(p,q)∈C

where p, q ∈ R3 are points of a correspondence, C is the set
of all true correspondences between the point cloud pair,
N is the cardinality of C, and R ∈ SO(3), t ∈ R3 are
the rotation matrix and the translation vector, respectively.
Therefore, point cloud registration is a dual problem of

Figure 1. Pairwise point cloud registration results of DGR [10]
(first column) and ours (second column) on 3DMatch dataset [56].
Our method is robust under low overlap and repetitive structures
while being about twice as fast as DGR. Best viewed in color.

finding inlier correspondences and optimizing transformation parameters to minimize the geometric errors on these
correspondences. Prior research on this topic can be categorized into geometric feature descriptors [4, 13, 16, 17,
23, 44, 50], pose optimization algorithms [5, 19, 58], and
the recent learning-based feature extraction and registration
pipelines [2, 10, 22, 52, 53]. Despite the impressive performances of recent end-to-end pipelines, they either require
a strong assumption on the high overlapping ratio of point
clouds [52], lack scalability to be operable on large-scale
point clouds [53], or rely on iterative post-processing [10].
We propose a novel robust registration pipeline for largescale point cloud fragment pairs to address these issues,
yielding accurate rotation and translation predictions even
in low point cloud overlap ratios. The key idea is to view
the registration problem as finding a consensus among the
candidate correspondences on a discretized 6D transforma-

15994

