Improving 3D Object Detection with Channel-wise Transformer
Hualian Sheng1,2 * Sijia Cai2 Yuan Liu2 Bing Deng2
Jianqiang Huang2 Xian-Sheng Hua2 Min-Jian Zhao1†
1
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
hlsheng@zju.edu.cn, {stephen.csj, alen.ly, dengbing.db}@alibaba-inc.com
jianqiang.jqh@gmail.com, xiansheng.hxs@alibaba-inc.com, mjzhao@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Though 3D object detection from point clouds has
achieved rapid progress in recent years, the lack of flexible
and high-performance proposal refinement remains a great
hurdle for existing state-of-the-art two-stage detectors. Previous works on refining 3D proposals have relied on humandesigned components such as keypoints sampling, set abstraction and multi-scale feature fusion to produce powerful 3D object representations. Such methods, however,
have limited ability to capture rich contextual dependencies
among points. In this paper, we leverage the high-quality
region proposal network and a Channel-wise Transformer
architecture to constitute our two-stage 3D object detection
framework (CT3D) with minimal hand-crafted design. The
proposed CT3D simultaneously performs proposal-aware
embedding and channel-wise context aggregation for the
point features within each proposal. Specifically, CT3D
uses proposal’s keypoints for spatial contextual modelling
and learns attention propagation in the encoding module,
mapping the proposal to point embeddings. Next, a new
channel-wise decoding module enriches the query-key interaction via channel-wise re-weighting to effectively merge
multi-level contexts, which contributes to more accurate object predictions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our CT3D method has superior performance and excellent
scalability. Remarkably, CT3D achieves the AP of 81.77%
in the moderate car category on the KITTI test 3D detection
benchmark, outperforms state-of-the-art 3D detectors.

1. Introduction
3D object detection from point clouds is envisioned as
an indispensable part of future Autonomous Vehicle (AV).
* This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a research intern. The code is available at https://github.com/hlsheng1/CT3D
† Corresponding author.

Unlike the developed 2D detection algorithms whose success is mainly due to the regular structure of image pixels, LiDAR point clouds are usually sparse, unordered and
unevenly distributed. This makes the CNN-like operations
not well suited to process unstructured point clouds directly.
To tackle these challenges, many approaches employ voxelization or custom discretization for point clouds. Several
methods [28, 15] project point clouds to a birds-eye view
(BEV) representation and apply the standard 2D convolutions, however, it will inevitably sacrifice certain geometric
details which are vital for generating accurate localization.
Other methods [3, 33] rasterize point clouds into a 3D voxel
grid and use regular 3D CNNs to perform computation in
grid space, but this category of methods suffers from computational bottleneck associated with making the grid finer.
A major breakthrough in detection task on point clouds is
due to the effective deep architectures for point clouds representation such as volumetric convolution [33] and permutation invariant convolution [22].
Recently, most state-of-the-art methods for 3D object
detection adopt a two-stage framework consisting of 3D
region proposal generation and proposal feature refinement. Notice that the most popular region proposal network
(RPN) backbone [33] has achieved over 95% recall rate on
the KITTI 3D Detection Benchmark, whereas this method
only achieves 78% Average Precision (AP). The reason for
such a gap stems from the difficulty in encoding an object
and extracting the robust feature from 3D proposals in cases
of occlusion or long-range distance. Therefore, how to effectively model geometric relationships among points and
exploit accurate position information during the proposal
feature refinement stage is crucial for good performance.
An important family of models is PointNet [22] and its variants [23, 19, 25], which use a flexible receptive field to aggregate features by local regions and permutation-invariant
network. However, these methods have the drawback of
involving plenty of hand-crafted designs, such as the neighbor ball radii and the grid size. Another family of models

2743

