Grounding Consistency: Distilling Spatial Common Sense for Precise Visual
Relationship Detection
Markos Diomataris1,2,† , Nikolaos Gkanatsios3,† , Vassilis Pitsikalis1,† , Petros Maragos2
1
deeplab.ai, 2 National Technical University of Athens, 3 Carnegie Mellon University∗
{m.diomataris, vpitsik}@deeplab.ai, ngkanats@andrew.cmu.edu, maragos@cs.ntua.gr

Figure 1. Even a state-of-the-art model [16] overfits the object context and ignores spatial common sense, e.g. it predicts overconfident
(p > 0.7) wear connections between every person-glasses pair, simply because wear is the predicate with the most samples in
this context. When semi-supervised by our Grounding Consistency Distillation (GCD) scheme, the same model is able to overcome such
biases, resulting in more precise scene graphs. However, current recall metrics ignore unlabeled pairs and get satisfied with both graphs,
failing to capture their obvious differences. To improve visibility we omit predictions of spatial relations. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
Scene Graph Generators (SGGs) are models that, given
an image, build a directed graph where each edge represents a predicted subject predicate object triplet.
Most SGGs silently exploit datasets’ bias on relationships’
context, i.e. its subject and object, to improve recall and
neglect spatial and visual evidence, e.g. having seen a glut
of data for person wearing shirt, they are overconfident that every person is wearing every shirt. Such
imprecise predictions are mainly ascribed to the lack of
negative examples for most relationships, which obstructs
models from meaningfully learning predicates, even those
that have ample positive examples. We first present an indepth investigation of the context bias issue to showcase
that all examined state-of-the-art SGGs share the above
vulnerabilities. In response, we propose a semi-supervised
scheme that forces predicted triplets to be grounded consistently back to the image, in a closed-loop manner. The
*Work done while N. Gkanatsios was with deeplab.ai.
† This is funded by deeplab.ai

developed spatial common sense can be then distilled to a
student SGG and substantially enhance its spatial reasoning ability. This Grounding Consistency Distillation (GCD)
approach is model-agnostic and benefits from the superfluous unlabeled samples to retain the valuable context information and avert memorization of annotations. Furthermore, we demonstrate that current metrics disregard unlabeled samples, rendering themselves incapable of reflecting
context bias, then we mine and incorporate during evaluation hard-negatives to reformulate precision as a reliable
metric. Extensive experimental comparisons exhibit large
quantitative - up to 70% relative precision boost on VG200
dataset - and qualitative improvements to prove the significance of our GCD method and our metrics towards refocusing graph generation as a core aspect of scene understanding. Code available at https://github.com/
deeplab-ai/grounding-consistent-vrd.

1. Introduction
“Multiple people wearing the same shirt, sitting
on the same chair and having the same hand”. Embarrass-

15911

