Patch2CAD: Patchwise Embedding Learning for In-the-Wild Shape Retrieval
from a Single Image
Weicheng Kuo1 , Anelia Angelova1 , Tsung-Yi Lin1 , Angela Dai2
1
Google Research, Brain Team
2
Technical University of Munich
{weicheng, anelia, tsungyi}@google.com, angela.dai@tum.de

Figure 1: From an input RGB image, we learn a shared image-CAD embedding space by embedding patches of detected
objects from the RGB images and patches of CAD models. By establishing patch-wise correspondence between image and
CAD, we can establish object correspondence based on part similarities, enabling more effective shape retrieval for new
views, as well as robust top-k CAD retrieval. Our patch-based retrieval for a similar 3D CAD representation coupled with
pose prediction results in a CAD-based 3D understanding of the objects in the image.

Abstract
3D perception of object shapes from RGB image input is fundamental towards semantic scene understanding, grounding image-based perception in our spatially 3dimensional real-world environments. To achieve a mapping between image views of objects and 3D shapes,
we leverage CAD model priors from existing large-scale
databases, and propose a novel approach towards constructing a joint embedding space between 2D images and
3D CAD models in a patch-wise fashion – establishing correspondences between patches of an image view of an object
and patches of CAD geometry. This enables part similarity
reasoning for retrieving similar CADs to a new image view
without exact matches in the database. Our patch embedding provides more robust CAD retrieval for shape estimation in our end-to-end estimation of CAD model shape and

pose for detected objects in a single input image. Experiments on in-the-wild, complex imagery from ScanNet show
that our approach is more robust than state of the art in
real-world scenarios without any exact CAD matches.

1. Introduction
Fundamental to many visual perception tasks is an understanding of the decomposition of an observed scene into
its constituent objects, and the semantic meaning of these
objects – including class categorization, segmentation, and
structural 3D understanding. In recent years, advances in
2D object recognition and localization have achieved impressive success in image-based understanding, even from
only single image input [22, 18, 46, 21]. Such recognition
and perception constrained to the image domain unfortunately remains limited towards understanding 3D attributes
12589

