Unsupervised Image Generation with Infinite Generative Adversarial Networks
Hui Ying1 ,
He Wang2 ,
1
Zhejiang University

Yin Yang3 ,
Kun Zhou1
Tianjia Shao1 ,*
2
3
University of Leeds
Clemson University

huiying@zju.edu.cn, H.E.Wang@leeds.ac.uk, tjshao@zju.edu.cn, yin5@clemson.edu, kunzhou@acm.org

Abstract
Image generation has been heavily investigated in computer vision, where one core research challenge is to generate images from arbitrarily complex distributions with little supervision. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
as an implicit approach have achieved great successes in
this direction and therefore been employed widely. However, GANs are known to suffer from issues such as mode
collapse, non-structured latent space, being unable to compute likelihoods, etc. In this paper, we propose a new unsupervised non-parametric method named mixture of infinite
conditional GANs or MIC-GANs, to tackle several GAN issues together, aiming for image generation with parsimonious prior knowledge. Through comprehensive evaluations across different datasets, we show that MIC-GANs are
effective in structuring the latent space and avoiding mode
collapse, and outperform state-of-the-art methods. MICGANs are adaptive, versatile, and robust. They offer a
promising solution to several well-known GAN issues. Code
available: github.com/yinghdb/MICGANs.

images that are similar to real data. The widely known
mode collapse issue refers to the generator’s tendency to
only generate similar data which aggregate around one or
few modes in a multi-modal data distribution, e.g., only
generating cat images in a cat/dog dataset. There has been
active research in distribution matching to solve/mitigate
mode collapse [31, 45, 50, 55], which essentially explicitly/implicitly minimizes the distributional mismatch between the generated and real data. In parallel, it is found
that latent space structuring can also help, e.g. by introducing conditions [39], noises [23], latent variables [5] or
latent structures [15]. In comparison, latent space structuring does enable more downstream applications such as controlled image generation, but they normally require strong
prior knowledge of the data/latent space structure, such as
class labels or the cluster number in the data or the mode
number in the latent space. In other words, they are either
supervised, or unsupervised but parametric and prescribed.

GANs have achieved great successes in a fast-growing
number of applications [19]. The success lies in their ability to capture complex data distributions in an unsupervised,
non-parametric and implicit manner [13]. Yet, such ability
comes with limitations, such as mode collapse. Despite a
range of methods attempting to address these issues, they
are still open. This motivates our research aiming to mitigate several limitations collectively including mode collapse, unstructured latent space, and being unable to compute likelihoods, which we hope will facilitate follow-up
GAN research and broaden their downstream applications.
GANs normally consist of two functions: a generator
and a discriminator. In image generation, the discriminator distinguishes between real and generated images, while
the generator aims to fool the discriminator by generating

We simultaneously tackle the latent space structure and
mode collapse by proposing a new, unsupervised and nonparametric method, mixture of infinite conditional GANs
or MIC-GANs. Without loss of generality, we assume an
image dataset contains multiple (unlabelled) clusters of images, with each cluster naturally forming one mode. Instead
of making a GAN avoid mode collapse, we make use of it,
i.e. exploiting GAN’s mode collapse property, to let one
GAN cover one mode so that we can use multiple GANs
to capture all modes. Next, doing so naturally brings the
question of how many GANs are needed. Instead of relying on the prior knowledge [3, 15], we aim to learn the
number of GANs needed from the data. In other words,
MIC-GANs model the distribution of an infinite number of
GANs. Meanwhile, we also construct a latent space according to the data space by letting each GAN learn to map one
latent mode to one data mode. Since there can be an infinite
number of modes in the data space, there are also the same
number of modes in the latent space, each associated with
one GAN. The latent space is then represented by a convex
combination of GANs and is therefore structured.

* Corresponding author. The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG.

To model a distribution of GANs, our first technical novelty is a new Bayesian treatment on GANs, with a family

1. Introduction

14284

