PreDet: Large-scale weakly supervised pre-training for detection
Vignesh Ramanathan
Facebook AI

Rui Wang
Facebook AI

Dhruv Mahajan
Facebook AI

vigneshr@fb.com

ruiw@fb.com

dhruvm@fb.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art object detection approaches typically
rely on pre-trained classification models to achieve better
performance and faster convergence. We hypothesize that
classification pre-training strives to achieve translation invariance, and consequently ignores the localization aspect
of the problem. We propose a new large-scale pre-training
strategy for detection, where noisy class labels are available for all images, but not bounding-boxes. In this setting, we augment standard classification pre-training with a
new detection-specific pretext task. Motivated by the noisecontrastive learning based self-supervised approaches, we
design a task that forces bounding boxes with high-overlap
to have similar representations in different views of an image, compared to non-overlapping boxes. We redesign
Faster R-CNN modules to perform this task efficiently. Our
experimental results show significant improvements over
existing weakly-supervised and self-supervised pre-training
approaches in both detection accuracy as well as finetuning speed.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of large-scale weakly supervised
pre-training for detection, where we assume that noisy classification labels are available for images, but localization
(bounding-boxes) information is missing. Almost all stateof-the-art approaches use pre-trained classification models
and fine-tune them for detection tasks. Fine-tuning mainly
yields two significant benefits: (a) improved accuracy and
(b) speedup in training for detection. Recently, there has
been a lot of work on large-scale [51, 34] pre-training of
classification models with noisy labels from the web. However, the benefits are more pronounced for classification
tasks compared to detection or instance segmentation [34].
We hypothesize that pre-training for classification tasks
overemphasizes translation invariance [26] as shown in
Fig. 1. Different crops of an image that share similar content but do not have high overlap are required to be similar
to each other. As seen in the figure, this runs contrary to the

classification
pre-training

dissimilar

PreDet

Figure 1. Consider the bounding boxes shown on the left. In classification pre-training, it is desirable for the model to learn similar
representations for all of them to incorporate translation invariance. However, this is undesirable for detection, which requires
bounding boxes with small or no overlap to be dissimilar. This
forms the core of our pre-training method, which uses a pretext
task to force the model to distinguish the non-overlapping boxes.

detection objective and could result in feature representations that are sub-par for the target detection task. In theory,
this could be handled by pre-training a detection model on a
large dataset from scratch. However, this is impractical due
to the huge effort required to annotate bounding boxes for
images at that scale. Instead, we propose to supplement the
standard classification pre-training task with a novel selfsupervised pretext task that is closer to detection.
Recent self-supervised approaches such as MoCo[18]
have shown that maximizing the agreement between two
views (constructed via transformations) of the same image
and minimizing it for different images works really well for
feature learning. These tasks typically require a dictionarylookup, wherein one view serves as the query, while the
other view is part of a dictionary. In our approach, we extend this idea to detection. We use a bounding box from
one-view of an image as a query to retrieve the same bounding box (or a box highly overlapping with it) from another
view of the image. We refer to this task as query-box
lookup. This ensures that boxes with sufficiently high overlap are similar to each other, while non-overlapping boxes
have distinct representations.
Ideally, the query-box should be retrieved from the set
of all bounding boxes in the image. However, this is too

2865

