Specialize and Fuse: Pyramidal Output Representation
for Semantic Segmentation
Chi-Wei Hsiao∗1

Cheng Sun∗1,2
1

National Tsing Hua University

Hwann-Tzong Chen1,3
2

ASUS AICS Department

Min Sun1,4

Aeolus Robotics3

Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare4
{chiweihsiao,chengsun}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
We present a novel pyramidal output representation to
ensure parsimony with our “specialize and fuse” process
for semantic segmentation. A pyramidal “output” representation consists of coarse-to-fine levels, where each level is
“specialize” in a different class distribution (e.g., more stuff
than things classes at coarser levels). Two types of pyramidal
outputs (i.e., unity and semantic pyramid) are “fused” into
the final semantic output, where the unity pyramid indicates
unity-cells (i.e., all pixels in such cell share the same semantic label). The process ensures parsimony by predicting a
relatively small number of labels for unity-cells (e.g., a large
cell of grass) to build the final semantic output. In addition
to the “output” representation, we design a coarse-to-fine
contextual module to aggregate the “features” representation from different levels. We validate the effectiveness of
each key module in our method through comprehensive ablation studies. Finally, our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance on three widely-used semantic segmentation
datasets—ADE20K, COCO-Stuff, and Pascal-Context.

1. Introduction
Given an RGB image, semantic segmentation defines semantic labels for all pixels as “output”. Recent methods on
semantic segmentation widely exploit deep neural networks.
One major research direction is designing new contextual
modules [4, 5, 6, 13, 27, 28, 29, 34] exploring better “feature”
representation in the networks. We argue that leveraging the
structure in the “output” representation could open up opportunities orthogonal to the current endeavors. We observe
that a large portion of pixels in most images share the same
label at a coarse spatial level (e.g., stuff classes like sky and
grass, or central region of objects). This observation induces
a parsimonious strategy to dynamically predict semantic labels at a coarser level according to the spatial distribution of
classes in each input image.
∗ The authors contribute equally to this paper.

htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

We proposed a novel pyramidal output representation to
ensure parsimony with our “specialize and fuse” process
(Fig. 1). Firstly, rather than a single-level output, a pyramidal output starting from the coarsest level to the finest
level is designed so that each level is learned to “specialize”
in a different class distribution (e.g., more stuff than things
classes at coarser levels). Specifically, two types of pyramidal output (unity and semantic pyramid) are predicted.
Unity pyramid identifies whether a patch of pixels (referred
to as a cell) shares the same label (referred to as a unity-cell)
(Fig. 1-first row), and semantic pyramid consists of semantic
labels at multiple levels (Fig. 1-second row). Finally, the
semantic pyramid are “fused” into one single semantic output according to the unity-cells across levels (Fig. 1-bottom
panel). Note that our “specialize and fuse” process ensures
parsimony by predicting a relatively small number of labels
for unity-cells (e.g., a large cell of grass) to build the final semantic output. In addition to the “output” representation, we
design a coarse-to-fine contextual module to aggregate the
“features” representation from different levels for improving
semantic pyramid prediction.
Our main contributions are as follows: i) we introduce a
pyramidal “output” representation and a “specialize and fuse”
process to allow each level to specialize in different class
distribution and ensure parsimony; ii) we design a contextual
module to aggregate the “features” representation from different levels for further improvements; iii) we showcase the
effectiveness of our method on ADE20K, COCO-Stuff, and
Pascal-Context. Our method with both HRNet and ResNet
as the backbone can achieve results on par with or better
than the recent state-of-the-art methods.

2. Related work
Contextual modules. Context is important to the task of
semantic segmentation, with more and more improvements
coming from the newly designed context spreading strategy. PSPNet [32] proposes to pool deep features into several small and fixed spatial resolutions to generate global

7137

