Toward Human-Like Grasp: Dexterous Grasping via Semantic Representation
of Object-Hand
Tianqiang Zhu Rina Wu Xiangbo Lin Yi Sun*
Dalian University of Technology, China
{zhutq,hswrn}@mail.dlut.edu.cn,{linxbo,lslwf}@dlut.edu.cn

Figure 1: The left side shows the functional areas of the object, and each functional area is annotated with the semantic touch
code to guide our model to generate the functional grasp of dexterous hand, which are shown in the right side.

Abstract
In recent years, many dexterous robotic hands have been
designed to assist or replace human hands in executing various tasks. But how to teach them to perform dexterous operations like human hands is still a challenging task. In
this paper, we propose a grasp synthesis framework to make
robots grasp and manipulate objects like human beings.
We first build a dataset by accurately segmenting the functional areas of the object and annotating semantic touch
code for each functional area to guide the dexterous hand
to complete the functional grasp and post-grasp manipulation. This dataset contains 18 categories of 129 objects
selected from four datasets, and 15 people participated in
data annotation. Then we carefully design four loss functions to constrain the model, which successfully generates
the functional grasp of dexterous hand under the guidance
of semantic touch code. The thorough experiments in synthetic data show our model can robustly generate functional
grasp, even for objects that the model has not see before.

1. Introduction
We have been pursuing to make robots grasp and manipulate objects like human beings, so as to help us complete various tasks. Although there are already some dex-

terous manipulators like human hands, it is very challenging to control them to operate like a human. Generally, the
methods of dexterous grasp synthesis are mainly divided
into hand-centered methods and object-centered methods.
Previous work in hand-centered methods has focused on
recording grasping activity in the form of hand joint configuration or grasp types by landmark tracking [19], model
based or data-driven based hand pose estimation [6, 18].
However, due to the high degree of freedom, self-occlusion
and self-similarity among fingers, it’s challenging to accurately annotate the coordinates or angles of each hand joint.
Recently, researchers begin to shift their focus to the
object-centered grasp synthesis. Their methods pay more
attention to the pose [10, 34], shape [28, 39, 42, 43, 46–48,
50, 51, 59] and function [5, 16, 17, 23, 36, 44, 45, 60] of the
object for grasp and manipulation, observing where contact
between the object and the human hand. GraspIt! [37] is
used to predict feasible grasps for the object geometry with
force closure condition, but it cannot guarantee to generate anthropomorphic grasps. In order to predict human-like
grasps, it should be aware of where objects can be grasped
by a dexterous hand. ContactDB [4], as the first large-scale
dataset that records detailed contact maps for human grasps
of household objects, synthesizes the grasp from the contact
map and does not need manual specification of per-finger

15741

