Learning to Remove Refractive Distortions from Underwater Images
Simron Thapa Nianyi Li Jinwei Ye
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
{sthapa5, nli5, jinweiye}@lsu.edu

Abstract
The fluctuation of the water surface causes refractive
distortions that severely downgrade the image of an underwater scene. Here, we present the distortion-guided network (DG-Net) for restoring distortion-free underwater images. The key idea is to use a distortion map to guide network training. The distortion map models the pixel displacement caused by water refraction. We first use a physically constrained convolutional network to estimate the distortion map from the refracted image. We then use a generative adversarial network guided by the distortion map to
restore the sharp distortion-free image. Since the distortion
map indicates correspondences between the distorted image
and the distortion-free one, it guides the network to make
better predictions. We evaluate our network on several real
and synthetic underwater image datasets and show that it
out-performs the state-of-the-art algorithms, especially in
presence of large distortions. We also show results of complex scenarios, including outdoor swimming pool images
captured by drone and indoor aquarium images taken by
cellphone camera.

1. Introduction
Underwater scenes, when observed in air, suffer from
strong distortion artifacts due to refraction caused by the
wavy water surface. Restoring the true underwater images
by removing the refractive distortions can benefit numerous
tasks in underwater exploration and outer-space expedition
(by extending to remove the atmospheric distortions).
However, it is non-trivial to remove the refractive distortions because 1) the geometric deformations are highly nonrigid and discontinuous due to the non-linear light transport through the wavy water surface, and 2) fast-evolving
waves also cause blurriness in the image. Classical approaches usually take a long sequence of images (or video)
of a static underwater scene, and rely on the mean/median
images [31, 30] or the “lucky patch” [16, 14], which happens to be free from distortion in a certain frame, to restore
the latent distortion-free image. As these methods require

Figure 1. We design a physics-based distortion-guided network for
underwater image correction. Our method predicts the distortionfree image, given three distorted underwater images.

video input of a static scene, they cannot be used for images
captured on a moving platform (for example, an underwater
vehicle). The seminal work of [34] presents a model-based
tracking method to undistort underwater images. But their
parametric model cannot be easily tuned and applied to arbitrary waves. Most recently, Li et al. [28] propose a learningbased method to correct refractive distortions using a single image. This work demonstrates great potential of using
deep neural networks to tackle the challenging problem of
refractive distortion removal. But this network does not account for physical constraints and requires a large training
set (over 300k images from the ImageNet [10]).
In this paper, we present the distortion-guided network
(DG-Net) for restoring distortion-free underwater images.
The key idea is to use a distortion map to guide network
training. The distortion map models the pixel displacement caused water refraction. As the distortion map reveals
correspondences between the distorted and distortion-free
images, we can use it to guide the network to make better predictions. We first use convolutional neural network
(CNN) to estimate the distortion map from the refracted image. Specifically, we design training losses that follow the
physical model of refractive distortions. We also exploit the
temporal consistency of the distortion map by taking three
sequential images as input. We use three parallel CNNs

5007

