EventHands: Real-Time Neural 3D Hand Pose Estimation from an Event Stream
Viktor Rudnev1

Vladislav Golyanik1

Franziska Mueller2
1

Jiayi Wang1

Mohamed Elgharib1
2

MPI for Informatics, SIC

Hans-Peter Seidel1

Christian Theobalt1

Google Inc.

DAVIS240C
Event Camera

Input

Live Demo

Prediction

Input

Prediction

Hand Pose Prediction

Large-Scale Dataset

Figure 1. Our EventHands approach estimates 3D hand poses from asynchronous event streams in real time (no greyscale or RGB images
are used at any step of our method). We built a demo system with a DAVIS240C event camera (left) that runs one order of magnitude faster
than image-based prior work on 3D hand reconstruction. EventHands leverages our new temporal event representation to reconstruct 3D
hands in various challenging poses and moving at previously unseen speed (center). Our approach is trained on a large synthetic dataset
(right) created by our new highly efficient GPU-based event camera simulator, but generalises well to real data.

Abstract
3D hand pose estimation from monocular videos is a
long-standing and challenging problem, which is now seeing a strong upturn. In this work, we address it for
the first time using a single event camera, i.e., an asynchronous vision sensor reacting on brightness changes. Our
EventHands approach has characteristics previously not
demonstrated with a single RGB or depth camera such
as high temporal resolution at low data throughputs and
real-time performance at 1000 Hz. Due to the different
data modality of event cameras compared to classical cameras, existing methods cannot be directly applied to and
re-trained for event streams. We thus design a new neural approach which accepts a new event stream representation suitable for learning, which is trained on newlygenerated synthetic event streams and can generalise to real
data. Experiments show that EventHands outperforms recent monocular methods using a colour (or depth) camera
in terms of accuracy and its ability to capture hand motions
of unprecedented speed. Our method, the event stream simulator and the dataset are publicly available (see https:
//4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/EventHands/).

1. Introduction
Event cameras are vision sensors which respond to
events, i.e., local changes in the incoming brightness signals. In contrast to conventional RGB cameras which record
images at a pre-defined frequency (e.g., 30−60 fps), event
cameras operate asynchronously, which enables high clock
speeds and temporal resolution of up to 1µs [29]. Due
to their unique properties and high-dynamic range, event
cameras have already found applications in low-level vision
[7, 40, 45, 67], low-latency robotics [54, 15], visual simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM) [63, 24], feature and object tracking [2, 34], gesture recognition [3, 60],
experimental physics (particle tracking and velocimetry)
[9, 61] and astronomy [13, 74], among other fields.
In this work, we are interested in 3D hand pose regression using a single event camera. The high dynamic range,
lower latency, and lower throughput of event data are better
suited than conventional images for tracking hands, which
are often in rapid motion. However, due to the drastically
different and less regular data from event cameras, existing RGB- or depth-based methods [10, 68, 31, 36] cannot
be directly applied to event streams. A naı̈ve way would
be to reconstruct greyscale images from an event stream at
arbitrary temporal resolutions first, and then run the same

12385

