MG-GAN: A Multi-Generator Model Preventing Out-of-Distribution Samples in
Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Patrick Dendorfer*
Sven Elflein*
Laura Leal-Taixé
Technical University Munich
{patrick.dendorfer,sven.elflein,leal.taixe}@tum.de

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is challenging due to its
uncertain and multimodal nature. While generative adversarial networks can learn a distribution over future trajectories, they tend to predict out-of-distribution samples when
the distribution of future trajectories is a mixture of multiple, possibly disconnected modes. To address this issue, we
propose a multi-generator model for pedestrian trajectory
prediction. Each generator specializes in learning a distribution over trajectories routing towards one of the primary
modes in the scene, while a second network learns a categorical distribution over these generators, conditioned on
the dynamics and scene input. This architecture allows us
to effectively sample from specialized generators and to significantly reduce the out-of-distribution samples compared
to single generator methods.

1. Introduction
To safely navigate through crowded scenes, intelligent
agents such as autonomous vehicles or social robots need to
anticipate human motion. Predicting human trajectories is
particularly difficult because future actions are multimodal:
given a past trajectory, there exist several plausible future
paths, depending on the scene layout and social interactions
among pedestrians. Recent methods leverage conditional
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [14, 16, 34, 22] to
learn a distribution over trajectories. These methods present
significant improvements over deterministic models [1, 18].
However, they suffer from limitations observed in the context of GANs [38, 20] that manifest in mode collapse or prediction of undesired out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, effectively yielding non-realistic trajectories. Mode collapse
can be tackled with best-of-many sampling [6] or regularizations of the latent space [22, 2] but the problem of OOD
samples remains unsolved. These OOD samples are particularly problematic in real-world applications where high
* Equal contribution.

precision of predictions matters. Imagine an autonomous
vehicle driving through crowded environments and interacting with pedestrians. To ensure the safety of pedestrians, the
vehicle needs to anticipate their future motion and react accordingly, e.g., brake or turn. As a consequence, unrealistic
predictions may lead to sudden reactions that pose danger
to other traffic participants.
To understand why OOD samples are produced by stateof-the-art GAN methods, we need to understand the underlying geometry of the problem. Consider a pedestrian
reaching the junction in Figure 1a. There are three plausible
main directions that the pedestrian can take, namely, going
straight, left, or right. Furthermore, there exist several paths
that route towards these directions. While all recent works
agree that such trajectory distribution is inherently multimodal, we further observe that the distribution consists of
several disconnected modes. Each mode is shown in Figure 1c in different colors, and as we can observe, the three
modes are disconnected in space. Existing GAN models do
not consider this property, and hence generate undesirable
OOD samples in between modes, visualized as red trajectories in Figure 1b. This is an inherent problem of singlegenerator GANs, as they cannot learn a mapping from a
continuous latent space to a disconnected, multimodal target distribution [38].
In this paper, we address this issue and explicitly focus
on learning such disconnected multimodal distributions for
pedestrian trajectory prediction. To this end, we propose a
novel multi-generator GAN that treats the multimodal target
distribution as a mixture of multiple continuous trajectory
distributions by optimizing a continuous generator for each
mode. Unlike previous multi-generator models [19, 7], our
model needs to adapt to the selection of generators to different scenes, e.g., two- and three-way junctions. For this, we
employ a fixed number of generators and allow the model
to learn the necessary number of modes directly from visual scene information. Towards this end, we train a second module estimating the categorical probability distribution over the individual generators, conditioned on the input
observations. At test time, we first select a specific gener-

13158

