When do GANs replicate? On the choice of dataset size
Qianli Feng1,2

Chenqi Guo1 Fabian Benitez-Quiroz1
1
The Ohio State University 2 Amazon

Aleix Martinez1,2

{feng.559, guo.1648, benitez-quiroz.1, martinez.158}@osu.edu

Abstract
Do GANs replicate training images? Previous studies
have shown that GANs do not seem to replicate training
data without significant change in the training procedure.
This leads to a series of research on the exact condition
needed for GANs to overfit to the training data. Although
a number of factors has been theoretically or empirically
identified, the effect of dataset size and complexity on GANs
replication is still unknown. With empirical evidence from
BigGAN and StyleGAN2, on datasets CelebA, Flower and
LSUN-bedroom, we show that dataset size and its complexity play an important role in GANs replication and perceptual quality of the generated images. We further quantify
this relationship, discovering that replication percentage
decays exponentially with respect to dataset size and complexity, with a shared decaying factor across GAN-dataset
combinations. Meanwhile, the perceptual image quality follows a U-shape trend w.r.t dataset size. This finding leads to
a practical tool for one-shot estimation on minimal dataset
size to prevent GAN replication which can be used to guide
datasets construction and selection.

Figure 1: An example of GAN replications in Flower
dataset. The complexity is measured by Intrinsic Dimensionality. We study the condition of GAN replication with a
particular focus on the effect dataset size/complexity. For a
given image synthesis task, when the dataset size decreases,
the replication become more prominent.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) has attracted
consistent attention since its first proposal in [9]. Since then,
the photorealism of the synthetic images has seen dramatic
improvement with methods like BigGAN [2], StyleGAN
[12, 13], etc. This low cost generation of photo-realistic
samples brings new possibility to applications like content
creation and dataset augmentation, all of which are based
on the assumption that the generator does not merely replicate training data. The GAN replication (or memorization,
overfitting [4, 3]) problem, besides its obvious theoretical
value, is also practically important.
A number of recent studies have explored the option of
Qianli Feng and Chenqi Guo contribute equally to the paper.
Code is available at https://github.com/chenqiguo/GAN_
replication. Authors were supported by NIH grant R01DC014498,
R01EY020834 and HFSP grant RGP0036/2016.

using GANs to augment training datasets to improve the
performance of downstream machine learning algorithms
[5, 25, 24, 6], especially for medical applications where
patients data is scarce. When these data augmentation
GANs overfit to the training data, the augmented samples
will provide little or no additional value to the downstream
algorithms, defying the purpose of augmenting the data.
Replicating training samples is also problematic for content creation due to potential copyright infringement [7].
This is more problematic when the GAN based face swapping technique is used for preserving patient privacy (deidentification) as used in [30]. If a replication happens during the swapping process, the technique is then protecting
one’s privacy by costing another’s portrait right and potentially spreading mis-information about the individual. Without deep understanding on the mechanism and conditions

6701

