Universal-Prototype Enhancing for Few-Shot Object Detection
Aming Wu1 Yahong Han2,3,4∗ Linchao Zhu5 Yi Yang5
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 5 ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
amwu@xidian.edu.cn, yahong@tju.edu.cn, {Linchao.Zhu, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Few-shot object detection (FSOD) aims to strengthen the
performance of novel object detection with few labeled samples. To alleviate the constraint of few samples, enhancing
the generalization ability of learned features for novel objects plays a key role. Thus, the feature learning process of
FSOD should focus more on intrinsical object characteristics, which are invariant under different visual changes and
therefore are helpful for feature generalization. Unlike previous attempts of the meta-learning paradigm, in this paper,
we explore how to enhance object features with intrinsical
characteristics that are universal across different object categories. We propose a new prototype, namely universal prototype, that is learned from all object categories. Besides
the advantage of characterizing invariant characteristics,
the universal prototypes alleviate the impact of unbalanced
object categories. After enhancing object features with the
universal prototypes, we impose a consistency loss to maximize the agreement between the enhanced features and
the original ones, which is beneficial for learning invariant object characteristics. Thus, we develop a new framework of few-shot object detection with universal prototypes
(F SODup ) that owns the merit of feature generalization
towards novel objects. Experimental results on PASCAL
VOC and MS COCO show the effectiveness of F SODup .
Particularly, for the 1-shot case of VOC Split2, F SODup
outperforms the baseline by 6.8% in terms of mAP.

1. Introduction
Recently, owing to the success of deep learning, great
progress has been made on object detection [26, 11, 14, 12].
However, the outstanding performance [25, 21, 3, 18] depends on abundant annotated objects in training images for
each category. As a challenging task, few-shot object detec∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Universal prototypes (colorful stars) are learned from
all object categories, which are not specific to certain object categories. Universal prototypes capture different intrinsical object
characteristics via latent projection, e.g., the prototype F incorporates object characteristics of ‘car’ and ‘motorbike’.

tion (FSOD) [16, 35] mainly aims to improve the detection
performance for novel objects that belong to certain categories but appear rarely in the annotated training images.
The main challenge of FSOD lies in how to learn generalized object features from both abundant samples in
base categories and few samples in novel categories, which
can simultaneously describe invariant object characteristics
and alleviate the impact of unbalanced categories. Recently, meta-learning strategy [28, 30, 9] has been utilized in [38, 37, 35, 8] to adapt representation ability from
base object categories to novel categories. However, the
weak performance compared to basic fine-tuning methods
[33, 36, 4, 5] shows the meta-learning technique fails to improve the generalization ability of object feature learning.
One possible reason is that the adaptation process in
meta-learning mechanism could not capture the invariant
characteristics across categories sufficiently. The invariance, i.e., invariant under different visual changes like textual variances or environmental noises, is always associated
with the intrinsical object characteristics. As demonstrated
in [23], the models that could extract invariant representations often generalize better than their non-invariant coun-

9567

