Joint Representation Learning and Novel Category Discovery on Single- and
Multi-modal Data
Xuhui Jia1 Kai Han1,2,3 * Yukun Zhu1 Bradley Green1
1
Google 2 University of Bristol 3 The University of Hong Kong
{xhjia, kaihanx, yukun, brg}@google.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of novel category discovery on single- and multi-modal data with labels from different but relevant categories. We present a generic, end-to-end
framework to jointly learn a reliable representation and assign clusters to unlabelled data. To avoid over-ﬁtting the
learnt embedding to labelled data, we take inspiration from
self-supervised representation learning by noise-contrastive
estimation and extend it to jointly handle labelled and unlabelled data. In particular, we propose using category
discrimination on labelled data and cross-modal discrimination on multi-modal data to augment instance discrimination
used in conventional contrastive learning approaches. We
further employ Winner-Take-All (WTA) hashing algorithm
on the shared representation space to generate pairwise
pseudo labels for unlabelled data to better predict cluster
assignments. We thoroughly evaluate our framework on
large-scale multi-modal video benchmarks Kinetics-400 and
VGG-Sound, and image benchmarks CIFAR10, CIFAR100
and ImageNet, obtaining state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
With the tremendous advances in deep learning, recent
machine learning models have shown superior performance
on many tasks, such as image recognition [9, 30], object detection [54, 41], image segmentation [7], etc. While the stateof-the-art models might even outperform human in these
tasks, the success of these models heavily relies on the huge
amount of data with human annotations under the closedworld assumption. Applying deep learning in real (open)
world brings many new challenges: it is cost-inhibitive to
identify and annotate all categories, and new categories could
keep emerging. Conventional methods struggle on handling
unlabelled data from new categories [13]. On the ﬂip side,
real world provides rich unlabeled data, which are often
multi-modal (e.g., video and audio), allowing more possi* Corresponding author.

bilities for machine learning models to learn in a similar
way as human. Indeed, humans learn from multi-modal data
everyday with text, videos, audios, etc.
In this paper, we focus on automatically learning to discover new categories in the open world setting. Similar to
recent works [18, 16] which transfer knowledge from labelled images of a few classes to other unlabelled image
collections, we formulate the problem as partitioning unlabelled data from unknown categories into proper semantic
groups, while some labelled data from other categories are
available. This is a more realistic setting than pure unsupervised clustering which may produce equally valid data
partitions following different unconstrained criteria (e.g., images can be clustered by texture, color, illumination, etc) and
closed-world recognition which can not handle unlabelled
data from new categories without any labels. Meanwhile,
our setting is more similar to the human cognition process
where humans can easily learn the concept of a new object
by transferring knowledge from known objects.
Speciﬁcally, we introduce a ﬂexible end-to-end framework to discover categories in unlabelled data, with the goal
of utilizing both labelled and unlabelled data to build unbiased feature representation, while transferring more knowledge from labelled to unlabelled data. In particular, we
extend the conventional contrastive learning [6, 19] to consider both instance discrimination and category discrimination to learn a reliable feature representation on labelled
and unlabelled data. We also demonstrate that the crossmodal discrimination would further beneﬁt representation
learning on data with multi-modalities. To leverage more
of unlabelled data, we employ the Winner-Take-All (WTA)
hashing [48] on the shared representation space to generate
pair-wise pseudo labels on-the-ﬂy, which is the key for robust knowledge transfer from the labelled data to unlabelled
data. With the weak pseudo labels, the model can be trained
with a simple binary cross-entropy loss on the unlabelled
data together with the standard cross-entropy loss on the
labelled data. This way our model can simultaneously learn
feature representation and perform the cluster assignment

610

