ICON: Learning Regular Maps Through Inverse Consistency
Hastings Greer1
1

Roland Kwitt2

UNC Chapel Hill

2

François-Xavier Vialard3

University of Salzburg

3

Marc Niethammer1

LIGM, Université Gustave Eiffel

(Grid)

(Grid)

Figure 1: Example inverse consistent network (ICON) registration results for OAI knee images (see §4), obtained from a U-Net trained for
inverse consistency (without any explicit loss to promote map regularity). All four panels show (left to right) the (1) moving image, (2) fixed
image, (3) warped moving image and the (4) corresponding transformation grid (colored). Transformations are, as desired, smooth.

Abstract
Learning maps between data samples is fundamental. Applications range from representation learning, image translation and generative modeling, to the estimation of spatial
deformations. Such maps relate feature vectors, or map between feature spaces. Well-behaved maps should be regular,
which can be imposed explicitly or may emanate from the
data itself. We explore what induces regularity for spatial
transformations, e.g., when computing image registrations.
Classical optimization-based models compute maps between
pairs of samples and rely on an appropriate regularizer
for well-posedness. Recent deep learning approaches have
attempted to avoid using such regularizers altogether by
relying on the sample population instead. We explore if it is
possible to obtain spatial regularity using an inverse consistency loss only and elucidate what explains map regularity
in such a context. We find that deep networks combined
with an inverse consistency loss and randomized off-grid
interpolation yield well behaved, approximately diffeomorphic, spatial transformations. Despite the simplicity of this
approach, our experiments present compelling evidence, on
both synthetic and real data, that regular maps can be obtained without carefully tuned explicit regularizers, while
achieving competitive registration performance.

1. Motivation
Learning maps between feature vectors or spaces is an
important task. Feature vector maps are used to improve
representation learning [7], or to learn correspondences in
natural language processing [4]. Maps between spaces are
important for generative models when using normalizing
flows [24] (to map between a simple and a complex probability distribution), or to determine spatial correspondences between images, e.g., for optical flow [16] to determine motion
from videos [12], depth estimation from stereo images [25],
or medical image registration [39, 40].
Regular maps are typically desired; e.g., diffeomorphic
maps for normalizing flows to properly map densities, or
for medical image registration to map to an atlas space [20].
Estimating such maps requires an appropriate choice of transformation model. This entails picking a parameterization,
which can be simple and depend on few parameters (e.g., an
affine transformation), or which can have millions of parameters for 3D nonparametric approaches [14]. Regularity is
achieved by 1) picking a simple transformation model with
limited degrees of freedom, 2) regularization of the transformation parameters, 3) or implicitly through the data itself.
Our goal is to demonstrate and understand how spatial regularity of a transformation can be achieved by encouraging
inverse consistency of a map. Our motivating example is

3396

