PixelPyramids: Exact Inference Models from Lossless Image Pyramids
Shweta Mahajan1
Stefan Roth1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

original image
original

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have enabled significant
progress in capturing the probability density of highly structured, complex data, such as of natural images [5, 16, 27,
34, 45] or raw audio [11, 21, 47]. These models find application in a wide range of tasks including image compression [8, 44], denoising [2], inpainting [42, 46], and
super-resolution [6, 30]. Popular generative models for
images include Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[16], which transform a noise distribution to the desired distribution, and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [27], where
the data is modeled in a low-dimensional latent space by
maximizing a lower bound on the log-likelihood of the data
[36]. However, GANs are not designed to provide exact
density estimates and VAEs only approximate the underlying true distribution with intractable likelihoods, posing
challenges in both training and inference.
In contrast, autoregressive models [14, 32, 45, 46] and
normalizing flows [3, 12, 13, 18, 25] are exact inference approaches, which estimate the exact likelihood of the data.
1 Code available at https://github.com/visinf/pixelpyramids

hessian.AI
Paired Pyramid
Paired
Pyramid

2.5
mutual information (bits)

Autoregressive models are a class of exact inference
approaches with highly flexible functional forms, yielding
state-of-the-art density estimates for natural images. Yet,
the sequential ordering on the dimensions makes these models computationally expensive and limits their applicability
to low-resolution imagery. In this work, we propose PixelPyramids,1 a block-autoregressive approach employing a
lossless pyramid decomposition with scale-specific representations to encode the joint distribution of image pixels.
Crucially, it affords a sparser dependency structure compared to fully autoregressive approaches. Our PixelPyramids yield state-of-the-art results for density estimation on
various image datasets, especially for high-resolution data.
For CelebA-HQ 1024 × 1024, we observe that the density
estimates (in terms of bits/dim) are improved to ∼44 % of
the baseline despite sampling speeds superior even to easily
parallelizable flow-based models.

2

orig. image
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

2

4
6
pixel distance

8

Figure 1. Motivation for PixelPyramids. An image from CelebA
[23] (top left) is decomposed into a Paired Pyramid [43] (top right)
through an invertible, lossless mapping. Considering the mutual
information between pixels as a function of pixel distance on the
CelebA dataset (bottom), there is significant spatial dependence in
the original image (blue, circles), even between distant pixels. The
fine components of the Paired Pyramid at different levels (other
lines) have significantly more localized dependencies, decreasing
further as the resolution increases. Our PixelPyramids exploit this
for efficient block-autoregressive generative image modeling.

Autoregressive models factorize the joint target distribution
into a product of conditional distributions with a certain
ordering over the dimensions, thereby encoding complex
dependencies in the data distribution for effective density
estimation. However, the sequential dependency structure
makes efficient parallelization difficult. Normalizing flows,
on the other hand, map the input data to a known base distribution through a series of invertible transformations, providing efficient sampling. However, the invertibility constraint limits their expressiveness and their density estimation performance lags behind that of autoregressive models.
Recent work [31, 35, 50] aims to improve the computationally expensive (autoregressive) or constrained (normalizing flows) exact inference models through multi-scale feature representations of images, such as that from Wavelet

6639

