Can Shape Structure Features Improve Model Robustness under Diverse
Adversarial Settings?
∗

Mingjie Sun 1 Zichao Li 2* Chaowei Xiao 3,4,8*
Haonan Qiu 5 Bhavya Kailkhura 7 Mingyan Liu 8
Bo Li 6
1
2
3
4
5
6
CMU UCSC NVIDIA
ASU
NTU
UIUC
7
8
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
sunmj15@gmail.com, zil023@ucsd.edu, xiaocw@umich.edu
qhnmoon@gmail.com, kailkhura1@llnl.gov,mingyan@umich.edu, lbo@illinois.edu

Abstract
Recent studies show that convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) are vulnerable under various settings, including adversarial attacks, common corruptions, and backdoor attacks. Motivated by the findings that human visual system pays more attention to global structure (e.g., shapes)
for recognition while CNNs are biased towards local texture features in images, in this work we aim to analyze
whether “edge features” could improve the recognition robustness in these scenarios, and if so, to what extent? To answer these questions and systematically evaluate the global
structure features, we focus on shape features and propose two edge-enabled pipelines EdgeNetRob and EdgeGANRob, forcing the CNNs to rely more on edge features.
Specifically, EdgeNetRob and EdgeGANRob first explicitly
extract shape structure features from a given image via an
edge detection algorithm. Then EdgeNetRob trains downstream learning tasks directly on the extracted edge features, while EdgeGANRob reconstructs a new image by refilling the texture information with a trained generative adversarial network (GANs). To reduce the sensitivity of edge
detection algorithms to perturbations, we additionally propose a robust edge detection approach Robust Canny based
on vanilla Canny. Based on our evaluation, we find that
EdgeNetRob can help boost model robustness under different attack scenarios at the cost of the clean model accuracy. EdgeGANRob, on the other hand, is able to improve
the clean model accuracy compared to EdgeNetRob while
preserving the robustness. This shows that given such edge
features, how to leverage them matters for robustness, and
it also depends on data properties. Our systematic studies
on edge structure features under different settings will shed
light on future robust feature exploration and optimization.

∗ indicates equal contributions. Our code is available at https://
github.com/Eric-mingjie/Shape-Robustness

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been studied extensively [17], and have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many learning tasks [7, 11, 14, 21, 31, 38, 44,
48, 49, 52, 66, 67, 69]. However, different from the human cognition system, recent works have shown that CNNs
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [4, 5, 19, 40, 40–
42, 51, 58–62], where imperceptible perturbation can be
added to the test data to tamper the predictions. Different
from adversarial examples where test data is manipulated,
data poisoning or backdoor attacks, where training data is
manipulated to reduce model’s generalization ability, have
also been proposed [9, 33]. In addition, recent studies show
that CNNs tend to learn spurious statistical features instead
of high level abstraction, making it fail to generalize under
common corruptions (e.g. fog and snow) [22]. For each of
these settings, different robust algorithms have been proposed to solve them independently. For instance, adversarial training based methods [19, 39, 47] are proposed to
improve the robustness against adversarial attacks but are
inefficient to backdoor attacks; spectral signature [54] is
designed for defending against backdoor attacks while remains vulnerable to adversarial attacks and common corruptions. Given existing studies on human visual systems,
in this paper we aim to ask: Is it possible to learn semantically meaningful structure features to simultaneously improve the robustness of DNNs under different settings including adversarial attacks, backdoors, and common corruptions?
To improve the general robustness of CNNs under different attacks, recent studies explore the underlying cause
of their vulnerability. Ilyas et al. [25] attributes the existence of adversarial examples to the non-robust but highlypredictive features. They suggest to train a classifier only on
“robust features” which contain the necessary information
for recognition and are insensitive to small perturbations.
In addition, Baker et al. [2] and Geirhos et al. [16] have
17526

