PIT: Position-Invariant Transform for Cross-FoV Domain Adaptation
Qiqi Gu1 * Qianyu Zhou1 * Minghao Xu1 Zhengyang Feng1
Guangliang Cheng2 5 Xuequan Lu3 † Jianping Shi2 7 Lizhuang Ma1 4 6 †
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 SenseTime Group Research
3
Deakin University, 4 East China Normal University, 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory
6
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, SJTU, 7 Qing Yuan Research Institute, SJTU
{miemie, zhouqianyu, xuminghao118, zyfeng97}@sjtu.edu.cn, guangliangcheng2014@gmail.com
xuequan.lu@deakin.edu.au, shijianping@sensetime.com, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-domain object detection and semantic segmentation have witnessed impressive progress recently. Existing approaches mainly consider the domain shift resulting from external environments including the changes of
background, illumination or weather, while distinct camera intrinsic parameters appear commonly in different domains and their influence for domain adaptation has been
very rarely explored. In this paper, we observe that the
Field of View (FoV) gap induces noticeable instance appearance differences between the source and target domains. We further discover that the FoV gap between
two domains impairs domain adaptation performance under both the FoV-increasing (source FoV < target FoV)
and FoV-decreasing cases. Motivated by the observations, we propose the Position-Invariant Transform (PIT)
to better align images in different domains. We also introduce a reverse PIT for mapping the transformed/aligned
images back to the original image space, and design a
loss re-weighting strategy to accelerate the training process. Our method can be easily plugged into existing crossdomain detection/segmentation frameworks, while bringing
about negligible computational overhead. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can soundly boost
the performance on both cross-domain object detection and
segmentation for state-of-the-art techniques. Our code
is available at https://github.com/sheepooo/
PIT-Position-Invariant-Transform.

1. Introduction
Object detection [20, 41, 40] and semantic segmentation [33, 5, 6, 14] are two fundamental problems in computer vision. The former aims at precisely locating and
identifying the objects in an image and the latter targets to

(a) Original Images

(b) Transformed Images

Figure 1: Objects (cars) in different positions relative to the
camera have different extent of deformation, which remarkably burdens the alignment of intra-class features. This can
be effectively mitigated by our PIT. Top row: images of an
object (in different positions) captured by a virtual camera.
Other rows: real photos from the KITTI dataset.

classify the semantics of each pixel. Training a generalized model with high performance for the two tasks calls
for massive images with elaborate annotations, while it is
laborious to prepare such well-annotated data. Meanwhile,
due to the existence of domain shift [1], a model trained on
a specific dataset often suffers from significant performance
degradation when applied to another domain. A common
*Equal Contribution. † Joint Corresponding author.

8761

