RINDNet: Edge Detection for Discontinuity in
Reflectance, Illumination, Normal and Depth

1

Mengyang Pu1 *, Yaping Huang1,† , Qingji Guan1 , Haibin Ling2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, USA
{mengyangpu, yphuang, qjguan}@bjtu.edu.cn;

hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
As a fundamental building block in computer vision,
edges can be categorised into four types according to the
discontinuity in surface-Reflectance, Illumination, surfaceNormal or Depth. While great progress has been made in
detecting generic or individual types of edges, it remains
under-explored to comprehensively study all four edge types
together. In this paper, we propose a novel neural network solution, RINDNet, to jointly detect all four types
of edges. Taking into consideration the distinct attributes
of each type of edges and the relationship between them,
RINDNet learns effective representations for each of them
and works in three stages. In stage I, RINDNet uses a common backbone to extract features shared by all edges. Then
in stage II it branches to prepare discriminative features for
each edge type by the corresponding decoder. In stage III,
an independent decision head for each type aggregates the
features from previous stages to predict the initial results.
Additionally, an attention module learns attention maps for
all types to capture the underlying relations between them,
and these maps are combined with initial results to generate the final edge detection results. For training and evaluation, we construct the first public benchmark, BSDS-RIND,
with all four types of edges carefully annotated. In our experiments, RINDNet yields promising results in comparison
with state-of-the-art methods. Additional analysis is presented in supplementary material.

1. Introduction
Edges play an important role in many vision tasks [33,
40, 43, 46]. While generic edge detection [14, 23, 41, 44]
has been extensively studied for decades, specific-edge detection recently attracts increasing amount of efforts due to
its practical applications concerning on different types of
* The work is partially done while the author was with Stony Brook
University. † Corresponding author.

surface normal
discontinuity

depth
discontinuity

a

surface reflectance
discontinuity

b
illumination
discontinuity
Reflectance Edge (RE)

Normal edge (NE)

Illumination Edge (IE)

Depth Edge (DE)

c

Figure 1. Left: Edges are caused by a variety of factors [27, 35].
Right (a-c): Samples of the proposed BSDS-RIND dataset.

edges, such as occlusion contours [25, 38, 39] or semantic
boundaries [16, 48].
In his seminal work [27], David Marr summarized four
basic ways edges can arise: (1) surface-reflectance discontinuity, (2) illumination discontinuity, (3) surface-normal
discontinuity, and (4) depth discontinuity, as shown in
Fig. 1. Recent studies [33, 40, 43, 46] have shown that the
above types of edges are beneficial for downstream tasks.
For example, pavement crack detection (reflectance discontinuity) is a critical task for intelligent transportation [46];
shadow edge (illumination discontinuity) detection is a prerequisite for shadow removal and path detection [43]; [33]
and [40] show that depth edge and normal edge representation prompt refined normal and sharp depth estimation,
respectively. Besides, [18] utilizes four types of cues simultaneously to improve the performance of depth refinement.
Despite their importance, fine-grained edges are still
under-explored, especially when compared with generic
edges. Generic edge detectors usually treat edges indistinguishably; while existing studies for specific edges focus
on individual edge type. By contrast, the four fundamental types of edges, to our best knowledge, have never been
explored in an integrated edge detection framework.
In this paper, for the first time, we propose to detect simultaneously the four types of edges, namely reflectance

6879

