Auto Graph Encoder-Decoder for Neural Network Pruning
Sixing Yu
Iowa State University

Arya Mazaheri
Technical University of Darmstadt

Ali Jannesari
Iowa State University

yusx@iastate.edu

arya.mazaheri@tu-darmstadt.de

jannesari@iastate.edu

Abstract

amount of time and might not necessarily lead to a fully
compressed model.

Model compression aims to deploy deep neural networks
(DNN) on mobile devices with limited computing and storage resources. However, most of the existing model compression methods rely on manually defined rules, which require domain expertise. DNNs are essentially computational graphs, which contain rich structural information.
In this paper, we aim to find a suitable compression policy
from DNNs’ structural information. We propose an automatic graph encoder-decoder model compression (AGMC)
method combined with graph neural networks (GNN) and
reinforcement learning (RL). We model the target DNN as a
graph and use GNN to learn the DNN’s embeddings automatically. We compared our method with rule-based DNN
embedding model compression methods to show the effectiveness of our method. Results show that our learningbased DNN embedding achieves better performance and a
higher compression ratio with fewer search steps. We evaluated our method on over-parameterized and mobile-friendly
DNNs and compared our method with handcrafted and
learning-based model compression approaches. On over
parameterized DNNs, such as ResNet-56, our method outperformed handcrafted and learning-based methods with
4.36% and 2.56% higher accuracy, respectively. Furthermore, on MobileNet-v2, we achieved a higher compression
ratio than state-of-the-art methods with just 0.93% accuracy loss.

Recently, automatic model compression [14, 49, 27] has
gained momentum. For example, Wang et al. [49] proposed
a Bayesian automatic model compression method trained
in a one-shot manner to find reasonable quantization policies. He et al. [14] proposed an automatic model compression method based on reinforcement learning (RL). However, when representing DNNs, they rely on manually defined DNN embedding vector (e.g., using one-hot vectors
to characterize DNN’s hidden layers) and ignore the rich
structural information between the hidden layers.

1. Introduction
With the increasing demand to deploy deep neural networks (DNNs) on edge devices (e.g., mobile phones, robots,
self-driving cars, etc.), which usually have limited storage
and computing power, model compression techniques became essential for efficient DNN deployment. Network
pruning [10, 11, 32], factorization [46, 38], knowledge distillation [36, 34, 16], and parameter quantization [10, 49,
19] are among the most well-known model compression
techniques. However, these methods heavily rely on handcrafted rules defined by experts, demanding an extensive

DNNs are essentially represented as computational
graphs in deep learning frameworks, such as TensorFlow [1]
and PyTorch [35]. A computational graph is composed
of numerous primitive operations (e.g., add, minus, multiply), where edges are operations and nodes are intermediate calculation results (i.e., feature maps in DNNs). Such
a rich structural representation can effectively delineate the
state of DNN hidden layers. Additionally, computational
graphs often contain repetitive structural patterns due to the
same set of primitive operations being used multiple times.
Thus, we aim to benefit from this feature by extracting
the structural information readily available within computational graphs to identify the redundancy and pruning policy
for DNN hidden layers.
In this paper, we propose a graph-based Auto Graph
encoder-decoder Model Compression (AGMC) method that
combines graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [21, 53,
52] and reinforcement learning (RL) [25, 45, 43] to learn
the compression strategy of DNNs without expert knowledge. The graph encoder-decoder aims to learn the DNN’s
layer embeddings. The GCN-based graph encoder learns
the DNN representation from its structure information, and
the decoder decodes the representation to hidden layer embeddings. The RL agent takes the hidden layer embeddings as the environment states, looks for the pruning ratio
for each hidden layer, and generates a corresponding compressed candidate model. Finally, we evaluate the candidate
compressed model performance and provide a reward value
as feedback to the RL agent. By exploiting DNN’s struc-

6362

