Encoder-decoder with Multi-level Attention for 3D Human Shape and Pose
Estimation
Ziniu Wan1 *

Maoqing Tian3
Jianbo Liu4
Shuai Yi3
Zhengjia Li2 *
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Tongji University
3
4
SenseTime Research
Chinese University of Hong Kong

ziniuwan@andrew.cmu.edu

zjli1997@tongji.edu.cn

liujianbo@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Hongsheng Li4

tianmaoqing@sensetime.com

yishuai@sensetime.com

hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

based on Deep Neural Network (DNN) have been made to
increase the accuracy and robustness of this task.

3D human shape and pose estimation is the essential
task for human motion analysis, which is widely used in
many 3D applications. However, existing methods cannot simultaneously capture the relations at multiple levels, including spatial-temporal level and human joint level.
Therefore they fail to make accurate predictions in some
hard scenarios when there is cluttered background, occlusion, or extreme pose. To this end, we propose Multi-level
Attention Encoder-Decoder Network (MAED), including a
Spatial-Temporal Encoder (STE) and a Kinematic Topology Decoder (KTD) to model multi-level attentions in a
unified framework. STE consists of a series of cascaded
blocks based on Multi-Head Self-Attention, and each block
uses two parallel branches to learn spatial and temporal
attention respectively. Meanwhile, KTD aims at modeling the joint level attention. It regards pose estimation
as a top-down hierarchical process similar to SMPL kinematic tree. With the training set of 3DPW, MAED outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods by 6.2, 7.2, and
2.4 mm of PA-MPJPE on the three widely used benchmarks 3DPW, MPI-INF-3DHP, and Human3.6M respectively. Our code is available at https://github.com/
ziniuwan/maed.

However, existing DNN-based methods often fail in
some challenging scenarios, including cluttered background, occlusion and extreme pose. To overcome these
challenges, three intrinsic relations should be jointly modeled for the video-based 3D human shape and pose estimation: a). Spatial relation: For the pose estimation task,
the human joints areas and the spatial correlations among
body parts are directly related to the pose prediction. It
is critical to carefully utilize the spatial relation, especially
in the scene of cluttered background. b). Temporal relation: Everyone has particular temporal trajectory in a given
video. In occlusion cases, this temporal relation should be
exploited to infer the pose of current occluded frame from
surrounding frames. c). Human joint relation: In the parametric 3D body model SMPL [26], human joints are organized as a kinematic tree. Once pose changes, the parent
joint rotates first, and then rotates the children. When the
pose amplitude is large, we argue that the prior of the dependence among joints is especially helpful for accurate pose
estimation. However, none of the existing methods fully
utilizes the above three relations in a unified framework.

1. Introduction
3D human shape and pose estimation from a single image or video is a fundamental topic in computer vision. It is
difficult to directly estimate the 3D human shape and pose
from monocular images without any 3D information. To
tackle this problem, massive 3D labeled data and 3D parametric human body models [26, 30, 3] with prior knowledge
are necessary. Tremendous works [16, 18, 20, 27, 21, 29]
* Equal Contribution.

Motivated by the above observations, we propose Multilevel Attention Encoder-Decoder Network (MAED) for
video-based 3D human shape and pose estimation. MAED
is the first work to explore the above three relations by exploiting corresponding multi-level attentions in a unified
framework. It includes Spatial-Temporal Encoder (STE)
for spatial-temporal attention and Kinematic Topology Decoder (KTD) for human joint attention.
Specifically, the STE consists of several cascaded blocks,
and each block uses two parallel branches to learn spatial and temporal attention respectively. We call the two
branches Multi-Head Self-Attention Spatial (MSA-S) and
Multi-Head Self-Attention Temporal (MSA-T), which are
inspired by Multi-Head Self-Attention (MSA) mechanism

13033

