Learning Canonical 3D Object Representation for Fine-Grained Recognition
(d)
Sunghun Joung1 , Seungryong Kim2 , Minsu Kim(a)1 , Ig-Jae(b)Kim3 , (c)
Kwanghoon
Sohn(e)1,∗
1
Yonsei University, 2 Korea University, 3 Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)
{sunghunjoung,minsukim320,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr, seungryong kim@korea.ac.kr, drjay@kist.re.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for fine-grained object
recognition that learns to recover object variation in 3D
space from a single image, trained on an image collection
without using any ground-truth 3D annotation. We accomplish this by representing an object as a composition of
3D shape and its appearance, while eliminating the effect
of camera viewpoint, in a canonical configuration. Unlike
conventional methods modeling spatial variation in 2D images only, our method is capable of reconfiguring the appearance feature in a canonical 3D space, thus enabling the
subsequent object classifier to be invariant under 3D geometric variation. Our representation also allows us to go
beyond existing methods, by incorporating 3D shape variation as an additional cue for object recognition. To learn
the model without ground-truth 3D annotation, we deploy
a differentiable renderer in an analysis-by-synthesis framework. By incorporating 3D shape and appearance jointly
in a deep representation, our method learns the discriminative representation of the object and achieves competitive
performance on fine-grained image recognition and vehicle re-identification. We also demonstrate that the performance of 3D shape reconstruction is improved by learning
fine-grained shape deformation in a boosting manner.

1. Introduction
Object recognition [34, 23, 17, 76] is one of the most
fundamental and essential tasks in computer vision fields,
which has achieved steady progress by the advent of deep
convolutional neural networks. However, it still remains a
challenging problem, especially when an object undergoes
severe geometric deformations, e.g., by object scale, pose
and part variations, which frequently occur across different
instances, or by camera viewpoint changes [16, 25, 8, 27].
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (NRF2021R1A2C2006703), and the Yonsei University Research Fund of 2021
(2021-22-0001).
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Intuition of our method: Given (a) 2D image, we recover object variation in 3D space by estimating (b) 3D shape deformation, (c) camera viewpoint change and (d) appearance variation. It allows for using 3D shape and appearance in a canonical
space, while eliminating camera viewpoint variation, enabling us
to deal with 3D object variations and facilitating the subsequent
object classifier.

To overcome these challenges, recent works [25, 39, 53,
7, 8] seek to handle such geometric variations based on an
assumption that the object variation can be decomposed into
appearance and 2D spatial variation. They first estimate
an appearance flow from an input and then warp the input
into a canonical configuration so as to remove the spatial
variation, from which the appearance feature is extracted
to facilitate the subsequent classifier’s task. The appearance flow is generally estimated by modeling 2D transformation [25, 39, 53], e.g., affine transformation, or by learning offset of sampling locations in the convolutional operators [7, 8]. These methods, however, do not account for the
fact that the object variation, given an image, is due to the
variations in appearance, 3D shape and camera viewpoint
as in Fig. 1. While the effect of camera viewpoint should
be eliminated for achieving geometric invariance, 3D shape
variation can be used as an additional cue to extract a shape
feature that is able to supplement an appearance feature, but
none of the existing methods utilize this.
However, estimating 3D object information from a single image is challenging, since collecting the ground-truth
3D shape is notoriously difficult and time-consuming [69],
thus limiting the supervised learning for this task. To overcome this, some methods implicitly consider the 3D object

1035

