Adaptive Convolutions with Per-pixel Dynamic Filter Atom
Ze Wang1 , Zichen Miao1 , Jun Hu2 , and Qiang Qiu1
Purdue University1 Facebook2
{zewang, miaoz, qqiu}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Applying feature dependent network weights have been
proved to be effective in many fields. However, in practice, restricted by the enormous size of model parameters
and memory footprints, scalable and versatile dynamic convolutions with per-pixel adapted filters are yet to be fully
explored. In this paper, we address this challenge by decomposing filters, adapted to each spatial position, over dynamic filter atoms generated by a light-weight network from
local features. Adaptive receptive fields can be supported
by further representing each filter atom over sets of prefixed multi-scale bases. As plug-and-play replacements to
convolutional layers, the introduced adaptive convolutions
with per-pixel dynamic atoms enable explicit modeling of
intra-image variance, while avoiding heavy computation,
parameters, and memory cost. Our method preserves the
appealing properties of conventional convolutions as being translation-equivariant and parametrically efficient. We
present experiments to show that, the proposed method delivers comparable or even better performance across tasks,
and are particularly effective on handling tasks with significant intra-image variance.

1. Introduction
The idea of data or context dependent network weights
have long been studied in the research of neural networks.
Many concepts, like fast weight [2, 32, 31] and dynamic
plasticity [24, 25] are developed to explicitly model the
evolution of model parameters, and have demonstrated improved performance on sequential data. In [2, 32, 31],
the parameters in these networks can be divided into two
groups: slow weights that are learned through training with
gradient descent, and fast weights that are generated on-thefly depending on both slow weights and observed data.
In recent years, similar idea has been extended to dynamic convolutions. Standard convolutions as in Figure 1a
uses shared filters across all samples and all spatial position. Dynamic convolutions, as in Figure 1b, allow convolutional filters to be adapted to data in one-shot (as opposite
to evolving through sequential observations). Dynamic fil-

junhu2@fb.com

ter networks (DFN) [16], conditionally parameterized convolutions (CondConv) [42], dynamic convolutions with attention (DY-CNN) [6] are introduced to allow convolutional
filters to be adapted to the current observed input, and explicitly modeling the inter-sample variance among images.
While improvements on certain tasks have been shown, the
flexibility comes at the cost of extra parameter and computation [6, 42], and sacrificing the translation equivariant property of CNNs [16]. More importantly, it is practically infeasible to extend such methods from per-image
adapted filters to per-pixel adapted filters due to the prohibitive memory footprints of applying per-pixel adapted
high-dimension filters as we will show in Section 4.4.
In this paper, we enable CNNs with per-pixel adaptive
convolutions as illustrated in Figure 1c, at any network layers to better model intra-image variance. We introduce
Adaptive Convolutions with Dynamic Atoms (ACDA), a versatile and scalable convolutional layer that allows per-pixel
specific filters to be adaptively generated from each local
input feature patch across spatial position. To remedy the
prohibitively high cost on generating and applying per-pixel
adaptive filters in high dimensions, we decompose filters
over dynamically generated low-dimensional filter atoms
at each spatial location. The adaptive filters can now be
reconstructed by linearly combining these per-pixel specific dynamic atoms with cross-location shared compositional coefficients, as illustrated in Figure 2. Most importantly, the decomposition enables a fast two-layer implementation of the adaptive convolutions as shown in Figure 3, which reduces the prohibitive computation and memory footprints of applying per-pixel specific convolutions
to a level that matches standard convolutions, allowing our
method becomes a versatile replacement to standard convolutions across layers in any CNNs.
To achieve adaptive receptive fields, we further decompose each filter atom over sets of multi-scale pre-fixed atom
bases as in Figure 4, for a two-level filter decomposition.
Now, instead of directly generating atoms, only per-pixel
basis coefficients are required to be generated. The multiscale atom bases and the generated basis coefficients reconstruct dynamic atoms, and allow the receptive field at each
spatial position to be selectively decided from the local features. Meanwhile the adaptive filters are effectively regular-

12302

