RFNet: Region-aware Fusion Network for Incomplete Multi-modal
Brain Tumor Segmentation

1

Yuhang Ding1,2 Xin Yu2 Yi Yang2 *
Baidu Research 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
dyh.ustc.uts@gmail.com, {xin.yu, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Most existing brain tumor segmentation methods usually
exploit multi-modal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images to achieve high segmentation performance. However,
the problem of missing certain modality images often happens in clinical practice, thus leading to severe segmentation performance degradation. In this work, we propose a
Region-aware Fusion Network (RFNet) that is able to exploit different combinations of multi-modal data adaptively
and effectively for tumor segmentation. Considering different modalities are sensitive to different brain tumor regions, we design a Region-aware Fusion Module (RFM)
in RFNet to conduct modal feature fusion from available
image modalities according to disparate regions. Benefiting from RFM, RFNet can adaptively segment tumor regions from an incomplete set of multi-modal images by effectively aggregating modal features. Furthermore, we also
develop a segmentation-based regularizer to prevent RFNet
from the insufficient and unbalanced training caused by
the incomplete multi-modal data. Specifically, apart from
obtaining segmentation results from fused modal features,
we also segment each image modality individually from
the corresponding encoded features. In this manner, each
modal encoder is forced to learn discriminative features,
thus improving the representation ability of the fused features. Remarkably, extensive experiments on BRATS2020,
BRATS2018 and BRATS2015 datasets demonstrate that our
RFNet outperforms the state-of-the-art significantly.

1. Introduction
Brain tumor segmentation, aiming to segment different
brain tumor regions, is vital for clinical assessment and surgical planning. In order to improve the segmentation accuracy, most existing methods [16, 43, 17, 29, 11, 4, 38] use
four modalities simultaneously, namely Fluid Attenuation
* This work was done when Yuhang Ding interned at Baidu Research.
Yi Yang is the corresponding author.

Flair

T1c

T1

T2

Labels

Figure 1. Illustration of different sensitivities of modalities to different brain tumor regions. From left to right: Images of four
modalities, i.e., Flair, T1c, T1 and T2, and the corresponding labels of three patients are shown. In the segmentation results, different colors denote different brain tumor regions.

Inversion Recovery (Flair), contrast enhanced T1-weighted
(T1c), T1-weighted (T1) and T2-weighted (T2). However,
the missing modality problem is very common in clinical
practice due to different scanning protocols and patient conditions. Therefore, these standard brain tumor segmentation
networks cannot be deployed directly in practice.
Incomplete multi-modal brain tumor segmentation approaches [3, 10, 14, 44] have been proposed to deal with
various missing situations. Havaei et al. [14] and Dorent
et al. [10] compute the mean and variance across accessible multi-modal features as fused features. However, this
fusion treats each modality equally regardless of different
missing scenarios and thus may fail to aggregate features effectively. Later, Chen et al. [3] and Zhou et al. [44] leverage
attention mechanisms to emphasize contributions from different accessible modalities. However, they do not fully exploit the relations between tumor regions and image modalities. In particular, different modalities contain distinct appearances and thus have different sensitivities to diverse tumor regions. For example, as visible in Fig. 1, T1c is more
sensitive to the red and blue tumor areas while Flair and T2

3975

