Learning Facial Representations from the Cycle-consistency of Face
Jia-Ren Chang
Yong-Sheng Chen
Wei-Chen Chiu
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
{followwar.cs00g, yschen, walon}@nctu.edu.tw

Cycle-consistency of Face

Abstract
Face

Faces manifest large variations in many aspects, such as
identity, expression, pose, and face styling. Therefore, it is
a great challenge to disentangle and extract these characteristics from facial images, especially in an unsupervised
manner. In this work, we introduce cycle-consistency in facial characteristics as free supervisory signal to learn facial
representations from unlabeled facial images. The learning is realized by superimposing the facial motion cycleconsistency and identity cycle-consistency constraints. The
main idea of the facial motion cycle-consistency is that,
given a face with expression, we can perform de-expression
to a neutral face via the removal of facial motion and further perform re-expression to reconstruct back to the original face. The main idea of the identity cycle-consistency is
to exploit both de-identity into mean face by depriving the
given neutral face of its identity via feature re-normalization
and re-identity into neutral face by adding the personal attributes to the mean face. At training time, our model learns
to disentangle two distinct facial representations to be useful for performing cycle-consistent face reconstruction. At
test time, we use the linear protocol scheme for evaluating facial representations on various tasks, including facial
expression recognition and head pose regression. We also
can directly apply the learnt facial representations to person recognition, frontalization and image-to-image translation. Our experiments show that the results of our approach
is competitive with those of existing methods, demonstrating the rich and unique information embedded in the disentangled representations. Code is available at https:
//github.com/JiaRenChang/FaceCycle.

1. Introduction
Face perception is vital for human beings and is also essential in the field of computer vision. Neuroimaging studies of both human and monkey [13, 15, 43] reveal the neuroanatomical dissociation between expression and identity
representations in face perception. Their findings suggest
that these facial characteristics are processed in different

de-expression

Neutral face

de-identity

𝑅exp

𝑅id

re-expression

re-identity

Mean face

Figure 1. We propose an unsupervised framework based on cycleconsistency for learning face disentanglement. We define that all
the variations between a face and its corresponding neutral face of
the same identity as expression. Similarly, all the variations between a neutral face and the global mean face are defined as identity. The input face is sequentially deprived of expression (Rexp )
and identity (Rid ) representations by networks to become the neutral face and mean face, respectively, which can be transformed
back to the original face in reverse order.

brain areas. With the renaissance of deep learning in recent
years, computer vision research field follows this thread of
thinking and progresses in the direction of disentangling the
face characteristics into separated low-dimensional latent
representations, such as identity [40], expression [45, 48],
shape/appearance [35, 44], intrinsic images [36], and finegrained attributes (age, gender, wearing glasses, etc.) [34].
Several supervised methods have been proposed to disentangle face characteristics for image manipulation by
conditioning generative models on a pre-specified face representations, including landmarks [47], action units [32],
or facial attributes [27]. Particularly, these methods are
able to manipulate faces while preserving the identity.
Other studies incorporate head pose information to disentangle pose-invariant representations for robust identity [40]/expression [48] recognition. Provided with neutral
face, moreover, de-expression residue learning [45] can facilitate the model to learn identity-invariant expression representations for performing facial expression recognition.
The 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [2, 4] for face shape
modeling incorporates a similar thinking of dissociation
for expression and identity. The most widely-used form
of 3DMM is that a face shape S is a linear combination of mean shape S̄ and identity and expression vectors
(zid , zexp ): S = S̄ + Aid zid + Aexp zexp , where Aid and
19680

