Learning Rare Category Classifiers on a Tight Labeling Budget
Ravi Teja Mullapudi2,4
rmullapu@cs.cmu.edu

Fait Poms1
fpoms@cs.stanford.edu

Deva Ramanan2,3
deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Many real-world ML deployments face the challenge of
training a rare category model with a small labeling budget. In these settings, there is often access to large amounts
of unlabeled data, therefore it is attractive to consider semisupervised or active learning approaches to reduce human
labeling effort. However, prior approaches make two assumptions that do not often hold in practice; (a) one has access to a modest amount of labeled data to bootstrap learning and (b) every image belongs to a common category of
interest. In this paper, we consider the scenario where we
start with as-little-as five labeled positives of a rare category and a large amount of unlabeled data of which 99.9%
of it is negatives. We propose an active semi-supervised
method for building accurate models in this challenging setting. Our method leverages two key ideas: (a) Utilize human and machine effort where they are most effective; human labels are used to identify “needle-in-a-haystack” positives, while machine-generated pseudo-labels are used to
identify negatives. (b) Adapt recently proposed representation learning techniques for handling extremely imbalanced
human labeled data to iteratively train models with noisy
machine labeled data. We compare our approach with prior
active learning and semi-supervised approaches, demonstrating significant improvements in accuracy per unit labeling effort, particularly on a tight labeling budget.

1. Introduction
Training image classification models for a single (or
small number of) rare category is common in real-world
settings. For instance, autonomous vehicle development
requires recognizing rare entities, like construction vehicles, in the video logs of a large fleet. A shopping ap1 Stanford University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Argo AI 4 Google
Research

William R. Mark4
billmark@google.com

Kayvon Fatahalian1
kayvonf@cs.stanford.edu

plication might need to recognize a particular type of apparel. Ecological monitoring requires recognition of rare
animal species. A major challenge of building models for
rare categories is acquiring training examples - precisely because they are rare! Fortunately, in many real-world scenarios one has access to a large amount of unlabeled data.
Naively labeling the unlabeled data is unlikely to find many
rare examples without significant human effort. Therefore, a natural strategy is to interactively mine the data by
combining [24, 27, 16, 31, 40, 34] active [32] and semisupervised [6, 46, 36, 43] learning techniques. However,
prior active and semi-supervised learning approaches assume access to a modest amount of labeled data and assume
that every image belongs to a common class of interest (Figure 1). In contrast, we are interested in building models for
rare categories starting with only a few labeled positives (as
little as 5) and where most (as much as 99.9%) of the unlabeled data is background. Simply put, our goal is to maximize model accuracy given a small fixed amount of human
labels (500–1000).
Typical active and semi-supervised approaches use an
initial labeled set to train a model for identifying and labeling relevant data. However, we have so few labeled positives for each rare category that it is difficult to train a deep
model using only the initial labeled set. Prior work in the
rare category setting resorts to training simple linear models using features from pre-trained deep networks [29, 11].
Unlike these approaches we show that it is feasible to improve deep features with a limited amount of labeled data
using a combination of active and semi-supervised learning
to address the following challenges:
• Because humans can only label a small fraction of the
full dataset, we make use of semi-supervised learning to
pseudo-labels additional examples. Pseudo-labeling positives works poorly because they are rare. We let humans
label “hard” examples that may contain positives and
hard negatives and let machines pseudo-label “easy”
negatives.
18423

