Divide-and-Assemble: Learning Block-wise Memory for Unsupervised Anomaly
Detection
Jinlei Hou1,2† , Yingying Zhang1 , Qiaoyong Zhong1 , Di Xie1 , Shiliang Pu1⋆ , Hong Zhou2
1
Hikvision Research Institute 2 Zhejiang University
{houjinlei,zhangyingying7,zhongqiaoyong,xiedi,pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com
zhouh@mail.bme.zju.edu.cn

DivideDivide

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection in images is an increasingly important area among the computer vision community. Lacking
of abnormal training data makes this task challenging and
limits the use of well-established supervised learning methods. Hence, existing works define anomaly detection as an
† Work done as an intern at Hikvision Research Institute.
⋆ Corresponding author. This project was supported by the National
Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2020AAA010400X) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61803332).

Small

Medium

Assemble

Large

1

Anomaly C Normality B

Reconstruction-based methods play an important role in
unsupervised anomaly detection in images. Ideally, we expect a perfect reconstruction for normal samples and poor
reconstruction for abnormal samples. Since the generalizability of deep neural networks is difficult to control, existing models such as autoencoder do not work well. In
this work, we interpret the reconstruction of an image as
a divide-and-assemble procedure. Surprisingly, by varying the granularity of division on feature maps, we are able
to modulate the reconstruction capability of the model for
both normal and abnormal samples. That is, finer granularity leads to better reconstruction, while coarser granularity leads to poorer reconstruction. With proper granularity, the gap between the reconstruction error of normal
and abnormal samples can be maximized. The divide-andassemble framework is implemented by embedding a novel
multi-scale block-wise memory module into an autoencoder
network. Besides, we introduce adversarial learning and
explore the semantic latent representation of the discriminator, which improves the detection of subtle anomaly.
We achieve state-of-the-art performance on the challenging
MVTec AD dataset. Remarkably, we improve the vanilla
autoencoder model by 10.1% in terms of the AUROC score.

Normality A

Abstract

Figure 1. A toy example demonstrating that the reconstruction capability on normality and anomaly varies with different building
block sizes. A: a normal sample with diagonal stripes. B: another
normal sample with diagonal stripes similar to A. C: an abnormal
sample with vertical stripes.

unsupervised learning problem that tries to model the distribution of normality without abnormal samples at training
time. During inference, samples described as outliers of the
normality distribution are then considered to be anomalous.
Reconstruction-based methods have been widely used
for unsupervised anomaly detection. Most recent methods are based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
In particular, autoencoder (AE) [21] is a natural choice to
model the high-dimensional image data in the unsupervised
setting. It is generally assumed [53, 17, 51] that the reconstruction error of the normal samples which are similar
to the training data will be lower than abnormal samples.
However, due to the existence of down-sampling in AE, the
latent coding representation loses the detailed information
of the original image. It may result in blurry output and
large reconstruction error even for normal samples. We may
strengthen the reconstruction capability of AE by reducing the down-sampling rate or adding skip connections [2].

8791

