Scaling Semantic Segmentation Beyond 1K Classes on a Single GPU
Shipra Jain1,2 , Danda Pani Paudel1 , Martin Danelljan1 , Luc Van Gool1,3
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland1
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden2
KU Leuven, Belgium3
shipra@kth.se {paudel,martin.danelljan,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
The state-of-the-art object detection and image classification methods can perform impressively on more than 9k
classes. In contrast, the number of classes in semantic segmentation datasets is relatively limited. This is not surprising when the restrictions caused by the lack of labeled data
and high computation demand for segmentation are considered. In this paper, we propose a novel training methodology to train and scale the existing semantic segmentation
models for a large number of semantic classes without increasing the memory overhead. In our embedding-based
scalable segmentation approach, we reduce the space complexity of the segmentation model’s output from O(C) to
O(1), propose an approximation method for ground-truth
class probability, and use it to compute cross-entropy loss.
The proposed approach is general and can be adopted by
any state-of-the-art segmentation model to gracefully scale
it for any number of semantic classes with only one GPU.
Our approach achieves similar, and in some cases, even
better mIoU for Cityscapes, Pascal VOC, ADE20k, COCOStuff10k datasets when adopted to DeeplabV3+ model with
different backbones. We demonstrate a clear benefit of our
approach on a dataset with 1284 classes, bootstrapped from
LVIS and COCO annotations, with almost three times better
mIoU than the DeeplabV3+. Our source code is available
at: https://github.com/shipra25jain/ESSNet.

1 . Introduction
With the advent of deep learning, significant progress has
been made in various image understanding tasks, including
image classification, object detection, and image segmentation. The state-of-the-art methods can impressively classify
images into 10k classes [15] and detect 9k different objects
[49]. In contrast, segmentation models have been trained
for a fairly limited number of common classes. The ability
to segment a greater variety of objects, including small and
rare object classes, is critical to many real-life applications

Figure 1. The left y-axis shows the maximum batch size that can
fit in a single GPU for DeepLabV3+ model vs number of classes
in the dataset. The right y-axis with markers in yellow and green
color shows pixel accuracy for our model and baseline for following datasets (number of classes): Cityscapes (19), ADE20k (150),
COCO-Stuff10k (182) and COCO+LVIS (1284).

like autonomous driving [2] and the scene exploration [7].
The scaling of existing segmentation models has several unresolved challenges. One of the challenges is the unbalanced distribution of classes. As mentioned in [21], due to
the Zipfian distribution of classes in natural settings, there is
a long tail of rare and small object classes that do not have a
sufficient number of examples to train the model. The lack
of segmentation datasets with a multitude of classes also
limits us to develop scalable segmentation models. In fact,
one can also argue from the other side. The reason for limited classes in existing segmentation datasets is the discouraging computational demand, alongside the labor-intensive
annotations.
The task of semantic segmentation is essentially a pixellevel classification of an image. Typically, it is performed
by predicting an output tensor of H × W × C for image
size H × W and C number of semantic classes [36]. This
is desirable during the pixel-wise classification by employing cross-entropy loss on the C-dimensional predictions.
Unfortunately, the memory demand for such predictions

7426

