Faster Multi-Object Segmentation using
Parallel Quadratic Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
Niels Jeppesen, Patrick M. Jensen, Anders N. Christensen, Anders B. Dahl, and Vedrana A. Dahl
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
{niejep,patmjen,anym,abda,vand}@dtu.dk

Abstract
We introduce a parallel version of the Quadratic PseudoBoolean Optimization (QPBO) algorithm for solving binary
optimization tasks, such as image segmentation. The original QPBO implementation by Kolmogorov and Rother relies
on the Boykov-Kolmogorov (BK) maxflow/mincut algorithm
and performs well for many image analysis tasks. However,
the serial nature of their QPBO algorithm results in poor
utilization of modern hardware. By redesigning the QPBO
algorithm to work with parallel maxflow/mincut algorithms,
we significantly reduce solve time of large optimization tasks.
We compare our parallel QPBO implementation to other
state-of-the-art solvers and benchmark them on two large
segmentation tasks and a substantial set of small segmentation tasks. The results show that our parallel QPBO algorithm is over 20 times faster than the serial QPBO algorithm
on the large tasks and over three times faster for the majority
of the small tasks. Although we focus on image segmentation,
our algorithm is generic and can be used for any QPBO
problem. Our implementation and experimental results are
available at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5201620

1. Introduction
Computational parallelism is essential to the performance
and thereby the usefulness of many image segmentation algorithms. The best example is perhaps deep learning, which
owes much of its success to highly efficient parallel implementations of the matrix operations used during both training
and inference. However, not all algorithms used in computer
vision rely on easily parallelizable matrix operations.
Graph cut algorithms are popular for solving binary optimization problems in image analysis, due to their speed
and guarantee of optimality. Thus, they provide efficient
solutions to a variety of computer vision problems – on their
own [8, 9, 11, 16, 23, 26, 33, 35], or in combination with
other methods [18, 29, 30]. While some popular graph cut

algorithms have been parallelized [11, 36, 41, 43], other algorithms have remained serial, which severely limits their
ability to utilize modern hardware. One example is the
Quadratic Pseudo-Boolean Optimization (QPBO) algorithm
[7, 19, 33, 39], which allows non-submodular energy terms,
making it particularly useful for instance segmentation. Instance segmentation without training data is common in
microscopy and material science, where manually labeling
large volumetric datasets can be highly impractical. Often,
the input needed for segmentation with QPBO can be obtained much easier.
In this paper, we introduce the first parallel QPBO (PQPBO) algorithm. Our goal is to provide an efficient and
scalable algorithm that can take advantage of modern multicore processors. With our P-QPBO algorithm, results can
be obtained over an order of magnitude faster than with
previous serial methods, and the scale of the tasks can be
increased significantly. It enables us to segment a volume
with hundreds of interacting 3D objects in minutes based on
limited user input and no training data. Although we only
demonstrate the advantage of P-QPBO for image segmentation, P-QPBO can be used for any QPBO problem.
This work focuses on our parallel algorithm and its time
and memory efficiency on image segmentation tasks. Thus,
the formulation of suitable energy functions for specific
computer vision tasks is outside the scope of this paper.

1.1. Related work
Several algorithms have been developed to solve
QPBO problems [19, 32, 33]. In computer vision, the
QPBO algorithm [7, 19] implemented by Kolmogorov and
Rother [33, 39], utilizing the serial Boykov-Kolmogorov
maxflow/mincut (BK) algorithm [9] for solving the optimization problem, is arguably the most popular. Generally, maxflow/mincut algorithms can be separated into three
groups [42]: push-relabel algorithms [3, 10, 14, 15], augmenting path algorithms [9, 17], and pseudoflow algorithms
[16, 20, 21], which are a hybrid of the two previous categories. BK is an augmenting path algorithm. It is the

6260

