Temporal Action Detection with Multi-level Supervision
Baifeng Shi
UC Berkeley

Qi Dai
Microsoft Research Asia

Kate Saenko
Boston University & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Judy Hoffman
Georgia Tech

Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley

Huijuan Xu
Penn State University

Abstract
Training temporal action detection in videos requires
large amounts of labeled data, yet such annotation is expensive to collect. Incorporating unlabeled or weakly-labeled
data to train action detection model could help reduce annotation cost. In this work, we first introduce the Semisupervised Action Detection (SSAD) task with a mixture
of labeled and unlabeled data and analyze different types
of errors in the proposed SSAD baselines which are directly adapted from the semi-supervised classification literature. Identifying that the main source of error is action
incompleteness (i.e., missing parts of actions), we alleviate it by designing an unsupervised foreground attention
(UFA) module utilizing the conditional independence between foreground and background motion. Then we incorporate weakly-labeled data into SSAD and propose Omnisupervised Action Detection (OSAD) with three levels of supervision. To overcome the accompanying action-context
confusion problem in OSAD baselines, an information bottleneck (IB) is designed to suppress the scene information
in non-action frames while preserving the action information. We extensively benchmark against the baselines for
SSAD and OSAD on our created data splits in THUMOS14
and ActivityNet1.2, and demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed UFA and IB methods. Lastly, the benefit of our full
OSAD-IB model under limited annotation budgets is shown
by exploring the optimal annotation strategy for labeled,
unlabeled and weakly-labeled data. 1

1. Introduction
Temporal action detection is one of the most fundamental tasks in video understanding, which requires simultaneously classifying the actions in a video and localizing their
start and end times. Recent success of temporal action detection models [55, 50, 18, 36, 4] highly relies on large
1 https://github.com/bfshi/SSAD_OSAD.

Figure 1: Left: Data type for different tasks. FSAD uses only
fully-labeled videos (white area). SSAD uses both fully-labeled
and unlabeled videos (blue area). OSAD further uses weaklylabeled videos besides these two data types (green area). Right:
Error analysis on SSAD/OSAD models. We consider three types
of errors: 1) Action incompleteness (Miss), 2) Misclassification
(Cls), and 3) Action-context confusion (Bkgd). Compared to the
supervised-only model, the main type of error in SSAD baseline
is Miss, while in OSAD baseline it is Bkgd. See Sec. 4.2.

amounts of fully-labeled training data with both classification and localization annotations. However, the annotation process, especially for localization, is extremely timeconsuming and expensive. To alleviate this problem, one
direction is to maximize the usage of unlabeled or weaklylabeled data to bring performance improvement with lower
annotation cost. In this work, we study temporal action detection using fewer labeled videos together with other levels
of supervision, e.g. unlabeled and weakly-labeled videos.
Learning from unlabeled data has been investigated in
the task of semi-supervised image classification [28, 42, 1,
40] and shows promising results, while such problem setting is unexplored in the temporal action detection. We introduce the Semi-supervised Action Detection (SSAD) task
and establish three SSAD baselines by incorporating three
state-of-the-art Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) models
(Mean Teacher [42], MixMatch [1], FixMatch [40]) into
a Fully-Supervised Action Detection (FSAD) backbone.
For the purpose of initial evaluation on SSAD benchmark,
we choose a straightforward yet effective FSAD method,

8022

