TrivialAugment: Tuning-free Yet State-of-the-Art Data Augmentation
Samuel G. Müller
University of Freiburg
muellesa@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Frank Hutter
University of Freiburg &
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany
fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Method

Abstract
Automatic augmentation methods have recently become
a crucial pillar for strong model performance in vision
tasks. While existing automatic augmentation methods
need to trade off simplicity, cost and performance, we
present a most simple baseline, TrivialAugment, that outperforms previous methods for almost free. TrivialAugment
is parameter-free and only applies a single augmentation
to each image. Thus, TrivialAugment's effectiveness is very
unexpected to us and we performed very thorough experiments to study its performance. First, we compare TrivialAugment to previous state-of-the-art methods in a variety
of image classification scenarios. Then, we perform multiple ablation studies with different augmentation spaces,
augmentation methods and setups to understand the crucial
requirements for its performance. Additionally, we provide
a simple interface to facilitate the widespread adoption of
automatic augmentation methods, as well as our full code
base for reproducibility1 . Since our work reveals a stagnation in many parts of automatic augmentation research,
we end with a short proposal of best practices for sustained
future progress in automatic augmentation methods.

Input image

Sample strength

Sample augmentation
and apply it

Figure 1: A visualization of TA. For each image, TA (uniformly) samples an augmentation strength and an augmentation. This augmentation is then applied to the image with
the sampled strength.

Search
CIFAR-10 CIFAR-100 SVHN ImageNet
Overhead ShakeShake
WRN
WRN ResNet
AA
40 - 800×
98.0
82.9
98.9
77.6
RA
4 - 80×
98.0
83.3
99.0
77.6
Fast AA
1×
98.0
82.7
98.8
77.6
TA (ours)
0×
98.2
84.3
98.9
78.1

Table 1: TrivialAugment compares very favourably to
previous augmentation methods. In this table we summarize some results from Table 2 and present augmentation
search overhead estimates.

1. Introduction
Data Augmentation is a very popular approach to increase generalization of machine learning models by generating additional data. It is applied in many areas, such
as machine translation [4], object detection [6] or semisupervised learning [20]. In this work, we focus on the
application of data augmentation to image classification
[3, 12].
Image augmentations for image classification generate
novel images based on images in a dataset, which are likely
to still belong to the same classification category. This way
the dataset can grow based on the biases that come with the
augmentations. While data augmentations can yield considerable performance improvements, they do require domain
knowledge. An example of an augmentation, with a likely
class-preserving behaviour, is the rotation of an image by
some small number of degrees. The image’s class is still
recognized by humans and so this allows the model to generalize in a way humans expect it to generalize.
Automatic augmentation methods are a set of methods
that design augmentation policies automatically. They have
been shown to improve model performance significantly
across tasks [2, 23, 20].
Automatic augmentation methods have flourished especially for image classification in recent years [2, 13, 14, 9]
with many different approaches that learn policies over aug1. https://github.com/automl/trivialaugment

774

