Ground-truth or DAER: Selective Re-query of Secondary Information
Stephan J. Lemmer and Jason J. Corso
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{lemmersj, jjcorso}@umich.edu

Abstract
Many vision tasks use secondary information at inference time—a seed—to assist a computer vision model in
solving a problem. For example, an initial bounding box
is needed to initialize visual object tracking. To date, all
such work makes the assumption that the seed is a good
one. However, in practice, from crowdsourcing to noisy automated seeds, this is often not the case. We hence propose the problem of seed rejection—determining whether to
reject a seed based on the expected performance degradation when it is provided in place of a gold-standard seed.
We provide a formal definition to this problem, and focus
on two meaningful subgoals: understanding causes of error and understanding the model’s response to noisy seeds
conditioned on the primary input. With these goals in mind,
we propose a novel training method and evaluation metrics
for the seed rejection problem. We then use seeded versions
of the viewpoint estimation and fine-grained classification
tasks to evaluate these contributions. In these experiments,
we show our method can reduce the number of seeds that
need to be reviewed for a target performance by over 23%
compared to strong baselines.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in computer vision require not only a primary input, such as an image or a video, but also additional
information based on the primary input—a seed—to be provided to the task model. This seed may be used to define the
problem, such as in visual object tracking [28], video object segmentation [36], and visual question answering [1],
or to provide additional information for common tasks such
as fine-grained scene classification [27], visual concept prediction [57], or viewpoint estimation [52]. Critically, these
tasks are evaluated using verified gold-standard seeds, ignoring the noisy processes by which seeds are generated.
The performance of computer vision models with poor
primary inputs has been explored in the context of naturally difficult [55, 69, 9, 14] and intentionally adversarial [58, 61, 10, 51] primary inputs, leading to a variety of

Distance from Gold-Standard: 30 px
Geodesic Error: 174.8°

Gold-Standard Keypoint
Geodesic Error: 18.5°

Distance from Gold-Standard: 189 px
Geodesic Error: 18.5°

Figure 1: An example from keypoint-conditioned viewpoint
estimation [52], with a heatmap of error caused by all potential clicks overlaid. Approaches focused on input-space
accuracy [47, 49, 7, 43, 8, 40, 33] would select the red
keypoint over the yellow keypoint as it closer to the goldstandard (green) keypoint, even though this results in higher
error.

methods designed to make models more robust [55, 69] or
detect and reject difficult inputs [14]. However, no work
to our knowledge has been performed on the identification
and rejection of bad seeds: seeds that cause a significant
increase in error on the task when used in place of the goldstandard seed. As reliability issues in crowdsourcing are
well studied [24, 39, 48, 44] and automated systems that
could be used to create seeds are subject to unpredictable
failure modes [42, 61], not having any mechanism for detecting bad seeds is a critical oversight.
To emphasize the need for such a mechanism, we examine Figure 1, where a human annotator is asked to click a semantically meaningful location on the image (e.g. rear seat)
to resolve the viewpoint estimation model’s perceptual ambiguities. This example illustrates the complex, and sometimes counterintuitive, interaction between the primary input, seed, and task model: while many seeds that are incorrect in the input space (e.g. the yellow seed) don’t de-

703

