Point Transformer
Hengshuang Zhao1,2 Li Jiang3 Jiaya Jia3 Philip Torr1 Vladlen Koltun4
1
University of Oxford 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Intel Labs

1. Introduction
3D data arises in many application areas such as autonomous driving, augmented reality, and robotics. Unlike
images, which are arranged on regular pixel grids, 3D point
clouds are sets embedded in continuous space. This makes
3D point clouds structurally different from images and precludes immediate application of deep network designs that
have become standard in computer vision, such as networks
based on the discrete convolution operator.
A variety of approaches to deep learning on 3D point
clouds have arisen in response to this challenge. Some voxelize the 3D space to enable the application of 3D discrete
convolutions [23, 32]. This induces massive computational
and memory costs and underutilizes the sparsity of point
sets in 3D. Sparse convolutional networks relieve these limitations by operating only on voxels that are not empty [9, 3].
Other designs operate directly on points and propagate information via pooling operators [25, 27] or continuous convolutions [42, 37]. Another family of approaches connect
the point set into a graph for message passing [44, 19].
In this work, we develop an approach to deep learning on
point clouds that is inspired by the success of transformers

ca
ssi
fi

lamp

bed

cla

airplane

part
segmentation
tic ion
an ntat
semgme
se

Self-attention networks have revolutionized natural language processing and are making impressive strides in image analysis tasks such as image classification and object
detection. Inspired by this success, we investigate the application of self-attention networks to 3D point cloud processing. We design self-attention layers for point clouds and
use these to construct self-attention networks for tasks such
as semantic scene segmentation, object part segmentation,
and object classification. Our Point Transformer design improves upon prior work across domains and tasks. For example, on the challenging S3DIS dataset for large-scale semantic scene segmentation, the Point Transformer attains
an mIoU of 70.4% on Area 5, outperforming the strongest
prior model by 3.3 absolute percentage points and crossing
the 70% mIoU threshold for the first time.

ti o

n

Abstract

Point Transformer

Figure 1. The Point Transformer can serve as the backbone for various 3D point cloud understanding tasks such as object classification, object part segmentation, and semantic scene segmentation.

in natural language processing [39, 45, 5, 4, 51] and image
analysis [10, 28, 54]. The transformer family of models is
particularly appropriate for point cloud processing because
the self-attention operator, which is at the core of transformer networks, is in essence a set operator: it is invariant
to permutation and cardinality of the input elements. The
application of self-attention to 3D point clouds is therefore
quite natural, since point clouds are essentially sets embedded in 3D space.
We flesh out this intuition and develop a self-attention
layer for 3D point cloud processing. Based on this layer,
we construct Point Transformer networks for a variety of
3D understanding tasks. We investigate the form of the selfattention operator, the application of self-attention to local
neighborhoods around each point, and the encoding of positional information in the network. The resulting networks
are based purely on self-attention and pointwise operations.
We show that Point Transformers are remarkably effective in 3D deep learning tasks, both at the level of detailed
object analysis and large-scale parsing of massive scenes.
In particular, Point Transformers set the new state of the art
on large-scale semantic segmentation on the S3DIS dataset
(70.4% mIoU on Area 5), shape classification on ModelNet40 (93.7% overall accuracy), and object part segmenta-

16259

