PatchMatch-RL: Deep MVS with Pixelwise Depth, Normal, and Visibility
Jae Yong Lee1
1

Joseph DeGol2

Chuhang Zou* 3
2

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{lee896, dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Microsoft

joseph.degol@microsoft.com

Derek Hoiem1
3

Amazon Go

zouchuha@amazon.com

Abstract
Recent learning-based multi-view stereo (MVS) methods
show excellent performance with dense cameras and small
depth ranges. However, non-learning based approaches still
outperform for scenes with large depth ranges and sparser
wide-baseline views, in part due to their PatchMatch optimization over pixelwise estimates of depth, normals, and
visibility. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end trainable
PatchMatch-based MVS approach that combines advantages
of trainable costs and regularizations with pixelwise estimates. To overcome the challenge of the non-differentiable
PatchMatch optimization that involves iterative sampling and
hard decisions, we use reinforcement learning to minimize
expected photometric cost and maximize likelihood of ground
truth depth and normals. We incorporate normal estimation
by using dilated patch kernels and propose a recurrent cost
regularization that applies beyond frontal plane-sweep algorithms to our pixelwise depth/normal estimates. We evaluate
our method on widely used MVS benchmarks, ETH3D and
Tanks and Temples (TnT). On ETH3D, our method outperforms other recent learning-based approaches and performs
comparably on advanced TnT.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to reconstruct 3D scene geometry from a set of RGB images with known camera poses,
with many important applications such as robotics [25], selfdriving cars [8], infrastructure inspection [7, 13], and mapping [31]. Non-learning based MVS methods [5, 26, 32,
34, 41] evolved to support pixelwise estimates of depths,
normals, and source view selection, with PatchMatch based
iterative optimization and cross-image consistency checks.
Recent learning-based MVS methods [12, 15, 16, 39, 40]
tend to use frontal plane sweeps, evaluating the same set
of depth candidates for each pixel based on the same images. The trainable photometric scores and cost-volume
regularization of the learning-based methods leads to excel-

Image

Ground Truth

COLMAP [27]

Ours

Figure 1. We propose PatchMatch-RL, an end-to-end trainable
PatchMatch-based MVS approach that combines advantages of
trainable costs and regularizations with pixelwise estimates of
depth, normal, and visibility. The left half of the bottom images
is the depth, and the right half is the normals. We show that our
method can achieve smoother and more complete depth and normal
map estimation over the existing approach (COLMAP).

lent performance with dense cameras and small depth ranges,
as evidenced in the DTU [2] and Tanks-and-Temples (TnT)
benchmarks [18], but the pixelwise non-learning based approach outperforms for scenes with large depth ranges and
slanted surfaces observed with sparser wide-baseline views,
as evidenced in the ETH3D benchmark [28].
Our paper aims to incorporate pixelwise depth, normal,
and view estimates into an end-to-end trainable system with
advantages from both approaches:
• Pixelwise depth and normal prediction efficiently
models scenes with large depth ranges and slanted surfaces.
• Pixelwise view selection improves robustness to occlusion and enables reconstruction from sparser images.
• Learned photometric cost functions improve correspondence robustness.

* Work done outside of Amazon

Code available at https://github.com/leejaeyong7/patchmatch-rl

16158

