Standardized Max Logits: A Simple yet Effective Approach for Identifying
Unexpected Road Obstacles in Urban-Scene Segmentation
Sanghun Jung*1 Jungsoo Lee*1 Daehoon Gwak1 Sungha Choi2 Jaegul Choo1
1
1 {shjung13,

KAIST AI

2

LG AI Research

bebeto, daehoon.gwak, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Input Image

2 shachoi@korea.ac.kr

(b) Unexpected Detected

(a) Initial Prediction

(c) Final Prediction

s

Figure 1: Results of our approach on identifying unexpected obstacles on roads. (a) Previous segmentation networks classify
the unexpected obstacles (e.g., dogs) as one of the pre-defined classes (e.g., road) which may be detrimental from the safetycritical perspective. (b) Through our method, we detect the unexpected obstacles. (c) Finally, we can obtain the final prediction
of segmentation labels with unexpected obstacles (cyan-colored objects) identified.

Abstract
Identifying unexpected objects on roads in semantic segmentation (e.g., identifying dogs on roads) is crucial in
safety-critical applications. Existing approaches use images of unexpected objects from external datasets or require additional training (e.g., retraining segmentation networks or training an extra network), which necessitate a
non-trivial amount of labor intensity or lengthy inference
time. One possible alternative is to use prediction scores of
a pre-trained network such as the max logits (i.e., maximum
values among classes before the final softmax layer) for detecting such objects. However, the distribution of max logits
of each predicted class is significantly different from each
other, which degrades the performance of identifying unexpected objects in urban-scene segmentation. To address
this issue, we propose a simple yet effective approach that
standardizes the max logits in order to align the different
distributions and reflect the relative meanings of max logits within each predicted class. Moreover, we consider the
local regions from two different perspectives based on the
intuition that neighboring pixels share similar semantic information. In contrast to previous approaches, our method
does not utilize any external datasets or require additional
training, which makes our method widely applicable to ex-

isting pre-trained segmentation models. Such a straightforward approach achieves a new state-of-the-art performance
on the publicly available Fishyscapes Lost & Found leaderboard with a large margin. Our code is publicly available
at this link1 .

1. Introduction
Recent studies [7, 8, 18, 34, 36, 37, 11] in semantic
segmentation focus on improving the segmentation performance on urban-scene images. Despite such recent advances, these approaches cannot identify unexpected objects (i.e., objects not included in the pre-defined classes
during training), mainly because they predict all the pixels
as one of the pre-defined classes. Addressing such an issue is critical especially for safety-critical applications such
as autonomous driving. As shown in Fig. 1, wrongly predicting a dog (i.e., an unexpected object) on the road as
the road does not stop the autonomous vehicle, which may
lead to roadkill. In this safety-critical point of view, the dog
should be detected as an unexpected object which works as
the starting point of the autonomous vehicle to handle these
objects differently (e.g., whether to stop the car or circumvent the dog).
Several studies [3, 22, 21, 4, 29, 2, 13] tackle the problem
of detecting such unexpected objects on roads. Some ap1 https://github.com/shjung13/Standardized-max-logits

* indicates equal contribution

15425

