PX-NET: Simple and Efficient Pixel-Wise Training
of Photometric Stereo Networks
Fotios Logothetis1
1

Ignas Budvytis2

Roberto Mecca1

Cambridge Research Laboratory,Toshiba Europe Ltd.
Cambridge, UK
flogothetis,rmecca@crl.toshiba.co.uk

2

Roberto Cipolla1,2

University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

ib255,rc10001@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

15

1
0.9
0.8

Retrieving accurate 3D reconstructions of objects from
the way they reflect light is a very challenging task in computer vision. Despite more than four decades since the
definition of the Photometric Stereo problem, most of the
literature has had limited success when global illumination effects such as cast shadows, self-reflections and ambient light come into play, especially for specular surfaces.
Recent approaches have leveraged the capabilities of deep
learning in conjunction with computer graphics in order to
cope with the need of a vast number of training data to invert the image irradiance equation and retrieve the geometry of the object. However, rendering global illumination
effects is a slow process which can limit the amount of training data that can be generated.
In this work we propose a novel pixel-wise training procedure for normal prediction by replacing the training data
(observation maps) of globally rendered images with independent per-pixel generated data. We show that global
physical effects can be approximated on the observation
map domain and this simplifies and speeds up the data creation procedure. Our network, PX-NET, achieves state-ofthe-art performance compared to other pixelwise methods
on synthetic datasets, as well as the DiLiGenT real dataset
on both dense and sparse light settings.

1. Introduction
Photometric Stereo (PS) is a classical problem in computer vision since the early ’80s [42]. PS assumes multiple
images from the same viewpoint along with varied illumination and calculates local geometrical features (e.g. normal
or depth) at each pixel by exploiting the relation between
surface orientation and intensity of reflected light. This is
essentially an inverse rendering problem requiring at least
three input images in order to have a unique solution.
Most of the difficulty in retrieving the 3D shape from

0.7
10

0.6
0.5
0.4
5

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0

‘Reading’

[16] MAE=12.6o

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Proposed MAE=9.78o

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed approach versus [16] on
‘Reading’ of the DiLiGenT real benchmark [35]. The evaluation
metric is the mean angular error (MAE) of the computed normal
map compared with the ground truth.

the light reflected off the object is due to the type of reflection and its non-linear dependence on material properties.
This is mathematically expressed though the surface bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) which is
determined by the material of the object. Over the last forty
years a very wide spectrum of BRDF equations have been
proposed to model the light reflection phenomena. Starting
from the basic linear light response for diffuse reflection
[21, 13], more specular behaviour of reflected light have
been proposed [31, 3, 8, 20, 38, 40]. Comparison among
numerous BRDFs can be found in [41, 11, 30, 29]. Finally,
the recently proposed Disney BRDF [4, 12] was invented to
unify most physical reflection effects including gloss reflection, subsurface scattering and metallic/specular roughness
into a unified formulation.
The above mentioned advancements in computer graphics have enabled convolutional neural network (CNN)based approaches to be useful for solving PS by rendering
large number of images of various surfaces under numerous
light and material configurations. They often parametrise
the PS problem as normal regression from light intensity
observations (i.e. observational map [16] ), effectively performing an inversion of the irradiance equation. CNNbased approaches have been shown to outperform classical
optimisation based methods [17, 32] mainly due to the ability of CNNs to learn how to deal with a great variety of real-

12757

