Image Manipulation Detection by Multi-View Multi-Scale Supervision
Xinru Chen1,2 ,* Chengbo Dong1,2∗ , Jiaqi Ji1,2 , Juan Cao3,4 , Xirong Li1,2†
1

MoE Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, Renmin University of China
2
3
4

AIMC Lab, School of Information, Renmin University of China

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence Production Technology and Systems
https://github.com/dong03/MVSS-Net

Abstract
The key challenge of image manipulation detection is
how to learn generalizable features that are sensitive to manipulations in novel data, whilst specific to prevent false
alarms on authentic images. Current research emphasizes
the sensitivity, with the specificity overlooked. In this paper we address both aspects by multi-view feature learning and multi-scale supervision. By exploiting noise distribution and boundary artifact surrounding tampered regions, the former aims to learn semantic-agnostic and thus
more generalizable features. The latter allows us to learn
from authentic images which are nontrivial to be taken into
account by current semantic segmentation network based
methods. Our thoughts are realized by a new network which
we term MVSS-Net. Extensive experiments on five benchmark sets justify the viability of MVSS-Net for both pixellevel and image-level manipulation detection.

1. Introduction
Digital images can now be manipulated with ease and
often in a visually imperceptible manner [11]. Copy-move
(copy and move elements from one region to another region
in a given image), splicing (copy elements from one image
and paste them on another image) and inpainting (removal
of unwanted elements) are three common types of image
manipulation that could lead to misinterpretation of the visual content [1, 19, 23]. This paper targets at auto-detection
of images subjected to these types of manipulation. We aim
to not only discriminate manipulated images from the authentic, but also pinpoint tampered regions at the pixel level.
Unsurprisingly, the state-of-the-arts are deep learning
based [14, 21, 26, 27, 29], specifically focusing on pixellevel manipulation detection [21, 26, 29]. With only two
* Xinru Chen and Chengbo Dong contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Xirong Li (xirong@ruc.edu.cn).

Figure 1. Image manipulation detection by the state-of-thearts. The first three rows are copy-move, splicing and inpainting,
followed by three authentic images (thus with blank mask). Our
model strikes a good balance between sensitivity and specificity.

classes (manipulated versus authentic) in consideration, the
task appears to be a simplified case of image semantic segmentation. However, an off-the-shelf semantic segmentation network is suboptimal for the task, as it is designed to
capture semantic information, making the network datasetdependent and do not generalize. Prior research [29] reports that DeepLabv2 [4] trained on the CASIAv2 dataset
[8] performs well on the CAISAv1 dataset [7] homologous
to CASIAv2, yet performs poorly on the non-homologous
COVER dataset [25]. A similar behavior of FCN [18] is
also observed in this study. Hence, the key question is how
to design and train a deep neural network capable of learning semantic-agnostic features that are sensitive to manipulations, whilst specific to prevent false alarms?
In order to learn semantic-agnostic features, image con-

14185

