Dressing in Order: Recurrent Person Image Generation for Pose Transfer,
Virtual Try-on and Outfit Editing
Aiyu Cui
Daniel McKee
Svetlana Lazebnik
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{aiyucui2,dbmckee2,slazebni}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We proposes a flexible person generation framework
called Dressing in Order (DiOr), which supports 2D pose
transfer, virtual try-on, and several fashion editing tasks.
The key to DiOr is a novel recurrent generation pipeline
to sequentially put garments on a person, so that trying on
the same garments in different orders will result in different
looks. Our system can produce dressing effects not achievable by existing work, including different interactions of
garments (e.g., wearing a top tucked into the bottom or over
it), as well as layering of multiple garments of the same type
(e.g., jacket over shirt over t-shirt). DiOr explicitly encodes
the shape and texture of each garment, enabling these elements to be edited separately. Joint training on pose transfer and inpainting helps with detail preservation and coherence of generated garments. Extensive evaluations show
that DiOr outperforms other recent methods like ADGAN
[28] in terms of output quality, and handles a wide range of
editing functions for which there is no direct supervision.

1. Introduction
Driven by increasing power of deep generative models
as well as commercial possibilities, person generation research has been growing fast in recent years. Popular applications include virtual try-on [3, 9, 14, 16, 29, 40, 42],
fashion editing [4, 11], and pose-guided person generation
[5, 8, 20, 23, 26, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 45]. Most existing work
addresses only one generation task at a time, despite similarities in overall system designs. Although some systems
[8, 28, 35, 36] have been applied to both pose-guided generation and virtual try-on, they lack the ability to preserve
details [28, 35] or lack flexible representations of shape
and texture that can be exploited for diverse editing tasks
[8, 28, 35, 36].
This paper proposes a flexible 2D person generation
pipeline applicable not only to pose transfer and virtual tryon, but also fashion editing, as shown in Figure 1. The

Figure 1. Applications supported by our DiOr system: Virtual tryon supporting different garment interactions (tucking in or not) and
overlay; pose-guided person generation; and fashion editing (texture insertion and removal, shape change). Note that the arrows
indicate possible editing sequences and relationships between images, not the flow of our system.

architecture of our system is shown in Figure 2. We separately encode pose, skin, and garments, and the garment
encodings are further separated into shape and texture. This
allows us to freely play with each element to achieve different looks.
In real life, people put on garments one by one, and can
layer them in different ways (e.g., shirt tucked into pants,
or worn on the outside). However, existing try-on methods
start by producing a mutually exclusive garment segmentation map and then generate the whole outfit in a single step.
This can only achieve one look for a given set of garments,
and the interaction of garments is determined by the model.
By contrast, our system incorporates a novel recurrent generation module to produce different looks depending on the
order of putting on garments. This is why we call our system DiOr, for Dressing in Order.

14638

