STAR: A Structure-aware Lightweight Transformer for
Real-time Image Enhancement
Zhaoyang Zhang1,2
1

Yitong Jiang2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

2

Jun Jiang 2

Xiaogang Wang1
3

SenseBrain Research

Ping Luo3

Jinwei Gu2,4

The Univesity of Hong Kong

4

Shanghai AI Laboratory

{zhaoyangzhang@link,xgwang@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk
{jiangyitong,jiangjun,gujinwei}@sensebrain.ai

pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Image and video enhancement such as color constancy,
low light enhancement, and tone mapping on smartphones
is challenging, because high-quality images should be
achieved efficiently with a limited resource budget. Unlike
prior works that either used very deep CNNs or large Transformer models, we propose a structure-aware lightweight
Transformer, termed STAR, for real-time image enhancement. STAR is formulated to capture long-range dependencies between image patches, which naturally and implicitly
captures the structural relationships of different regions in
an image. STAR is a general architecture that can be easily adapted to different image enhancement tasks. Extensive experiments show that STAR can effectively boost the
quality and efficiency of many tasks such as illumination
enhancement, auto white balance, and photo retouching,
which are indispensable components for image processing
on smartphones. For example, STAR reduces model complexity and improves image quality compared to the recent
state-of-the-art [19] on the MIT-Adobe FiveK dataset [7]
(i.e., 1.8dB PSNR improvements with 25% parameters and
13% float operations.)

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant progress on a variety of image and video enhancement tasks with learningbased methods, such as super-resolution, denoising, demosaicking, low light enhancement, color constancy (i.e.,
white balance), tone mapping. Yet, there are still two key
challenges for deploying these methods on edge devices.
First, these methods must process high-resolution images
efficiently within a very limited computation budget, making trade-offs between model flexibility and computation
efficiency. Second, they need to incorporate structural and
global information of input images in order to achieve highquality stable results, especially for tasks such as color con-

CNN ( 79.4K , 5.2 GFLOPS ) CNN_D (79.4K, 0.31 GFLOPS) STAR (20.1K, 0.07 GFOPS)

Inputs

CNN Curves Mean

CNN_D Curves Mean

STAR Curves Mean

Figure 1. Comparison of curve estimation results between CNN
and STAR for low light enhancement. ”CNN” denotes the original
backbone model used by [19] that predicts per-pixel curves. For
fair comparison, we also train the same CNN model with downsampling (denoted as CNN-D), so that both STAR and CNN-D
predict per-token curves. Both the enhanced results and model
complexity (number of parameters, FLOPS) are shown. We also
visualize the predicted curves by plotting the mean of α (See more
details in Section 4.1).

stancy, low light enhancement, and tone mapping. Even for
tasks with local support, such as denoising and demosaicking, structure-aware region-based processing can often produce better results [33].
To address these two challenges, prior work can be summarized into three categories. The first approach is to use
stacked, very deep CNNs [49, 9, 17, 45, 19]. In order to
maintain high-frequency details, the spatial resolution is often kept unchanged, and thus these methods have a large
computational cost and memory footprint. The second approach is to estimate one set of global adjustment function [52, 35, 24, 31], but they lack the flexibility to handle
the complexity of real-world scenarios (e.g., mixed illumination for white balance, HDR scenes for tone mapping).
Finally, the third approach is to explicitly use a segmentation network to divide images into semantically-meaningful
regions and process each region separately [33, 51]. However, this approach also has limitations such as requiring
per-pixel annotated datasets.
In this paper, we proposed STAR (Structure-aware
Transformer), a general lightweight backbone for various

4106

