Learning to drive from a world on rails
Dian Chen
UT Austin

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin

Abstract
We learn an interactive vision-based driving policy from
pre-recorded driving logs via a model-based approach. A
forward model of the world supervises a driving policy that
predicts the outcome of any potential driving trajectory. To
support learning from pre-recorded logs, we assume that the
world is on rails, meaning neither the agent nor its actions
influence the environment. This assumption greatly simplifies
the learning problem, factorizing the dynamics into a nonreactive world model and a low-dimensional and compact
forward model of the ego-vehicle. Our approach computes
action-values for each training trajectory using a tabular
dynamic-programming evaluation of the Bellman equations;
these action-values in turn supervise the final vision-based
driving policy. Despite the world-on-rails assumption, the final driving policy acts well in a dynamic and reactive world.
It outperforms imitation learning as well as model-based
and model-free reinforcement learning on the challenging
CARLA NoCrash benchmark. It is also an order of magnitude more sample-efficient than state-of-the-art model-free
reinforcement learning techniques on navigational tasks in
the ProcGen benchmark.

1. Introduction
Vision-based autonomous driving is hard. An agent needs
to perceive, understand, and interact with its environment
from incomplete and partial experiences. Most successful driving approaches [5, 27, 33, 34] reduce autonomous
navigation to imitating an expert, usually a human actor.
Expert actions serve as a source of strong supervision, sensory inputs of the expert trajectories explore the world, and
policy learning reduces to supervised learning backed by
powerful deep networks. However, expert trajectories are
often heavily biased, and safety-critical observations are rare.
After all, human operators drive hundreds of thousands of
miles before observing a traffic incident [39]. This sparsity of safety-critical training data makes it difficult for a
behavior-cloning agent to learn and recover from mistakes.
Model-free reinforcement learning [25, 40] offers a solution,

?

?

?

Figure 1: We learn a reactive visuomotor driving policy that
gets to explore the effects of its own actions at training time.
The policy simulates the effects of its own actions using a
forward model in pre-recorded driving logs. It then learns to
choose safe actions without explicitly experiencing unsafe
driving behavior. Picture selected from the Waymo open
dataset [37].

allowing an agent to actively explore its environment and
learn from it. However, this exploration is even less dataefficient than behavior cloning, as it needs to experience
mistakes to avoid them. For reinforcement learning, the required sample complexity for safe driving is prohibitively
large, even in simulation [40].
In this paper, we present a method to learn a navigation
policy that recovers from mistakes without ever making
them, as illustrated in Figure 1. We first learn a world-model
on static pre-recorded trajectories. This world model is
able to simulate the agent’s actions without ever executing
them. Next, we estimate action-value functions for all prerecorded trajectories. Finally, we train a reactive visuomotor
policy that gets to observe the impact of all its actions as
predicted by the action-value function. The policy learns
to avoid costly mistakes, or recover from them. We use
driving logs, recorded lane maps and locations of traffic
participants, to train the world-model and compute the actionvalue function. However, our visuomotor policy drives using
raw sensor inputs, namely RGB images and speed readings
alone. Figure 2 shows an overview.
The core challenge in our approach is to build a sufficiently expressive and accurate world-model that allows the

15590

