Group-aware Contrastive Regression for Action Quality Assessment
Xumin Yu∗, Yongming Rao∗, Wenliang Zhao, Jiwen Lu† , Jie Zhou
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
yuxm20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; raoyongming95@gmail.com;
zhaowl20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Assessing action quality is challenging due to the subtle
differences between videos and large variations in scores.
Most existing approaches tackle this problem by regressing
a quality score from a single video, suffering a lot from
the large inter-video score variations. In this paper, we
show that the relations among videos can provide important clues for more accurate action quality assessment during both training and inference. Specifically, we reformulate the problem of action quality assessment as regressing
the relative scores with reference to another video that has
shared attributes (e.g., category and difficulty), instead of
learning unreferenced scores. Following this formulation,
we propose a new Contrastive Regression (CoRe) framework to learn the relative scores by pair-wise comparison,
which highlights the differences between videos and guides
the models to learn the key hints for assessment. In order to
further exploit the relative information between two videos,
we devise a group-aware regression tree to convert the conventional score regression into two easier sub-problems:
coarse-to-fine classification and regression in small intervals. To demonstrate the effectiveness of CoRe, we conduct
extensive experiments on three mainstream AQA datasets
including AQA-7, MTL-AQA and JIGSAWS. Our approach
outperforms previous methods by a large margin and establishes new state-of-the-art on all three benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Action quality assessment (AQA), which aims to evaluate how well a specific action is performed, has attracted
growing attention in recent years since it plays a crucial role
in many real world applications including sports [9, 20, 13,
23, 24, 22, 31, 21], healthcare [17, 39, 26, 38, 41, 42] and
others [5, 6]. Unlike conventional action recognition tasks
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

𝑑!"

𝑋!

𝑑#"

𝑋

𝑉!

𝑋#
learning

𝑑!
𝑋!

𝑋#

contrastive learning

𝑉

𝑉!

𝑉#

score

∆#

∆!

𝑑#
𝑋

∆"#

∆!"

𝑉

𝑉#

score

contrastive regression

S = 88

S = 72

Figure 1: Our Contrastive Regression (CoRe) framework
for action quality assessment. Inspired by contrastive learning that learns representation by encouraging the distances
of samples (e.g., dA and dB ) to reflect their semantic relationship, we learn an AQA model to regress the relative
scores (e.g., ∆A and ∆B ) to reflect the differences of action quality among videos. By comparing two videos with
different scores, CoRe encourage the model to learn from
differences between videos for assessment.
that focus on action classification [12, 33, 32, 27, 15, 7, 34]
and detection [40, 16, 28, 37, 18], AQA is more challenging
as it requires the model to predict fine-grained scores from
videos that describe the same action. Considering the differences between videos and large variations in scores, we
argue that a key to addressing this problem is to discover
the differences among the videos and predict scores based
on the differences.
Many efforts have been made to tackle this problem over
the past few years [19, 22, 6, 35, 20]. Most of them formulate the AQA as a regression problem, where the scores are
directly predicted from a single video. While some promis17919

