Infinite Nature:
Perpetual View Generation of Natural Scenes from a Single Image
Andrew Liu∗
Ameesh Makadia

Richard Tucker∗
Noah Snavely

Varun Jampani
Angjoo Kanazawa

Google Research

TRAIN

TEST

Output frames

t=5

20

50

100

…

Input image
150

200

300

500

Figure 1. Perpetual View Generation. Using a collection of aerial videos of nature scenes for training (left), our method learns to take a
single image and perpetually generate novel views for a camera trajectory covering a long distance (right). Our method can successfully
generate hundreds of frames of an aerial video from a single input image (up to 500 shown here).

Abstract
We introduce the problem of perpetual view generation—
long-range generation of novel views corresponding to an
arbitrarily long camera trajectory given a single image. This
is a challenging problem that goes far beyond the capabilities of current view synthesis methods, which quickly degenerate when presented with large camera motions. Methods
for video generation also have limited ability to produce
long sequences and are often agnostic to scene geometry. We
take a hybrid approach that integrates both geometry and
image synthesis in an iterative ‘render, refine and repeat’
framework, allowing for long-range generation that cover
large distances after hundreds of frames. Our approach can
be trained from a set of monocular video sequences. We propose a dataset of aerial footage of coastal scenes, and compare our method with recent view synthesis and conditional
video generation baselines, showing that it can generate
plausible scenes for much longer time horizons over large
camera trajectories compared to existing methods.
Project page at https://infinite-nature.github.io.

1. Introduction
Consider the input image of a coastline in Fig. 1. Imagine flying through this scene as a bird. Initially, we would
see objects grow in our field of view as we approach them.
* indicates equal contribution

Beyond, we might find a wide ocean or new islands. At the
shore, we might see cliffs or beaches, while inland there
could be mountains or forests. As humans, we are adept at
imagining a plausible world from a single picture, based on
our own experience.
How can we emulate this ability on a computer? One approach would be to attempt to generate an entire 3D planet
with high-resolution detail from a single image. However,
this would be extremely expensive and far beyond the current state of the art. So, we pose the more tractable problem
of perpetual view generation: given a single image of scene,
the task is to synthesize a video corresponding to an arbitrary camera trajectory. Solving this problem can have applications in content creation, novel photo interactions, and
methods that use learned world models like model-based
reinforcement learning.
Perpetual view generation, though simple to state, is an
extremely challenging task. As the viewpoint moves, we
must extrapolate new content in unseen regions and also
synthesize new detail in existing regions that are now closer
to the camera. Two active areas of research, video synthesis
and view synthesis, both fail to scale to this problem for
different reasons.
Recent video synthesis methods apply developments in
image synthesis [20] to the temporal domain, or rely on
recurrent models [10]. But they can generate only limited
numbers of novel frames (e.g., 25 [41] or 48 frames [9]).
Additionally, such methods often neglect an important el-

14458

