Multitask AET with Orthogonal Tangent Regularity for Dark Object Detection
Ziteng Cui1 , Guo-Jun Qi2 , Lin Gu3,4 ,* Shaodi You5 , Zenghui Zhang1 , Tatsuya Harada4,3
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 , Seattle Research Center, Innopeak Technology
3
RIKEN AIP, 4 The University of Tokyo, 5 University of Amsterdam
cuiziteng@sjtu.edu.cn, guojunq@gmail.com, lin.gu@riken.jp, s.you@uva.nl, zenghui.zhang@sjtu.edu.cn, harada@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Dark environment becomes a challenge for computer
vision algorithms owing to insufficient photons and undesirable noise. To enhance object detection in a dark
environment, we propose a novel multitask auto encoding transformation (MAET) model which is able to explore the intrinsic pattern behind illumination translation.
In a self-supervision manner, the MAET learns the intrinsic visual structure by encoding and decoding the realistic illumination-degrading transformation considering
the physical noise model and image signal processing
(ISP). Based on this representation, we achieve the object detection task by decoding the bounding box coordinates and classes. To avoid the over-entanglement of
two tasks, our MAET disentangles the object and degrading features by imposing an orthogonal tangent regularity. This forms a parametric manifold along which multitask predictions can be geometrically formulated by maximizing the orthogonality between the tangents along the
outputs of respective tasks. Our framework can be implemented based on the mainstream object detection architecture and directly trained end-to-end using normal
target detection datasets, such as VOC and COCO. We
have achieved the state-of-the-art performance using synthetic and real-world datasets. Codes will be released at
https://github.com/cuiziteng/MAET.

1. Introduction
Low-illumination environment poses significant challenges in computer vision. Computational photography
community has proposed many human-vision-oriented algorithms to recover normal-lit images [26, 46, 28, 27, 4, 20,
51, 12, 8]. Unfortunately, the restored image does not necessarily benefit the high-level visual understanding tasks.
As the enhancement/restoration approaches are optimized
for human visual perception, they may generate artifacts
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Detection and enhancement results of image taken by
Sony DSC-RX100M7 camera at night with 0.1s exposure time and
3200 ISO. (a) is detection result on the original image by MAET
(YOLOv3) and (b), (c), (d) are the enhanced images by Lv et al.
[28], Zhang et al. [51], Guo et al. [8] respectively, on which
YOLOv3 failed to make detection.

(see Fig. 1 for an example), which are misleading for consequent vision tasks. Another line of research focuses on the
robustness of specific high-level vision algorithms. They
either train models on a large volume of real-world data
[31, 25, 48] or rely on carefully designed task-related features [29, 17].
However, existing methods suffer from two major inconsistencies: target inconsistency and data inconsistency (in
the existing research). Target inconsistency refers to the fact
that most methods focus on their own target, either human
vision or machine vision. Each line follows their routes separately without benefiting each other under a general framework.
In the meantime, data inconsistency complicates the assumption that the training data should resemble the one used

2553

