Class Semantics-based Attention for Action Detection
Deepak Sridhar1 *†

Niamul Quader1 *

Srikanth Muralidharan1
Yaoxin Li1,2
Juwei Lu1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Canada1 University of Waterloo2

Peng Dai1

{deepak.sridhar1,niamul.quader1,srikanth.muralidharan,yaoxin.li,peng.dai,juwei.lu}@huawei.com

Abstract
Action localization networks are often structured as
a feature encoder sub-network and a localization subnetwork, where the feature encoder learns to transform
an input video to features that are useful for the localization sub-network to generate reliable action proposals.
While some of the encoded features may be more useful
for generating action proposals, prior action localization
approaches do not include any attention mechanism that
enables the localization sub-network to attend more to the
more important features. In this paper, we propose a novel
attention mechanism, the Class Semantics-based Attention
(CSA), that learns from the temporal distribution of semantics of action classes present in an input video to find
the importance scores of the encoded features, which are
used to provide attention to the more useful encoded features. We demonstrate on two popular action detection
datasets that incorporating our novel attention mechanism
provides considerable performance gains on competitive
action detection models (e.g., around 6.2% improvement
over BMN action detection baseline to obtain 47.5% mAP
on the THUMOS-14 dataset), and a new state-of-the-art of
36.25% mAP on the ActivityNet v1.3 dataset. Further, the
CSA localization model family which includes BMN-CSA,
was part of the second-placed submission at the 2021 ActivityNet action localization challenge. Our attention mechanism outperforms prior self-attention modules such as the
squeeze-and-excitation in action detection task. We also observe that our attention mechanism is complementary to
such self-attention modules in that performance improvements are seen when both are used together.

1. Introduction
The creation of digital videos and the need for video
understanding has exploded over the last decade due to
* denotes equal contribution
† Corresponding author

widespread availability and presence of digital cameras.
Two fundamental components of video understanding are
identifying the action components that are present in the
video [12, 22, 42] and localizing these actions across the
temporal axis [7, 13, 29, 46, 23] and also the spatial axis
[18, 37]. For video understanding tasks, it is crucial to
learn good video representations, learning relevant encoded
features that are useful for the video understanding tasks
[12, 23, 25]. These rich video representations or encoded
features can then be utilized to perform various video understanding tasks (e.g. a localization sub-network can use
these features for detecting action segments, etc.). This
paper focuses on the task of temporal action detection in
untrimmed videos, which has several applications such as
content-based video searching [21], video highlight generation [15] and surveillance [9].
With the availability of large-scale action recognition
and detection datasets (e.g. Kinetics-400 [5], ActivityNet v1.3 [4], etc.) and the availability of high performance computing services, deep learning approaches have
achieved enormous success in learning video representations or learning encoders that generate features which are
useful for video understanding tasks such as temporal action detection [22, 12, 42, 35]. These encoder learning
processes can be very comprehensive - e.g. the encoder
learning process of BMN [23] (a recently proposed competitive approach) first involves training a TSN-ResNet101
action recognition model [42] on Kinetics-400 action recognition task [52] followed by fine-tuning the action recognition model on ActivityNet v1.3 [4], followed by extracting
action class-semantic rich features using the action recognition model, and finally using a localization encoder to encode features that are useful for video understanding tasks
such as action localization. These encoded features are processed by the localization sub-network for generating action
proposals [51, 25, 23]. It is unlikely that all of these encoded
features will be equally useful or important for the localization sub-network for a particular video. In fact, prior
works on attention in convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) have shown that attending to more important feature

13739

