A Latent Transformer for Disentangled Face Editing in Images and Videos
Xu Yao1,2 , Alasdair Newson1 , Yann Gousseau1 , Pierre Hellier2
1
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2
InterDigital R&I, 975 avenue des Champs Blancs, Cesson-Sévigné, France
{xu.yao,anewson,yann.gousseau}@telecom-paris.fr, Pierre.Hellier@InterDigital.com

Original

Projected

+ Smile

+ Bangs

+ Arched Eyebrows

+ Age

- Age

+ Smile

+ Beard

+ Eyeglasses

Figure 1: We project real images to the latent space of a StyleGAN generator and achieve sequential disentangled attribute editing on the
encoded latent codes. From the original and the projected image, we can edit sequentially a list of attributes such as: ‘smile’, ‘bangs’,
‘arched eyebrows’, ‘age’, ‘beard’ and ‘eyeglasses’. All results are obtained at resolution 1024 × 1024.

Abstract
High quality facial image editing is a challenging problem in the movie post-production industry, requiring a high
degree of control and identity preservation. Previous works
that attempt to tackle this problem may suffer from the entanglement of facial attributes and the loss of the person’s
identity. Furthermore, many algorithms are limited to a certain task. To tackle these limitations, we propose to edit
facial attributes via the latent space of a StyleGAN generator, by training a dedicated latent transformation network and incorporating explicit disentanglement and identity preservation terms in the loss function. We further introduce a pipeline to generalize our face editing to videos. Our
model achieves a disentangled, controllable, and identitypreserving facial attribute editing, even in the challenging
case of real (i.e., non-synthetic) images and videos. We
conduct extensive experiments on image and video datasets
and show that our model outperforms other state-of-theart methods in visual quality and quantitative evaluation.

Source codes are available at https://github.com/
InterDigitalInc/latent-transformer.

1. Introduction
Facial attribute editing is a crucial task for photo retouching or in the film post-production industry. For example,
many actors are retouched for beautification or other special makeup effects. For such tasks, it is highly desirable
for artists to be able to control a facial attribute without
affecting other informations. Consequently, a face editing
method should rely on disentangled attributes and permit
identity-preserving manipulations.
Earlier works based on deep learning focus on encoderdecoder based architectures [8, 17]. Despite the improvements in quality of recent results, these approaches are limited in resolution and generate noticeable artifacts on high
resolution images. Therefore, they are not appropriate for
high quality video editing. In addition, these methods are
difficult to control, because the modification of one facial

13789

