Deep Symmetric Network for Underexposed Image Enhancement with
Recurrent Attentional Learning
Lin Zhao1∗
1

Shao-Ping Lu1 * Tao Chen2 Zhenglu Yang1 Ariel Shamir3
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
Elephant Technologies, China
3
The Interdisciplinary Center, Herzliya, Israel

lin-zhao@mail.nankai.edu.cn; {slu,yangzl}@nankai.edu.cn; tao.chen1@vcg.com; arik@idc.ac.il

Abstract
Underexposed image enhancement is of importance in
many research domains. In this paper, we take this problem as image feature transformation between the underexposed image and its paired enhanced version, and we propose a deep symmetric network for the issue. Our symmetric network adapts invertible neural networks (INN) for
bidirectional feature learning between images, and to ensure the mutual propagation invertible we specifically construct two pairs of encoder-decoder with the same pretrained parameters. This invertible mechanism with bidirectional feature transformations enable us to both avoid
colour bias and recover the content effectively for image enhancement. In addition, we propose a new recurrent residual-attention module (RRAM), where the recurrent learning network is designed to gradually perform the
desired colour adjustments. Ablation experiments are executed to show the role of each component of our new architecture. We conduct a large number of experiments on
two datasets to demonstrate that our method achieves the
state-of-the-art effect in underexposed image enhancement.
Code is available at https://www.shaopinglu.
net/proj-iccv21/ImageEnhancement.html.

1. Introduction
Digital photography is gaining increasing popularity
thanks to the abundance of digital cameras widely used
in day-to-day life. Still, poor shooting environment, inappropriate camera parameters, or lack of photographic skills
can result in unsatisfactory image quality. Many times it
is necessary to adjust the exposure-aware aspects of the
photograph including the colour and local details in postprocessing.
* indicates equal contribution.

Image enhancement still remains a challenge especially
for underexposed images. To enhance the image quality, both colour adjustments are required, and preservation of the content-features of the image. Traditional algorithms with global adjustments, such as histogram equalization [31,40,41], contrast adjustment [18,44] and Gamma
correction [22,42] are incapable of editing and changing the
local details in the image. Recent methods based on deep
neural networks [7, 11, 21, 34, 46] can still suffer from either colour bias or artifacts in complex underexposed conditions. Specifically, when the picture is taken in a low-light
environment, the visual features are hidden in dark areas.
To correct this situation, not only colour adjustments are
needed, but also content recovery (see an example in Fig. 1).
Some methods attempt to deal with these requirements by
employing multiple different modules separately. However,
this scheme may introduce accumulated training errors, and
result in visual artifacts.
In this paper, we formulate the image enhancement problem as an unified framework of invertible feature transformation between an image pair: an underexposed image and
its enhanced version (that can be the ground truth during
training). Therefore, we propose a deep symmetric network
based on an invertible feature transformer (IFT) inspired by
the latest invertible neural networks (INN) [1, 8, 27, 48]. In
order to make the forward and backward propagation operations highly solvable, two pairs of pre-trained encoderdecoder, which exactly share the same parameters, are
specifically designed to apply the mutual conversion between the image pair ( i.e. , the underexposed and enhanced
images) and the corresponding features. Our symmetric
network carries out the forward and backward learning synchronously, and successfully solves the image colour bias
problem caused by the lack of massive training data of
paired images and the difficulty of learning color features.
To accurately restore the desired features of the image,
we further propose a recurrent learning schedule with a re-

12075

