Cross-Encoder for Unsupervised Gaze Representation Learning
Yunjia Sun1,2 , Jiabei Zeng1 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
{sunyunjia18z, jiabei.zeng, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Gaze indicates where someone is looking toward. It
serves as one of the cues in understanding human desires,
intents and states of mind. 3D gaze estimation retrieves
the direction of the line from an observer’s eye to a sight.
Automatically estimating gaze direction show potential applications in psychological research [22], human-computer
interaction [26], driver distraction detection [1], and other
areas. Recently, significant efforts have been devoted to developing non-intrusive gaze direction estimator based on facial or eyes images. Specially, the growing strength of ConAcknowledgement: This work is partially supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (No. 2017YFA0700800) and National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 61976203, 61702481).

(a)

gaze feature

eye feature

The same eye

(b)

…

In order to train 3D gaze estimators without too many
annotations, we propose an unsupervised learning framework, Cross-Encoder, to leverage the unlabeled data to
learn suitable representation for gaze estimation. To address the issue that the feature of gaze is always intertwined
with the appearance of the eye, Cross-Encoder disentangles
the features using a latent-code-swapping mechanism on
eye-consistent image pairs and gaze-similar ones. Specifically, each image is encoded as a gaze feature and an eye
feature. Cross-Encoder is trained to reconstruct each image in the eye-consistent pair according to its gaze feature and the other’s eye feature, but to reconstruct each
image in the gaze-similar pair according to its eye feature
and the other’s gaze feature. Experimental results show
the validity of our work. First, using the Cross-Encoderlearned gaze representation, the gaze estimator trained with
very few samples outperforms the ones using other unsupervised learning methods, under both within-dataset and
cross-dataset protocol. Second, ResNet18 pretrained by
Cross-Encoder is competitive with state-of-the-art gaze estimation methods. Third, ablation study shows that CrossEncoder disentangles the gaze feature and eye feature.

The similar
gaze

Figure 1. (a) The mutual information between the auto-encoder
learned representation and the eye’s identity or the gaze. (b) Disentangled gaze features and eye features learned by Cross-Encoder.
The images of the same eye from different frames have consistent
eye features. The images of the two eyes from one frame have
similar gaze features.

volutional Neural Network (CNN) [11] makes it relatively
easy to deal with some practical problems in gaze estimation like head pose variations, eye occlusions, and variable
eye shapes [7, 8, 31, 38, 40].
Despite its representational power, a well-performed
CNN-based method is usually trained on sufficiently large
and diverse labeled data. However, acquiring precise gaze
labels is difficult. The gaze direction could not be measured directly, but be measured by complicated setups and
computations according to the geometry [20, 41]. The limited access to labeled data hinders the development of gaze
estimation methods. When trained on a small amount of
monotonous annotated samples, supervised learning methods are easy to overfit the training data and preserve features
that do not represent the gaze. The redundant and unrelated
features lead methods to perform poorly on data beyond the
training ones.

3702

