Visual Alignment Constraint for Continuous Sign Language Recognition
Yuecong Min1,2 , Aiming Hao1,2 , Xiujuan Chai3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Agricultural Information Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, China
{yuecong.min,aiming.hao}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, chaixiujuan@caas.cn, xlchen@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Sign Language is a complete and natural language
that conveys information through both manual components
(hand/arm gestures) and non-manual components (facial
expressions, head movements, and body postures) [10, 37]
with its own grammar and lexicon [41]. Vision-based Continuous Sign Language Recognition (CSLR) aims to automatically recognize signs from image streams, which can
bridge the communication gap between the Deaf and hearing people. It also provides more non-intrusive communication channel for sign language users.
Different from speech recognition, the data collection
and annotation of sign language are costly, which poses a

𝑇

Feature
Extractor

Alignment
Module

Target Sentence

Backward pass

Visual Features

Vision-based Continuous Sign Language Recognition
(CSLR) aims to recognize unsegmented signs from image
streams. Overfitting is one of the most critical problems
in CSLR training, and previous works show that the iterative training scheme can partially solve this problem while
also costing more training time. In this study, we revisit the
iterative training scheme in recent CSLR works and realize that sufficient training of the feature extractor is critical
to solving the overfitting problem. Therefore, we propose
a Visual Alignment Constraint (VAC) to enhance the feature extractor with alignment supervision. Specifically, the
proposed VAC comprises two auxiliary losses: one focuses
on visual features only, and the other enforces prediction
alignment between the feature extractor and the alignment
module. Moreover, we propose two metrics to reflect overfitting by measuring the prediction inconsistency between the
feature extractor and the alignment module. Experimental
results on two challenging CSLR datasets show that the proposed VAC makes CSLR networks end-to-end trainable and
achieves competitive performance.

Forward pass

Visual Alignment Loss
Visual Enhancement Loss

Visual Alignment Constraint

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed non-iterative CLSR approach
with the visual alignment constraint. To solve the insufficient
training of the feature extractor, the proposed VAC enhances the
generalization ability of the visual extractor by constraining the
feature space with the alignment supervision.

significant problem for recognition [2]. Therefore, most recent CSLR works solve this problem in a weakly supervised
manner and adopt network architectures composed of the
feature extractor and the alignment module. The feature extractor abstracts visual information from each frame, and
the alignment module searches the possible alignments between visual features and the corresponding labeling. Different to those works [27, 29, 31] adopt HMMs to update
frame-wise state labels for the feature extractor, Graves et
al. [15] provide a more elegant solution so-called Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) to align the prediction and labeling by maximizing the sum of probability
of all feasible alignments, which is adopted by following
works [3, 6, 8, 9, 27, 36, 46].
Although CTC-based CSLR methods provide convenience in training, previous studies [9, 39] show that endto-end training limits the discriminative power of the feature extractor. They leverage the iterative training scheme to
enhance the feature extractor, which significantly improves
the performance. Nevertheless, it requires an additional
fine-tuning process besides the end-to-end training and increases the training time. Several recent works [6, 36] try
to accelerate this training scheme by adopting fully convolutional networks and fine-grained labels.
In this study, we revisit CTC-based CSLR model at dif-

11542

