Crossover Learning for Fast Online Video Instance Segmentation
Shusheng Yang1,2 ,* Yuxin Fang1∗ , Xinggang Wang1†, Yu Li2 ,
Chen Fang3 , Ying Shan2 , Bin Feng1 , Wenyu Liu1

Abstract
Modeling temporal visual context across frames is critical for video instance segmentation (VIS) and other video
understanding tasks. In this paper, we propose a fast online VIS model termed CrossVIS. For temporal information modeling in VIS, we present a novel crossover learning scheme that uses the instance feature in the current
frame to pixel-wisely localize the same instance in other
frames. Different from previous schemes, crossover learning does not require any additional network parameters for
feature enhancement. By integrating with the instance segmentation loss, crossover learning enables efficient crossframe instance-to-pixel relation learning and brings costfree improvement during inference. Besides, a global balanced instance embedding branch is proposed for better
and more stable online instance association. We conduct extensive experiments on three challenging VIS benchmarks, i.e., YouTube-VIS-2019, OVIS, and YouTube-VIS2021 to evaluate our methods. CrossVIS achieves state-ofthe-art online VIS performance and shows a decent tradeoff between latency and accuracy. Code is available at
https://github.com/hustvl/CrossVIS.

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS) [68] is an emerging
task in computer vision that aims to perform per-pixel labeling of instances within video sequences. This task provides a natural understanding of the video scenes. Therefore achieving accurate, robust, and fast video instance
segmentation in real-world scenarios will greatly stimulate
the development of computer vision applications, e.g., autonomous driving, video surveillance, and video editing.
Recently, significant progress has been witnessed in stillimage object detection and instance segmentation. How* Equal contributions. This work was done while Shusheng Yang was
interning at Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG.
† Corresponding author, E-mail: xgwang@hust.edu.cn.

w/o. crossover

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG 3 Tencent

w/. crossover

1

Figure 1. CrossVIS can predict more accurate video instance segmentation results (bottom row) compared with the baseline model
without crossover learning (top row).

ever, extending these methods to VIS remains a challenging
work. Similar to other video-based recognition tasks, such
as video object segmentation (VOS) [45, 46], video object detection (VOD) [49] and multi-object tracking (MOT)
[16, 21, 55, 71], continuous video sequences always bring
great challenges, e.g., a huge number of frames required
to be fast recognized, heavy occlusion, object disappearing
and unconventional object-to-camera poses [18].
To conquer these challenges and obtain better performance on these video understanding tasks (VIS, VOS,
VOD, and MOT), fully utilizing the temporal information
among video frames is critical. Previous deep learning
based methods on this topic are in four folds. (1) Pixel-level
feature aggregation enhances pixels feature of the current
frame using other frames, e.g., STM-VOS [42] and STEmSeg [1] aggregates pixel-level space-time feature based on
Non-local network [57] and 3D convolution, respectively.
(2) Instance-level feature aggregation enhances region, proposal or instance features across frames, e.g., MaskProp [2]
propagates instance features using deformable convolution
[15] for VIS and SELSA [63] fuses instance features using spectral clustering for VOD. (3) Associating instances
using metric learning, e.g., MaskTrack R-CNN [68] introduces an association head based on Mask R-CNN [24] and
SipMask-VIS [6] adds an adjunctive association head based

8043

