Bifold and Semantic Reasoning for Pedestrian Behavior Prediction
Amir Rasouli, Mohsen Rohani, Jun Luo
Huawei Technologies Canada
{amir.rasouli, mohsen.rohani, jun.luo1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Pedestrian behavior prediction is one of the major challenges for intelligent driving systems. Pedestrians often exhibit complex behaviors influenced by various contextual
elements. To address this problem, we propose BiPed, a
multitask learning framework that simultaneously predicts
trajectories and actions of pedestrians by relying on multimodal data. Our method benefits from 1) a bifold encoding
approach where different data modalities are processed independently allowing them to develop their own representations, and jointly to produce a representation for all modalities using shared parameters; 2) a novel interaction modeling technique that relies on categorical semantic parsing
of the scenes to capture interactions between target pedestrians and their surroundings; and 3) a bifold prediction
mechanism that uses both independent and shared decoding
of multimodal representations. Using public pedestrian behavior benchmark datasets for driving, PIE and JAAD, we
highlight the benefits of the proposed method for behavior
prediction and show that our model achieves state-of-theart performance and improves trajectory and action prediction by up to 22% and 9% respectively. We further investigate the contributions of the proposed reasoning techniques
via extensive ablation studies.

1. Introduction
Predicting road user behavior in complex urban environments is fundamental for assistive and intelligent driving systems. Prediction is particularly challenging when
these systems are encountering pedestrians who exhibit diverse behaviors [1] that depend on various contextual factors, such as social interactions, road structure, traffic condition, and other environmental factors [2].
Pedestrian behavior can be predicted implicitly in the
form of future trajectories [3, 4, 5], or explicitly in the form
of upcoming actions [6, 7, 8]. It is evident from recent studies [5, 9, 10] that both types of behavior prediction play
complementary roles. For instance, predicting pedestrian
actions, such as crossing the road, implies the possibility
of a lateral motion across the road. Similarly, a pedestrian

Interaction
Modelling
Scenes

Multitask Prediction

Multimodal Encoding
Trajectory

Trajectory

Action
Grid locations

Ego-motion

Final Location

Figure 1. Proposed multitask learning for simultaneous prediction
of pedestrian trajectory, action and final location. Interaction of
traffic elements are modeled along with separately and jointly encoded visual context, pedestrian motion, and ego-motion inputs.

approaching a parked vehicle is expected to interact with
it. To capture these complementary aspects of behavior, we
propose a multitask learning framework that simultaneously
predicts trajectories, actions, and final locations of pedestrians (see Figure 1). To learn complex pedestrian behavior,
our model relies on multiple data modalities including visual context, pedestrian motion, and ego-vehicle dynamics.
The proposed method independently and jointly processes
different input modalities and tasks. Independent processing allows each modality or task to learn its own parameters,
whereas joint processing acts as a regularizer, inducing the
model to learn more representative features. Since pedestrians’ behaviors are often influenced by what is around them,
we introduce a novel technique to model interactions between target pedestrians and their surroundings based on
the semantic composition of the scenes. The proposed technique relies on visuospatial semantic representations of the
scenes divided into categories based on object classes.
We evaluate the performance of the proposed method
using public pedestrian behavior benchmark datasets, PIE
[10] and JAAD [11], and show that our method significantly
improves over state-of-the-art algorithms on both pedestrian
trajectory and action prediction tasks.

2. Related Works
2.1. Multimodal Behavior Prediction
Human behavior prediction research in computer vision and robotics has many practical applications, such as

15600

