Self-Supervised 3D Face Reconstruction via Conditional Estimation

1

Yandong Wen1 Weiyang Liu2,3 Bhiksha Raj1 Rita Singh1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Cambridge 3 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Abstract

Training & Inference
Viewpoint

Original Image

Illumination

Shape S

Renderer

Reflectance R

Overlay Image

Illumination ℓ

P(S ,R ,v , l | I ) = P(S | I ) P(R | I ) P(v | I ) P(l | I )

(a) Most existing methods assume conditional independence.

Shape S

Training

Renderer

Viewpoint v

Training & Inference

Illumination

Original Image

Reflectance

Reconstructing 3D faces from single-view 2D images
has been a longstanding problem in computer vision. The
common approach represents the 3D face as a combination
of its shape, as represented by the 3D coordinates of a number of points on its surface called vertices, and its texture,
as represented by the reflectances of red, green and blue at
these vertices [4]. The problem then becomes learning a
regression model between the 2D images, and vertices and
their reflectances.
The regression itself may be learned using training data
where both, the 2D images and the corresponding 3D parameters are available. However, these data are scarce, and
even the ones that are available generally only have shape
information [8, 47, 46]; the ones that do have other parameters are usually captured in a controlled environment
[22] or are synthetic [33], which is not representative of
real-world images. Consequently, there is great interest in
self-supervised learning methods, which learn the regression model from natural in-the-wild 2D images or videos,

Reflectance

Viewpoint v

Shape

1. Introduction

Shape

Viewpoint

We present a conditional estimation (CEST) framework
to learn 3D facial parameters from 2D single-view images
by self-supervised training from videos. CEST is based on
the process of analysis by synthesis, where the 3D facial
parameters (shape, reflectance, viewpoint, and illumination) are estimated from the face image, and then recombined to reconstruct the 2D face image. In order to learn
semantically meaningful 3D facial parameters without explicit access to their labels, CEST couples the estimation
of different 3D facial parameters by taking their statistical dependency into account. Specifically, the estimation
of any 3D facial parameter is not only conditioned on the
given image, but also on the facial parameters that have
already been derived. Moreover, the reflectance symmetry
and consistency among the video frames are adopted to improve the disentanglement of facial parameters. Together
with a novel strategy for incorporating the reflectance symmetry and consistency, CEST can be efficiently trained with
in-the-wild video clips. Both qualitative and quantitative
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of CEST.

Training

Reflectance R

Illumination ℓ

Overlay Image

P(S ,R ,v , l | I ) = P(v | I ) P(S | I ,v) P(R | I ,v ,S ) P(l | I ,v ,S ,R )

(b) The proposed CEST makes no assumption on dependency.

Figure 1: Conventional 3D face reconstruction and our CEST framework.
The dotted lines separate the modules used for inference of the 3D parameters from those used for training with self-supervision.

without explicit access to 3D training data [39, 41].
The problem is complicated by the fact that the actual
image formation depends not only on the shape and texture
of the face, but also the illumination (the intensity and direction of the incident light), and other factors such as the
viewpoint (incorporating the orientation of the face and the
position of the camera), etc. Thus, the learned regression
model must also account for these factors. To this end, the
general approach is one where shape, reflectance, illumination and viewpoint parameters are all extracted from the 2D
image. The regression model that extracts these facial parameters are learned through self-supervision: the extracted
facial parameters are recombined to render the original 2D
image, and the model parameters are learned to minimize
the reconstruction error.
The solution, however, remains ambiguous because a
2D image may be obtained from different combinations of
shape, texture, illumination and viewpoint. To ensure that
the self-supervision provides meaningful disentanglement,
the manner in which the facial parameters are recombined
to reconstruct the 2D image are based on the actual physics
of image formation [39, 41, 33]. To further reduce potential ambiguities, regularizations are necessary. Reflectance
symmetry has been proposed as a regularizer [42, 38, 45],
wherein the reflectance of a face image and its mirror reflec-

13289

