Road Anomaly Detection by Partial Image Reconstruction with Segmentation
Coupling
Tomas Vojir*†
Nikolay Chumerin‡

Tomas Sipka†
Rahaf Aljundi‡
Daniel Olmeda Reino‡
Jiri Matas†

Abstract
We present a novel approach to the detection of unknown
objects in the context of autonomous driving. The problem
is formulated as anomaly detection, since we assume that
the unknown stuff or object appearance cannot be learned.
To that end, we propose a reconstruction module that can be
used with many existing semantic segmentation networks,
and that is trained to recognize and reconstruct road (drivable) surface from a small bottleneck. We postulate that
poor reconstruction of the road surface is due to areas that
are outside of the training distribution, which is a strong indicator of an anomaly. The road structural similarity error
is coupled with the semantic segmentation to incorporate
information from known classes and produce final per-pixel
anomaly scores. The proposed JSR-Net was evaluated on
four datasets, Lost-and-found, Road Anomaly, Road Obstacles, and FishyScapes, achieving state-of-art performance
on all, reducing the false positives significantly, while typically having the highest average precision for wide range
of operation points.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles have quickly become one of the
prime application areas of computer vision methods. The
range of research topics that have been influenced and stimulated by this rapid development is broad: object detection [33], tracking [31, 52], optical flow estimation [51],
stereo [49], monocular depth [9] estimation, semantic segmentation [53], lidar-camera fusion, 3D mapping and selflocalisation [50, 23], to name a few. For many of the problems, the best performing methods are, or include, deep
neural networks, which have a voracious appetite for training data; currently mainly labeled data. As a consequence,
a vast data acquisition and labeling effort has been taking place, together with research into the use of synthetic
* Corresponding author, vojirtom@fel.cvut.cz
† Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineer-

ing, Czech Republic
‡ Toyota Motor Europe, Brussels, Belgium

data [36, 18], virtual environments and simulators [16], and
unsupervised learning [2].
In this work, we present an approach to detect road
anomalies in a semantic segmentation setting, in the context
of spotting arbitrary “stuff” or objects on the road surface.
The detection of “stuff” on the road is currently formulated
as the detection of the known and “unknown unknown” (unexpected and not considered types of “stuff”), which is typical for one-class classification [42] and outlier/anomaly detection [6] problems. While the semantic segmentation explains the scene, as viewed in an image, decomposing it into
a set of known categories, modelling an appearance that is
outside the known classes, or is out of distribution, requires
additional consideration.
In the proposed approach, we tightly combine information about the known class, “road” in our application, with a
strategy for estimating previously unseen objects and stuff.
The known class information is captured by a standard segmentation deep neural network. The performance on data
close to the training distribution is excellent, but its behaviour on unseen data is variable, as experiments show.
We therefore add a reconstruction network module, arguing,
and experimentally verifying, that a failure to reconstruct
reliably and predictably is an indicator of an anomaly.
The main contributions of the paper are the following:
(i) a novel use of image reconstruction to distinguish one
known semantic class from anomalies and outliers, originating from unknown appearance distributions, by explicitly
requiring poor reconstruction outside of the known class,
(ii) a trainable coupling of information from reconstruction
and semantic segmentation that is able to exploit efficiently
the two sources of information, (iii) a plug-and-play module
that can be used with many segmentation networks without
the need of re-training the segmentation part, i.e., adding
novel functionality without any semantic segmentation performance loss and with a minimal computational and memory overhead. (iv) Achieving state-of-the-art results and
better generalization to out-of-distribution data than competing methods.
We show quantitative results on three standard
and one derivative datasets – Lost-and-found [34],

15651

