Mutual-Complementing Framework for Nuclei Detection and Segmentation in
Pathology Image
Zunlei Feng1,5,6,# , Zhonghua Wang1,# , Xinchao Wang2 , Yining Mao1 , Thomas Li3 , Jie Lei4 ,
Yuexuan Wang1 , Mingli Song1,5,6 *
2
1
Zhejiang University, National University of Singapore, 3 The University of Hong Kong,
4
Zhejiang University of Technology, 5 Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Service Robot,
6
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
Abstract
Detection and segmentation of nuclei are fundamental
analysis operations in pathology images, the assessments
derived from which serve as the gold standard for cancer
diagnosis. Manual segmenting nuclei is expensive and timeconsuming. What’s more, accurate segmentation detection
of nuclei can be challenging due to the large appearance
variation, conjoined and overlapping nuclei, and serious
degeneration of histological structures. Supervised methods
highly rely on massive annotated samples. The existing two
unsupervised methods are prone to failure on degenerated
samples. This paper proposes a Mutual-Complementing
Framework (MCF) for nuclei detection and segmentation in
pathology images. Two branches of MCF are trained in the
mutual-complementing manner, where the detection branch
complements the pseudo mask of the segmentation branch,
while the progressive trained segmentation branch complements the missing nucleus templates through calculating
the mask residual between the predicted mask and detected
result. In the detection branch, two response map fusion
strategies and gradient direction based postprocessing are
devised to obtain the optimal detection response. Furthermore, the conﬁdence loss combined with the synthetic samples and self-ﬁnetuning is adopted to train the segmentation
network with only high conﬁdence areas. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MCF achieves comparable performance with only a few nucleus patches as supervision. Especially, MCF possesses good robustness (only dropping by
about 6%) on degenerated samples, which are critical and
common cases in clinical diagnosis.

1. Introduction
With the advent of whole slide imaging scanners,
the histopathological analysis performed on these digital
* Corresponding author. # Equal contribution to this work.

pathology images has been demonstrated as an effective and
reliable tool for cancer diagnosis and prognosis [9]. The assessments derived from the pathology image serve as the
gold standard for cancer diagnosis in many clinical protocols. The shape and distribution of cell nuclei in pathology images are used to determine cell, tissue, and cancer
types, and are critical in cancer identiﬁcation, grading, and
prognosis [9]. Accurate detection and segmentation of these
nuclei from histology images is an essential prerequisite to
obtain reliable morphological statistics for quantitative diagnosis, prognosis, and analysis.
However, manual searching and segmenting nuclei from
large-scale histopathology images in a conventional way
can be expensive, error-prone, and time-consuming. Furthermore, it often suffers from a high inter and intraobserver variability [4, 15], which results in limited reproducibility. Therefore, automatic detection and segmentation methods are highly demanded in clinical practice to
improve the efﬁciency, reliability, and scalability of largescale histopathological image analysis.
Automated detection and segmentation of histological
nuclei from histology images can be quite challenging for
several reasons. First, there is a huge variation of object appearance depending on the histologic grade as well as the
type of the disease. Second, there exist conjoined and overlapping nuclei. Third, the structures of nuclei have seriously
degenerated in the malignant cases£¬ which lead to weak
boundaries. In addition, the variation of tissue preparation
procedures such as sectioning and staining can cause deformation, artifacts and inconsistency of tissue appearance,
which can impede the segmentation process as well.
Recently, deep learning approaches have achieved
promising results in the medical image analysis area [16].
Some CNN based method has been applied into nuclei detection [3, 10, 13, 24, 31] and segmentation [1, 3, 6, 16, 20,
33, 21, 22, 25, 29, 38] . However, those supervised methods
highly rely on a large amount of annotation. Careful annota-

4036

