4D-Net for Learned Multi-Modal Alignment
AJ Piergiovanni
Google Research

Vincent Casser
Waymo LLC

Scene understanding is a long-standing research topic
in computer vision. It is especially important to the autonomous driving domain, where a central point of interest is detecting pedestrians, vehicles, obstacles and potential
hazards in the environment. While it was traditionally undertaken from a still 2D image, 3D sensing is widely available, and most modern vehicle platforms are equipped with
both 3D LiDAR sensors and multiple cameras producing
3D Point Clouds (PC) and RGB frames. Furthermore, autonomous vehicles obtain this information in time. Since
all sensors are grounded spatially, their data collectively,
when looked at in time, can be seen as a 4-dimensional entity. Reasoning across these sensors and time clearly offers opportunities to obtain a more accurate and holistic understanding, instead of the traditional scene understanding
from a single 2D still-image or a single 3D Point Cloud.
While all this 4D sensor data is readily available onboard, very few approaches have utilized it. For example,
the majority of methods targeting 3D object detection use a
single 3D point cloud as an input [17], with numerous approaches proposed [24, 52, 36, 31, 39, 40, 55, 57, 56]. Only
more recently has point cloud information been considered in time, with approaches typically accumulating several point clouds over a short time horizon [21, 20, 55, 31].
Furthermore, the sensors have complementary character-

Z

RGB in Time

Anelia Angelova
Google Research

3D boxes

Backbone CNN features

3D Boxes

1. Introduction

Pseudo-image

Cp

RGB
Video

We present 4D-Net, a 3D object detection approach,
which utilizes 3D Point Cloud and RGB sensing information, both in time. We are able to incorporate the 4D information by performing a novel dynamic connection learning
across various feature representations and levels of abstraction, as well as by observing geometric constraints. Our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art and strong baselines on the Waymo Open Dataset. 4D-Net is better able
to use motion cues and dense image information to detect
distant objects more successfully. We will open source the
code.

Points in Time

PCiT

Abstract

Michael S. Ryoo
Robotics at Google

X

RGB CNN features

Figure 1. 4D-Net effectively combines 3D sensing in time (PCiT)
with RGB data also streamed in time, learning the connections
between different sensors and their feature representations.

istics. The point cloud data alone may sometimes be insufficient, e.g., at far ranges where an object only reflects a
handful of points, or for very small objects. More information is undoubtedly contained in the RGB data, especially when combined with the 3D Point Cloud inputs. Yet,
relatively few works attempted to combine these modalities [34, 50, 19, 23]. Notably, only 2 of the 26 submissions
to the Waymo Open Dataset 3D detection challenge operated on both modalities [46]. No methods have attempted
combining them when both are streamed in time. The questions of how to align these very different sensor modalities
most effectively, as well as how to do so efficiently, have
been major roadblocks.
To address these challenges, we propose 4D-Net, which
combines Point Cloud information together with RGB camera data, both in time, in an efficient and learnable manner. We propose a novel learning technique for fusing information in 4D from both sensors, respectively building and
learning connections between feature representations from
different modalities and levels of abstraction (Figure 1). Using our method, each modality is processed with a suitable architecture producing rich features, which are then
aligned and fused at different levels by dynamic connection learning (Figure 2). We show that this is an effective
and efficient way of processing 4D information from multiple sensors. 4D-Nets provide unique opportunities as they
naturally learn to establish relations between these sensors’
features, combining information at various learning stages.
This is in contrast to previous late fusion work, which fuse

15435

