Point Cloud Augmentation with Weighted Local Transformations
Sihyeon Kim1 ,* Sanghyeok Lee1 ,* Dasol Hwang1
Jaewon Lee1 , Seong Jae Hwang2 , Hyunwoo J. Kim1†
1

Korea University 2 University of Pittsburgh

{sh_bs15, cat0626, dd_sol, 2j1ejyu, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr
sjh95@pitt.edu

Abstract
Despite the extensive usage of point clouds in 3D vision,
relatively limited data are available for training deep neural networks. Although data augmentation is a standard approach to compensate for the scarcity of data, it has been
less explored in the point cloud literature. In this paper,
we propose a simple and effective augmentation method
called PointWOLF for point cloud augmentation. The proposed method produces smoothly varying non-rigid deformations by locally weighted transformations centered at
multiple anchor points. The smooth deformations allow diverse and realistic augmentations. Furthermore, in order to
minimize the manual efforts to search the optimal hyperparameters for augmentation, we present AugTune, which
generates augmented samples of desired difficulties producing targeted confidence scores. Our experiments show
our framework consistently improves the performance for
both shape classification and part segmentation tasks. Particularly, with PointNet++, PointWOLF achieves the stateof-the-art 89.7 accuracy on shape classification with the
real-world ScanObjectNN dataset. The code is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/PointWOLF.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning techniques, which established
their popularity on structured data, began showing success
on point clouds. Unlike images with clear lattice structures,
each point cloud is an unordered set of points with no inherent structures that globally represent various 3D objects.
Recent deep learning efforts have focused on enabling neural networks to operate on point clouds. While several point
cloud datasets appeared, a particular dataset of scanned realworld objects [1] required a much greater understanding of
the point cloud structures to identify highly complex realworld objects. In response, the approaches have evolved
from extracting point-wise information with no structural
* Equal contribution. † is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Locally augmented point clouds using PointWOLF.
In each row, the left most sample is the original, and the remaining samples are its locally transformed results (brighter regions
indicate stronger local transformations). PointWOLF can locally
transform objects while preserving the original shape identity.

information [2] to explicitly encoding the local structure
[3]. These works on network development have been making steady progress despite the scarcity of point cloud data.
Our interest lies in data augmentation, which is extensively utilized in other machine learning pipelines for solving the data scarcity issue. Interestingly, despite its prevalence in other data modalities, data augmentation (DA) on
point clouds is relatively less explored. For instance, conventional data augmentation (CDA) [2, 3], which consists
of global rotation, scaling, translation, and small point-

548

