Deep Relational Metric Learning
Wenzhao Zheng∗, Borui Zhang∗, Jiwen Lu†, Jie Zhou
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{zhengwz18, zhang-br21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a deep relational metric learning
(DRML) framework for image clustering and retrieval.
Most existing deep metric learning methods learn an embedding space with a general objective of increasing interclass distances and decreasing intraclass distances. However, the conventional losses of metric learning usually suppress intraclass variations which might be helpful to identify samples of unseen classes. To address this problem,
we propose to adaptively learn an ensemble of features that
characterizes an image from different aspects to model both
interclass and intraclass distributions. We further employ a
relational module to capture the correlations among each
feature in the ensemble and construct a graph to represent an image. We then perform relational inference on
the graph to integrate the ensemble and obtain a relationaware embedding to measure the similarities. Extensive
experiments on the widely-used CUB-200-2011, Cars196,
and Stanford Online Products datasets demonstrate that our
framework improves existing deep metric learning methods
and achieves very competitive results. 1

1. Introduction
How to effectively measure the similarities among examples has been an important problem for many computer
vision tasks. Metric learning aims to learn a distance metric
under which samples from one class are close to each other
and far away from samples from the other classes. Taking
advantage of the deep learning technique [15, 26, 45, 50],
deep metric learning (DML) methods utilize the combination of a convolutional neural network (CNN) and fully
connected layers (FCs) to construct a mapping from the
image space to an embedding space and employ the Euclidean distance in this space to measure the similarities
between samples. Deep metric learning has outperformed
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/zbr17/DRML.

Conventional DML
Network

Ensemble-based DML
Network

DRML
Network

Figure 1. Comparisons of the proposed DRML framework with
conventional deep metric learning methods and ensemble-based
deep metric learning methods. Conventional DML employs a
deep neural network to obtain an embedding for each image and
measures the similarity of two samples by the Euclidean distance
between their corresponding embeddings. Ensemble-based DML
learns an ensemble of embeddings but simply concatenates them
to obtain the final embedding, which ignores the structural relations among them. Differently, the proposed DRML framework
represents one image using an ensemble of features as well as
their interactions and then incorporates the relations to infer the
final embedding. (Best viewed in color.)

conventional methods by a large margin and demonstrated
promising results in a variety of tasks, such as image retrieval [35, 46, 47, 67], face recognition [16, 30, 43, 53],
and person re-identification [4, 5, 44, 52, 68].
Most existing metric learning methods utilize a discriminative objective to learn the embedding space, which encourages the metric to discard intraclass variations so that
intraclass samples will form a compact cluster with a large
margin from the other clusters. The large margin nature
of metric learning has been proven useful to improve its robustness and generalization for seen class retrieval or classi-

12065

