Learning Dynamic Interpolation for Extremely Sparse Light Fields with Wide
Baselines
Mantang Guo *
Jing Jin *
Hui Liu
Junhui Hou
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
{mantanguo2-c,jingjin25-c,hliu99-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of dense light
field (LF) reconstruction from sparsely-sampled ones with
wide baselines and propose a learnable model, namely dynamic interpolation, to replace the commonly-used geometry warping operation. Specifically, with the estimated geometric relation between input views, we first construct a
lightweight neural network to dynamically learn weights
for interpolating neighbouring pixels from input views to
synthesize each pixel of novel views independently. In contrast to the fixed and content-independent weights employed
in the geometry warping operation, the learned interpolation weights implicitly incorporate the correspondences
between the source and novel views and adapt to different image content information. Then, we recover the spatial correlation between the independently synthesized pixels of each novel view by referring to that of input views
using a geometry-based spatial refinement module. We also
constrain the angular correlation between the novel views
through a disparity-oriented LF structure loss. Experimental results on LF datasets with wide baselines show that
the reconstructed LFs achieve much higher PSNR/SSIM
and preserve the LF parallax structure better than stateof-the-art methods. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/MantangGuo/DI4SLF.

1. Introduction
Densely-sampled light field (LF) images record not only
appearance but also geometry information of 3D scenes,
which enable wide applications, such as 3D reconstruction
[30, 24, 3], image post-refocusing [20], and virtual reality
[7, 38]. However, densely-sampled LFs raise great challenges for the acquisition. For example, camera array [33]
or computer-controlled gantry [29] are either bulky and exThis work was supported by the Hong Kong RGC under grants CityU
21211518 and 11218121. Corresponding author: Junhui Hou
* Equal Contributions

Index the correspondence
Interpolation

Input view

MLP

Interpolation weights

Interpolation neighborhood

Synthesized view

Input view

Corresponding point

Synthesized view

Distance

Distance

(a) Commonly-used warping

Input view

Synthesized view

Input view

...

...

Embeddings

Embeddings

Synthesized view

(b) Dynamic interpolation

Figure 1. Comparison of the commonly-used warping operation
and the proposed dynamic interpolation. In contrast to the fixed
and content-independent weights employed in the warping operation (taking bilinear interpolation weights as an example), we propose to dynamically learn geometry-aware and content-adaptive
interpolation weights from carefully constructed embeddings.

pensive or limited in capturing static scenes, while costeffective commercial LF cameras [17, 21] suffer from a
trade-off between the spatial and angular resolution due to
the limited sensor resolution [8, 9].
Although many computational methods have been proposed to reconstruct densely-sampled LFs from sparselysampled ones, the wide baseline between input views remains a great challenge. To be more specific, non-depthbased methods [23, 37, 35, 31, 36, 4, 5] investigate the implicit signal distribution of LF data to learn the mapping
from sparse to dense LFs. These methods inevitably suffer
from the aliasing problem and lead to artifacts when the LF
is extremely under-sampled. In comparison, depth-based
methods [32, 12, 34, 11, 10] perform much better by employing the explicit geometry information. These methods
follow the general pipeline of warping-based view synthe-

2450

