Scribble-Supervised Semantic Segmentation by Uncertainty Reduction on
Neural Representation and Self-Supervision on Neural Eigenspace
Zhiyi Pan1

Yunhai Wang1
Peng Jiang1 *
Shandong University, China

1

2

Changhe Tu1
Anthony G. Cohn2,1
University of Leeds, UK

{panzhiyi1996, sdujump, cloudseawang, changhe.tu}@gmail.com

a.g.cohn@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract
Scribble-supervised semantic segmentation has gained
much attention recently for its promising performance without high-quality annotations. Due to the lack of supervision, confident and consistent predictions are usually hard
to obtain. Typically, people handle these problems by either
adopting an auxiliary task with the well-labeled dataset or
incorporating a graphical model with additional requirements on scribble annotations. Instead, this work aims
to achieve semantic segmentation by scribble annotations
directly without extra information and other limitations.
Specifically, we propose holistic operations, including minimizing entropy and a network embedded random walk on
the neural representation to reduce uncertainty. Given the
probabilistic transition matrix of a random walk, we further train the network with self-supervision on its neural
eigenspace to impose consistency on predictions between
related images. Comprehensive experiments and ablation
studies verify the proposed approach, which demonstrates
superiority over others; it is even comparable to some fulllabel supervised ones and works well when scribbles are
randomly shrunk or dropped.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the use of neural networks, especially
convolutional neural networks, has dramatically improved
semantic classification, detection, and segmentation [16].
As one of the most fine-grained ways to understand the
scene, typically, semantic segmentation demands largescale data with high-quality annotations to feed the network. However, the pixel-level annotating process for semantic segmentation is costly and tedious, limiting its flexibility and usability on some tasks that require rapid deployment [18]. As a consequence, the scribble annotations,
which are more easily available, have become popular.
The main difficulty for scribble-supervised semantic seg* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. From left to right: image, scribble annotation, ground
truth, our prediction. From top to bottom: sample with regular,
shrunk and dropped scribble annotation, respectively.

mentation lies in two aspects. (1) the scribble annotation is
sparse and cannot provide enough supervision for the network to make confident predictions. (2) the scribble annotation varies from image to image, which makes it hard for the
network to produce consistent results. As a consequence,
[18] adopted the classic graphical model as post-processing
to obtain the final dense predictions. Some works [25, 28]
turn to an auxiliary task with well-labeled dataset for help,
but this does not actually remove the burden of annotation
but merely shifts it. To avoid the post-processing and dependence on another well-labeled dataset, [24] design a graphical model with regularized loss to make predictions consistent within the appearance similar neighborhood, but did
not consider semantic similarity. Moreover, they require every object in an image to be labeled, which is too strict for
dataset preparation.
We address the task by a more flexible approach without introducing auxiliary supervision and constraints in this
work. The approach can work properly when scribbles on
some objects are randomly dropped or even shrunk to spots.
Several representative results are shown in Fig. 1. We propose two creative solutions for the problems of confidence
and consistency mentioned above. To reduce uncertainty
when supervision is lacking, we take advantage of two facts
related to semantic segmentation. The first one is that each
pixel only belongs to one category (deterministic), and there

7416

