UniT: Multimodal Multitask Learning with a Unified Transformer
Ronghang Hu
Amanpreet Singh
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
{ronghanghu,asg}@fb.com
image

question

detection

What color is
The woman
the woman’s
is
swimming.
VQA jacket? SNLI-VE
MNLI

detection

VQA

SNLI-VE

MNLI

detection

VQA

SNLI-VE

MNLI

Inputs

Tasks

hypothesis

answer:
red

Outputs

contradiction

premise

The woman
is driving a
QNLI
car.

QNLI

QNLI

cannot be
answered

paragraph

…

This movie doesn't care
about cleverness, wit
or any other kind of
QQP
SST-2
intelligent humor.

QQP

QQP

…

SST-2

SST-2

sentiment:
negative

learned with a single Unified Transformer (UniT) across tasks
Figure 1: In this work, we propose UniT, which jointly learns multiple tasks across different domains with a Unified
Transformer. Our UniT model simultaneously handles 7 tasks on 8 datasets ranging from object detection to vision-andlanguage reasoning and natural language understanding, while achieving strong performance on each task with a compact set
of model parameters.

Abstract
We propose UniT, a Unified Transformer model to simultaneously learn the most prominent tasks across different
domains, ranging from object detection to natural language
understanding and multimodal reasoning. Based on the
transformer encoder-decoder architecture, our UniT model
encodes each input modality with an encoder and makes
predictions on each task with a shared decoder over the encoded input representations, followed by task-specific output heads. The entire model is jointly trained end-to-end
with losses from each task. Compared to previous efforts on
multi-task learning with transformers, we share the same
model parameters across all tasks instead of separately finetuning task-specific models and handle a much higher variety of tasks across different domains. In our experiments,
we learn 7 tasks jointly over 8 datasets, achieving strong
performance on each task with significantly fewer parameters. Our code is available in MMF at https://mmf.sh.

1. Introduction
First proposed in [59], transformers have shown great
success in a wide range of domains including but not limited to natural language, images, video, and audio. Previous
works (e.g. [14, 43, 44, 4, 65, 35, 29, 45, 49]) demonstrate
that transformers trained on large corpora learn strong representations for a wide range of downstream language tasks.
In the visual domain, models based on transformers have
achieved promising results on image classification, object
detection, and panoptic segmentation (e.g. [40, 3, 22, 21, 47,
15, 61, 5, 72, 2, 58]). Besides modeling a single modality,
transformer models also exhibit strong performance in joint
vision-and-language reasoning tasks such as visual question
answering (e.g. [31, 38, 39, 57, 9, 30, 55, 71, 23]).
However, despite the above achievements in the application of transformers to specific domains, there has not been
much prior effort to connect different tasks across domains
with transformers. After witnessing the success of transformers, various questions naturally arise: could a transformer model trained for natural language inference on textual input also perform object detection on images, or could
11439

