Knowledge-Enriched Distributional Model Inversion Attacks
Si Chen, Mostafa Kahla, Ruoxi Jia
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA

Guo-Jun Qi*
Seattle Research Center, Innopeak Technology
Bellevue, WA

{chensi, kahla, ruoxijia}@vt.edu

guojun.qi@innopeaktech.com

Abstract
Model inversion (MI) attacks are aimed at reconstructing training data from model parameters. Such attacks
have triggered increasing concerns about privacy, especially given a growing number of online model repositories.
However, existing MI attacks against deep neural networks
(DNNs) have large room for performance improvement. We
present a novel inversion-specific GAN that can better distill
knowledge useful for performing attacks on private models
from public data. In particular, we train the discriminator
to differentiate not only the real and fake samples but the
soft-labels provided by the target model. Moreover, unlike
previous work that directly searches for a single data point
to represent a target class, we propose to model a private
data distribution for each target class. Our experiments
show that the combination of these techniques can significantly boost the success rate of the state-of-the-art MI attacks by 150%, and generalize better to a variety of datasets
and models. Our code is available at https://github.
com/SCccc21/Knowledge-Enriched-DMI.

1. Introduction
Many attractive applications of machine learning (ML)
techniques involve training models on sensitive and proprietary datasets. One major concern for these applications
is that models could be subject to privacy attacks and reveal inappropriate details of the training data. One type of
privacy attacks is MI attacks, aimed at recovering training
data from the access to a model. The access could either
be black-box or white-box. In the blackbox setting, the attacker can only make prediction queries to the model, while
in the whitebox setting, the attacker has complete knowledge of the model. Given a growing number of online platforms where users can download entire models, such as
Tensorflow Hub1 and ModelDepot2 , whitebox MI attacks
* Correspondence to G.-J. Qi, guojunq@gmail.com
1 https://www.tensorflow.org/hub
2 https://modeldepot.io/

have posed an increasingly serious threat to privacy.
Effective MI attacks have been mostly demonstrated on
simple models, such as linear models, and low-dimensional
feature space [5, 4]. MI attacks are typically cast as an optimization problem that seeks for the most likely input examples corresponding to a target label under the private model.
When the target model is a DNN, the underlying attack optimization problem becomes intractable and solving it via
gradient methods in an unconstrained manner may easily
end in a local minima. Previous MI attack models like [31]
explore the idea of distilling a generic prior from potential
public data via a GAN generator and using it to guide the
inversion process. For instance, to attack a face recognition classifier trained on private face images, one can train
a GAN with public face datasets to learn generic statistics
of real face images and then solving the attack optimization
over the latent space of the GAN rather than in an unconstrained ambient space.
However, there still exists a large room to improve the
attack performance. For instance, the top-one identification
accuracy of face images inverted from the state-of-the-art
face recognition classifier is 45%. A natural question is: Is
the underperformance of MI attacks against DNNs because
DNNs do not memorize much about private data or it is simply an artifact of imperfect attack algorithm design? This
paper shows that it is the latter.
We reveal a variety of drawbacks associated with the the
current MI attacks against DNNs. Particularly, we notice
that the previous state-of-the-art approach suffers from the
two key limitations: 1) The information about private classifier is not sufficiently explored for distilling knowledge
from public data. Previous works ignore the important role
of the target classifier in adapting the knowledge distilled
from the public data for training the MI attack model on the
target classifier. Indeed, given a target classifier to attack,
we can also use its output labels to distill which public data
are more useful in inverting the target model to recover the
private training examples of the given labels. 2) Prior works
made a simplified one-to-one assumption in recovering a
single example for a given label of the target model. How-

16178

