PoGO-Net: Pose Graph Optimization with Graph Neural Networks
Xinyi Li *
Magic Leap, Sunnyvale, CA, USA

Haibin Ling †
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA

xinli@magicleap.com

hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Accurate camera pose estimation or global camera relocalization is a core component in Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) and SLAM systems. Given pair-wise relative camera poses, pose-graph optimization (PGO) involves solving
for an optimized set of globally-consistent absolute camera
poses. In this work, we propose a novel PGO scheme fueled by graph neural networks (GNN), namely PoGO-Net,
to conduct the absolute camera pose regression leveraging multiple rotation averaging (MRA). Specifically, PoGONet takes a noisy view-graph as the input, where the nodes
and edges are designed to encode the geometric constraints
and local graph consistency. Besides, we address the outlier edge removal by exploiting an implicit edge-dropping
scheme where the noisy or corrupted edges are effectively
filtered out with parameterized networks. Furthermore, we
introduce a joint loss function embedding MRA formulation
such that the robust inference is capable of achieving realtime performances even for large-scale scenes. Our proposed network is trained end-to-end on public benchmarks,
outperforming state-of-the-art approaches in extensive experiments that demonstrate the efficiency and robustness of
our proposed network.

1. Introduction
Visual localization or camera pose regression lies in the
heart of many computer vision and robotics tasks, with
applications including robot navigation, autonomous driving and augmented reality. Camera pose estimation is
the process of self-determining the orientation and position with the aid of sequential information via image retrieval. As the key component in standard camera pose
estimation pipelines, pose-graph optimization (PGO) involves iterative estimations of pair-wise camera relative
poses and the progressive optimization of the noisy global
view-graph. In most of the conventional Structure-fromMotion (SfM) [65, 69] and SLAM [47] systems, PGO is
* Work primarily conducted during graduate study at Temple Univ.
† Corresponding author.

conducted as numerically solving a high-dimensional nonconvex approximation problem by leveraging feature-frame
correspondences and often yields high computational costs.
Despite the proliferation of research addressing the backend optimization in SfM systems, many challenges remain
open. Firstly, canonical solvers carry a complexity of cubic order with regards to the input size and gradually slows
down [67], forfeiting the real-time requirements. Secondly,
measurements of pair-wise relative camera poses are often
noisy, yielding corrupted and erroneous edges in the viewgraph and henceforth impairing the performances of both
conventional and learning-based methods [52]. Thirdly, direct regressions of structures and motions with deep learning networks are prone to overfitting [55, 62], hindering the
robustness and generality in real-world applications.
Inspired by the recent successes of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [53], we herein propose a novel GNN-based
PGO scheme to address all the aforementioned issues with
a concrete network, namely, PoGO-Net. Specifically, we
encode the edge messages with pair-wise geometric constraints on the edges of the view-graph, aggregated with the
local consistency information. The absolute camera orientations are encoded as node features, updated according to
its connected edges and neighboring nodes. As we consider
the input as a corrupted graph with erroneous and redundant edges, we address the graph de-noising issue by exploiting topological parameterized network layers to conduct the ‘edge dropping’, i.e., the outlier edges are removed
according to the local graph consistency, resulting a sparser
yet preciser sub-graph of the input view-graph. We redefine the message aggregation and design the loss function based on multiple rotation averaging (MRA) algorithm,
with the efficient message passing scheme our proposed network is capable of processing in real-time speed even with
large-scale datasets. Moreover, our network bares an endto-end differentiable structure where the parameters of the
de-noising layers and the GNN layers are jointly optimized
during training.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel PGO formulation fueled with a
GNN to conduct the absolute camera pose regression
by exploiting the MRA scheme.

5895

