Semantics Disentangling for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Zhi Chen1

Yadan Luo1

Ruihong Qiu1 Sen Wang1 Zi Huang1 Jingjing Li2 Zheng Zhang3
1
The University of Queensland, Australia
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 3 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{zhi.chen,y.luo,r.qiu,sen.wang}@uq.edu.au
huang@itee.uq.edu.au, lijin117@yeah.net, darrenzz219@gmail.com
Abstract

Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) aims to classify
samples under the assumption that some classes are not observable during training. To bridge the gap between the
seen and unseen classes, most GZSL methods attempt to associate the visual features of seen classes with attributes or
to generate unseen samples directly. Nevertheless, the visual features used in the prior approaches do not necessarily encode semantically related information that the shared
attributes refer to, which degrades the model generalization to unseen classes. To address this issue, in this paper,
we propose a novel semantics disentangling framework for
the generalized zero-shot learning task (SDGZSL), where
the visual features of unseen classes are ﬁrstly estimated
by a conditional VAE and then factorized into semanticconsistent and semantic-unrelated latent vectors. In particular, a total correlation penalty is applied to guarantee the
independence between the two factorized representations,
and the semantic consistency of which is measured by the
derived relation network. Extensive experiments conducted
on four GZSL benchmark datasets have evidenced that
the semantic-consistent features disentangled by the proposed SDGZSL are more generalizable in tasks of canonical and generalized zero-shot learning. Our source code
is available at https://github.com/uqzhichen/
SDGZSL.

1. Introduction
Human beings have a remarkable ability to learn new notions based on prior experience without seeing them in advance. For example, given the clues that zebras appear like
horses yet with black-and-white stripes, one can quickly
recognize a zebra if he/she has seen horses before. Nevertheless, unlike humans, supervised machine learning algorithms can only classify samples belonging to the classes
that have already appeared during the training phase, and
they are not able to handle samples from previously unseen

Semantic-unrelated visual features, e.g., ear shape

Annotated attributes
Ocean
Stripes
Vegetation
Big
Longleg
Tail
Furry
Muscle
Strainteeth
Grazer
Smelly
Arctic
Walks
Tree
Fast
Domestic
Slow
Fields
Bipedal
Bush
Meat
Hunter
Active
Stalker
Pads
Forager
Paws
Nocturnal
Longneck
Tusks
Hooves
Strong

Figure 1: An illustration of the visual features (red boxes)
that are not associated with the annotated attributes. Learning from such visual features that are semantically unrelated
may jeopardize the model generalization to unseen classes.
categories. This challenge motivates the study of generalizing models to the unseen classes by transferring knowledge
from intermediate semantics (e.g., attributes), which typically refers to zero-shot learning (ZSL). intro
Particularly, the core idea of ZSL [19, 34, 1, 17] lies in
learning to map features between the semantic space and visual space, thereby closing the gap between the seen and unseen classes. While effective, conventional ZSL techniques
are built upon the assumption that the test set only contains
samples from the unseen classes, which can be easily violated in practice. Hence, it is more reasonable to consider a
new protocol called generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL),
where seen and unseen images are both to be identiﬁed.
Existing GZSL techniques can be roughly grouped into
two types: embedding-based [9, 34, 22, 21, 13] and
generative-based [38, 35, 28, 24, 15] approaches. The former group learns a projection or an embedding function
to associate the visual features of seen classes with the
respective semantic vectors, while the latter one learns a
visual generator for the unseen classes based on the seen
points and semantic representations of both classes. However, most GZSL approaches directly leverage the visual
features extracted from the pre-trained deep models, such

8712

