Polarimetric Helmholtz Stereopsis
Yuqi Ding1 Yu Ji2 Mingyuan Zhou2 Sing Bing Kang3 Jinwei Ye1
1
Louisiana State University 2 DGene U.S.A. 3 Zillow Group

Abstract
Helmholtz stereopsis (HS) exploits the reciprocity principle of light propagation (i.e., the Helmholtz reciprocity)
for 3D reconstruction of surfaces with arbitrary reflectance.
In this paper, we present the polarimetric Helmholtz stereopsis (polar-HS), which extends the classical HS by considering the polarization state of light in the reciprocal
paths. With the additional phase information from polarization, polar-HS requires only one reciprocal image pair.
We formulate new reciprocity and diffuse/specular polarimetric constraints to recover surface depths and normals
using an optimization framework. Using a hardware prototype, we show that our approach produces high-quality 3D
reconstruction for different types of surfaces, ranging from
diffuse to highly specular.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D surfaces from 2D images is a longstanding ill-posed problem in computer vision. The complex surface reflectance properties of real-world objects
make the problem highly challenging. All existing methods
are limited to certain types of surface reflectance. For example, passive techniques examine the optical appearance
of a surface under non-tightly focused illumination (e.g., a
distant light source) and often assume photo-consistency or
Lambertian reflectance model for 3D reconstruction.
Helmholtz Stereopsis (HS) [55] is a 3D reconstruction
technique that can recover surfaces with arbitrary and unknown reflectance. HS exploits the symmetry of surface
reflectance; this is accomplished by using reciprocal image pairs (minimal three) that are captured with exchanged
camera and light source positions. The reciprocity property guarantees that the relationship between the intensities
at corresponding pixels depends only on the surface shape,
and is independent of surface reflectance.
In this paper, we present a novel method we call polarimetric Helmholtz Stereopsis (polar-HS), which extends the
classical HS by considering the polarization state of light in
the reciprocal paths. We investigate the reciprocity relationship when the polarization states of incident and outgoing

light are unrestricted (in which case the original Helmholtz
reciprocity property cannot be directly applied). We derive a transpositional reciprocity relationship based on the
Stokes-Mueller formalism, and formulate a reciprocity constraint for depth and normal estimation. We also exploit
polarimetric cues under different types of reflections. We
propose a new polarimetric image decomposition method
that allows us to apply the polarimetric constraints under
different circumstances. By combining the reciprocity and
polarimetric constraints, our method can recover the surface depth and normal with only one reciprocity pair, which
greatly simplifies the capture process. Unlike other onepair HS methods [56, 48] that assume continuous parametric depth functions, polar-HS works for discontinuous depth
and does not require priors on surface geometry and material properties.
We validate our method with both synthetic and real experiments. We build a real polar-HS acquisition system
with a rotating wheel to allow exchange of camera and light
source positions. We perform experiments on objects with
various shapes and reflectances, and on different composite
scenes. Results show that our method is state-of-the-art.
Contributions. Our key contribution is the derivation
of the transpositional reciprocity relationship when unrestricted polarization states are being considered. The original Helmholtz reciprocity property has strong restrictions
on the polarization states of the light beams in the reciprocal paths, which is hard to satisfy in practice. The transpositional reciprocity we derive allows the classical HS to be
extended to the polarimetric case.
We propose a new image decomposition formulation
that consists of three components: polarized-specular,
polarized-diffuse, and unpolarized-diffuse. The decomposition provides a more accurate estimation of the angle of
polarization for regularizing the surface normal, because
it separates diffuse and specular (the angles of polarization under these two cases have a 90◦ shift). Shape-frompolarization methods usually use the overall angle, and assume a dominant type of reflection. This decomposition
also provides a specular map that allows us to apply the polarimetric cues under different types of reflection.
Polar-HS reduces the minimal number of image pairs to

5037

