SAT: 2D Semantics Assisted Training for 3D Visual Grounding
Zhengyuan Yang1 Songyang Zhang1 Liwei Wang 2 Jiebo Luo1
1
2
University of Rochester
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zyang39, szhang83, jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

lwwang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Previous methods

Abstract
3D visual grounding aims at grounding a natural language description about a 3D scene, usually represented
in the form of 3D point clouds, to the targeted object region. Point clouds are sparse, noisy, and contain limited
semantic information compared with 2D images. These inherent limitations make the 3D visual grounding problem
more challenging. In this study, we propose 2D Semantics
Assisted Training (SAT) that utilizes 2D image semantics in
the training stage to ease point-cloud-language joint representation learning and assist 3D visual grounding. The
main idea is to learn auxiliary alignments between rich,
clean 2D object representations and the corresponding objects or mentioned entities in 3D scenes. SAT takes 2D
object semantics, i.e., object label, image feature, and 2D
geometric feature, as the extra input in training but does
not require such inputs during inference. By effectively utilizing 2D semantics in training, our approach boosts the
accuracy on the Nr3D dataset from 37.7% to 49.2%, which
significantly surpasses the non-SAT baseline with the identical network architecture and inference input. Our approach
outperforms the state of the art by large margins on multiple
3D visual grounding datasets, i.e., +10.4% absolute accuracy on Nr3D, +9.9% on Sr3D, and +5.6% on ScanRef.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding provides machines the ability to
ground a language description to the targeted visual region.
The task has received wide attention in both datasets [54,
31, 19] and methods [16, 46, 53, 50]. However, most previous visual grounding studies remain on images [54, 31, 19]
and videos [57, 38, 51], which contain 2D projections of
inherently 3D visual scenes. The recently proposed 3D visual grounding task [1, 4] aims to ground a natural language
description about a 3D scene to the region referred to by a
language query (in the form of a 3D bounding box). The
3D visual grounding task has various applications, including autonomous agents [40, 47], human-machine interac-

(a) w/o 2D semantics

(c) Ours: 2D semantics assisted training
"It is the office chair, next
to the one in front of the
computer monitor."

"It is the office chair, next
to the one in front of the
computer monitor."
3D object proposals

Query words

(b) 2D semantics as extra inputs

"It is the office chair, next
to the one in front of the
computer monitor."

Query words

Only in training

...
2D image semantics

...
3D+2D visual inputs

3D object proposals

Query words

:
:

The main 3D grounding loss

:

Training losses for joint
representation learning

SAT’s 2D auxiliary losses

Figure 1. 3D visual grounding aims to ground a language query
to a targeted 3D object region, as shown by the green 3D bounding box. (a) Previous 3D visual grounding studies are trained with
a sole 3D grounding loss that maximizes the similarity between
positive object-query pairs. However, the sole objective is less effective as point clouds are sparse and noisy. (b) 2D semantics contain rich and clean object representations and can be used as extra
visual inputs to assist 3D grounding. However, requiring extra 2D
inputs in inference limits potential application scenarios. (c) Our
proposed 2D Semantics Assisted Training (SAT) uses 2D semantics only in training and does not require extra inputs in inference.
The green and red boxes are the targeted and distracting objects.

tion in augmented/mixed reality [20, 22], intelligent vehicles [29, 12], and so on.
Visual grounding tries to learn a good joint representation between visual and text modalities, i.e., the 3D
point cloud and language query in 3D visual grounding.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), previous 3D grounding studies [1, 4, 17, 55] directly learn the joint representation with
a sole 3D grounding objective of maximizing the positive object-query pairs’ similarity scores. Specifically, the
model first generates a set of 3D object proposals and then
fuses each proposal with the language query to predict a
similarity score. The framework is trained with a sole objective that maximizes the paired object-query scores and minimizes the unpaired ones’ scores. However, direct joint representation learning is challenging and less effective since
3D point clouds are inherently sparse, noisy, and contain
limited semantic information. Given that the 2D object representation provides rich and clean semantics, we explore
using 2D image semantics to help 3D visual grounding.

1856

