Multi-Expert Adversarial Attack Detection in Person Re-identification Using
Context Inconsistency
Xueping Wang1,2 , Shasha Li3 , Min Liu * 1,2 , Yaonan Wang1,2 and Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury3
1

2

College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Robot Visual Perception and Control Technology, China
3
University of California, Riverside

Abstract
The success of deep neural networks (DNNs) has
promoted the widespread applications of person reidentification (ReID). However, ReID systems inherit the
vulnerability of DNNs to malicious attacks of visually inconspicuous adversarial perturbations. Detection of adversarial attacks is, therefore, a fundamental requirement for
robust ReID systems. In this work, we propose a MultiExpert Adversarial Attack Detection (MEAAD) approach to
achieve this goal by checking context inconsistency, which
is suitable for any DNN-based ReID systems. Specifically,
three kinds of context inconsistencies caused by adversarial attacks are employed to learn a detector for distinguishing the perturbed examples, i.e., a) the embedding distances
between a perturbed query person image and its top-K retrievals are generally larger than those between a benign
query image and its top-K retrievals, b) the embedding distances among the top-K retrievals of a perturbed query image are larger than those of a benign query image, c) the
top-K retrievals of a benign query image obtained with multiple expert ReID models tend to be consistent, which is
not preserved when attacks are present. Extensive experiments on the Market1501 and DukeMTMC-ReID datasets
show that, as the first adversarial attack detection approach
for ReID, MEAAD effectively detects various adversarial attacks and achieves high ROC-AUC (over 97.5%).

1. Introduction
The success of DNNs has benefited a wide range of computer vision tasks, such as image classification [13, 16], object detection [12, 36], face recognition [34, 20], video classification [21, 47], and person ReID [50, 23, 14, 50, 33].
* Corresponding author: liu_min@hnu.edu.cn.
X. Wang was a visiting student at UCR in 2019-20.

Person ReID is a critical task aiming to retrieve pedestrians across multiple non-overlapping cameras. By learning the discriminative feature embedding and adaptive distance metric models, DNNs-based ReID models, in recent years, have extensive applications in video surveillance
or criminal identification for public safety. However, recent research has found that these models inherit the vulnerability of DNNs to adversarial examples [42, 45, 2, 8]
which are slightly perturbed input images but lead DNNs
to make wrong predictions [11, 39]. Detection of adversarial examples is, therefore, a fundamental requirement for
robust ReID systems because the insecurity of ReID systems may cause severe losses. However, ReID is defined
as a ranking problem rather than a classification problem
and thus existing defense methods for image classification
[6, 18, 30, 26, 28, 41] do not fit the person ReID problem.
In addition, the top-K retrievals output by person ReID
systems, compared to the prediction label in classification
task, contain richer information and can be potentially employed to detect adversarial attacks. To illustrate, let’s consider the top-10 retrievals obtained with five different stateof-the-art person ReID systems (LSRO [53], AlignedReID
[48], PCB [38], HACNN [23] and Mudeep [33]) of a query
sample before and after an adversarial attack in Fig. 1(a).
When considering the retrievals returned by a single ReID
system, e.g. LSRO, they are visually more similar to the
query image before attack than that after attack, and they
are visually more similar to each other before attack. When
considering the retrievals returned by different expert models, they are consistent before attack but certainly not after
attack. We did an empirical study as shown in Fig. 1(b) and
found that the embedding distance is able to reflect visual
similarity; specifically, the retrievals of the benign query
tend to gather together in the embedding space while the
retrievals of the perturbed query tend to spread over.
Inspired by these observations, we propose Multi-Expert

15097

