BiMaL: Bijective Maximum Likelihood Approach to
Domain Adaptation in Semantic Scene Segmentation
Thanh-Dat Truong1 , Chi Nhan Duong2 , Ngan Le1 , Son Lam Phung4 , Chase Rainwater3 , Khoa Luu1
1
CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas 2 Concordia University
3
Dep. of Industrial Engineering, University of Arkansas 4 University of Wollongong
{tt032, thile, cer, khoaluu}@uark.edu, dcnhan@ieee.org, phung@uow.edu.au

Abstract
Semantic segmentation aims to predict pixel-level labels.
It has become a popular task in various computer vision
applications. While fully supervised segmentation methods
have achieved high accuracy on large-scale vision datasets,
they are unable to generalize on a new test environment or a
new domain well. In this work, we first introduce a new Unaligned Domain Score to measure the efficiency of a learned
model on a new target domain in unsupervised manner.
Then, we present the new Bijective Maximum Likelihood1
(BiMaL) loss that is a generalized form of the Adversarial
Entropy Minimization without any assumption about pixel
independence. We have evaluated the proposed BiMaL on
two domains. The proposed BiMaL approach consistently
outperforms the SOTA methods on empirical experiments
on “SYNTHIA to Cityscapes”, “GTA5 to Cityscapes”, and
“SYNTHIA to Vistas”.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the most popular computer vision topics, which aims to to assign each pixel in an
image to a predefined class. It has various practical applications, especially in autonomous driving where a segmentation model is needed to recognize roads, sidewalks, pedestrians or vehicles in a large variety of urban conditions. A
typical supervised segmentation model is usually trained on
datasets with labels. However, annotating images for the
semantic segmentation task is costly and time-consuming.
Alternatively, a powerful and cost-effective way to acquire a
large-scale training set is to use a simulation, e.g. game engines, to create a synthetic dataset [42, 43]. However, fully
supervised models [3, 24] trained on the synthetic datasets
are often unable to perform well on real images due to the
pixel appearance gap between synthetic and real images.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to train
1 https://github.com/uark-cviu/BiMaL

a machine learning model on an annotated dataset, i.e. the
source, and guarantee its high performance on a new unlabeled dataset, i.e. the target. The UDA approaches have
been applied to various computer vision tasks such as Semantic Segmentation [3, 24, 26, 54, 55, 57], Face Recognition [12, 32, 33, 34, 35]. The recent UDA methods aim to
reduce the cross-domain discrepancy, along with the supervised training on the source domain [5, 16, 29, 40, 52, 54].
In particular, these methods aim to minimize the distribution discrepancy of the deep representations extracted from
the source and the target domains. This process can be performed at single or multiple levels of deep features using
maximum mean discrepancies [16, 29, 52], or adversarial
training [5, 6, 20, 21, 22, 50]. The approaches in this group
have shown their potential in aligning the predicted outputs of images from the two domains. However, the binary cross-entropy label predicted by the learned discriminator is usually a weak indication of structural learning
for the segmentation task. Another approach named selftraining utilizes the pseudo-labels or generative networks
conditioned on target images [37, 58]. Semi-supervised
learning is an approach related to UDA where the training
set consists of both labeled and unlabeled samples. Thus,
it has motivated several UDA approaches such as Classbalanced self-training (CBST) [60], and entropy minimization [4, 17, 40, 47, 54]. Although metrics such as entropy
can be efficiently computed and adopted for training, they
tend to rely on easy predictions, i.e. high confident scores,
as references for the label transfer from source to target domains. This issue is alleviated in a later approach [4] by
preventing learned models from over-focusing on high confident areas. However, this type of metrics is formulated in
pixel-wised manner, and, therefore, neglects the structural
information presented in the image (see Figure 1).
Contributions of this Work. This work presents a new
unsupervised domain adaptation approach to tackle the semantic segmentation problem. Table 1 summarizes the difference between our proposed approach and the prior ones.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows.

8548

