The surprising impact of mask-head architecture on novel class segmentation
Vighnesh Birodkar, Zhichao Lu, Siyang Li, Vivek Rathod, Jonathan Huang
Google
{vighneshb,lzc,siyang,rathodv,jonathanhuang}@google.com

Abstract
Instance segmentation models today are very accurate
when trained on large annotated datasets, but collecting mask annotations at scale is prohibitively expensive.
We address the partially supervised instance segmentation
problem in which one can train on (significantly cheaper)
bounding boxes for all categories but use masks only for a
subset of categories. In this work, we focus on a popular
family of models which apply differentiable cropping to a
feature map and predict a mask based on the resulting crop.
Under this family, we study Mask R-CNN and discover that
instead of its default strategy of training the mask-head with
a combination of proposals and groundtruth boxes, training the mask-head with only groundtruth boxes dramatically improves its performance on novel classes. This training strategy also allows us to take advantage of alternative
mask-head architectures, which we exploit by replacing the
typical mask-head of 2-4 layers with significantly deeper
off-the-shelf architectures (e.g. ResNet, Hourglass models).
While many of these architectures perform similarly when
trained in fully supervised mode, our main finding is that
they can generalize to novel classes in dramatically different ways. We call this ability of mask-heads to generalize to unseen classes the strong mask generalization effect
and show that without any specialty modules or losses, we
can achieve state-of-the-art results in the partially supervised COCO instance segmentation benchmark. Finally, we
demonstrate that our effect is general, holding across underlying detection methodologies (including anchor-based,
anchor-free or no detector at all) and across different backbone networks. Code and pre-trained models are available
at https://git.io/deepmac.

1. Introduction
Large labeled datasets like COCO [32] are crucial for
deep neural network based instance segmentation methods
[16, 3, 38]. However, collecting groundtruth masks can
take > 10× more time than bounding box annotations. In
COCO [32], mask annotations required ≈ 80 seconds on
average whereas methods such as Extreme Clicking [37]
yield bounding boxes in 7 seconds.

(a) ResNet-4

(b) ResNet-12

(c) ResNet-20

(d) Hourglass-20

Figure 1: The effect of mask-head architecture on mask predictions for
unseen classes. Despite never having seen masks from the ‘parking meter’,
‘pizza’ or ‘mobile phone’ class, the rightmost mask-head architecture can
segment these classes correctly. From left to right, we show better maskhead architectures predicting better masks. Moreover, this difference is
only apparent when evaluating on unseen classes — if we evaluate on seen
classes, all four architectures exhibit similar performance.

Given that boxes are much cheaper to annotate than
masks, we address the “partially supervised” instance segmentation problem [20], where all classes have bounding
box annotations but only a subset of classes have mask annotations. We will refer to classes with mask annotations as
“seen” categories and classes without as “unseen”. Doing
well on this task requires the model to generalize in a strong
sense, producing correct masks on unseen classes.
We consider a general family of crop-then-segment instance segmentation models where one extracts a feature
map over an image, then given a tight bounding box
around an instance, performs a differentiable crop (e.g.

7015

