End-to-End Urban Driving by Imitating a Reinforcement Learning Coach
Zhejun Zhang1 , Alexander Liniger1 , Dengxin Dai1,2 , Fisher Yu1 and Luc Van Gool1,3
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, 2 MPI for Informatics, 3 PSI, KU Leuven
{zhejun.zhang,alex.liniger,dai,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch, i@yf.io

Abstract

Driver

End-to-end approaches to autonomous driving commonly rely on expert demonstrations. Although humans are
good drivers, they are not good coaches for end-to-end algorithms that demand dense on-policy supervision. On the
contrary, automated experts that leverage privileged information can efficiently generate large scale on-policy and
off-policy demonstrations. However, existing automated experts for urban driving make heavy use of hand-crafted
rules and perform suboptimally even on driving simulators, where ground-truth information is available. To address these issues, we train a reinforcement learning expert
that maps bird’s-eye view images to continuous low-level
actions. While setting a new performance upper-bound on
CARLA, our expert is also a better coach that provides informative supervision signals for imitation learning agents
to learn from. Supervised by our reinforcement learning
coach, a baseline end-to-end agent with monocular camerainput achieves expert-level performance. Our end-to-end
agent achieves a 78% success rate while generalizing to a
new town and new weather on the NoCrash-dense benchmark and state-of-the-art performance on the more challenging CARLA LeaderBoard.

IL Agent

1. Introduction
Even though nowadays, most autonomous driving (AD)
stacks [30, 48] use individual modules for perception, planning and control, end-to-end approaches have been proposed since the 80’s [35] and the success of deep learning
brought them back into the research spotlight [5, 50]. Numerous works have studied different network architectures
for this task [3, 16, 52], yet most of these approaches use
supervised learning with expert demonstrations, which is
known to suffer from covariate shift [36, 40]. While data
augmentation based on view synthesis [2, 5, 35] can partially alleviate this issue, in this paper, we tackle the problem from the perspective of expert demonstrations.
Expert demonstrations are critical for end-to-end AD algorithms. While imitation learning (IL) methods directly

Simulation
Ground Truth

Actions

Strong
Supervisions

RL Coach

Actions

Expert
Figure 1: Roach: RL coach allows IL agents to benefit
from dense and informative on-policy supervisions.
mimic the experts’ behavior [3, 10], reinforcement learning (RL) methods often use expert demonstrations to improve sample efficiency by pre-training part of the model
via supervised learning [27, 47]. In general, expert demonstrations can be divided into two categories: (i) Off-policy,
where the expert directly controls the system, and the
state/observation distribution follows the expert. Off-policy
data for AD includes, for example, public driving datasets
[6, 22, 51]. (ii) On-policy, where the system is controlled
by the desired agent and the expert “labels” the data. In this
case, the state/observation distribution follows the agent,
but expert demonstrations are accessible. On-policy data
is fundamental to alleviate covariate shift as it allows the
agent to learn from its own mistakes, which the expert in the
off-policy data does not exhibit. However, collecting adequate on-policy demonstrations from humans is non-trivial.
While trajectories and actions taken by the human expert
can be directly recorded during off-policy data collection,
labeling these targets given sensor measurements turns out
to be a challenging task for humans. In practice, only sparse
events like human interventions are recorded, which, due to
the limited information it contains, is hard to use for training
and better suited for RL [2, 23, 24] than for IL methods.
In this work we focus on automated experts, which in

15222

