iPOKE: Poking a Still Image for Controlled Stochastic Video Synthesis
Andreas Blattmann1,2 Timo Milbich1,2 Michael Dorkenwald2 Björn Ommer1,2
1
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich 2 IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany

Abstract
How would a static scene react to a local poke? What
are the effects on other parts of an object if you could locally push it? There will be distinctive movement, despite
evident variations caused by the stochastic nature of our
world. These outcomes are governed by the characteristic kinematics of objects that dictate their overall motion
caused by a local interaction. Conversely, the movement of
an object provides crucial information about its underlying
distinctive kinematics and the interdependencies between
its parts. This two-way relation motivates learning a bijective mapping between object kinematics and plausible future
image sequences. Therefore, we propose iPOKE – invertible Prediction of Object Kinematics – that, conditioned on
an initial frame and a local poke, allows to sample object
kinematics and establishes a one-to-one correspondence to
the corresponding plausible videos, thereby providing a controlled stochastic video synthesis. In contrast to previous
works, we do not generate arbitrary realistic videos, but
provide efficient control of movements, while still capturing
the stochastic nature of our environment and the diversity of
plausible outcomes it entails. Moreover, our approach can
transfer kinematics onto novel object instances and is not
confined to particular object classes. Our project page is
available at https://bit.ly/3dJN4Lf.

1. Introduction
Imagine a 3-year-old standing next to a stacked pyramid
of glasses in a shop. Can you sense the urge to pull one
glass out—just to observe what happens. We have an inborn
curiosity to understand how the world around us reacts to our
actions, so we can eventually imagine and predict their outcome beforehand. This ability to predict is the prerequisite
for targeted, goal-oriented interaction with our world rather
than random manipulation of our environment. Once we
are older, we have also learned to generalize and predict the
dynamics of previously unseen objects when they are pulled
or poked; and the less audacious have understood that it is
often more effective to have others do daring experiments
like the one above (and pay the bill) while they are learning
by merely watching the outcome. While such experiments

Figure 1. iPOKE: Conditioned on a local poke controlling desired
object motion in a static image, our invertible model learns a representation of the remaining object kinematics for arbitrary object
classes. Once learned, our framework allows users to locally control intended movements while sampling diverse realistic motion
for the remainder of the object and to even transfer kinematics to
unseen object instances.

are not just fun to watch, they also help to imagine the many
possible outcomes caused by the stochastic nature of the
many factors beyond our control.
Given a single static image, how can an artificial vision system imagine, i.e. synthesize, the many possible outcomes
when locally manipulating the scene? It needs to learn how
a local poke affects different parts of an object and the resulting kinematics [49]. Conditioned on only the start frame
and the displacement of a single pixel, we want to synthesize
multiple videos, each showing the different plausible future
dynamics. To render this generative, stochastic approach
widely applicable, training should only require videos of
objects in motion, but no ground truth information regarding
the forces acting on an object such as a local poke. The
representation of the kinematics should then generalize to
similar objects not seen during training in contrast to instance
specific models [15]. Moreover, the method should work
for arbitrary objects, rather than being tuned to just a single
class [1, 21]. Therefore, no prior motion model is available,
but all kinematics have to be learned from the unannotated

14707

