Semantic Diversity Learning for Zero-Shot Multi-label Classification
Avi Ben-Cohen Nadav Zamir Emanuel Ben Baruch Itamar Friedman Lihi Zelnik-Manor
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{avi.bencohen, nadav.zamir, emanuel.benbaruch, itamar.friedman, lihi.zelnik}
@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Training a neural network model for recognizing multiple labels associated with an image, including identifying unseen labels, is challenging, especially for images that
portray numerous semantically diverse labels. As challenging as this task is, it is an essential task to tackle since it
represents many real-world cases, such as image retrieval
of natural images. We argue that using a single embedding vector to represent an image, as commonly practiced,
is not sufficient to rank both relevant seen and unseen labels accurately. This study introduces an end-to-end model
training for multi-label zero-shot learning that supports the
semantic diversity of the images and labels. We propose
to use an embedding matrix having principal embedding
vectors trained using a tailored loss function. In addition,
during training, we suggest up-weighting in the loss function image samples presenting higher semantic diversity to
encourage the diversity of the embedding matrix. Extensive experiments show that our proposed method improves
the zero-shot model’s quality in tag-based image retrieval
achieving SoTA results on several common datasets (NUSWide, COCO, Open Images).

Figure 1: Our model extracts a set of principal embedding
vectors used as a transformation matrix Ai where each row
sets a ranking principal direction for labels in the word vector space based on their relevance. By using multiple directions, it can deal with multiple diverse image semantic
concepts. In addition, we propose that images with larger
semantic diversity (top images) should be up-weighted during training compared to ones with lower semantic diversity
(bottom images).

1. Introduction
Identifying all the relevant labels that describe the objects or scene in an image is an essential task in computer
vision real-world applications. With the ongoing increase of
photos stored online comes a growing need for better image
tagging and tag-based retrieval for various use cases such
as search, organization, or data collection. Recent datasets
in this field made progress in this direction by including a
large number of classes with annotations of their presence
in each image. Yet, annotating a large number of classes
for many images, each with high semantic diversity, can
be very time-consuming and practically infeasible for realworld applications. Although current conventional multilabel classification methods can deal with a large number of
classes, they are still limited by the annotated (seen) set of

labels provided with the datasets.
On the other hand, Zero-shot (ZS) learning for multilabel classification adds the ability to recognize labels from
additional categories that do not exist during training (unseen). This is usually done by transferring knowledge between the seen and unseen labels. In most cases, a text
model [5, 32, 36] is used to transfer this knowledge using
word vectors. Then, a visual model is trained, learning a
transformation between the visual space and the word vector label space.
Most studies on ZS classification focus on the single label problem, i.e., recognizing a single unseen label in each
image [1, 11, 14, 25, 29, 34, 50, 57, 53, 51, 52]. However,
a single label per image does not provide a full description

640

