Learning to Diversify for Single Domain Generalization
Zijian Wang

Yadan Luo

Ruihong Qiu Zi Huang Mahsa Baktashmotlagh
University of Queesland
{zijian.wang, y.luo, r.qiu, m.baktashmotlagh}@uq.edu.au, huang@itee.uq.edu.au

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) aims to generalize a model
trained on multiple source (i.e., training) domains to a distributionally different target (i.e., test) domain. In contrast to the conventional DG that strictly requires the availability of multiple source domains, this paper considers
a more realistic yet challenging scenario, namely Single Domain Generalization (Single-DG), where only one
source domain is available for training. In this scenario,
the limited diversity may jeopardize the model generalization on unseen target domains. To tackle this problem, we propose a style-complement module to enhance
the generalization power of the model by synthesizing images from diverse distributions that are complementary to
the source ones. More specifically, we adopt a tractable
upper bound of mutual information (MI) between the generated and source samples and perform a two-step optimization iteratively: (1) by minimizing the MI upper
bound approximation for each sample pair, the generated
images are forced to be diversified from the source samples; (2) subsequently, we maximize the MI between the
samples from the same semantic category, which assists
the network to learn discriminative features from diversestyled images. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach,
which surpasses the state-of-the-art single-DG methods by
up to 25.14%. The code will be publicly available at
https://github.com/BUserName/Learning to diversify

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of modern machine learning algorithms is built on the assumption that the source (i.e.,
training) and target (i.e., test) samples are drawn from similar distributions. In practice, this assumption is commonly
violated by various factors, such as the changes of illuminations, object appearance, or background, which are known
as the domain shift problem [36, 3]. Due to the discrepancy
across domains, the performance of a model trained on the
source domain can be significantly degraded when applied

to the target domain.
To tackle this problem, extensive research has been carried out mainly on domain adaptation and domain generalization. Domain adaptation aims to transfer the knowledge from the labeled source domain(s) to an unlabeled target domain [45, 1, 26, 13], while domain generalization attempts to generalize a model to an unseen target domain
by learning from multiple source domains [34, 42, 10, 42].
Compared with domain adaptation, domain generalization
(DG) is considered as a more challenging task as the target samples are not exposed in the training phase. Regarding different strategies for transferring knowledge from
source domains to the unseen target domain, existing DG
techniques can be subsumed under two broad categories,
i.e., alignment-based [2, 11, 33] and augmentation-based
[5, 17, 44, 50, 47]. Technically, alignment-based approaches aim to reach the consensus from multiple source
domains and learn domain-invariant latent representations
for the target domain. Augmentation-based approaches
learn to augment the source images with different transformations or generate the pseudo-novel samples for each
source domain.
In general, the paradigm of DG relies on the availability
of multiple source domains. However, it is more plausible
to consider a more realistic scenario namely single domain
generalization (Single-DG), where only one source domain
is at hand during training. Despite DG has been extensively
studied, single-DG remains under-explored. It is nontrivial
for prior DG methods to handle this new setting, as the samples gathered from multiple sources and the domain identifiers are no longer accessible. Without the domain information to rely on, neither alignment-based nor augmentationbased models could well identify the domain-invariant features or transformations that are robust to unseen target domain shifts. Very recently, a few works [37, 49] are proposed that learn to add adversarial noises on the source images in order to train robust classifiers against unforeseen
data shifts. While contributing positively to address the
model vulnerability, the manipulated images are indistinguishable from the original source images, which are not
sufficiently diverse to cover the real target distributions.

834

