Generating Smooth Pose Sequences for Diverse Human Motion Prediction
Wei Mao1 , Miaomiao Liu1 , Mathieu Salzmann2,3
1
Australian National University; 2 CVLab, EPFL; 3 ClearSpace, Switzerland
{wei.mao, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch
Controllable Motion Prediction

Diverse Motion Prediction

0s

0s

t

t

Figure 1: Diverse and controllable motion prediction. Given a past human motion, shown with blue and red skeletons, our
model can predict diverse future motions, as shown in the red box. It also allows us to produce future motions with the same
lower-body motion but diverse upper-body ones, i.e., to perform controllable motion prediction, as shown in the blue box.

Abstract
Recent progress in stochastic motion prediction, i.e., predicting multiple possible future human motions given a single past pose sequence, has led to producing truly diverse
future motions and even providing control over the motion
of some body parts. However, to achieve this, the state-ofthe-art method requires learning several mappings for diversity and a dedicated model for controllable motion prediction. In this paper, we introduce a unified deep generative network for both diverse and controllable motion
prediction. To this end, we leverage the intuition that realistic human motions consist of smooth sequences of valid
poses, and that, given limited data, learning a pose prior
is much more tractable than a motion one. We therefore design a generator that predicts the motion of different body parts sequentially, and introduce a normalizing flow based pose prior, together with a joint angle loss,
to achieve motion realism. Our experiments on two standard benchmark datasets, Human3.6M and HumanEva-I,
demonstrate that our approach outperforms the state-ofthe-art baselines in terms of both sample diversity and accuracy. The code is available at https://github.com/
wei-mao-2019/gsps

1. Introduction
Predicting future human motions from historical pose sequences has broad applications in autonomous driving [41],
animation creation in the game industry [50] and human
robot interaction [32]. Most existing work focuses on deterministic prediction, namely, predicting only the most likely

future sequence [16, 40, 34, 38, 37]. However, future human motion is naturally diverse, especially over a long-term
horizon (> 1s).
Most of the few attempts to produce diverse future motion predictions exploit variational autoencoders (VAEs) to
model the multi-modal data distribution [51, 54, 4]. These
VAEs-based models are trained to maximize the motion
likelihood. As a consequence, and as discussed in [55],
because training data cannot cover all possible diverse motions, test-time sampling tends to concentrate on the major
data distribution modes, ignoring the minor ones, and thus
limiting the diversity of the output. To address this Yuan
et al. [55] proposed to learn multiple mapping functions,
which produce multiple predictions that are explicitly encouraged to be diverse. While this framework indeed yields
high diversity, it requires training several mappings in parallel, and separates the training of such mappings from that of
the VAE it employs for prediction. Furthermore, while the
approach was shown to be applicable to controllable motion
prediction, doing so requires training a dedicated model and
does not guarantee the controlled part of the motion, e.g.,
the lower body, to be truly fixed to the same motion in different predictions as the remaining body parts vary.
In this paper, we introduce an end-to-end trainable approach for diverse motion prediction that does not require
learning several mappings to achieve diversity. Our framework yields fully controllable motion prediction; one can
strictly fix the motion of one portion of the human body and
generate diverse predictions for the other portion only.
To this end, we rely on the observation that diverse future motions are composed of valid human poses organized in smooth sequences. Therefore, instead of learn-

13309

