Self-Mutual Distillation Learning for Continuous Sign Language Recognition
Aiming Hao1,2 , Yuecong Min1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
{aiming.hao,yuecong.min}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, xlchen@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
In recent years, deep learning moves video-based Continuous Sign Language Recognition (CSLR) significantly
forward. Currently, a typical network combination for
CSLR includes a visual module, which focuses on spatial
and short-temporal information, followed by a contextual
module, which focuses on long-temporal information, and
the Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss is
adopted to train the network. However, due to the limitation of chain rules in back-propagation, the visual module
is hard to adjust for seeking optimized visual features. As a
result, it enforces that the contextual module focuses on contextual information optimization only rather than balancing
efficient visual and contextual information. In this paper,
we propose a Self-Mutual Knowledge Distillation (SMKD)
method, which enforces the visual and contextual modules
to focus on short-term and long-term information and enhances the discriminative power of both modules simultaneously. Specifically, the visual and contextual modules share
the weights of their corresponding classifiers, and train with
CTC loss simultaneously. Moreover, the spike phenomenon
widely exists with CTC loss. Although it can help us choose
a few of the key frames of a gloss, it does drop other frames
in a gloss and makes the visual feature saturation in the
early stage. A gloss segmentation is developed to relieve
the spike phenomenon and decrease saturation in the visual module. We conduct experiments on two CSLR benchmarks: PHOENIX14 and PHOENIX14-T. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the SMKD.

1. Introduction
As spoken language in speaking-hearing person’s daily
conversation, sign language plays the most important role
for hearing-impaired person’s communication. Sign language is used by millions of people all over the world.
Different to spoken language, sign language conveys meaning by manual elements (e.g., hand configuration) and non-

Contextual
Module

Visual
Module
T

Contextual Features

Visual Features
Weight Vectors

T

Gloss
Segmentation

T

Shared-Classifier
HEUTE

BLANK

Gloss
Recognition

NACHT

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed SMKD method. With the
help of the shared-classifier, the visual and contextual modules are
attempted to align the features at gloss level. This makes the two
modules focus more on spatial-temporal information. To explore
the short-term temporal information, a gloss segmentation is proposed into the visual module.

manual elements (e.g., facial expressions) [24], and has
its own vocabulary and grammar. These characters make
speaking-hearing person hard to understand sign language.
Automatic Sign Language Recognition (SLR) provides a
bridge to overcome this gap.
Different to the video-based isolated SLR, which recognizes a gloss-wise clip into its corresponding gloss (i.e.,
written words that represent signs), video-based Continuous
Sign Language Recognition (CSLR) is a much more complicated task that aims to translate a sign language video
into its corresponding sign gloss sequence. Due to the enormous cost of creating frame-level annotations, most CSLR
dataset only has sentence-level annotations, and researchers
often treat video-based CSLR as a weakly supervised problem [6, 3]. This further increases the difficulty of the task.
To address these problems, some recent works [6, 26] adopt
a deep network to deal with the video-based CSLR. The network consists of a visual module to extract the short-term
spatial-temporal information of the input sequence and followed by a contextual module to encode the long-term contextual information. To train the designed network, the Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) [9] loss is used

11303

