Compressing Visual-linguistic Model via Knowledge Distillation
Zhiyuan Fang♠ , Jianfeng Wang♡ , Xiaowei Hu♡ , Lijuan Wang♡ , Yezhou Yang♠ , Zicheng Liu♡
♠

Arizona State University,

♡

Downstream
VL Distillation

Task-Head

Transfm. Block

…

Transfm. Block

StudentVLM

Task-Head

Pre-training Finetuning
VL Distillation

Transformer Block

Finetuned TeacherVLM
…

Transformer Block

Adaptation

…

https://asu-active-perception-group.github.io/
DistillVLM

Adapted TeacherVLM
…

There have been exciting progress in visual linguistic (VL) pre-training to learn omni-representation models [44, 60, 9, 64, 83, 42] which could benefit a number
of downstream tasks (i.e. , image captioning, VQA, image
retrieval, etc.). The success can largely be attributed to
the self-attention-based [68] transformer architecture, e.g. ,
BERT [14], which is effective in learning from image-text

…

1. Introduction

Transformer Block

TeacherVLM

Abstract
Despite exciting progress in pre-training for visuallinguistic (VL) representations, very few aspire to a small
VL model. In this paper, we study knowledge distillation
(KD) to effectively compress a transformer based large VL
model into a small VL model. The major challenge arises
from the inconsistent regional visual tokens extracted from
different detectors of Teacher and Student, resulting in the
misalignment of hidden representations and attention distributions. To address the problem, we retrain and adapt
the Teacher by using the same region proposals from Student’s detector while the features are from Teacher’s own
object detector. With aligned network inputs, the adapted
Teacher is capable of transferring the knowledge through
the intermediate representations. Specifically, we use the
mean square error loss to mimic the attention distribution
inside the transformer block, and present a token-wise noise
contrastive loss to align the hidden state by contrasting with
negative representations stored in a sample queue. To this
end, we show that our proposed distillation significantly improves the performance of small VL models on image captioning and visual question answering tasks. It reaches
120.8 in CIDEr score on COCO captioning, an improvement of 5.1 over its non-distilled counterpart; and an accuracy of 69.8 on VQA 2.0, a 0.8 gain from the baseline. Our
extensive experiments and ablations confirm the effectiveness of VL distillation in both pre-training and fine-tuning
stages.

Microsoft Corporation

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed VL distillation schema. The
VL model typically contains a region feature extraction module
and a multi-modal transformer module. To have an aligned input,
we adapt the Teacher VL model based on the region proposals
from Student’s region feature extractor. The VL distillation is then
performed in both the pre-training stage and the fine-tuning stage.

pairs at scale. So far, much of the work has focused on
large models that suffer from high latency and large memory footprints at the time of inference, which limits their
deployment to resource constrained edge devices for realworld applications.
As one of the effective techniques to compress large
models, knowledge distillation (KD) [25, 6] was proposed
by injecting the knowledge from a strong Teacher model
into a smaller Student model without losing too much generalization power. Typically, the knowledge is transferred
though mimicking the output logit [25, 57, 17], reducing
the divergence of feature maps [80, 27, 78], or learning the
intermediate layer representations [36, 1], etc.
In recent years, KD has been proven effective in compressing language models. For instance, Kim et al. [35]
adopt KD for sequential model compression. In the transformer based language model, DistillBERT [57] reduces
the size of the BERT-base model by 40% using a cosine
embedding loss on the basis of hidden embedding in the
transformer block, and a soft-target probability loss. TinyBERT [34], MobileBERT [63] and MiniLM [72] further
highlight the importance of minimizing the self-attention

1428

