Lightweight Multi-person Total Motion Capture
Using Sparse Multi-view Cameras
Yuxiang Zhang, Zhe Li, Liang An, Mengcheng Li, Tao Yu*, Yebin Liu*
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Multi-person total motion capture is extremely challenging when it comes to handle severe occlusions, different reconstruction granularities from body to face and
hands, drastically changing observation scales and fast
body movements. To overcome these challenges above, we
contribute a lightweight total motion capture system for
multi-person interactive scenarios using only sparse multiview cameras. By contributing a novel hand and face bootstrapping algorithm, our method is capable of efficient localization and accurate association of the hands and faces
even on severe occluded occasions. We leverage both pose
regression and keypoints detection methods and further
propose a unified two-stage parametric fitting method for
achieving pixel-aligned accuracy. Moreover, for extremely
self-occluded poses and close interactions, a novel feedback
mechanism is proposed to propagate the pixel-aligned reconstructions into the next frame for more accurate association. Overall, we propose the first light-weight total capture
system and achieves fast, robust and accurate multi-person
total motion capture performance. The results and experiments show that our method achieves more accurate results
than existing methods under sparse-view setups.

1. Introduction
Marker-less motion capture, due to its great potentials
for behaviour understanding, sports analysis, human animation, video editing and virtual reality, has been a popular
research topic in computer vision and graphics for decades.
Within this research field, total motion capture, pioneered
by [22] using an extremely dense-view setup (hundreds
of cameras), shows impressive results of simultaneous capture of multi-person total interactive behaviours including
facial expressions, body and hand poses, and has aroused
widespread interest in computer vision community. However, this work [22] suffers from expensive and sophisticated hardware setup and low run-time efficiency.
Recently, to reduce the capture complexity, more and
more researches try to perform total motion capture from
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Our lightweight total capture system produces expressive
human models with sparse multi-view cameras.

only a single image or video [41, 55, 13, 45, 35, 64]. By
either optimizing a parametric models like SMPL-X [41]
and Adam [22] ( [55]) or regressing the model parameters directly from the input images [13], these methods
even achieve real-time total motion capture performance for
single-person [45, 64]. However, it remains difficult for the
monocular methods to handle severe occlusions and challenging poses under multi-person interactive scenarios.
To guarantee both lightweight setups and robust performance, we propose the first lightweight total capture system
using only sparse multi-view cameras. However, extending
the existing monocular total capture methods to sparse-view
multi-person total capture is not trivial. Although the incorporation of multi-view observations may resolve the depth
ambiguities for monocular methods, the severe occlusions
caused by complex-poses and multi-person interactions will
significantly deteriorate the performance for current total
capture methods. Specifically, the main challenges include:
i) hand/face association across multiple views under drastically changing observation scales and unstable detection
results, ii) pixel-aligned fitting between the reconstructed
3D model and the input images, and iii) robust and accurate
body association under severe occlusions even for close interactions. To resolve all the challenges above, we propose,
as far as we know, the first method to achieve fast, robust
and accurate multi-person total motion capture using only
light-weight sparse-view cameras.
First of all, compared with the relatively fixed body part
scales and satisfactory occlusion-free view point in monocular single-person total capture cases [41, 55, 13, 45, 64],

5560

