Structure-from-Sherds: Incremental 3D Reassembly of Axially Symmetric Pots
from Unordered and Mixed Fragment Collections
Je Hyeong Hong* †
KIST, Hanyang University

Seong Jong Yoo*
KIST

Muhammad Zeeshan Arshad
KIST

jhh37@hanyang.ac.kr

yoosj@kist.re.kr

zeeshan@kist.re.kr

Young Min Kim
Seoul National University

Jinwook Kim†
KIST

youngmin.kim@snu.ac.kr

zinook@kist.re.kr

Abstract
Re-assembling multiple pots accurately from numerous
3D scanned fragments remains a challenging task to this
date. Previous methods extract all potential matching pairs
of pot sherds and considers them simultaneously to search
for an optimal global pot configuration. In this work, we
empirically show such global approach greatly suffers from
false positive matches between sherds inflicted by indistinctive sharp fracture surfaces in pot fragments. To mitigate
this problem, we take inspirations from the field of structurefrom-motion (SfM), where many pipelines have matured in
reconstructing a 3D scene from multiple images. Motivated
by the success of the incremental approach in robust SfM,
we present an efficient reassembly method for axially symmetric pots based on iterative registration of one sherd at
a time. Our method goes beyond replicating incremental SfM and addresses indistinguishable false matches by
embracing beam search to explore multitudes of registration possibilities. Additionally, we utilize multiple roots
in each step to allow simultaneous reassembly of multiple
pots. The proposed approach shows above 80% reassembly accuracy on a dataset of real 80 fragments mixed from
5 pots, pushing the state-of-the-art and paving the way towards the goal of large-scale pot reassembly. Our code and
preprocessed data is available at https://github.com/
SeongJong-Yoo/structure-from-sherds.

1. Introduction
Ceramic pots are fundamental cultural relics in human
history. Most of them are made on a spinning wheel, encompassing axial symmetry. While they provide meaningful information to understanding ancestral lifestyles, many
pots are excavated as broken pieces (known as sherds), ne* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Co-corresponding authors

A

B

C

D

E

Figure 1. An illustration of 5 real pots simultaneously reassembled from 80 unclustered sherds (3D point clouds) using our
pipeline. It can handle some degree of non-axially symmetric decorations on the pot surface as shown in pot C. Ground truth (manually restored) pot images are shown above each reassembly result.

cessitating accurate reassembly from these sherds for the
purpose of recovering historical records.
Currently, the process of reassembly is relied upon extensive manual efforts from restoration experts. Despite
years of experience, however, reconstructing each pot can
often require hours of concentration even for the qualified
professionals as fragments are mixed from multiple pots.
Furthermore, pieces are fitted on a trial-and-error basis, potentially incurring undesired abrasions on the break surfaces
of sherds. These motivate strong need for an efficient framework that can virtually reassemble axially symmetric pots.
Recent studies have proposed pipelines [18, 13] majorly
comprising 3 stages, first extracting features from each pot
sherd, second computing potential matches between each
pair of sherds, and last performing global combinatorial
optimization to deduce the most likely 3D pot configuration from these matches. These are known as global
approaches since the last stage can be viewed as finding
true positive sherd matches from the global pot configuration graph. Nevertheless, our effort of implementing such
pipeline raises an inherent issue illustrated in Fig. 2, that a

5443

