Fast Video Moment Retrieval
Junyu Gao1,2 and Changsheng Xu1,2,3
National Lab of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
1

{junyu.gao, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

50

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video Moment Retrieval (VMR) aims to localize a temporal segment from an untrimmed video, as queried by a
natural language sentence [14, 1]. It plays a crucial role in
video understanding and has various downstream applications such as robotic navigation, autonomous driving, video
entertainment, and so forth. Despite great successes in recent years [63, 57, 65, 40, 62, 64, 38], effective VMR remains challenging due to many factors including complex
video scenes, ﬁne-grained semantic query structures, and
huge cross-modal gap between visual and textual features.

澵濗濗濩濦濕濗濭澔澜澙澝

This paper targets at fast video moment retrieval (fast
VMR), aiming to localize the target moment efﬁciently and
accurately as queried by a given natural language sentence.
We argue that most existing VMR approaches can be divided into three modules namely video encoder, text encoder,
and cross-modal interaction module, where the last module
is the test-time computational bottleneck. To tackle this issue, we replace the cross-modal interaction module with a
cross-modal common space, in which moment-query alignment is learned and efﬁcient moment search can be performed. For the sake of robustness in the learned space,
we propose a ﬁne-grained semantic distillation framework
to transfer knowledge from additional semantic structures.
Speciﬁcally, we build a semantic role tree that decomposes
a query sentence into different phrases (subtrees). A hierarchical semantic-guided attention module is designed to perform message propagation across the whole tree and yield
discriminative features. Finally, the important and discriminative semantics are transferred to the common space by a
matching-score distillation process. Extensive experimental
results on three popular VMR benchmarks demonstrate that
our proposed method enjoys the merits of high speed and
signiﬁcant performance.

濁濙濨濜濣濘濧
澦澸澡濈澵濂澜澵澵澵澽瀁澦澤澝
澸濆濂澜澷濊濄濆瀁澦澤澝
激澻澽澜澷濊濄濆瀁澦澤澝
濊濇激濂濙濨澜澵澷激瀁澦澤澝
澷澶濄澜澵澵澵澽瀁澦澤澝
濈濁激澻澵澜濋澵澷濊瀁澦澤澝
濇澷澸濁澜濂濙濩濦澽濄濇瀁澥澭澝
澷濈濆激澜澽澷澷濊瀁澥澫澝
澺濊濁濆澜濃濩濦濧澝

TACos: R1@0.3
ANetCap: R1@0.5

45

40

35

30

澸濕濨濕濧濙濨濧

25

澵濂濙濨澷濕濤
20

0

5

10

20

25

50

200

350

500

750

2100

濈澵澷濣濧

濈濙濧濨澔濈濝濡濙澔澜濡濧澝

Figure 1. Test time and accuracy plot of state-of-the-art VMR
approaches on TACos and ActivityNet Captions (ANetCap). We
report the metrics R1@0.3 and R1@0.5 for the two datasets respectively. Our proposed FVMR achieves the best accuracy-speed
balance among all the competitors. Best viewed in color.

To tackle the above challenges, the current state-of-theart VMR pipeline can be divided into three modules namely video encoder, text encoder, and cross-modal interaction
module. The ﬁrst two encoders utilize convolutional neural
networks (e.g. C3D [49] or I3D [4]) and recurrent neural
networks (e.g. BiLSTM [27] or GRU [12]) to extract visual
and textual features respectively. Then, to predict the target
moment, the cross-modal interaction module is designed to
jointly consider both modalities by using different architectures such as cross attention [36, 35, 7, 64], graph neural
networks [63, 67, 42], and temporal adjacent networks [65].
Despite the above achievements, we emphasize, fast
video moment retrieval (fast VMR) is in fact often necessary, since localizing the target moment is usually employed
only as a part of time-critical video retrieval systems. For
example, to localize moments in a video corpus [46, 30], it
usually requires us to perform efﬁcient VMR on hundreds
to thousands of candidate videos for a given natural language query. Also, fast video moment retrieval on embedded devices may enable many additional applications, such
as intelligent robot service and smart home [68]. However,
as shown in Figure 1, high-speed and effective VMR algorithms remain scarce. Taking the recently state-of-the-art

1523

