Box-Aware Feature Enhancement for Single Object Tracking on Point Clouds
Chaoda Zheng1,† , Xu Yan1,† , Jiantao Gao2 , Weibing Zhao1 , Wei Zhang3 , Zhen Li1, *, Shuguang Cui1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
2
Research Institute of USV Engineering, Shanghai University, 3 Baidu Inc

Abstract

1. Introduction
Single object tracking (SOT) in 3D scene has a broad
spectrum of practical applications, such as autonomous
driving [20], semantic understanding [38, 37] and assistive
robotics [21, 7]. Given a 3D bounding box (BBox) of an
object as the template in the first frame, the SOT task is to
keep track of this object across all frames. In real scenes,
LiDAR becomes a popular 3D sensor due to its precise measurement, reasonable cost and insensitivity to ambient light
variations. In this paper, we focus on SOT on LiDAR data,
which can be viewed as 3D point clouds in general.
Due to the moving environment and self-occlusion, point
* Corresponding author: Zhen Li. † Equal first authorship.
1 https://github.com/Ghostish/BAT

!#

different boxes

Current 3D single object tracking approaches track the
target based on a feature comparison between the target
template and the search area. However, due to the common occlusion in LiDAR scans, it is non-trivial to conduct
accurate feature comparisons on severe sparse and incomplete shapes. In this work, we exploit the ground truth
bounding box given in the first frame as a strong cue to enhance the feature description of the target object, enabling
a more accurate feature comparison in a simple yet effective way. In particular, we first propose the BoxCloud, an
informative and robust representation, to depict an object
using the point-to-box relation. We further design an efficient box-aware feature fusion module, which leverages the
aforementioned BoxCloud for reliable feature matching and
embedding. Integrating the proposed general components
into an existing model P2B [27], we construct a superior
box-aware tracker (BAT)1 . Experiments confirm that our
proposed BAT outperforms the previous state-of-the-art by
a large margin on both KITTI and NuScenes benchmarks,
achieving a 12.8% improvement in terms of precision while
running ∼20% faster.

!"

similar shapes

{chaodazheng@link., xuyan1@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn

Template

!"

!#

!"

!#

short car

long car

Figure 1. Motivation behind BAT. Partial scans of two different
cars (i.e. c1, c2) collected by a LiDAR sensor both have highly
similar shapes with the target template (1st row), though their 3D
BBoxes are quite different in size (2nd row). With explicit consideration of object bounding-boxes, our method can elegantly overcome such ambiguities.

clouds generated by a LiDAR system are inevitably irregular and incomplete, making the SOT task very challenging.
In 3D SOT, feature comparison plays an important role. The
general idea to locate the target object is based on measuring the feature similarity between some candidate regions
and the object template (initialized as the point cloud in the
first given BBox). For example, SC3D [13] uses the exhaustive search or Kalman Filter to generate a set of candidate shapes at the current frame, and comparing them to the
template using a siamese network. The candidate with the
maximum similarity is chosen to be the target object for the
frame. Inspired by the success of the siamese region proposal network (RPN) [17] in 2D SOT, P2B [27] proposes a
point-based correlation based on the pair-wise feature comparison. P2B executes such a correlation between the template and the search area to output the target-specific search
features, on which a 3D RPN is applied to obtain the final
target proposals. However, the features used for comparison are extracted from pure LiDAR point clouds, which
face the following defects: 1) They do not encode the size
information of objects. Since objects in LiDAR scans are
mostly incomplete, it is hard to infer an object’s size only
from the partial point cloud. 2) They cannot capture the
explicit part-aware structure information within each object

13199

