SOTR: Segmenting Objects with Transformers
Ruohao Guo* 1,3 , Dantong Niu* 2 , Liao Qu1,3 , and Zhenbo Li†1,3,4
1

College of Information and Electrical Engineering, China Agricultural University
2
EECS department, University of California, Berkeley
3
Key Laboratory of Agricultural Information Acquisition Technology, Ministry of Agriculture
4
National Innovation Center for Digital Fishery, China Agricultural University

Abstract
Most recent transformer-based models show impressive
performance on vision tasks, even better than Convolution Neural Networks (CNN). In this work, we present a
novel, flexible, and effective transformer-based model for
high-quality instance segmentation. The proposed method,
Segmenting Objects with TRansformers (SOTR), simplifies
the segmentation pipeline, building on an alternative CNN
backbone appended with two parallel subtasks: (1) predicting per-instance category via transformer and (2) dynamically generating segmentation mask with the multi-level upsampling module. SOTR can effectively extract lower-level
feature representations and capture long-range context dependencies by Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) and twin
transformer, respectively. Meanwhile, compared with the
original transformer, the proposed twin transformer is timeand resource-efficient since only a row and a column attention are involved to encode pixels. Moreover, SOTR is
easy to be incorporated with various CNN backbones and
transformer model variants to make considerable improvements for the segmentation accuracy and training convergence. Extensive experiments show that our SOTR performs
well on the MS COCO dataset and surpasses state-of-theart instance segmentation approaches. We hope our simple but strong framework could serve as a preferment baseline for instance-level recognition. Our code is available at
https://github.com/easton-cau/SOTR.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation, a fundamental task in computer
vision, requires the correct prediction of each object instance and its per-pixel segmentation mask in an image.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. E-mail: lizb@cau.edu.cn

Figure 1: Selected output of SOTR. We combine CNN
with transformer and obtain competitive qualitative results.
Notice that not only are larger objects well delineated, targets with elaborate shapes can also get nice segmentation.
It becomes more challenging because of the contiguously
increasing demands for precise separation of instances in
complicated scenes with dense objects and accurate prediction of their masks at the pixel level. Modern instance segmentation approaches [24, 15] are typically built on CNN
and follow the detect-then-segment paradigm, which consists of a detector used to identify and locate all objects,
and a mask branch to generate segmentation masks. The
success of this segmentation philosophy is attributed to the
following favorable merits, i.e. translation equivariance and
location, but faces the following obstacles: 1) CNN relatively lacks features’ coherence in high-level visual semantic information to associate instances due to the limited receptive field, leading to the sub-optimal results on large objects; 2) Both the segmentation quality and inference speed
rely heavily on the object detector, incurring inferior performance in complex scenarios.
To overcome these drawbacks, many recent studies tend
to escape from the detect-then-segment manner toward
bottom-up strategy [29, 31], which learns per-pixel embedding and instance-aware features, and then uses post-

7157

