Weakly Supervised Human-Object Interaction Detection in Video via
Contrastive Spatiotemporal Regions
Shuang Li1∗

Yilun Du1
1

Antonio Torralba1
MIT 2 CIIRC CTU

3

Josef Sivic2 Bryan Russell3
Adobe

https://shuangli-project.github.io/weakly-supervised-human-object-detection-video

Abstract
We introduce the task of weakly supervised learning for
detecting human and object interactions in videos. Our
task poses unique challenges as a system does not know
what types of human-object interactions are present in a
video or the actual spatiotemporal location of the human
and the object. To address these challenges, we introduce
a contrastive weakly supervised training loss that aims to
jointly associate spatiotemporal regions in a video with an
action and object vocabulary and encourage temporal continuity of the visual appearance of moving objects as a
form of self-supervision. To train our model, we introduce
a dataset comprising over 6.5k videos with human-object
interaction annotations that have been semi-automatically
curated from sentence captions associated with the videos.
We demonstrate improved performance over weakly supervised baselines adapted to our task on our video dataset.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the problem of weakly supervised human-object interaction detection in videos. Given
a video sequence, as illustrated in Figure 1, a system must
correctly identify and localize the person and interacted object (“bike”) in the scene, in addition to identifying the action (“washing”) taken by the human, for the duration of
the interaction in the video without bounding box supervision. While there has been an impressive progress in learning visual-language representations [32, 21, 25] from hundreds of millions of captioned images or videos recently,
the learnt representations focus on classifying or retrieving
entire images or videos given a language query. Our task is
more challenging as it requires the models to correctly detect both the human and object bounding boxes in multiple
frames of the video.
2 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the
Czech Technical University in Prague
∗ Work done at Adobe Research during SL’s summer internship

Figure 1: We seek to detect human-object interactions in videos.
In this example, our system is able to detect “human washing bike”
in the given video. Our approach learns to detect such interactions
in a weakly supervised fashion, i.e., without requiring bounding
box annotations at training time. (Video credit: Dude Chennai [6])

Human-object interaction detection has been primarily
studied in the context of still images [3, 4, 14, 19, 47, 48,
31, 50, 60, 46, 40]. However, they are naturally temporal
events that take place over a period of time. Interactions
such as “drinking” or “pushing” occur between a human
and an object over time, making videos a natural modality
for studying this problem.
Existing video-based methods primarily rely on strong
bounding box supervision and having access to a fully annotated video dataset. However, relying on strong supervision has significant drawbacks. First, exhaustively annotating the spatial location of objects in a video is time
consuming given the large number of frames in a video.
Second, scaling to the large number of possible interactions
and obtaining a sufficient number of ground truth bounding boxes is challenging due to the potentially open vocabulary of objects and actions and the combinatorial nature of
human-object interactions. Third, interactions typically follow a long-tailed distribution, with common human-object
interactions occurring much more frequently than others
[41, 19]. While supervised learning usually prefers common interactions, a robust human-object interaction detection system should instead perform equally well on both
common and rare interactions.
In this work, we seek to leverage videos with verb and
noun phrase annotations derived from natural language sentence captions to learn to detect human-object interactions
in videos in a weakly supervised manner. Such an approach

1845

