MultiSiam: Self-supervised Multi-instance Siamese Representation Learning for
Autonomous Driving

1

Kai Chen1 Lanqing Hong2 Hang Xu2 Zhenguo Li2 Dit-Yan Yeung1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

kai.chen@connect.ust.hk

{honglanqing, xu.hang, li.zhenguo}@huawei.com

dyyeung@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Autonomous driving has attracted much attention over
the years but turns out to be harder than expected, probably due to the difficulty of labeled data collection for model
training. Self-supervised learning (SSL), which leverages
unlabeled data only for representation learning, might be
a promising way to improve model performance. Existing
SSL methods, however, usually rely on the single-centricobject guarantee, which may not be applicable for multiinstance datasets such as street scenes. To alleviate this
limitation, we raise two issues to solve: (1) how to define
positive samples for cross-view consistency and (2) how to
measure similarity in multi-instance circumstances. We first
adopt an IoU threshold during random cropping to transfer
global-inconsistency to local-consistency. Then, we propose two feature alignment methods to enable 2D feature
maps for multi-instance similarity measurement. Additionally, we adopt intra-image clustering with self-attention
for further mining intra-image similarity and translationinvariance. Experiments show that, when pre-trained on
Waymo dataset, our method called Multi-instance Siamese
Network (MultiSiam) remarkably improves generalization
ability and achieves state-of-the-art transfer performance
on autonomous driving benchmarks, including Cityscapes
and BDD100K, while existing SSL counterparts like MoCo,
MoCo-v2, and BYOL show significant performance drop.
By pre-training on SODA10M, a large-scale autonomous
driving dataset, MultiSiam exceeds the ImageNet pretrained MoCo-v2, demonstrating the potential of domainspecific pre-training. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/KaiChen1998/MultiSiam.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving has attracted much attention over
the years [19, 15, 32]. However, it becomes harder than
people have expected in such an age of AI advances. Fully
autonomous cars are still out of reach except in special
trial programs, mainly due to the limitation of model per-

Figure 1. Visualizations of different random crops on
Waymo [20] (left) and ImageNet [9] (right). On ImageNet, images are small and pre-processed to guarantee only one object in
the center part of it (i.e., single-centric-object) mostly. However,
images from Waymo are of high resolution and contain multiple
instances. Different random crops might represent different semantic meanings (i.e., global-inconsistency), which will restrict
the effectiveness of current self-supervised learning methods.

formance. One of the main restrictions is that the annotation cost of self-driving datasets is much more expensive
than other datasets. Considering that autonomous cars keep
collecting unlabeled data when operating, self-supervised
learning (SSL) might be a promising way to ease the desire for labeled data and improve model performance, which
has achieved remarkable transfer results on different downstream tasks using unlabeled data only.
Existing SSL methods are mainly based on the pretext
called instance discrimination and cross-view consistency
framework, whose basic assumption is that different views
(e.g. data augmentation) of a single image should be consistent in the feature space under different metrics, such as
cosine distance [10, 7], clustering assignments [4] and discriminability from negative samples [27, 21, 5, 12, 6, 18],
This assumption is satisfied well with single-centric-object
datasets such as ImageNet. In self-driving, nevertheless, the

7546

