Explainable Person Re-Identification with Attribute-guided Metric Distillation
Xiaodong Chen1 * Xinchen Liu2 Wu Liu2† Xiao-Ping Zhang3 Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
JD AI Research, Beijing, China 3 Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada

Tao Mei2

cxd1230@mail.ustc.edu.cn,liuxinchen1@jd.com,liuwu@live.cn,xzhang@ee.ryerson.ca,zyd73@ustc.edu.cn,tmei@live.com

Despite the great progress of person re-identification
(ReID) with the adoption of Convolutional Neural Networks, current ReID models are opaque and only outputs
a scalar distance between two persons. There are few methods providing users semantically understandable explanations for why two persons are the same one or not. In
this paper, we propose a post-hoc method, named Attributeguided Metric Distillation (AMD), to explain existing ReID
models. This is the first method to explore attributes to
answer: 1) what and where the attributes make two persons different, and 2) how much each attribute contributes
to the difference. In AMD, we design a pluggable interpreter network for target models to generate quantitative
contributions of attributes and visualize accurate attention
maps of the most discriminative attributes. To achieve this
goal, we propose a metric distillation loss by which the interpreter learns to decompose the distance of two persons
into components of attributes with knowledge distilled from
the target model. Moreover, we propose an attribute prior
loss to make the interpreter generate attribute-guided attention maps and to eliminate biases caused by the imbalanced distribution of attributes. This loss can guide the interpreter to focus on the exclusive and discriminative attributes rather than the large-area but common attributes
of two persons. Comprehensive experiments show that the
interpreter can generate effective and intuitive explanations
for varied models and generalize well under cross-domain
settings. As a by-product, the accuracy of target models can
be further improved with our interpreter. 1

1. Introduction
Person Re-identification (ReID), i.e., retrieval of the
same person captured by multiple cameras, has attracted
* This work was done when Xiaodong Chen was an intern at JD AI
Research.
† Wu Liu is the corresponding author
1 See the project on www.xiaodongchen.cn/AMD.github.io/

Rank List

Query

Abstract
(a)

…

ReID Model

Attribute-guided
Metric Distillation

(b)

Interpreter

Distance = 32.23
Decomposition
No hat
Bag
Up-write
Low-blue
Boots
…

D1 = 1.22
D2 = 4.01
D3 = 2.27
D4 = 5.66
D5 = 4.20
…

No hat
Backpack
Up-write
Low-black
Shoes
…

Reweighting
Distance = 35.06

(c)

Refined
Rank List

…

Figure 1. The motivation of attribute-guided metric distillation. (a)
Given a query, the ReID model returns a rank list of gallery images based on pairwise metrics. (b) The learned Interpreter can
visualize intuitive attention maps of attributes to tell users what attributes make two persons different, and generate contributions of
attributes to reflect the impact of each attribute. (c) Refined results
by re-weighted distances from Interpreter. (Best viewed in color.)

tremendous attention from academia and industry [19, 30,
32, 34, 41, 42]. Although Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have significantly improved the accuracy of person ReID, we still cannot completely trust the results produced by black-box models, especially for critical scenarios [43]. Therefore, this paper is focused on the interpretation of CNN-based person ReID models which is crucial
yet rarely studied.
In recent years, there has been a surge of work in discovering how a target CNN processes input images and makes
predictions [10, 24, 46]. These methods usually visualize
gradients or salient regions on feature maps w.r.t. the input image and its prediction [4, 8, 24, 25, 26, 46]. Particularly, Chen et al. [5] proposed to explain neural networks
semantically and quantitatively by decomposing the prediction made by CNNs into semantic concepts by knowledge
distillation. However, these methods mainly consider clas-

11813

