Spatio-temporal Self-Supervised Representation Learning for 3D Point Clouds
Siyuan Huang1,˚ , Yichen Xie2,˚ , Song-Chun Zhu3,4,5 , Yixin Zhu3,4
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence 4 Peking University 5 Tsinghua University
https://siyuanhuang.com/STRL
 

Abstract
To date, various 3D scene understanding tasks still lack
practical and generalizable pre-trained models, primarily due to the intricate nature of 3D scene understanding
tasks and their immense variations introduced by camera
views, lighting, occlusions, etc. In this paper, we tackle this
challenge by introducing a spatio-temporal representation
learning (STRL) framework, capable of learning from unlabeled 3D point clouds in a self-supervised fashion. Inspired
by how infants learn from visual data in the wild, we explore
the rich spatio-temporal cues derived from the 3D data.
Specifically, STRL takes two temporally-correlated frames
from a 3D point cloud sequence as the input, transforms it
with the spatial data augmentation, and learns the invariant
representation self-supervisedly. To corroborate the efficacy
of STRL, we conduct extensive experiments on three types
(synthetic, indoor, and outdoor) of datasets. Experimental
results demonstrate that, compared with supervised learning methods, the learned self-supervised representation facilitates various models to attain comparable or even better performances while capable of generalizing pre-trained
models to downstream tasks, including 3D shape classification, 3D object detection, and 3D semantic segmentation.
Moreover, the spatio-temporal contextual cues embedded in
3D point clouds significantly improve the learned representations.

1. Introduction
Point cloud is a quintessential 3D representation for visual analysis and scene understanding. It differs from alternative 3D representations (e.g., voxel, mesh) as it is ubiquitous: Entry-level depth sensors (even on cellphones) directly produce point clouds before triangulating into meshes
or converting to voxels, making it mostly applicable to 3D
scene understanding tasks such as 3D shape analysis [5],
3D object detection and segmentation [58, 10]. Despite its
omnipresence in 3D representation, however, annotating 3D
point cloud data is proven to be much more difficult com* indicates equal contribution.






  





Figure 1: Overview of our method. By learning the spatiotemporal data invariance from a point cloud sequence, our
method self-supevisedly learns an effective representation.
pared with labeling conventional 2D image data; this obstacle precludes its potentials in 3D visual tasks. As such,
properly leveraging the colossal amount of unlabeled 3D
point cloud data is a sine qua non for the success of largescale 3D visual analysis and scene understanding.
Meanwhile, self-supervised learning from unlabeled images [11, 45, 24, 22, 6, 19, 7] and videos [54, 80, 34, 51]
becomes a nascent direction in representation learning with
great potential in downstream tasks.
In this paper, we fill in the absence by exploiting selfsupervised representation learning for 3D point clouds to
address a long-standing problem in our community—the
supervised training struggles at producing practical and
generalizable pre-trained models due to the supervisionstarved nature of the 3D data. Specifically, we consider the
following three principles in model design and learning:
Simplicity Although self-supervised learning approaches for 3D point clouds exist, they rely exclusively
on spatial analysis by reconstructing the 3D point
clouds [1, 75, 53, 20]. This static perspective of selfsupervised learning is designed explicitly with complex
operations, architectures, or losses, making it difficult to
train and generalize to diversified downstream tasks. We
believe such intricate designs are artificially introduced
and unnecessary, and could be diminished or eliminated by
complementing the missing temporal contextual cues, akin
to how infants may understand this world [18, 57].
16535

