Prior to Segment: Foreground Cues for Weakly Annotated Classes
in Partially Supervised Instance Segmentation
David Biertimpel1,2 * Sindi Shkodrani2
1

Anil S. Baslamisli1

University of Amsterdam

david.biertimpel@protonmail.com

2

Nóra Baka2

TomTom

a.s.baslamisli@uva.nl

{sindi.shkodrani, nora.baka}@tomtom.com

Abstract
Instance segmentation methods require large datasets
with expensive and thus limited instance-level mask labels.
Partially supervised instance segmentation aims to improve
mask prediction with limited mask labels by utilizing the
more abundant weak box labels. In this work, we show
that a class agnostic mask head, commonly used in partially
supervised instance segmentation, has difficulties learning
a general concept of foreground for the weakly annotated
classes using box supervision only. To resolve this problem,
we introduce an object mask prior (OMP) that provides the
mask head with the general concept of foreground implicitly
learned by the box classification head under the supervision
of all classes. This helps the class agnostic mask head to focus on the primary object in a region of interest (RoI) and
improves generalization to the weakly annotated classes.
We test our approach on the COCO dataset using different
splits of strongly and weakly supervised classes. Our approach significantly improves over the Mask R-CNN baseline and obtains competitive performance with the state-ofthe-art, while offering a much simpler architecture. 1

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is an essential task in computer
vision with applications ranging from autonomous vehicles to robotics and medical imaging [5, 6, 13, 22, 26, 30].
A major contributor to the success of recent instance segmentation methods is the availability of large-scale datasets
with numerous instance-level mask labels [7, 8, 12, 24, 36].
A major problem with mask labels is that their acquisition is rather time-consuming at ∼ 67 seconds per instance
[4]. Conversely, weak labels (w.r.t. instance masks) such
as bounding boxes (∼ 10.5 seconds) allow for much more
* This paper is the product of work during an internship at TomTom.
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/dbtmpl/OPMask

Input

Mask R-CNN

OMP

Prediction

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Our object mask prior (OMP) provides foreground cues
to the mask head highlighting the primary instance in ambiguous
RoIs (yellow pixels indicate foreground). OPMask is able to resolve ambiguous constellations and segment the correct instance,
while our Mask R-CNN baseline fails to do so.

efficient annotation [4]. Nonetheless, for classes without
sufficient mask labels, conventional instance segmentation
methods perform poorly and tend to generate mask predictions that are perforated, do not cover the entire object or
are completely missing it [16, 20]. To improve mask predictions for classes with no mask labels available, recent research has focused on addressing the problem in a partially
supervised learning setting [9, 16, 20, 40], where all classes
are annotated with box labels while only a subset of these
classes also carry instance mask labels. The goal in partially
supervised instance segmentation is to use the abundant but
weak box labels in conjunction with the strong but limited
mask labels to predict better instance masks for the weakly
(box) annotated classes.
In current methods, the task of generalizing mask predictions for weak classes is either achieved with meta-learning

2824

