CrackFormer: Transformer Network for Fine-Grained Crack Detection
Huajun Liu1∗ , Xiangyu Miao1 , Christoph Mertz2 , Chengzhong Xu3 , Hui Kong3 *
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology,2 Carnegie Mellon University,3 University of Macau
{liuhj, miaoxy}@njust.edu.cn, cmertz@andrew.cmu.edu, {czxu, huikong}@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Cracks are irregular line structures that are of interest in
many computer vision applications. Crack detection (e.g.,
from pavement images) is a challenging task due to intensity in-homogeneity, topology complexity, low contrast and
noisy background. The overall crack detection accuracy
can be significantly affected by the detection performance
on fine-grained cracks. In this work, we propose a Crack
Transformer network (CrackFormer) for fine-grained crack
detection. The CrackFormer is composed of novel attention modules in a SegNet-like encoder-decoder architecture.
Specifically, it consists of novel self-attention modules with
1x1 convolutional kernels for efficient contextual information extraction across feature-channels, and efficient positional embedding to capture large receptive field contextual
information for long range interactions. It also introduces
new scaling-attention modules to combine outputs from the
corresponding encoder and decoder blocks to suppress nonsemantic features and sharpen semantic ones. The CrackFormer is trained and evaluated on three classical crack
datasets. The experimental results show that the CrackFormer achieves the Optimal Dataset Scale (ODS) values of
0.871, 0.877 and 0.881, respectively, on the three datasets
and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Pavement crack detection from images is a challenging
issue due to intensity inhomogeneity, topology complexity,
low contrast, and noisy texture background [18]. In addition, crack’s diversity (thin, grid or thick crack etc.) makes
it more difficult.
There are a large number of studies on crack detection [6, 22, 2, 36, 37, 35, 10]. Recent studies have employed
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to boost detection
accuracy to a higher level. In this study, we consider the
problem of detecting thin cracks from the image of an asphalt surface. In general, it is much easier to detect thick
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Crack prediction from our CrackFormer model (Best
viewed in color). The upper left is a classical crack image. The
upper right is the predicted result. The bottom shows a profile slice
with normalized grey scale, its ground truth and corresponding
crack predicted probabilities.

cracks than thin cracks. Thus, crack detection performance
is largely affected by how well one method can detect thin
cracks.
The state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods heavily rely on
Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [9], such as SegNet [31], U-Net [27] and their variants [21]. SegNets
and U-Nets use an encoder-decoder architecture, where
the encoder extracts high-level semantic representations
by using a cascade of convolution and pooling layers,
and the decoder leverages memorized pooling indices or
skip connections to re-use high-resolution feature maps
from the encoder in order to recover lost spatial information from high-level representations. Despite their outstanding performance, these methods suffer from limitation in complex segmentation tasks, e.g. when dealing
with thin cracks or when there exists low contrast between
crack and background. In general, these models rely on
stacked 3 × 3 convolution and pooling operations, and
could not achieve pixel-level segmentation precision in the
convolution-pooling pipeline, resulting in blur and coarse
crack segmentation. Moreover, suffering from the limited
receptive field by using 3 × 3 convolutional kernels, these

3783

