Painting from Part
Dongsheng Guo1

Haoru Zhao1 Yunhao Cheng1 Haiyong Zheng1, * Zhaorui Gu1
1
Underwater Vision Lab (http://ouc.ai), Ocean University of China
2
Sanya Oceanographic Institution, Ocean University of China

Bing Zheng1,2

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

Figure 1. Our results of painting from part on various datasets, considering both object and scene, involving both outpainting and inpainting
(left: input, right: output): (a) regular image outpainting, (b) irregular image outpainting, and (c) image inpainting. (d) The t-SNE [30]
visualizing embeddings of three flower images and their parts, indicating strong correlations between parts and the whole image.

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of painting the whole
image from part of it, namely painting from part or partpainting for short, involving both inpainting and outpainting. To address the challenge of taking full advantage
of both information from local domain (part) and knowledge from global domain (dataset), we propose a novel
part-painting method according to the observations of relationship between part and whole, which consists of three
stages: part-noise restarting, part-feature repainting, and
part-patch refining, to paint the whole image by leveraging both feature-level and patch-level part as well as powerful representation ability of generative adversarial network. Extensive ablation studies show efficacy of each
stage, and our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on both inpainting and outpainting benchmarks with
free-form parts, including our new mask dataset for irregular outpainting. Our code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/zhenglab/partpainting.
* Corresponding author: Haiyong Zheng (zhenghaiyong@ouc.edu.cn).

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant Nos. 61771440 and 41776113, and the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant No. 202061002.

1. Introduction
Given a part of an image, human have the natural ability to paint the unseen region (e.g., outside or inside the
part) [37]. Painting from part, or part-painting for short,
is the task to paint a whole reasonable and realistic image
according to a part of the image, which can be widely used
in many computer vision applications such as view expansion [58, 47, 40], texture synthesis [25, 49, 42], image editing [3, 60, 9], and object removal [28, 55]. Due to intrinsic
complexity of the part in an image (e.g., diverse shapes and
different positions), part-painting is full of challenges.
Specifically, in order to paint a reasonable and realistic
whole image from a part, it is indispensable to not only require information from the given part (local domain), but
also learn knowledge from other similar images (global domain). However, the multiple properties of the parts lead
to fiendish complexity and huge uncertainty of the balance
between local domain and global domain for part-painting.
Thus, how to make full use of information from local domain (part) and knowledge from global domain (dataset)
while keeping a proper balance between them, is essential
and crucial for painting from part.
Recent advances in part-painting, i.e., image inpainting [51, 39, 55, 32, 38, 29] and image outpainting [48,

14779

