Probabilistic Monocular 3D Human Pose Estimation with Normalizing Flows
Tom Wehrbein1
1

Marco Rudolph1

Bodo Rosenhahn1

Bastian Wandt2

Leibniz University Hannover, 2 University of British Columbia
wehrbein@tnt.uni-hannover.de

Abstract
3D human pose estimation from monocular images is a
highly ill-posed problem due to depth ambiguities and occlusions. Nonetheless, most existing works ignore these ambiguities and only estimate a single solution. In contrast,
we generate a diverse set of hypotheses that represents the
full posterior distribution of feasible 3D poses. To this end,
we propose a normalizing flow based method that exploits
the deterministic 3D-to-2D mapping to solve the ambiguous inverse 2D-to-3D problem. Additionally, uncertain detections and occlusions are effectively modeled by incorporating uncertainty information of the 2D detector as condition. Further keys to success are a learned 3D pose prior
and a generalization of the best-of-M loss. We evaluate our
approach on the two benchmark datasets Human3.6M and
MPI-INF-3DHP, outperforming all comparable methods in
most metrics. The implementation is available on GitHub1 .

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D pose of a human from a single monocular image is an active research field in computer vision. It
has many applications e.g. in human computer interaction,
animation, medicine and surveillance. A common approach
is to decouple the problem into two stages. In the first stage,
a 2D pose detector is used to estimate 2D keypoints which
are then lifted to 3D joint locations in the second stage.
By utilizing a 2D pose detector pretrained on diverse and
richly annotated data, the 3D pose estimator becomes invariant to different scenes varying in lighting, background
and clothing. However, reconstructing the correct 3D pose
from 2D joint detections is a highly ill-posed problem because of depth ambiguities and occluded body parts. While
some ambiguities can be resolved by utilizing information
from the image (e.g. difference in shading due to depth disparity) or by exploiting known proportions of the human
body, such as joint angle and bone length constraints, there
1
https://github.com/twehrbein/Probabilistic-Monocul
ar-3D-Human-Pose-Estimation-with-Normalizing-Flows

Figure 1. Our model generates diverse 3D pose hypotheses that are
consistent with the input image. Compared to [28, 40] we achieve
a higher diversity mainly where 2D detections are uncertain, in this
case for the occluded left arm. For visualization purposes, more
than three hypotheses are shown only for the highly ambiguous
left arm.

still remain scenarios where multiple plausible 3D poses are
consistent with the same image. Fig. 1 shows such a situation where the left arm is occluded by the upper body and
therefore its position cannot be determined unambiguously.
Nevertheless, most existing works ignore the ambiguities by
assuming that only a single solution exists. In contrast, we
model monocular 3D human pose estimation as an ambiguous inverse problem with multiple feasible solutions. Thus,
in this work, we propose to estimate the full posterior distribution of plausible 3D poses conditioned on a monocular
image.
Recently, few methods [20, 28, 29, 35, 40] have been
proposed that follow the line of research to explicitly generate multiple 3D pose hypotheses from the 2D input. However, they only consider 2D joint coordinates and ignore the
uncertainty of the 2D detector. While it is reasonable to
infer depth ambiguities based on 2D coordinates only, directly modeling occlusions and uncertain detections is not
meaningful. Fortunately, most 2D human joint detectors

11199

