CodeNeRF: Disentangled Neural Radiance Fields for Object Categories
Wonbong Jang
Lourdes Agapito
Department of Computer Science
University College London
{ucabwja,l.agapito}@ucl.ac.uk

Figure 1: CodeNeRF represents variations of shape and texture across an object class. Left: At test time, given a single input
image, the trained model can be used to jointly optimize camera viewpoint and shape/texture latent codes. Right: Object
shapes, textures and viewpoints can later be edited simply by varying the latent codes, offering full control over synthesis.

Abstract
CodeNeRF is an implicit 3D neural representation that
learns the variation of object shapes and textures across a
category and can be trained, from a set of posed images, to
synthesize novel views of unseen objects. Unlike the original NeRF, which is scene specific, CodeNeRF learns to
disentangle shape and texture by learning separate embeddings. At test time, given a single unposed image of an unseen object, CodeNeRF jointly estimates camera viewpoint,
and shape and appearance codes via optimization. Unseen
objects can be reconstructed from a single image, and then
rendered from new viewpoints or their shape and texture
edited by varying the latent codes. We conduct experiments
on the SRN benchmark, which show that CodeNeRF generalises well to unseen objects and achieves on-par performance with methods that require known camera pose at test
time. Our results on real-world images demonstrate that
CodeNeRF can bridge the sim-to-real gap. Project page:
https://github.com/wayne1123/code-nerf

1. Introduction
Synthesizing novel views of unseen objects given a
sparse set of input views or even a single image is a longstanding problem in the fields of computer vision and graphics. Synthesis methods require both an accurate representation of the 3D geometry and appearance of objects, and the
ability to offer control over changes in viewpoint, shape or
texture to render different objects of the same category.
Traditionally, discrete scene representations have been
used, such as meshes or voxel grids that store geometry
and appearance information either explicitly or via learnt
neural features [23]. However, their discrete nature limits
their representation power and resolution. With the recent
introduction of scene representation networks (SRN), Sitzmann et al. [24] propose to learn a continuous function that
map 3D locations to features of scene properties. Crucially,
SRN does not require 3D supervision and can be trained
end-to-end with a differentiable ray marcher that renders the
feature-based representation into a set of 2D images. While
SRN allows generalization to unseen objects, accurate cam-

12949

