Reconstructing Hand-Object Interactions in the Wild
Zhe Cao∗

Ilija Radosavovic∗

Angjoo Kanazawa

Jitendra Malik

University of California, Berkeley

Figure 1: Reconstructions in the wild. For each row, we show the input image (top), the reconstructed hand and object in two different
viewpoints (bottom). Our method can achieve compelling results for a variety of object categories, grasp types, and interaction scenarios.

Abstract
We study the problem of understanding hand-object interactions from 2D images in the wild. This requires reconstructing both the hand and the object in 3D, which is challenging because of the mutual occlusion between the hand
and the object. In this paper we make two main contributions: (1) a novel reconstruction technique, RHO (Reconstructing Hands and Objects), which reconstructs 3D models of both the hand and the object leveraging the 2D image
cues and 3D contact priors; (2) a dataset MOW (Manipulating Objects in the Wild) of 500 examples of hand-object
interaction images that have been ”3Dfied” with the help
of the RHO technique. Overall our dataset contains 121
distinct object categories, with a much greater diversity of
manipulation actions, than in previous datasets.

1. Introduction
Our hands are the primary way we interact with objects
in the world. In turn, we designed our world with hands
in mind. Therefore, understanding hand-object interactions
* Equal contribution. More examples available at this project page.

is an important ingredient for building agents that perceive
and act in the real world. For example, it can allow them to
learn object affordances [10], infer human intents [27], and
learn manipulation skills from humans [34, 26, 33].
What does it mean to understand hand-object interactions? We argue that fully capturing the richness of handobject interactions requires 3D understanding. In general, recovering 3D from a single RGB image is an underconstrained problem. In the case of hand-object interactions, the problem is even more challenging due to heavy
occlusions that occur during object manipulation, a wide
range of small daily objects that are not even present in
labeled recognition datasets, and fine-grained interactions
with complex contacts that are difficult to model.
Overall, our community has made substantial progress
toward this goal. However, due to the difficulty in obtaining
3D annotations in the wild, the data collection efforts have
focused mainly on in-the-lab setting [12, 61, 9, 2, 47]. As
shown in Figure 2, there is a large reality gap between the
existing in-the-lab settings and the richness of environments
and interactions found in images in the wild. Indeed, as
shown in Table 1, existing datasets have a limited number
of participants and objects.
12417

