Syncretic Modality Collaborative Learning for Visible Infrared Person
Re-Identiﬁcation
Ziyu Wei1 , Xi Yang1 *, Nannan Wang1 , Xinbo Gao2
1
The State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University
2
Key Laboratory of Image Cognition, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
zywei xd@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {yangx,nnwang}@xidian.edu.cn, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Visible infrared person re-identiﬁcation (VI-REID) aims
to match pedestrian images between the daytime visible and
nighttime infrared camera views. The large cross-modality
discrepancies have become the bottleneck which limits the
performance of VI-REID. Existing methods mainly focus
on capturing cross-modality sharable representations by
learning an identity classiﬁer. However, the heterogeneous
pedestrian images taken by different spectrum cameras differ signiﬁcantly in image styles, resulting in inferior discriminability of feature representations. To alleviate the
above problem, this paper explores the correlation between
two modalities and proposes a novel syncretic modality
collaborative learning (SMCL) model to bridge the crossmodality gap. A new modality that incorporates features of
heterogeneous images is constructed automatically to steer
the generation of modality-invariant representations. Challenge enhanced homogeneity learning (CEHL) and auxiliary distributional similarity learning (ADSL) are integrated to project heterogeneous features on a uniﬁed space
and enlarge the inter-class disparity, thus strengthening the
discriminative power. Extensive experiments on two crossmodality benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method. Especially, on SYSUMM01 dataset, our SMCL model achieves 67.39% rank1 accuracy and 61.78% mAP, surpassing the cutting-edge
works by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) plays an essential role
in video surveillance, which automatically searches person
images across multiple non-overlapping cameras [39, 36].
Recently, fast-growing works contribute to visible modality
person Re-ID and have achieved remarkable performance
[1, 28]. However, visible cameras cannot capture enough
* Corresponding author

identity information in the dark. To ensure the safety of
pedestrians at night, infrared cameras are deployed to acquire infrared person images, cooperating with visible cameras for 24-hour video surveillance. Hence, visible infrared
person re-identiﬁcation (VI-REID) [27] has emerged to retrieve visible (infrared) images according to the given infrared (visible) images.
VI-REID is challenging due to the considerable visual
differences among heterogeneous pedestrian images. Existing studies aim to address this challenge mainly from
two aspects, i.e., image-level and feature-level. To achieve
modality uniﬁcation, image generation-based methods [11,
22, 25, 3, 23] are proposed to translate heterogeneous images to the same modality for style consistency. However,
the introduction of additional noise during the image translation affects the extraction of discriminative features. To
ensure feature alignment, dual-path networks are exploited
to obtain modality-speciﬁc and modality-invariant representations [38, 33, 7, 5, 32], but the last few layers are difﬁcult to map the speciﬁc representations of each modality to
a shared space. Subsequently, one-stream weight-sharing
network is introduced in massive works [4, 24, 30, 9] to
directly extract modality-sharable features. However, the
performance of these methods is far inferior to that of visible modality person Re-ID because of the signiﬁcant color
discrepancies between two modalities.
Recently, several researches have built a new modality and combine with two real modalities to conduct trimodal sharable feature learning, which gains inspiring performance. Li et al. [13] introduce an auxiliary X modality
as an assistant for modality-invariant feature generation. Ye
et al. [37] propose a homogeneous augmented grayscale
modality and enhance the robustness against color variations. However, these methods neglect the distribution of
features in the intermediate modality. As shown in Figure
1, since the images of X modality and grayscale modality
are directly generated by the visible images without considering the infrared images, there are two main drawbacks
encountering in feature distribution of testing set: 1) The

225

