The Road to Know-Where: An Object-and-Room Informed Sequential BERT
for Indoor Vision-Language Navigation
Yuankai Qi1 Zizheng Pan2 Yicong Hong3 Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5,6 Anton van den Hengel1 Qi Wu1 *
1 Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide 2 Monash University
3 The Australian National University 4 University of California, Merced 5 Google Research 6 Yonsei University
{qykshr, zizhpan}@gmail.com

yicong.hong@anu.edu.au

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

{anton.vandenhengel, qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au

1. Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) offers the appealing prospect of more flexible interactions with robotic
applications including domestic robots and personal assistants. One of the first VLN tasks to appear was Room-toRoom navigation (R2R) [4]. This task saw an agent initialised at a random location within a simulated environ* Corresponding author

Room
Tpye
(where?)

... Walk past the coffee table and couch and stop by the pool table.
... Go to the front of the couch towards the billiard table, and stop.
... Walk in front of the ﬁreplace ... stop once you reach the pool table.
Next Room: Living Room

Goal Room: Living Room

Navigable Viewpoints
doubledoor

Possible
Landmarks
(what?)

Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires an
agent to find a path to a remote location on the basis of
natural-language instructions and a set of photo-realistic
panoramas. Most existing methods take the words in the
instructions and the discrete views of each panorama as
the minimal unit of encoding. However, this requires a
model to match different nouns (e.g., TV, table) against
the same input view feature. In this work, we propose an
object-informed sequential BERT to encode visual perceptions and linguistic instructions at the same fine-grained
level, namely objects and words. Our sequential BERT
also enables the visual-textual clues to be interpreted in
light of the temporal context, which is crucial to multiround VLN tasks. Additionally, we enable the model to
identify the relative direction (e.g., left/right/front/back)
of each navigable location and the room type (e.g., bedroom, kitchen) of its current and final navigation goal, as
such information is widely mentioned in instructions implying the desired next and final locations. We thus enable the model to know-where the objects lie in the images, and to know-where they stand in the scene. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness compared
against several state-of-the-art methods on three indoor
VLN tasks: REVERIE, NDH, and R2R. Project repository:
https://github.com/YuankaiQi/ORIST

Instructions

stairs

mirror
windows
lamp

pool table ﬁreplace

chair

couch

cabinet

desk

coffee table
bookshelf

Front
Direction
(where?)

Abstract

Left

Right

Viewpoint directions?

Next/Goal room?

Figure 1. Objects, rooms, and directions are important clues that
can be inferred from visiolinguistic information. Our Object-andRoom Informed Sequential BERT (ORIST) is designed to learn
to navigate by leveraging this information.

ment rendered from real images, and required it to navigate to a remote goal location according to natural-language
instructions, such as “Leave the bedroom, and enter the
kitchen. Walk forward, and take a left at the couch. Stop in
front of the window.” The actions available to the agent at
each step are to investigate the current panorama, to move to
a neighbouring navigable location/viewpoint, or to stop. An
interactive version of the problem is introduced in [25, 33],
while REVERIE [28] extends it to identifying remote objects, and TOUCHDOWN [8] introduces outdoor environments.
Numerous methods have been proposed to address indoor VLN tasks. Ma et al. [22] propose to learn textualvisual co-grounding to enhance the understanding of instructions completed in the past and the instruction to be
executed next. Heuristic search algorithms for exploration
and back-tracking are introduced in [16, 23]. Qi et al. [27]

1655

