Where2Act: From Pixels to Actions for Articulated 3D Objects
Kaichun Mo∗1 Leonidas Guibas1 Mustafa Mukadam2 Abhinav Gupta2 Shubham Tulsiani2
1 Stanford University 2 Facebook AI Research

https://cs.stanford.edu/˜kaichun/where2act
Abstract
One of the fundamental goals of visual perception is to
allow agents to meaningfully interact with their environment.
In this paper, we take a step towards that long-term goal –
we extract highly localized actionable information related to
elementary actions such as pushing or pulling for articulated
objects with movable parts. For example, given a drawer,
our network predicts that applying a pulling force on the
handle opens the drawer. We propose, discuss, and evaluate
novel network architectures that given image and depth data,
predict the set of actions possible at each pixel, and the
regions over articulated parts that are likely to move under
the force. We propose a learning-from-interaction framework
with an online data sampling strategy that allows us to train
the network in simulation (SAPIEN) and generalizes across
categories. Check the website for code and data release.

1. Introduction
We humans interact with a plethora of objects around us
in our daily lives. What makes this possible is our effortless
understanding of what can be done with each object, where
this interaction may occur, and precisely how our we must
move to accomplish it – we can pull on a handle to open a
drawer, push anywhere on a door to close it, flip a switch to
turn a light on, or push a button to start the microwave. Not
only do we understand what actions will be successful, we
also intuitively know which ones will not e.g. pulling out a
remote’s button is probably not a good idea! In this work,
our goal is to build a perception system which also has a
similar understanding of general objects i.e. given a novel
object, we want a system that can infer the myriad possible
interactions1 that one can perform with it.
The task of predicting possible interactions with objects is
∗ The majority of the work was done while Kaichun Mo was a research
intern at Facebook AI Research.
1 Gibson proposed the idea of affordances – opportunities of interaction.
Classical notion of object affordance involves consideration of agent’s
morphology. Our interactions are more low-level actions.

0

push

0.25

0.5

0.75

(a)

0.92 (c) 0.81

pull

(a)

(b)

0.94

1

(b)

0.35

0.95

0.92 (c) 0.85

0.29

Figure 1. The Proposed Where2Act Task. Given as input an articulated 3D object, we learn to propose the actionable information
for different robotic manipulation primitives (e.g. pushing, pulling):
(a) the predicted actionability scores over pixels; (b) the proposed
interaction trajectories, along with (c) their success likelihoods,
for a selected pixel highlighted in red. We show two high-rated
proposals (left) and two with lower scores (right) due to interaction
orientations and potential robot-object collisions.

one of central importance in both, the robotics and the computer vision communities. In robotics, the ability to predict
feasible and desirable actions (e.g. a drawer can be pulled
out) can help in motion planning, efficient exploration and
interactive learning (sampling successful trials faster). On
the other hand, the computer vision community has largely
focused on inferring semantic labels (e.g. part segmentation,
keypoint estimation) from visual input, but such passively
learned representations provide limited understanding. More
specifically, passive learning falls short on the ability of
agents to perform actions, learn prediction models (forward
dynamics) or even semantics in many cases (categories are
more than often defined on affordances themselves!). Our
paper takes a step forward in building a common perception system across diverse objects, while creating its own
supervision about what actions maybe successful by actively
interacting with the objects.
The first question we must tackle is how one can
parametrize the predicted action space. We note that any

6813

