Graph-BAS3 Net: Boundary-Aware Semi-Supervised Segmentation Network with
Bilateral Graph Convolution
Huimin Huang1 , *Lanfen Lin1 , Yue Zhang1 , Yingying Xu2,1 , Jing Zheng3 , XiongWei Mao4 ,
Xiaohan Qian3 , Zhiyi Peng3 , *Jianying Zhou3 , *Yen-Wei Chen5,2,1 , Ruofeng Tong1,2
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Zhejiang Lab, 3 The First Affiliated Hospital,
4
Zhejiang University Hospital, 5 Ritsumeikan University

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms have attracted much attentions in medical image segmentation
by leveraging unlabeled data, which challenge in acquiring massive pixel-wise annotated samples. However, most
of the existing SSLs neglected the geometric shape constraint in object, leading to unsatisfactory boundary and
non-smooth of object. In this paper, we propose a novel
boundary-aware semi-supervised medical image segmentation network, named Graph-BAS3 Net, which incorporates
the boundary information and learns duality constraints
between semantics and geometrics in the graph domain.
Specifically, the proposed method consists of two components: a multi-task learning framework BAS3 Net and a
graph-based cross-task module BGCM. The BAS3 Net improves the existing GAN-based SSL by adding a boundary detection task, which encodes richer features of object
shape and surface. Moreover, the BGCM further explores
the co-occurrence relations between the semantics segmentation and boundary detection task, so that the network
learns stronger semantic and geometric correspondences
from both labeled and unlabeled data. Experimental results
on the LiTS dataset and COVID-19 dataset confirm that our
proposed Graph-BAS3 Net outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods in semi-supervised segmentation task.

1. Introduction
Accurate medical image segmentation is an essential
prerequisite for many clinical applications [19]. Recently, a
variety of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
developed for segmentation tasks. Though these methods
achieved satisfactory results, they needed massive pixelwise annotated samples and to be trained in fully supervision. In the medical field, however, sufficient labeled data
*Corresponding Authors: Lanfen Lin (llf@zju.edu.cn), Jianying Zhou
(zjyhz@zju.edu.cn), Yen-Wei Chen (chen@is.ritsumei.ac.jp)

Figure 1. (a) shows the boundary results of four methods on LiTS
dataset with 10% labeled data, where cyan edges are ground truth
boundaries; while red edges are predictions. (b) shows the number of error pixels (horizontal axis) vs. their Euclidean distances
(vertical axis) to the boundaries on four methods. We can see that
pixels with larger distance tend to be well-classified, while pixels
with smaller distance (boundary pixels) have larger errors.

is unavailable as the manual annotation is costly and timeconsuming. To address this issue, semi-supervised learning
(SSL) has been introduced, which uses both labeled data
and arbitrary amounts of unlabeled data in training.
Recent efforts in SSL have been focused on incorporating unlabeled data into training, which can be categorized into following groups: self-training [2, 5], cotraining [22,29,35], GAN-based methods [10,14,21,33,34]
and self-ensembling (Π model [12, 16] and Mean-Teacher
model [7, 25, 31]). For example, Chen et al. [5] proposed
a self-training-based SSL that alternately updated the segmentation results of unlabeled data; while Ouali et al. [22]
achieved co-training by exploiting cross-consistency, which
learned the generalized feature from the unlabeled data.
Hung et al. [10] designed a GAN-based SSL that enforced
the segmentation of unlabeled data to be similar to the labeled ones. Tarvainen et al. [25] proposed a Mean-Teacher
model to guide the student network learning. However, they
often ignored the geometric information and/or the inher-

7386

