Unsupervised Point Cloud Pre-training via Occlusion Completion

1

Qi Liu2

University of Cambridge

2

Xiangyu Yue3
3

University of Oxford

Abstract

1. Introduction
There has been a flurry of exciting new point cloud
models for object detection [27, 52, 64] and segmentation [22, 26, 57, 65]. These methods rely on large scale
point cloud datasets that are labelled. Unfortunately, labelling point clouds is challenging for a number of reasons:
(1) Point clouds can be sparse, occluded, and at low resolutions, making the identity of points ambiguous; (2) Datasets
that are not sparse can easily reach hundreds of millions
of points (e.g., small dense point clouds for object classification [63] and large vast point clouds for reconstruction [66]); (3) Labelling individual points or drawing 3D
bounding boxes are both more time-consuming and errorprone than labelling 2D images [50]. These challenges have
impeded the deployment of point cloud models into new
real world settings where labelled data is scarce.
However, current 3D sensing modalities (i.e., 3D scanners, stereo cameras, lidars) have enabled the creation of
large unlabelled repositories of point cloud data [13, 41].
This has inspired a recent line of work on unsupervised pretraining methods to learn point cloud model initialisation.
Initial work used latent generative models such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1, 14, 54] and autoen-

4

UC Berkeley

few shot

Matt J. Kusner4

University College London

object recognition

segmentation

ScanNet

S3DIS

ModelNet

% relative improvement (acc)

We describe a simple pre-training approach for point
clouds. It works in three steps: 1. Mask all points occluded
in a camera view; 2. Learn an encoder-decoder model
to reconstruct the occluded points; 3. Use the encoder
weights as initialisation for downstream point cloud tasks.
We find that even when we pre-train on a single dataset
(ModelNet40), this method improves accuracy across different datasets and encoders, on a wide range of downstream tasks. Specifically, we show that our method outperforms previous pre-training methods in object classification, and both part-based and semantic segmentation
tasks. We study the pre-trained features and find that they
lead to wide downstream minima, have high transformation invariance, and have activations that are highly correlated with part labels. Code and data are available at:
https://github.com/hansen7/OcCo

Joan Lasenby1

ScanObjectNN

ScanObjectNN

ModelNet

Jigsaw [41]

cTree [43]

% relative improvement (mIoU)

Hanchen Wang1

SensatUrban

ShapeNetPart

OcCo (ours)

Figure 1: The relative improvement over random initialisation of multiple pre-training methods: Jigsaw [42],
cTree [44], and OcCo (ours) for various downstream tasks.
coders [15, 29, 59]. These have been recently outperformed
by self-supervised objectives [42, 56, 2, 44, 20, 61].
Inspired by this recent line of work, we propose Occlusion Completion (OcCo), an unsupervised pre-training
method that consists of: (a) a mechanism to generate
masked point clouds via view-point occlusions, and (b) a
completion task to reconstruct the occluded point cloud.
The idea of occlusion+completion is grounded in three observations: (1) A pre-trained model that is accurate at completing occluded point clouds needs to understand spatial
and semantic properties of these point clouds. (2) 3D scene
completion [45, 9, 19] has been shown to be a useful auxiliary task for learning representations for visual localisation [43]. (3) Mask-based completion tasks have become
the de facto standard for learning pre-trained representations in natural language processing [11, 32, 36] and are
widely used in pre-training for images [35] and graphs [24].
We demonstrate that pre-training on a single object-level
dataset (ModelNet40) can improve the performance of a
range of downstream tasks, even on completely different
datasets. Specifically we find that OcCo has the following properties compared to other initialisation techniques:
1) Improved sample efficiency in few-shot learning experiments; 2) Improved generalisation in object classification,
object part segmentation, and semantic segmentation; 3)
Wider local minima found after fine-tuning; 4) More seman-

9782

