One-pass Multi-view Clustering for Large-scale Data
Jiyuan Liu, Xinwang Liu,* Yuexiang Yang, Li Liu, Siqi Wang, Weixuan Liang and Jiangyong Shi
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan, China. 410072.
{liujiyuan13, xinwangliu, yyx}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing non-negative matrix factorization based multiview clustering algorithms compute multiple coefficient matrices respect to different data views, and learn a common
consensus concurrently. The final partition is always obtained from the consensus with classical clustering techniques, such as k-means. However, the non-negativity constraint prevents from obtaining a more discriminative embedding. Meanwhile, this two-step procedure fails to unify
multi-view matrix factorization with partition generation
closely, resulting in unpromising performance. Therefore,
we propose an one-pass multi-view clustering algorithm by
removing the non-negativity constraint and jointly optimize
the aforementioned two steps. In this way, the generated
partition can guide multi-view matrix factorization to produce more purposive coefficient matrix which, as a feedback, improves the quality of partition. To solve the resultant optimization problem, we design an alternate strategy
which is guaranteed to be convergent theoretically. Moreover, the proposed algorithm is free of parameter and of
linear complexity, making it practical in applications. In
addition, the proposed algorithm is compared with recent
advances in literature on benchmarks, demonstrating its effectiveness, superiority and efficiency.

1. Introduction
With the wide spread of multi-view data, multi-view
clustering (MvC) algorithms are proposed to maximally integrate complementary information among views and reveal
the underlying data structure for clustering [10, 18]. Most of
them are developed on classical clustering methods, such as
non-negative matrix factorization, k-means, spectral clustering, etc. [26, 21, 9, 17]. Therefore, MvC approaches can
be roughly classified according to this criterion. In the paper, we concentrates on non-negative matrix factorization
based ones.
* Corresponding author

Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) [14] is one
of the most fundamental clustering techniques in machine
learning and data engineering tasks. It factorizes the input
data into two parts, i.e. coefficient and base matrices [12].
Orthogonality [5] and low rank constraint [29] are widely
explored in matrix factorization, achieving promising performance. In MvC setting, Gao et al. obtain the coefficient
matrices via performing NMF on each data view, then push
them towards a common consensus [6]. On the contrary,
some researches assume that all views share an underlying
consensus manifold, thus employ a single coefficient matrix to capture the intrinsic data structure [7]. Upon the two
aforementioned frameworks, a large number of researchers
[27, 30, 24, 7, 25] borrow the manifold regularization in [2]
to further improve clustering performance. In specific, each
view can be regarded as a manifold and manifold regularization is able to preserve the local geometry structure of
data [30]. However, it requires building one or more similarity graphs, introducing higher computational and storage
complexities, O(n2 ) or even O(n3 ) sometimes [27]. Nevertheless, Gao et al. impose orthogonality on the base matrix explicitly [7], while Zhang et al. do so implicitly [27],
where the both are validated to be effective in experiment.
However, the aforementioned approaches limit the discriminative embedding learning by imposing non-negativity
and fail to unify multi-view matrix factorization with partition generation closely, leading to unsatisfying performance. To address the issues, we propose an One-pass
Multi-view Clustering (OPMC) algorithm. First, we remove the non-negativity constraint on both coefficient and
base matrices. Instead of explicitly combining the objectives of matrix factorization and k-means in a unified formulation, we approximate the coefficient matrix with a consensus hard partition matrix and a view-specific centroid
matrix, where no additional parameter is introduced. The
overview of OPMC is presented in Fig. 1. It can be observed that the generated hard partition guides multi-view
matrix factorization to produce more purposive coefficient
matrix which, as a feedback, improves the quality of partition. In order to validate effectiveness of the proposal, we

12344

