How to Train Neural Networks for Flare Removal
†

Qiurui He2 Tianfan Xue2 Rahul Garg2 Jiawen Chen3
Ashok Veeraraghavan1 Jonathan T. Barron2
1
Rice University 2 Google Research 3 Adobe Inc.

Yicheng Wu1

wuyichengg@gmail.com

jiawen@adobe.com

vashok@rice.edu

{qiurui, tianfan, rahulgarg, barron}@google.com

Abstract
When a camera is pointed at a strong light source, the resulting photograph may contain lens flare artifacts. Flares
appear in a wide variety of patterns (halos, streaks, color
bleeding, haze, etc.) and this diversity in appearance makes
flare removal challenging. Existing analytical solutions
make strong assumptions about the artifact’s geometry or
brightness, and therefore only work well on a small subset of flares. Machine learning techniques have shown success in removing other types of artifacts, like reflections, but
have not been widely applied to flare removal due to the lack
of training data. To solve this problem, we explicitly model
the optical causes of flare either empirically or using wave
optics, and generate semi-synthetic pairs of flare-corrupted
and clean images. This enables us to train neural networks
to remove lens flare for the first time. Experiments show
our data synthesis approach is critical for accurate flare
removal, and that models trained with our technique generalize well to real lens flares across different scenes, lighting
conditions, and cameras.

1. Introduction
Photographs of scenes with a strong light source often
exhibit lens flare—a salient visual artifact caused by unintended reflections and scattering within the camera. Flare
artifacts can be distracting, reduce detail, and occlude image
content. Despite significant efforts in optical design to minimize lens flare, even small light sources can still produce
substantial artifacts when imaged by consumer cameras.
Flare patterns depend on the optics of the lens, the location of the light source, manufacturing imperfections, and
scratches and dust accumulated through everyday use. The
diversity in the underlying cause of lens flare leads to the diversity in its presentation. As Fig. 1 shows, typical artifacts
† This work was done while Yicheng Wu was an intern at Google Research. He is currently a Research Scientist at Snap Research.

Figure 1. Lens flare artifacts frequently occur in photographs with
strong light sources. They exhibit a wide range of shapes and colors, which makes them difficult to remove with existing methods.

include halos, streaks, bright lines, saturated blobs, color
bleeding, haze, and many others. This diversity makes the
problem of flare removal exceedingly challenging.
Most existing methods for lens flare removal [1, 3, 21]
do not account for the physics of flare formation, but rather
naı̈vely rely on template matching or intensity thresholding
to identify and localize the artifact. As such, they can only
detect and potentially remove limited types of flares, such
as saturated blobs, and do not work well in more complex
real-world scenarios.
Despite the proliferation of deep neural networks, there
seems to be no successful attempt at learning-based flare
removal. What is it that makes this problem so hard?
The main challenge is the lack of training data. Collecting a large number of perfectly-aligned image pairs with
and without lens flare would be tedious at best and impossible at worst: the camera and the scene would need to be
static (a particularly difficult requirement given most lens
flare occurs outdoors and involves the sun), and one would
need some mechanism to “switch” the artifacts on and off
without also changing the illumination of the scene. With
significant effort this can be accomplished by collecting
pairs of images taken on a tripod where the photographer
manually places an occluder between the illuminant and
the camera in one image. But this approach is too labor-

2239

