Adversarial Robustness for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Muhammad Awais 1, 2 * , Fengwei Zhou 1 , Hang Xu 1 , Lanqing Hong 1 ,
Ping Luo 3 , Sung-Ho Bae 2† , Zhenguo Li 1
1

2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Dept. of Computer Science, Kyung-Hee University, South Korea
3
Dept. of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong

awais@khu.ac.kr, {zhoufengwei, xu.hang, honglanqing}@huawei.com, pluo@cs.hku.hk,
shbae@khu.ac.kr, li.zhenguo@huawei.com

Abstract
Extensive Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) studies
have shown great success in practice by learning transferable representations across a labeled source domain and
an unlabeled target domain with deep models. However,
current work focuses on improving the generalization ability
of UDA models on clean examples without considering the
adversarial robustness, which is crucial in real-world applications. Conventional adversarial training methods are
not suitable for the adversarial robustness on the unlabeled
target domain of UDA since they train models with adversarial examples generated by the supervised loss function.
In this work, we propose to leverage intermediate representations learned by robust ImageNet models to improve the
robustness of UDA models. Our method works by aligning the features of the UDA model with the robust features
learned by ImageNet pre-trained models along with domain
adaptation training. It utilizes both labeled and unlabeled
domains and instills robustness without any adversarial intervention or label requirement during domain adaptation
training. Our experimental results show that our method
significantly improves adversarial robustness compared to
the baseline while keeping clean accuracy on various UDA
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Transferring knowledge from a labeled source domain to
an unlabeled target domain is desirable in many real-world
applications. However, deep learning models do not perform
well in the presence of such domain shifts. For example, a
* This work was done while being at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. The
webpage for the project: awaisrauf.github.io/robust_uda
† Corresponding Author

model trained on synthetic data may fail to generalize well on
real-world data. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
seeks to solve this problem by learning domain-invariant
features. Recent UDA methods harness transferable features
learned by deep models pre-trained on large datasets like
ImageNet [12, 17, 29, 28, 49, 26, 40, 15, 21, 22]. However,
a large body of work has shown that these deep models are
vulnerable to small adversarial changes in the input that can
easily fool the trained models [5, 39, 14, 7]. The widespread
use of these models in sensitive applications requires them
to be robust against these changes.
Significant attention has been devoted to counter adversarial examples, and many defense methods have been devised [14, 16, 42, 30, 6, 25, 33, 37, 41, 46]. Supervised adversarial training is among the most successful approaches [30].
It is based on the simple idea of training a model on adversarial examples. It utilizes min-max optimization where
adversarial examples are first generated by iterative maximization of the loss, and the model is then trained on these
examples. However, the generation of these adversarial examples requires labels and adversarial training implicitly
assumes inputs from a single domain. These issues limit the
applicability of adversarial training in UDA.
In this paper, we propose a simple, unsupervised, and domain agnostic method for robustness in UDA. Our method
does not require labels and utilizes data from both domains,
making it feasible for UDA. Our work is motivated by the
recent line of work on transferability of robustness [13, 9],
and observation that adversarially trained models learn "fundamentally different" features from normally trained counterparts [43, 20, 36]. The first line of work has demonstrated the
transferability of adversarial robustness from a pre-trained
robust model. The authors in [18, 38] show that adversarially
pre-trained models can improve robustness in transfer learning; [13] shows that adversarial robustness can be distilled
by matching softened labels produced by robust pre-trained

8568

