Conditional DETR for Fast Training Convergence
Depu Meng1 * Xiaokang Chen2 * Zejia Fan2 Gang Zeng2
Houqiang Li1 Yuhui Yuan3 Lei Sun3 Jingdong Wang3†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Peking University 3 Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
The recently-developed DETR approach applies the
transformer encoder and decoder architecture to object detection and achieves promising performance. In this paper, we handle the critical issue, slow training convergence,
and present a conditional cross-attention mechanism for
fast DETR training. Our approach is motivated by that the
cross-attention in DETR relies highly on the content embeddings for localizing the four extremities and predicting the
box, which increases the need for high-quality content embeddings and thus the training difficulty.
Our approach, named conditional DETR, learns a conditional spatial query from the decoder embedding for
decoder multi-head cross-attention. The benefit is that
through the conditional spatial query, each cross-attention
head is able to attend to a band containing a distinct region, e.g., one object extremity or a region inside the object box. This narrows down the spatial range for localizing the distinct regions for object classification and box
regression, thus relaxing the dependence on the content embeddings and easing the training. Empirical results show
that conditional DETR converges 6.7× faster for the backbones R50 and R101 and 10× faster for stronger backbones
DC5-R50 and DC5-R101. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Atten4Vis/ConditionalDETR.

Figure 1. Comparison of spatial attention weight maps for our conditional DETR-R50 with 50 training epochs (the first row), the
original DETR-R50 with 50 training epochs (the second row), and
the original DETR-R50 with 500 training epochs (the third row).
The maps for our conditional DETR and DETR trained with 500
epochs are able to highlight the four extremity regions satisfactorily. In contrast, the spatial attention weight maps responsible for
the left and right edges (the third and fourth images in the second row) from DETR trained with 50 epochs cannot highlight the
extremities satisfactorily. The green box is the ground-truth box.

The DEtection TRansformer (DETR) method [3] applies
the transformer encoder and decoder architecture to object
detection and achieves good performance. It effectively
eliminates the need for many hand-crafted components, including non-maximum suppression and anchor generation.
The DETR approach suffers from slow convergence on
training, and needs 500 training epochs to get good performance. The very recent work, deformable DETR [53],
handles this issue by replacing the global dense attention

(self-attention and cross-attention) with deformable attention that attends to a small set of key sampling points and
using the high-resolution and multi-scale encoder. Instead,
we still use the global dense attention and propose an improved decoder cross-attention mechanism for accelerating
the training process.
Our approach is motivated by high dependence on content embeddings and minor contributions made by the spatial embeddings in cross-attention. The empirical results in
DETR [3] show that if removing the positional embeddings
in keys and the object queries from the second decoder layer
and only using the content embeddings in keys and queries,
the detection AP drops slightly1 .
Figure 1 (the second row) shows that the spatial attention weight maps from the cross-attention in DETR trained
with 50 epochs. One can see that two among the four maps
do not correctly highlight the bands for the corresponding
extremities, thus weak at shrinking the spatial range for the

* Equal Contribution. This work was done when D. Meng, X. Chen,
and Z. Fan were interns at Microsoft Research, Beijing, P.R. China
† Corresponding author.

1 The minor AP drop 1.4 is reported on R50 with 300 epochs in Table
3 from [3]. We empirically got the consistent observation: the AP drops to
34.0 from 34.9 for 50 training epochs.

1. Introduction

3651

