Auxiliary Tasks and Exploration Enable ObjectGoal Navigation
Joel Ye1 * Dhruv Batra1,2

2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Consider how a robot placed in a novel home environment
should find a target object, e.g. ‘Find a chair’. This task,
known as ObjectGoal Navigation (O BJECT NAV), requires
the agent to search through the unseen environment and,
upon seeing a goal, navigate around obstacles to reach it.
Current state-of-the-art O BJECT NAV agents [5, 35] build
explicit spatial maps of the environment and leverage a mix
of analytic and learned planning on top of these maps. This
is in contrast to the state-of-the-art methods in P OINT NAV,
a related task where agents navigate to specified goal coordinates (instead of object categories). In P OINT NAV, the best
method [39] scales a generic architecture (i.e. a CNN and
RNN) to 2.5 billion frames of experience. This approach outpaces methods with explicit spatial grounding, to the point
* Correspondence to joel.ye@gatech.edu

RedNet

RNN Aux
RNN Aux

SGE ("0.1")
"Find a Chair"
GPS + Compass

RNN Aux

Fusion

Site: joel99.github.io/objectnav/

Beliefs
CNN

ObjectGoal Navigation (O BJECT NAV) is an embodied task
wherein agents are to navigate to an object instance in an unseen environment. Prior works have shown that end-to-end
O BJECT NAV agents that use vanilla visual and recurrent
modules, e.g. a CNN+RNN, perform poorly due to overfitting
and sample inefficiency. This has motivated current stateof-the-art methods to mix analytic and learned components
and operate on explicit spatial maps of the environment. We
instead re-enable a generic learned agent by adding auxiliary learning tasks and an exploration reward. Our agents
achieve 24.5% success and 8.1% SPL, a 37% and 8% relative improvement over prior state-of-the-art, respectively,
on the Habitat ObjectNav Challenge [35]. From our analysis, we propose that agents will act to simplify their visual
inputs so as to smooth their RNN dynamics, and that auxiliary tasks reduce overfitting by minimizing effective RNN
dimensionality; i.e. a performant O BJECT NAV agent that
must maintain coherent plans over long horizons does so by
learning smooth, low-dimensional recurrent dynamics.

Facebook AI Research

RGBD

Georgia Institute of Technology

Erik Wijmans1

Segm

1

Abhishek Das2

Acting
Policy

left

Tethered
Policy

stop

Figure 1. Overview of the O BJECT NAV agent architecture. The
agent receives RGBD input, a GPS+Compass sensor, and must
navigate to a goal instance. Building on [40], we introduce new
auxiliary tasks, a semantic segmentation visual input, a Semantic
Goal Exists (SGE) feature that describes the fraction of the frame
occupied by the goal object, and a method for tethering secondary
policies that learns from its own reward signal with off-policy
updates. We encourage the acting policy to explore, and the tethered
policy to perform efficient O BJECT NAV.

of essentially solving P OINT NAV in Habitat [28].
In this work, we explore how to enable such a generic agent
for O BJECT NAV. O BJECT NAV is considerably more challenging than P OINT NAV; the agent that nearly solves P OINTNAV only achieves 6% success on O BJECT NAV [35]. While
P OINT NAV agents can use the onboard GPS+Compass sensor as a compact representation to measure progress towards
the goal, O BJECT NAV agents cannot; they instead need to
be competent at exploration since the target object can be
anywhere in the environment. As such, a vanilla CNN+RNN
agent tasked with learning these complex representations for
O BJECT NAV is likely to be under-equipped with only an RL
reward, even if the reward is shaped to encourage navigation
towards a goal [35]. Even with an additional exploration
reward and no other feedback to learn better environment
representations, efficient exploration is hard [6].
Our approach builds on a recent advance in P OINT NAV [40]
that combines simple architectures with auxiliary learning
tasks to greatly improve sample complexity in visually complex environments. Specifically, 1) we update the agent’s
inputs to incorporate egocentric semantic segmentation and
a feature that explicitly describes how much of the target
object class is in view. 2) We additionally introduce three
new auxiliary learning tasks: two general task for learning

16117

