Fog Simulation on Real LiDAR Point Clouds
for 3D Object Detection in Adverse Weather
Martin Hahner 1

Christos Sakaridis 1

Dengxin Dai 1,2

Luc Van Gool 1,3

mhahner@vision.ee.ethz.ch

csakarid@vision.ee.ethz.ch

ddai@mpi-inf.mpg.de

luc.vangool@kuleuven.be

1

ETH Zürich

2

MPI for Informatics

3

KU Leuven

Abstract
This work addresses the challenging task of LiDARbased 3D object detection in foggy weather. Collecting and
annotating data in such a scenario is very time, labor and
cost intensive. In this paper, we tackle this problem by simulating physically accurate fog into clear-weather scenes, so
that the abundant existing real datasets captured in clear
weather can be repurposed for our task. Our contributions are twofold: 1) We develop a physically valid fog
simulation method that is applicable to any LiDAR dataset.
This unleashes the acquisition of large-scale foggy training data at no extra cost. These partially synthetic data
can be used to improve the robustness of several perception
methods, such as 3D object detection and tracking or simultaneous localization and mapping, on real foggy data.
2) Through extensive experiments with several state-of-theart detection approaches, we show that our fog simulation
can be leveraged to significantly improve the performance
for 3D object detection in the presence of fog. Thus, we are
the first to provide strong 3D object detection baselines on
the Seeing Through Fog dataset. Our code is available at
www.trace.ethz.ch/lidar fog simulation.

1. Introduction
Light detection and ranging (LiDAR) is crucial for the
implementation of safe autonomous cars, because LiDAR
measures the precise distance of objects from the sensor,
which cameras cannot measure directly. Thus, LiDAR
has found its way into many applications, including detection [23, 34], tracking [7, 50], localization [25, 8], and mapping [48, 15]. Despite the benefit of measuring exact depth
information, LiDAR has a significant drawback. The light
pulses that LiDAR sensors emit in the invisible near infrared
(NIR) spectrum (typically at 850 and 903 to 905 nm wavelength [4]) do not penetrate water particles, as opposed to
automotive radars. This means as soon as there are water
particles in the form of fog in the air, light pulses emitted
by the sensor will undergo backscattering and attenuation.

(a) strongest returns

(b) last returns

Figure 1: LiDAR returns caused by fog in the (top) scene.
(a) shows the strongest returns and (b) the last returns, color
coded by the LiDAR channel. The returns of the ground are
removed for better visibility of the points introduced by fog.
Best viewed in color (red =
b low, cyan =
b high, 3D bounding
box annotation in green, ego vehicle dimensions in gray).

Attenuation reduces the received signal power that corresponds to the range of the solid object in the line of sight
which should be measured, while backscattering creates a
spurious peak in the received signal power at an incorrect
range. As a result, the acquired LiDAR point cloud will
contain some spurious returns whenever there is fog present
at the time of capture. This poses a big challenge for most
outdoor applications, as they typically require robust performance under all weather conditions.
In recent years, several LiDAR datasets for 3D object
detection [10, 3, 19, 5, 39, 27, 11, 16] have been presented.
Although many of them contain diverse driving scenarios,
none of them allows an evaluation on different kinds of adverse weather. Only recently, the Canadian Adverse Driving
Conditions (CADC) Dataset [28] and the Seeing Through
Fog (STF) Dataset [2] address the need for such an evaluation. While CADC focuses on snowfall, STF is targeted
towards evaluation under fog, rain and snow. Consequently,
there is still not a large quantity of LiDAR foggy data available that could be used to train deep neural networks.

15283

