Distinctiveness oriented Positional Equilibrium for Point Cloud Registration
Taewon Min*
KAIST

Chonghyuk Song*
CMU

Abstract
Recent state-of-the-art learning-based approaches to
point cloud registration have largely been based on graph
neural networks (GNN). However, these prominent GNN
backbones suffer from the indistinguishable features problem associated with oversmoothing and structural ambiguity of the high-level features, a crucial bottleneck to point
cloud registration that has evaded scrutiny in the recent
relevant literature. To address this issue, we propose the
Distinctiveness oriented Positional Equilibrium (DoPE)
module, a novel positional embedding scheme that significantly improves the distinctiveness of the high-level features
within both the source and target point clouds, resulting in
superior point matching and hence registration accuracy.
Specifically, we use the DoPE module in an iterative registration framework, whereby the two point clouds are gradually registered via rigid transformations that are computed
from DoPE’s position-aware features. With every successive
iteration, the DoPE module feeds increasingly consistent
positional information to would-be corresponding pairs,
which in turn enhances the resulting point-to-point correspondence predictions used to estimate the rigid transformation. Within only a few iterations, the network converges
to a desired equilibrium, where the positional embeddings
given to matching pairs become essentially identical. We
validate the effectiveness of DoPE through comprehensive
experiments on various registration benchmarks, registration task settings, and prominent backbones, yielding unprecedented performance improvement across all combinations.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is a well-known task by which
two point clouds are matched via a rigid transformation.
For a source point cloud X and a target point cloud Y,
the registration problem is finding a rigid transformation
that minimizes the geometric shape differences between Y
* This work was done while Taewon Min, Chonghyuk Song, and Eunseok Kim were with the Agency for Defense Development (ADD).
† Corresponding author: iwshim@add.re.kr

Eunseok Kim*

Inwook Shim†
ADD

and the transformed X . In many applications such as 3D
reconstruction and simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM), the registration process has long relied on traditional, non-learning-based algorithms to predict the optimal
rigid transformations.
Recently, deep learning methods have brought remarkable advances in a variety of 3D vision tasks, ranging from
classification, segmentation, and, point cloud registration.
A common theme among many learning-based registration
methods [18, 19, 24, 5, 25] is the fact they are comprised
of 1) a feature extraction backbone, usually a graph neural
network (GNN), which generates per-point feature descriptors via iterative local aggregation, followed by 2) a feature
matching step, which computes point-to-point matchability
scores, or (soft) correspondences, between the source and
target point clouds using their extracted features.
For example, Deep Closest Point (DCP) [18] computes
point correspondences from learned features, via attention combined with pointer generation, in order to desensitize the network from initialization and avoid local minima. RPM-Net [24] incorporates Robust Point Matching
(RPM) [3] into the feature matching step to be able to also
handle outliers and missing correspondences. On the other
hand, DeepGMR [25] avoids exhaustive point-to-point correspondences all together by learning correspondences from
both point clouds to a common distribution inside a learned
latent space.
While these recent methods have made significant improvements to the feature matching step and displayed stateof-the-art performance, they overlook a key design consideration for feature extraction that can critically affect registration accuracy: the distinctiveness of the per-point features within both the source and target point clouds; that is,
in order to obtain accurate point-to-point correspondences
for estimating the optimal rigid transformation, the desired
point features should sufficiently represent the geometric
pattern in the neighborhood of any given point while still
being distinguishable enough from the local patterns surrounding other points within the same point cloud. However, many of the GNN backbones typically used to embed the input point clouds into the feature space [12, 20]
are susceptible to oversmoothing [6, 17, 1] and structural

5490

