Self-Supervised Video Representation Learning with Meta-Contrastive Network
Xun Guo2
Yan Lu2
Yuanze Lin1 *
1
University of Washington, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
yuanze@uw.edu,

{xunguo, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has been successfully applied
to pre-train video representations, which aims at efficient
adaptation from pre-training domain to downstream tasks.
Existing approaches merely leverage contrastive loss to
learn instance-level discrimination. However, lack of category information will lead to hard-positive problem that
constrains the generalization ability of this kind of methods. We find that the multi-task process of meta learning
can provide a solution to this problem. In this paper, we
propose a Meta-Contrastive Network (MCN), which combines the contrastive learning and meta learning, to enhance the learning ability of existing self-supervised approaches. Our method contains two training stages based
on model-agnostic meta learning (MAML), each of which
consists of a contrastive branch and a meta branch. Extensive evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method. For two downstream tasks, i.e., video action recognition and video retrieval, MCN outperforms state-of-theart approaches on UCF101 and HMDB51 datasets. To be
more specific, with R(2+1)D backbone, MCN achieves Top1 accuracies of 84.8% and 54.5% for video action recognition, as well as 52.5% and 23.7% for video retrieval.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have brought
unprecedented success for supervised video representation
learning [4, 7, 8, 48, 29] . However, labeling large-scale
video data requires huge human annotations, which is expensive and laborious. How to learn effective video representations by leveraging unlabeled videos is an important yet challenging problem. The recent progress of selfsupervised learning for image provides an efficient solution
to this problem [20, 43, 21, 5], which proposed to use contrastive loss [14, 15, 49, 51, 22] to discriminate different
data samples.
* The work was done when the author was with MSRA as an intern.

Figure 1. Comparison between models trained without and
with MCN on UCF101 [39]. The top row shows the activation
maps produced by conv5 layer of R(2+1)D backbone using the
method of [55]. By using our proposed MCN, the learned representations can capture motion areas more accurately. The bottom
row shows top-1 accuracies of models trained without and with
MCN approach.

This instance-based contrastive learning has also been
applied to videos as pre-training, and achieved excellent
performance on downstream tasks such as video action
recognition and video retrieval [18, 42, 31]. However, it
has the inherent limit of lacking the common category information. The instance-based discrimination process takes
each video sample as an independent class, so that distance
between two video samples will be pushed away by contrastive loss even if they belong to the same category. This
drawback reduces the generalization of the pre-training parameters. Consequently, the efficiency of the supervised
fine-tuning for the downstream tasks will also be damaged. How to improve the generalization of contrastive selfsupervised learning and make the learned parameters easily
adapt from pre-training domain to fine-tuning domain for
various new tasks is still challenging.
Meta learning has demonstrated the capability of fast
18239

