A General Recurrent Tracking Framework without Real Data
Shuai Wang1,2 , Hao Sheng1,2,∗ , Yang Zhang3 , Yubin Wu1,2 , Zhang Xiong1
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P.R.China
2
Beihang Hangzhou Innovation Institute Yuhang, Beihang University, Xixi Octagon City,
Yuhang District, Hangzhou 310023, P.R.China
3
College of Information Science & Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology,
Beijing 100029, P.R.China
{shuaiwang, shenghao, yubin.wu, xiongz}@buaa.edu.cn, yang zh@mail.buct.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent progress in multi-object tracking (MOT) has
shown great significance of a robust scoring mechanism
for potential tracks. However, the lack of available data
in MOT makes it difficult to learn a general scoring mechanism. Multiple cues including appearance, motion and
etc., are limitedly utilized in current manual scoring functions. In this paper, we propose a Multiple Nodes Tracking ( MNT) framework that adapts to most trackers. Based
on this framework, a Recurrent Tracking Unit (RTU) is designed to score potential tracks through long-term information. In addition, we present a method of generating simulated tracking data without real data to overcome the defect
of limited available data in MOT. The experiments demonstrate that our simulated tracking data is effective for training RTU and achieves state-of-the-art performance on both
MOT17 and MOT16 benchmarks. Meanwhile, RTU can be
flexibly plugged into classic trackers such as DeepSORT
and MHT, and makes remarkable improvements as well.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) has attracted a lot of attention for its wide application such as surveillance, cell
analysis and autonomous driving. Tracking-by-detection
has emerged as the preferred paradigm to solve MOT for
its simple pipeline: (i) detecting object locations, (ii) form
tracks by linking corresponding detections across time [2].
In particular, the performance of the linking step, or the data
association highly depends on a robust scoring mechanism.
Currently, the scoring mechanisms in most approaches
only take account of the appearance feature extracted from
the cropped object patches [29]. The tracking accuracy

state feature of node
dummy node
correct node
false node

select the best

𝑠𝑖

track tree

…

𝑠𝑗
𝑠𝑖
RTU RTU RTU

…

…

…

train RTU

simulated tracking data

Figure 1. The processing procedure of our methods. RTU is
trained on simulated data first. After building the track tree, each
possible association is evaluated by RTU to get the score. Then
the tracker selects the best one.

of these methods is limited due to the following reasons.
Firstly, objects across frames suffer from frequent occlusions and pose variation, which leads to much noise in the
appearance features. Secondly, much long-term information is lost since they can not consider the temporal relationship. Even some works [10, 18, 32, 27] utilize multiple cues
such as appearance and motion, the manual scoring function is unsatisfactory when the objects are missing or occluded. Moreover, the parameters of these methods should
be adjusted for new scenes. A general scoring mechanism is
urgently needed to adapt to various scenarios and tracking
frameworks.
To solve this, neural network based scoring methods
have attracted many researchers. For example, Kim et .al
[11] use a specialized gating mechanism in RNN to aggre-

13219

