DTMNet: A Discrete Tchebichef Moments-based Deep Neural Network for
Multi-focus Image Fusion
Bin Xiao Haifeng Wu Xiuli Bi∗
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Chongqing, China
xiaobin@cqupt.edu.cn S190231138@stu.cqupt.edu.cn bixl@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Compared with traditional methods, the deep learningbased multi-focus image fusion methods can effectively improve the performance of image fusion tasks. However,
the existing deep learning-based methods encounter a common issue of a large number of parameters, which leads
to the deep learning models with high time complexity and
low fusion efficiency. To address this issue, we propose a
novel discrete Tchebichef moment-based Deep neural network, termed as DTMNet, for multi-focus image fusion. The
proposed DTMNet is an end-to-end deep neural network
with only one convolutional layer and three fully connected
layers. The convolutional layer is fixed with DTM coefficients (DTMConv) to extract high/low-frequency information without learning parameters effectively. The three
fully connected layers have learnable parameters for feature classification. Therefore, the proposed DTMNet for
multi-focus image fusion has a small number of parameters
(0.01M paras vs. 4.93M paras of regular CNN) and high
computational efficiency (0.32s vs. 79.09s by regular CNN
to fuse an image). In addition, a large-scale multi-focus
image dataset is synthesized for training and verifying the
deep learning model. Experimental results on three public datasets demonstrate that the proposed method is competitive with or even outperforms the state-of-the-art multifocus image fusion methods in terms of subjective visual
perception and objective evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Due to the limitation of imaging devices, it is difficult
to capture an image where all objects are in focus. However, all-in-focus images are often required as input for specific computer vision tasks, such as localization, detection,
and segmentation tasks [4]. A common method to solve
the issues above is the multi-focus image fusion (MFIF)
∗ Corresponding Author

(a) Source image A

(b) Source image B

(c) Fused image

Fig. 1. An example of MFIF with two source images with different focal
lengths. (a) Focus on foreground, (b) Focus on background and (c) All-infocus.

technique, which aims at obtaining an all-in-focus image
by combining two or more images taken with diverse focal lengths [18]. Fig. 1 shows an example of the fused
image obtained from two source images with different focal lengths. According to the fusion strategy, the existing
MFIF methods can be roughly divided into two categories:
traditional MFIF methods and deep learning-based MFIF
methods.
The traditional MFIF methods can be further divided into
transform domain-based methods and spatial domain-based
methods. The transform domain-based methods firstly decompose the source images into multiple coefficients, and
these different coefficients are then fused by following certain fusion rules to get the fused coefficients. Finally, the
fused image is obtained by inverse transformation of the
fused coefficients. Typical transform domain-based methods include gradient pyramid (GP) method [17] and discrete
cosine transform (DCT) method [1]. Although the transform domain-based methods have high noise robustness and
are easy to implement, the fused images always produce unreal results in brightness and color due to the imperfection
of transformations and handcrafted features. As the name
suggests, the source images are fused in the spatial domain
for the spatial domain-based methods, i.e., using some spatial features of images [11]. Typical spatial domain-based
methods include image matting(IM) method [8], guided filtering (GF) method [7] and density-SIFT (DSIFT) method
[10]. Due to the influence of defocus and artificially de-

43

