ID-Reveal: Identity-aware DeepFake Video Detection
Davide Cozzolino1
1

Andreas Rössler2

Justus Thies2,3

Matthias Nießner2

Luisa Verdoliva1

University Federico II of Naples 2 Technical University of Munich
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Abstract
A major challenge in DeepFake forgery detection is that
state-of-the-art algorithms are mostly trained to detect a
specific fake method. As a result, these approaches show
poor generalization across different types of facial manipulations, e.g., from face swapping to facial reenactment.
To this end, we introduce ID-Reveal, a new approach that
learns temporal facial features, specific of how a person
moves while talking, by means of metric learning coupled
with an adversarial training strategy. The advantage is that
we do not need any training data of fakes, but only train on
real videos. Moreover, we utilize high-level semantic features, which enables robustness to widespread and disruptive forms of post-processing. We perform a thorough experimental analysis on several publicly available benchmarks.
Compared to state of the art, our method improves generalization and is more robust to low-quality videos, that are
usually spread over social networks. In particular, we obtain an average improvement of more than 15% in terms of
accuracy for facial reenactment on high compressed videos.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in synthetic media generation allow us to automatically manipulate images and videos with
a high level of realism. To counteract the misuse of these
image synthesis and manipulation methods, the digital media forensics field got a lot of attention [41, 40]. For instance, during the past two years, there has been intense research on DeepFake detection, that has been strongly stimulated by the introduction of large datasets of videos with
manipulated faces [35, 33, 15, 31, 25, 28, 19].
However, despite excellent detection performance, the
major challenge is how to generalize to previously unseen
methods. For instance, a detector trained on face swapping
will drastically drop in performance when tested on a facial
reenactment method. This unfortunately limits practicality
as we see new types of forgeries appear almost on a daily

Figure 1: ID-Reveal is an identity-aware DeepFake video detection. Based on reference videos of a person, we estimate a temporal embedding which is used as a distance metric to detect fake
videos.

basis. As a result, supervised detection, which requires extensive training data of a specific forgery method, cannot
immediately detect a newly-seen forgery type.
This mismatch and generalization issue has been addressed in the literature using different strategies, ranging
from applying domain adaptation [12, 5] or active learning [17] to strongly increasing augmentation during training
[43, 15] or by means of ensemble procedures [15, 7]. A different line of research is relying only on pristine videos at
training time and detecting possible anomalies with respect
to forged ones [24, 11, 13]. This can help to increase the
generalization ability with respect to new unknown manipulations but does not solve the problem of videos characterized by a different digital history. This is quite common
whenever a video is spread over social networks and posted
multiple times by different users. In fact, most of the platforms often reduce the quality and/or the video resolution.
Note also that current literature has mostly focused on
face-swapping, a manipulation that replaces the facial identity of a subject with another one, however, a very effective
modification is facial reenactment [39], where only the expression or the lips movements of a person are modified
(Fig. 2). Recently, the MIT Center for Advanced Virtual-

15108

