Transfusion: A Novel SLAM Method Focused on Transparent Objects
Yifan Zhu
Nankai University

Jiaxiong Qiu
Nankai University

Bo Ren†
Nankai University

zhuyifan@mail.nankai.edu.cn

qiujiaxiong727@gmail.com

rb@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently RGB-D sensors have become very popular in the
area of Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping (SLAM).
The RGB-D SLAM approach relies heavily on the accuracy
of the input depth map. However, refraction and reflection
of transparent objects will result in false depth input of
RGB-D cameras, which makes the traditional RGB-D
SLAM algorithm unable to work correctly in the presence
of transparent objects. In this paper, we propose a novel
SLAM approach called transfusion that allows transparent
object existence and recovery in the video input. Our
method is composed of two parts. Transparent Objects
Cut Iterative Closest Points (TC-ICP)is first used to
recover camera pose, detecting and removing transparent
objects from input to reduce the trajectory errors. Then
Transparent Objects Reconstruction (TO-Reconstruction)
is used to reconstruct the transparent objects and opaque
objects separately. The opaque objects are reconstructed
with the traditional method, and the transparent objects
are reconstructed with the visual hull-based method. To
evaluate our algorithm, we construct a new RGB-D SLAM
database containing 25 video sequences. Each sequence
has at least one transparent object. Experiments show
that our approach can work adequately in scenes contain
transparent objects while the existing approach can not
handle them. Our approach significantly improves the
accuracy of the camera trajectory and the quality of
environment reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the interests in visual SLAM has been significantly increased due to its variety of usages on many
other computer vision applications, such as augmented reality, autonomous driving car, and robotics navigation. There
are rich types of sensors utilized for SLAM algorithm, such
as lidar, monocular camera, RGB-D camera, etc [7, 3, 2].
Among them, the RGB-D camera has been widely consid†Bo Ren is the corresponding author

Figure 1. Reconstruction result of two scene with our method
and Elasticfusion[31]. Due to the transparent object’s characteristic, the passed RGB-D slam method can not reconstruct the
scene contains transparent objects properly. The first column is the
reconstruction result of Elasticfusion without transparent objects;
in the second column is the reconstruction result of Elasticfusion
with transparent objects; in the third column is the reconstruction
result of our algorithm with transparent objects.

ered for the visual SLAM since it can provide a rich source
of 3D information at a relatively low cost.
There is a lot of excellent SLAM methods that take
RGB-D as perception modules [31, 24, 5, 16]. They can
get more refined reconstruction results than the monocular
methods and can eliminate the scale drifting problem. However, they are all developed in an environment where there
are all opaque objects, and as shown in Fig. 1, they cannot
properly function when the environment contains transparent objects. But, transparent objects made of glass, such
as bottles, windows, are ubiquitous around us, so it is essential to study the RGB-D SLAM algorithms that contain
transparent objects in the environment model.
RGB-D cameras usually equip infrared light emission
and receivers to measure the depth, such as Microsoft’s
Kinect and Intel’s RealSense. Unlike opaque objects, transparent materials do not satisfy the classic geometric light
path assumptions of stereo vision algorithms. When in-

6019

