Fake it till you make it: face analysis in the wild using synthetic data alone
Erroll Wood* Tadas Baltrušaitis* Charlie Hewitt
Sebastian Dziadzio Thomas J. Cashman Jamie Shotton
Microsoft

Abstract
We demonstrate that it is possible to perform face-related
computer vision in the wild using synthetic data alone. The
community has long enjoyed the benefits of synthesizing
training data with graphics, but the domain gap between real
and synthetic data has remained a problem, especially for
human faces. Researchers have tried to bridge this gap with
data mixing, domain adaptation, and domain-adversarial
training, but we show that it is possible to synthesize data
with minimal domain gap, so that models trained on synthetic data generalize to real in-the-wild datasets. We describe how to combine a procedurally-generated parametric
3D face model with a comprehensive library of hand-crafted
assets to render training images with unprecedented realism and diversity. We train machine learning systems for
face-related tasks such as landmark localization and face
parsing, showing that synthetic data can both match real
data in accuracy as well as open up new approaches where
manual labeling would be impossible.

1. Introduction
When faced with a machine learning problem, the hardest
challenge often isn’t choosing the right machine learning
model, it’s finding the right data. This is especially difficult in the realm of human-related computer vision, where
concerns about the fairness of models and the ethics of deployment are paramount [31]. Instead of collecting and
labelling real data, which is slow, expensive, and subject to
bias, it can be preferable to synthesize training data using
computer graphics [68]. With synthetic data, you can guarantee perfect labels without annotation noise, generate rich
labels that are otherwise impossible to label by hand, and
have full control over variation and diversity in a dataset.
Rendering convincing humans is one of the hardest problems in computer graphics. Movies and video games have
shown that realistic digital humans are possible, but with
* Denotes equal contribution.

https://microsoft.github.io/FaceSynthetics

Figure 1. We render training images of faces with unprecedented
realism and diversity. The first example above is shown along with
3D geometry and accompanying labels for machine learning.

significant artist effort per individual [22, 26]. While it’s
possible to generate endless novel face images with recent
self-supervised approaches [27], corresponding labels for
supervised learning are not available. As a result, previous
work has resorted to synthesizing facial training data with
simplifications, with results that are far from realistic. We
have seen progress in efforts that attempt to cross the domain
gap using domain adaptation [60] by refining synthetic images to look more real, and domain-adversarial training [13]
where machine learning models are encouraged to ignore
differences between the synthetic and real domains, but less
work has attempted to improve the quality of synthetic data
itself. Synthesizing realistic face data has been considered
so hard that we encounter the assumption that synthetic data
cannot fully replace real data for problems in the wild [60].
In this paper we demonstrate that the opportunities for
synthetic data are much wider than previously realised, and
are achievable today. We present a new method of acquiring
training data for faces – rendering 3D face models with an
unprecedented level of realism and diversity (see Figure 1).
With a sufficiently good synthetic framework, it is possible

3681

