Adaptive Focus for Efficient Video Recognition
Yulin Wang∗, Zhaoxi Chen∗, Haojun Jiang, Shiji Song, Yizeng Han, Gao Huang†
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{wang-yl19, jhj20, hanyz18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, frozen.burning@gmail.com,
{shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the spatial redundancy in video
recognition with the aim to improve the computational efficiency. It is observed that the most informative region
in each frame of a video is usually a small image patch,
which shifts smoothly across frames. Therefore, we model
the patch localization problem as a sequential decision task,
and propose a reinforcement learning based approach for
efficient spatially adaptive video recognition (AdaFocus). In
specific, a light-weighted ConvNet is first adopted to quickly
process the full video sequence, whose features are used by
a recurrent policy network to localize the most task-relevant
regions. Then the selected patches are inferred by a highcapacity network for the final prediction. During offline inference, once the informative patch sequence has been generated, the bulk of computation can be done in parallel, and
is efficient on modern GPU devices. In addition, we demonstrate that the proposed method can be easily extended by
further considering the temporal redundancy, e.g., dynamically skipping less valuable frames. Extensive experiments
on five benchmark datasets, i.e., ActivityNet, FCVID, MiniKinetics, Something-Something V1&V2, demonstrate that
our method is significantly more efficient than the competitive baselines. Code is available at https://github.
com/blackfeather-wang/AdaFocus.

1. Introduction
The explosive growth of online videos (e.g., on YouTube
or TikTok) has fueled the demands for automatically recognizing human actions, events, or other contents within them,
which benefits applications like recommendation [7, 8, 15],
surveillance [6, 3] and content-based searching [22]. In
the past few years, remarkable success in accurate video
recognition has been achieved by leveraging deep networks
[11, 53, 12, 2, 36, 19]. However, the impressive performance of these models usually comes at high computational
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparisons of temporal-based methods and our
proposed AdaFocus approach. Most existing works reduce computational costs by selecting a few informative frames to process,
while AdaFocus aims to perform efficient inference by attending to
the task-relevant patch of each frame. Importantly, our method is
compatible with temporal-based techniques as it can be improved
by skipping less important frames (AdaFocus+).

costs. In real-world scenarios, computation directly translates into power consumption, carbon emission and practical latency, which should be minimized under both economic and safety considerations.
To address this issue, a number of recent works propose to reduce the inherent temporal redundancy in video
recognition [26, 29, 45, 42, 16, 44, 25]. As shown in Figure 1 (b), it is efficient to focus on the most task-relevant
video frames, and allocate the majority of computation
to them rather than all frames. However, another important source of redundant computation in image-based data,
namely spatial redundancy, has rarely been explored in
the context of efficient video recognition. In fact, it has
been shown in 2D-image classification that convolutional
networks (CNNs) are able to produce correct predictions
with only a few discriminative regions of the whole image

16249

