Aggregation with Feature Detection
Shuyang Sun1 Xiaoyu Yue2 Xiaojuan Qi3 Wanli Ouyang4 Victor Prisacariu1 Philip Torr1
1
University of Oxford 2 Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
3
University of Hong Kong 4 The University of Sydney

Abstract
Aggregating features from different depths of a network
is widely adopted to improve the network capability. Lots of
modern architectures are equipped with skip connections,
which actually makes the feature aggregation happen in all
these networks. Since different features tell different semantic meanings, there are inconsistencies and incompatibilities to be solved. However, existing works naı̈vely blend
deep features via element-wise summation or concatenation with a convolution behind. Better feature aggregation
method beyond summation or concatenation is rarely explored. In this paper, given two layers of features to be
aggregated together, we first detect and identify where and
what needs to be updated in one layer, then replace the feature at the identified location with the information of the
other layer. This process, which we call DEtect-rePLAce
(DEPLA), enables us to avoid inconsistent patterns while
keeping useful information in the merged outputs. Experimental results demonstrate our method largely boosts multiple baselines e.g. ResNet, FishNet and FPN on three major
vision tasks including ImageNet classification, MS COCO
object detection and instance segmentation.

1. Introduction
Representation learning is considered to be the engine
for most applications in the field of computer vision. By
stacking basic blocks with different connectivities, deep
networks can be designed for various tasks, e.g. image classification [15, 18, 46, 34, 35, 16, 48, 25, 7, 45], object detection [20, 34] and semantic segmentation [30].
Deep networks [15, 18, 34, 20, 30, 46] that fuses features from different depths have benefited many applications in computer vision. It is often the case that features
from deeper layers are better geared towards the final prediction because they contain high-level semantics harvested
from large contextual region. However, recent works have
found that there may be information loss when forwardpropagating data throughout the network [15, 13, 18]. Thus
skip connections [15] or dense connections [18] were pro-

𝐗

RPN

ROIs
ROI
Pool

Filling

𝐘 in ROIs
𝐘
Figure 1: Brief description of DEPLA. Given an identity
feature X and a candidate feature Y, our method could first
locate where and what need to be updated in the identity
feature X, and then migrate the information from the candidate feature Y using the learnt locations.

posed to consecutively fuse features from previous layers
to prevent such loss of information and better leverage the
capacity of the network. The above facts indicate that the
features at all depths are crucial for building up a network
with better performance.
Existing methods [15, 18, 20, 46, 22] however largely
focus on features of which layers should be combined, and
paid little attention to how to combine them. To the best of
our knowledge, state-of-the-art backbones [28, 36] for feature extraction still follow the conventional design in [15].
They use either the element-wise sums to fuse the features
together, or a concatenation/convolution [18]. However, as
the semantic meaning of different features may vary, network activation at the same position but on different feature
maps may capture very different information. The aforementioned element-wise sum or concatenation cannot discover the inconsistency or the incompatibility between features during the feature aggregation. A method that can
identify which location to aggregate is needed.
In this study, we aim to address this problem by designing a pipeline that can learn to detect the most appropriate
part of feature for aggregation. As shown in Figure 1, we
reformulate the entire feature aggregation process as a twostage process. Specifically, we first detect where to update,
then aggregate the selected locations using the detected fea1527

