Learning Multi-Scene Absolute Pose Regression with Transformers
Yoli Shavit
Ron Ferens
Yosi Keller
Faculty of Engineering, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel
{yolisha, ronferens, yosi.keller}@gmail.com

Abstract
Absolute camera pose regressors estimate the position
and orientation of a camera from the captured image alone.
Typically, a convolutional backbone with a multi-layer perceptron head is trained using images and pose labels to
embed a single reference scene at a time. Recently, this
scheme was extended for learning multiple scenes by replacing the MLP head with a set of fully connected layers. In this work, we propose to learn multi-scene absolute
camera pose regression with Transformers, where encoders
are used to aggregate activation maps with self-attention
and decoders transform latent features and scenes encoding into candidate pose predictions. This mechanism allows
our model to focus on general features that are informative
for localization while embedding multiple scenes in parallel. We evaluate our method on commonly benchmarked
indoor and outdoor datasets and show that it surpasses
both multi-scene and state-of-the-art single-scene absolute
pose regressors. We make our code publicly available from
https://github.com/yolish/multi-scene-pose-transformer.

1. Introduction
Localizing a camera using a query image is a key task
in many computer vision applications, such as indoor navigation, augmented reality and autonomous driving, to name
a few. Contemporary approaches for estimating the position and orientation of a camera offer different trade-offs
between accuracy, runtime, and memory. For example, hierarchical localization pipelines [26, 30, 25] achieve stateof-the-art (SOTA) pose accuracy, but are relatively slow (response time of hundreds of milliseconds) and require a large
memory footprint and client-server connectivity. These approaches employ image retrieval (IR) to fetch images that
are similar to the query image, followed by local features
extraction and matching. The extracted 2D-2D matches
are mapped to 2D-3D correspondences via depth or a 3D
point cloud, and are then used to estimate the camera pose
with Perspective-n-Point (PnP) and RANSAC [13]. Absolute pose regressors (APRs), on the other hand, estimate

Position
Transformer
0

CNN

1

2

0

1

2

3

2

MLP

𝑥

2

MLP

𝑞

3

Selected Scene Index

+

Query Image
From Scene 2
Orientation
Transformer
0

1

2

0

1

2

3

3

Figure 1: Multi-scene absolute pose regression with Transformers. Two Transformers separately attend to positionand orientation- informative features from a convolutional
backbone. Scene-specific queries (0−3) are further encoded
with aggregated activation maps into latent representations,
from which a single output is selected. The strongest response, shown as an overlaid color-coded heatmap of attention weights, is obtained with the output associated with
the input image’s scene. The selected outputs are used to
regress the position x and the orientation q.

the camera pose with a single forward pass, using only the
query image. They are an order of magnitude faster and can
be deployed as a standalone application on a thin client due
to their small memory footprint. Unfortunately, APRs are
also an order of magnitude less accurate compared to hierarchical localization pipelines and to other methods utilizing
3D data at inference time [27]. Moreover, most APRs are
designed to embed a single scene at a time, implying that for
a dataset with N scenes (for example, a hospital with many
wards and rooms), N models are required to be trained,
deployed and chosen from during inference. In this work,
we focus on improving the accuracy of APRs while extending the current single-scene paradigm for learning multiple
scenes in parallel.
The formulation of absolute camera pose regression was
first suggested by Kendall et al. [17]. Following the success
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in learning different computer vision tasks, the authors suggested to adapt

2733

