BN-NAS: Neural Architecture Search with Batch Normalization
Boyu Chen1 ,* Peixia Li1 ,* Baopu Li2†, Chen Lin3 , Chuming Li1,4 , Ming Sun4 , Junjie Yan4 , Wanli Ouyang1†
1
The University of Sydney, 2 BAIDU USA LLC,
3
University of Oxford, 4 SenseTime Group Limited

Abstract
We present BN-NAS, neural architecture search with
Batch Normalization (BN-NAS), to accelerate neural architecture search (NAS). BN-NAS can significantly reduce
the time required by model training and evaluation in NAS.
Specifically, for fast evaluation, we propose a BN-based indicator for predicting subnet performance at a very early
training stage. The BN-based indicator further facilitates
us to improve the training efficiency by only training the
BN parameters during the supernet training. This is based
on our observation that training the whole supernet is not
necessary while training only BN parameters accelerates
network convergence for network architecture search. Extensive experiments show that our method can significantly
shorten the time of training supernet by more than 10 times
and shorten the time of evaluating subnets by more than
600,000 times without losing accuracy. The source codes
are available at https://github.com/bychen515/BNNAS.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS), which aims to find
the optimal network architecture automatically, has significantly improved the network performance in many computer vision tasks, such as image classification [36, 11, 17,
8, 3], object detection [18, 6, 21], semantic segmentation
[4, 19], etc. However, a successful NAS method usually
means training and evaluating thousands of models, which
takes up to thousands of GPU days [36, 25]. The huge
searching budget makes NAS hard to be applied widely.
To overcome the above issue, one-shot methods [24, 11],
have been proposed to reduce the computational cost based
on the weight-sharing technique, reducing the search cost
from thousands of GPU days to tens of GPU days. These
methods construct a supernet that includes all candidate network architectures. With the constructed supernet, one-shot
methods consist of three stages: supernet training, subnet
searching and subnet retraining.
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Training

Searching

SPOS

1 GPU day

100 epochs

OURS

Train all parameters
Only train BN

Evaluate 1000 subnets
Evaluate BN scores

10 epochs + external
20% speed up

0.14s on CPU

Figure 1. Designs and computational cost of SPOS and Our BNNAS. Compared with SPOS, our proposed BN-NAS can accelerate the one-shot methods in two stages: training supernet more
than ten times faster, and searching subnets more than 600,000
times faster. The key to the speed-up is the BN-based indicator,
which saves the searching cost and facilitates the training only BN
paramters with much fewer epochs. SPOS needs 11 GPU hours in
total. Ours needs only 0.8 GPU hours.

In the supernet training stage, the supernet is trained by
back-propagation. In the subnet searching stage, subnets
are sampled from supernet and treated as the candidate architectures. The sampled subnets are evaluated on validation data, from which the top-5 subnets with the highest
accuracy on validation data are selected in SPOS. The selected subnets are then retrained from random initialization
in the subnet retraining stage. The primary benefit of oneshot methods is that the subnets can inherit the weights of
supernet to reduce the computational burden significantly in
the searching stage. However, the process of training supernet hundreds of epochs and evaluating thousands of subnets
is still time-consuming, leading to tens of GPU days cost.
In this paper, we identify the parameters learned at the
Batch Normalization (BN) layer as the key to significantly
reduce the excessive time required by one-shot methods in
training and searching stages. In searching stage, the motivation is that BN parameter is a very light-weight measure
for the importance of operations and subnets. Existing oneshot methods evaluate thousands of subnets on validation
data. Although the searching process efficiency has been
improved, the large computation required for these thousands of subnets is still a burden. It is widely accepted that

307

