Visio-Temporal Attention for Multi-Camera Multi-Target Association
Yu-Jhe Li

Xinshuo Weng
Yan Xu
Carnegie Mellon University

Kris Kitani

{yujheli, xinshuow, yxu2, kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We address the task of Re-Identification (Re-ID) in multitarget multi-camera (MTMC) tracking where we track multiple pedestrians using multiple overlapping uncalibrated
(unknown pose) cameras. Since the videos are temporally synchronized and spatially overlapping, we can see a
person from multiple views and associate their trajectory
across cameras. In order to find the correct association
between pedestrians visible from multiple views during the
same time window, we extract a visual feature from a tracklet (sequence of pedestrian images) that encodes its similarity and dissimilarity to all other candidate tracklets. We
propose a inter-tracklet (person to person) attention mechanism that learns a representation for a target tracklet while
taking into account other tracklets across multiple views.
Furthermore, to encode the gait and motion of a person,
we introduce second intra-tracklet (person-specific) attention module with position embeddings. This second module
employs a transformer encoder to learn a feature from a sequence of features over one tracklet. Experimental results
on WILDTRACK and our new dataset ‘ConstructSite’ confirm the superiority of our model over state-of-the-art ReID
methods (5% and 10% performance gain respectively) in
the context of uncalibrated MTMC tracking. While our
model is designed for overlapping cameras, we also obtain
state-of-the-art results on two other benchmark datasets
(MARS and DukeMTMC) with non-overlapping cameras.

1. Introduction
Multi-Target Multi-Camera (MTMC) tracking [22, 37]
relies deeply on the ability to associate people between multiple cameras to determine the position of each person over
time. Depending on the situations, the cameras may be synchronized, calibrated (known position) or have overlapping
views. In this work, we focus on the case where cameras
are synchronized with overlapping views, but the calibration information is not available. Our aim is to develop a
method that can perform association of pedestrian trajectories across cameras without using any calibration informa-

Camera 1

Camera 2

Camera 3

Camera 4

Figure 1: Multi-target multi-camera tracking with overlapping views. When the target person is seen from multiple synchronized cameras (views), identifying the person is
feasible by finding the similarities and dissimilarities across
multiple views. Note that the geometry information such as
the position of each camera may not be known.

tion about the cameras (shown in Figure 1).
In order to develop such a method for data association across uncalibrated cameras, we need to extract a discriminative feature for each person over a sequence of image patches (tracklet) and perform feature matching across
tracklets in different cameras. This process we have described is a form of the Re-Identification (Re-ID) problem [71]. In the time-synchronized MTMC scenario, the
Re-ID problem is simplified since we only need to match
pedestrians appearing in multiple cameras during the same
time window. Within this time window, we would like to
extract visual features that are both representative and discriminative (sufficiently different from other pedestrians in
the same view) so that we can match people across camera
views.
To learn both a representative and discriminative visual
feature for robust person association across views, we propose a novel video-based Re-ID model using Transformers [50]. Since attention models [63] has the ability to learn
and embed the similarity and dissimilarity between different synchronized tracklets from overlapping views, it can be
used to learn representative and discriminative visual fea-

9834

