Human Trajectory Prediction via Counterfactual Analysis
Guangyi Chen1,2,3 , Junlong Li1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
chen-gy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; ljlong.leo@gmail.com; {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Forecasting human trajectories in complex dynamic environments plays a critical role in autonomous vehicles and
intelligent robots. Most existing methods learn to predict future trajectories by behavior clues from history trajectories
and interaction clues from environments. However, the inherent bias between training and deployment environments
is ignored. Hence, we propose a counterfactual analysis
method for human trajectory prediction to investigate the
causality between the predicted trajectories and input clues
and alleviate the negative effects brought by the environment bias. We first build a causal graph for trajectory forecasting with history trajectory, future trajectory, and the
environment interactions. Then, we cut off the inference
from environment to trajectory by constructing the counterfactual intervention on the trajectory itself. Finally, we
compare the factual and counterfactual trajectory clues to
alleviate the effects of environment bias and highlight the
trajectory clues. Our counterfactual analysis is a plug-andplay module that can be applied to any baseline prediction
methods including RNN- and CNN-based ones. We show
that our method achieves consistent improvement for different baselines and obtains the state-of-the-art results on
public pedestrian trajectory forecasting benchmarks.1

1. Introduction
Human trajectory prediction aims at forecasting the future trajectory of pedestrians based on their past positions
in complex and crowd environments. It is a critical and fundamental task for many applications, including the planning
and controlling of the autonomous vehicles, the robot navigation, and the tracking and re-identification in the crowd
surveillance [39, 7, 8, 3, 9]. Thanks to these significances,
∗ Corresponding author

1 Code and a video demo are available at https://github.com/
CHENGY12/CausalHTP

E

X

Y

Factual causal graph

E

(a)

Train

Test
𝐘𝐘(𝐱𝐱𝑥)

X=𝐱𝐱𝑥

Counterfactual intervention

𝑌𝑌𝐶𝐶 = 𝑌𝑌 − 𝑌𝑌(𝑥𝑥𝑥)
(b)

(c)

Figure 1. The motivation and key idea of our approach. In part (a),
we show the bias between training and testing environments of the
UNIV scene. We respectively compare the average numbers of
neighbors, parallel trajectories, trajectories that pedestrians meet,
and trajectories that pedestrians gather. In part (b), we visualize
the training and testing environments. We can observe obvious
difference between two environments. In part (c), we first build
a causal graph with nodes E (environment interaction), X (history
trajectory), and Y (future trajectory). Then, at the bottom of (c),
we conduct the counterfactual intervention on the X history trajectory to cut off the dependence between history trajectory and
environment interaction. The causal prediction YC is obtained by
computing the difference between the original and counterfactual
predictions to alleviate the negative effects of environment bias.

human trajectory prediction task has attracted much attention over the past few years [1, 53, 56, 15, 25].
Despite the recent progress, trajectory prediction is still a
challenging problem due to complex social or physical environment interactions. In crowded environment, the pedestrians are always interacted with the social behavior from
other pedestrians and the common scene context. For example, pedestrians may walk in parallel for social talking
or stop for seconds to avoid collisions. Besides, the behaviors of pedestrians may be interacted by the traffic light,
crosswalk, or just an obstacle like a tree.
Most existing methods concentrate on modeling the en-

9824

