Low-Shot Validation: Active Importance Sampling
for Estimating Classifier Performance on Rare Categories
Fait Poms*1

Vishnu Sarukkai*1

William R. Mark3

Ravi Teja Mullapudi2

Deva Ramanan2,4

Nimit S. Sohoni1

Kayvon Fatahalian1

Abstract
For machine learning models trained with limited labeled training data, validation stands to become the main
bottleneck to reducing overall annotation costs. We propose a statistical validation algorithm that accurately estimates the F-score of binary classifiers for rare categories,
where finding relevant examples to evaluate on is particularly challenging. Our key insight is that simultaneous
calibration and importance sampling enables accurate estimates even in the low-sample regime (< 300 samples).
Critically, we also derive an accurate single-trial estimator of the variance of our method and demonstrate that
this estimator is empirically accurate at low sample counts,
enabling a practitioner to know how well they can trust
a given low-sample estimate. When validating state-ofthe-art semi-supervised models on ImageNet and iNaturalist2017, our method achieves the same estimates of model
performance with up to 10× fewer labels than competing
approaches. In particular, we can estimate model F1 scores
with a variance of 0.005 using as few as 100 labels.

1. Introduction
As model training techniques become increasingly label efficient, model validation stands to become a dominant
fraction of overall data annotation costs. For example, stateof-the-art semi-supervised [3, 9, 2], weakly supervised [19],
few-shot [7, 15], and active learning [25, 4, 8, 24] techniques all offer the promise of training models using a
small number of human-labeled examples, but validating
the resulting models typically uses large, human-annotated
datasets. As a result, the cost of annotating validation sets
is a significant factor limiting rapid model development.
In this paper we focus on the challenge of efficiently validating binary image classifiers for rare categories (positive instances are ≤ 0.1% of the dataset). Building binary
classification models for rare categories is common in realworld settings—wildlife preservation monitoring requires
identifying rare flora and fauna species; autonomous vehi* Both authors contributed equally to this paper
1 Stanford University
2 Carnegie Mellon University
3 Google
4 Argo AI

Training dataset

Validation dataset

70% of labeled data

Total labels

30%

100%

30%

31%

Semi-supervised, weakly supervised, few-shot

Unlabeled data

1%

Low-shot validation
Unlabeled data

1%

Unlabeled 1%

2%

Figure 1: Recent model training techniques such as selfsupervised learning, few-shot learning, and weakly supervised learning have made it possible to train models with
a fraction of the traditional fully supervised training set.
However, these methods still mostly evaluate using a large
validation set. In this paper, we focus on low-shot validation, which addresses the high relative cost of collecting labeled validation data for models trained using label-efficient
techniques.
cles must recognize rare categories, like baby strollers, to
avoid collisions. The validation problem is particularly difficult for rare categories: while it is easy to collect a large
amount of unlabeled data, finding even a small number of
positives via uniform random sampling can require labeling
thousands of images.
Given a binary classification model to validate and a
large unlabeled dataset, our goal is to estimate the model’s
F-score [29] on the data using a small number of annotated
data samples. The F-score of a model depends on the distribution of the model’s predicted labels, which are known,
and the dataset’s ground-truth labels, which require data
annotation. Importance sampling [27] is a powerful theoretical tool for stochastically sampling the most important
points in a dataset to label, but the efficiency of estimating
F-scores using importance sampling depends on accurate
knowledge of the likelihood that a given sample is a positive. Therefore, the key challenge in using importance sampling for efficiently computing F-scores is model calibration, the task of predicting the likelihood that a given sample is a positive, conditioned on the model scores. Given
this observation, we propose an active sampling algorithm
that alternates between acquiring labels used to train an iso-

10705

