Topic Scene Graph Generation by Attention Distillation from Caption
Wenbin Wang1,2 , Ruiping Wang1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, 100084, China
wenbin.wang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

tree
person

If an image tells a story, the image caption is the briefest
narrator. Generally, a scene graph prefers to be an omniscient “generalist”, while the image caption is more willing to be a “specialist”, which outlines the gist. Lots of
previous studies have found that a scene graph is not as
practical as expected unless it can reduce the trivial contents and noises. In this respect, the image caption is a
good tutor. To this end, we let the scene graph borrow the
ability from the image caption so that it can be a specialist
on the basis of remaining all-around, resulting in the socalled Topic Scene Graph. What an image caption pays
attention to is distilled and passed to the scene graph for
estimating the importance of partial objects, relationships,
and events. Specifically, during the caption generation, the
attention about individual objects in each time step is collected, pooled, and assembled to obtain the attention about
relationships, which serves as weak supervision for regularizing the estimated importance scores of relationships. In
addition, as this attention distillation process provides an
opportunity for combining the generation of image caption
and scene graph together, we further transform the scene
graph into linguistic form with rich and free-form expressions by sharing a single generation model with image caption. Experiments show that attention distillation brings
significant improvements in mining important relationships
without strong supervision, and the topic scene graph shows
great potential in subsequent applications.

1. Introduction
A picture is worth a thousand words. However, only a
few person prefers to know all of the “thousand words”,
while others would like to be informed the “topic words”.
Therefore, the scene graph and the image caption are used
for conveying the image contents out of different purposes.

grass
shirt

hat

•
•
•
•
•

person on horse
horse on grass
person has hat
person has shirt
tree near person

horse

(a) Traditional Scene Graph

tree
person
A person is riding a
horse on the grass.

grass
shirt

hat

horse

• a person riding the
horse
• a horse running on
the grass
• a person is wearing a
blue shirt
• tree behind the
person

(b) Topic Scene Graph

Figure 1. Comparison of the (a) traditional general scene
graph, and the (b) topic scene graph generated under the
guidance of attention in the image caption, which gives priority to the important relationships (highlighted nodes and
edges), and expresses a relationship in the style of natural
language.
Concretely, the scene graph [20] consists of objects in an
image and the relationships between pairs of objects. A series of studies have tried to generate the scene graph and
realize its potential in advanced intelligence tasks, e.g., visual Q&A [2, 47], visual reasoning [44], and vision-andlanguage navigation (VLN) [53], etc. Nevertheless, as
pointed in [25, 35, 52], the scene graph is helpful only if
it is informative, while the current generated scene graph
with such a lot of noises does not meet this standard. This is
mainly due to the explosive combination possibility of two
objects [52, 65], which brings the double-edge effect that
the scene graph is comprehensive but the key information
is overwhelmed by massive trivial details. It is necessary
and practical to make the scene graph well-circumscribed
between important and trivial contents. Fortunately, the image caption exactly shows this ability and is a good teacher
from which a scene graph should learn.
In the context of scene graph generation, few researches
devote endeavor to discovering the important relationships,
which is a meaningful step for restricting the scale of the

15900

