Semantically Robust Unpaired Image Translation for Data with Unmatched
Semantics Statistics
Zhiwei Jia1 * Bodi Yuan2 * Kangkang Wang2 Hong Wu2
David Clifford2 Zhiqiang Yuan2 Hao Su1
1
UC San Diego {zjia,haosu}@eng.ucsd.edu
2
X {bodiyuan,kangkang,wuh,davidclifford,zyuan}@google.com

Abstract
Many applications of unpaired image-to-image translation require the input contents to be preserved semantically
during translations. Unaware of the inherently unmatched
semantics distributions between source and target domains,
existing distribution matching methods (i.e., GAN-based)
can give undesired solutions. In particular, although producing visually reasonable outputs, the learned models usually flip the semantics of the inputs. To tackle this without
using extra supervisions, we propose to enforce the translated outputs to be semantically invariant w.r.t. small perceptual variations of the inputs, a property we call “semantic robustness”. By optimizing a robustness loss w.r.t. multiscale feature space perturbations of the inputs, our method
effectively reduces semantics flipping and produces translations that outperform existing methods both quantitatively
and qualitatively.

Figure 1: The class distributions in GTA vs. Cityscapes.
During unpaired image translation, the generator has to flip
the inputs’ semantics to match the target distributions. Instances from over-represented semantic classes in the source
domain (e.g., sky) can be flipped to those from underrepresented classes (e.g., vegetation).

1. Introduction
Recently, unpaired image-to-image translation [11] has
been very popular in the computer vision community. Due
to its general assumptions on the inputs (unlabelled images collected from different domains) and the easy accessibility of training data (does not use paired images),
it is widely used in fields such as image manipulations,
style transfer, domain adaptation, data augmentation, etc.
[13, 58, 43, 22, 28, 9, 30, 41, 45, 2]. On the other hand,
unpaired image translation remains a very challenging task
owing to its unsupervised learning nature. Without paired
images that specify the exact domain mapping, one has to
rely on visual cues to perform distribution matching (i.e.,
via GANs [16]). Existing GAN-based methods all rely
on the adversarial loss that aims to optimally align image
statistics between translation images and the target ones (in
* Co-first authors; work partly done during an internship at X. Code
available at https://github.com/SeanJia/SRUNIT.

Figure 2: (top) Conceptually, forcing the distribution of
translated images to match the target one causes semantics (the different colored shapes) of the input images to get
flipped. (bottom) An example of semantics flipping (highlighted in red boxes) from the GTA to Cityscapes task.
the marginal sense). However, what if the two distributions
should not be the same? In fact, the underlying distributions
of semantics from the two domains are usually different, let
alone the image distribution of translated images and target
one. We call this the unmatched semantics statistics problem, which is under-explored yet both critical and common
for unpaired image translation tasks.
14273

