Self-Supervised Real-to-Sim Scene Generation
Aayush Prakash
Eric Cameracci

Shoubhik Debnath
Jean-Francois Lafleche
Gavriel State
Stan Birchfield
Marc T. Law
NVIDIA

Abstract
Synthetic data is emerging as a promising solution
to the scalability issue of supervised deep learning, especially when real data are difficult to acquire or hard to
annotate. Synthetic data generation, however, can itself
be prohibitively expensive when domain experts have to
manually and painstakingly oversee the process. Moreover, neural networks trained on synthetic data often
do not perform well on real data because of the domain
gap. To solve these challenges, we propose Sim2SG,
a self-supervised automatic scene generation technique
for matching the distribution of real data. Importantly,
Sim2SG does not require supervision from the real-world
dataset, thus making it applicable in situations for which
such annotations are difficult to obtain. Sim2SG is designed to bridge both the content and appearance gaps,
by matching the content of real data, and by matching
the features in the source and target domains. We select
scene graph (SG) generation as the downstream task,
due to the limited availability of labeled datasets. Experiments demonstrate significant improvements over
leading baselines in reducing the domain gap both qualitatively and quantitatively, on several synthetic datasets
as well as the real-world KITTI dataset.

1. Introduction
Synthetic data, for which annotations can be automatically generated, is a promising solution to overcome
the well-known supervised learning bottleneck of labeling real data. For this approach to succeed, such synthetic data must look like real data, in both appearance
and content. Differences in appearance and content
together comprise the so-called “domain gap” between
synthetic and real data [55, 27]. Appearance refers to
aspects like color, texture, shape, and lighting, whereas
Correspondence to aayush382.iitkgp@gmail.com, sdebnath@nvidia.com, sbirchfield@nvidia.com, marcl@nvidia.com

Figure 1. We present Sim2SG, a self-supervised real-to-sim
scene generation technique that matches the distribution
of real data, for the purpose of training a network to infer
scene graphs. Sim2SG does not require costly supervision
from the real-world dataset. (Only one tree is shown in the
graph to avoid clutter.)

content refers to the number, position, and orientation
of objects in the scene, as well as their relationships to
one another.
At one extreme, synthetic scenes can be created
manually by domain experts to reduce these gaps, but
such solutions are expensive and therefore do not scale
well [61, 47, 45, 18]. At the opposite extreme, domain
randomization intentionally leverages these gaps to facilitate sim-to-real transfer [54, 41, 56]; these approaches,
however, fail to capture the complexity and distribution of real scenes, thus fundamentally limiting their
performance.
Recent approaches such as Meta-Sim [27], MetaSim2 [14], and SceneGen [52] attempt to reduce the
content gap by automatically learning to generate synthetic data that matches the distribution of real data.
However, Meta-Sim can only learn the position and
orientation of objects, and therefore cannot align the

16044

