V-DESIRR: Very Fast Deep Embedded Single Image Reflection Removal
B H Pawan Prasad1

Green Rosh K S1

Lokesh R B1

Kaushik Mitra2

Sanjoy Chowdhury1
1
2
Samsung R&D Institute Bangalore, India
IIT Madras, Chennai, India
pawan.prasad,greenrosh.ks,lokesh.rb,s5.chowdhury@samsung.com, kmitra@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Real world images often gets corrupted due to unwanted
reflections and their removal is highly desirable. A major
share of such images originate from smart phone cameras
capable of very high resolution captures. Most of the existing methods either focus on restoration quality by compromising on processing speed and memory requirements or,
focus on removing reflections at very low resolutions, there
by limiting their practical deploy-ability. We propose a light
weight deep learning model for reflection removal using a
novel scale space architecture. Our method processes the
corrupted image in two stages, a Low Scale Sub-network
(LSSNet) to process the lowest scale and a Progressive Inference (PI) stage to process all the higher scales. In order
to reduce the computational complexity, the sub-networks
in PI stage are designed to be much shallower than LSSNet. Moreover, we employ weight sharing between various
scales within the PI stage to limit the model size. This also
allows our method to generalize to very high resolutions
without explicit retraining. Our method is superior both
qualitatively and quantitatively compared to the state of the
art methods and at the same time 20× faster with 50× less
number of parameters compared to the most recent stateof-the-art algorithm RAGNet. We implemented our method
on an android smart phone, where a high resolution 12 MP
image is restored in under 5 seconds.

1. Introduction
Image capture in the vicinity of a reflective surface such
as glass windows is very challenging due to the formation
of undesirable reflection artifacts. These artifacts not only
affect the perceptual quality of the image, but also impact
high-level tasks such as image recognition and object detection. Hence removal of reflection is very desirable and is
an active area of research in image processing and computer
vision.
Several methods have been proposed in the past to ad-

Input

Input Zoomed

BDN [33]

ERRNet [28]

Zhang.et.al [34]

BeyLin [29]

IBCLN [12]

RAGNet [16]

Ours

Figure 1: High Resolution Performance and Complexity Analysis. (a) Comparison of our method against current state of the art
for a high resolution 12MP input image. (b) Complexity evaluation on NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti for an image tile of size 540x400.

dress the problem of reflection, The earliest methods try
to solve the problem by imposing additional handcrafted
constraints on the problem definition such as natural scene
statistics [10], sparsity priors [11], gradient smoothness [32]
and ghosting cues [22]. However it has been observed that
solutions based on handcrafted priors do not adapt very well
to the complex reflection patterns often observed in real life.
In order to model real-life reflection patterns, several
data-driven approaches using deep neural networks have
been proposed in the recent past [12] [16] [28] [34] . Even
though these methods achieve state-of-the-art results and
is able to model strong and complex reflections efficiently,
they suffer from two major drawbacks:
a) High computation requirements: Reflection removal
needs a large receptive field to efficiently gather the semantic information required for recovering the transmission layer. The conventional methods try to increase the
receptive field by stacking up a large number of convolution filters which tremendously increases the computation
and memory requirements. For example, a recent method
proposed by RAGNet [16] consists of 131 million parameters, consumes a peak memory of 2.9 GB and takes 20

2390

