PARE: Part Attention Regressor for 3D Human Body Estimation
Muhammed Kocabas1,2

Chun-Hao P. Huang1

Otmar Hilliges2

Michael J. Black1

1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zurich
{mkocabas,paul.huang,black}@tue.mpg.de otmar.hilliges@inf.ethz.ch

(a) Input Image

(b) SPIN [1]

(c) SPIN [2]

(d) SPIN Occlusion Sensitivity Heatmap

1
250

Mean 3D joint error (mm)

2

200

(e) PARE [1]

(f) PARE [2]

(g) PARE Occlusion Sensitivity Heatmap

1

150

2

100

50

Figure 1: Occlusion Sensitivity Analysis. Given an input image (a), a small occluding patch (shown in gray) causes
SPIN [29] to fail (b,c), whereas our method (PARE) (e,f) is robust to the occluder. Sub-figures on the right show the sensitivity of SPIN (d) and PARE (g) to an occluding patch (the size of the white squares) centered at every point in the image.
Warmer colors mean higher average joint error.

Abstract
Despite significant progress, we show that state of the
art 3D human pose and shape estimation methods remain
sensitive to partial occlusion and can produce dramatically
wrong predictions although much of the body is observable.
To address this, we introduce a soft attention mechanism,
called the Part Attention REgressor (PARE), that learns
to predict body-part-guided attention masks. We observe
that state-of-the-art methods rely on global feature representations, making them sensitive to even small occlusions.
In contrast, PARE’s part-guided attention mechanism overcomes these issues by exploiting information about the visibility of individual body parts while leveraging information from neighboring body-parts to predict occluded parts.
We show qualitatively that PARE learns sensible attention masks, and quantitative evaluation confirms that PARE
achieves more accurate and robust reconstruction results
than existing approaches on both occlusion-specific and
standard benchmarks. The code and data are available for
research purposes at https://pare.is.tue.mpg.de/

1. Introduction
Regressing 3D human pose and shape (HPS) directly
from RGB images has many applications in robotics, computer graphics, AR/VR and beyond. The task is to take a
single image [24, 29, 40] or video sequence [25, 27, 35] as
input and to regress the parameters of a human body model
such as SMPL [33] as output. Powered by deep CNNs, this
task has seen rapid progress [24, 27, 29, 40]. However, in
fully in-the-wild settings, people often appear under occlusion either due to self-overlapping body-parts, due to closerange interaction with other people or due to occluding objects such as furniture or other scene content. While pose
estimation under occlusion has been treated in the literature
[8, 9, 14, 19, 42, 43, 53, 54, 59], we highlight that this issue
is particularly important in the context of direct regression
methods. Such methods use all the pixels in the input to predict a single set of pose and shape parameters. Thus their
pose estimates are particularly sensitive to even small perturbations in the observations of the body and its parts.
In this paper, we apply a visualization technique [58] for
occlusion sensitivity analysis that yields insights into when
11127

