A Simple Baseline for Weakly-Supervised Scene Graph Generation
Jing Shi1
Yiwu Zhong2
Ning Xu3
Yin Li2
Chenliang Xu1
1
2
3
University of Rochester
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Adobe Research
1

{j.shi,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

2

{yzhong52,yin.li}@wisc.edu

1. Introduction
Given an image, scene graph generation (SGG) is to
generate a scene graph [17, 44], consisting of the detected objects and the possible relationships between the
objects. Such abstraction mimics the structured representations of language [33, 42], facilitating various downstream
visual reasoning tasks, e.g. VQA [38, 12, 13], image caption [46, 59], image generation [15]. However, most of
the current SGG models are supervised trained with scene
graph annotations, which suffered from two limitations.
First, they rely on the expensive annotations of object locations and relations. Second, they are hard to generalize
to out-of-domain objects or relations that are required by
downstream tasks, e.g., the VQA dataset, where the questions query novel objects and relations that are out of the
scene graph dataset domain.
To overcome the above limitations, we investigate
the weakly-supervised scene graph generation (WS-SGG)
problem, demonstrated in Fig. 1. We relax the annotation requirements of SGG only to consider the ungrounded
scene graph, composed of solely image-level object and relation labels without knowing the exact object locations,

nxu@adobe.com

Test output

Training pair

Abstract
We investigate the weakly-supervised scene graph generation, which is a challenging task since no correspondence
of label and object is provided. The previous work regards
such correspondence as a latent variable which is iteratively updated via nested optimization of the scene graph
generation objective. However, we further reduce the complexity by decoupling it into an efficient first-order graph
matching module optimized via contrastive learning to obtain such correspondence, which is used to train a standard
scene graph generation model. The extensive experiments
show that such a simple pipeline can significantly surpass
the previous state-of-the-art by more than 30% on the Visual
Genome dataset, both in terms of graph matching accuracy
and scene graph quality. We believe this work serves as a
strong baseline for future research. Code is available at
https://github.com/jshi31/WS-SGG.

3

man
on

man

bike
on

skateboard
on

riding

street

man

man

riding

on
bike
on

skateboard
on
street

Figure 1. Demonstration the task of WS-SGG. During training,
only the pair of image and the ungrounded scene graph are provided. For test stage, given an image, the model should output the
full scene graph.

i.e., bounding boxes. Such a weakly-supervised learning
setting effectively assuages the difficulties associated with
data annotation. For the generalization issue, one can obtain
the ungrounded scene graph label from the caption of the
image through a language parser [42], and the ungrounded
scene graph can be paired with the image that is described
by the caption. As the community has collected extremely
large image caption datasets [34], it provides WS-SGG task
with a considerable amount of training data and alleviates
the generalization problem. Hence, WS-SGG is of great
significance.
We are not the first one to deal with this task. Typically
one can deem the region proposals extracted from an image
as the nodes of a visual graph, and the ungrounded scene
graph as the label graph. The node alignment between these
two graphs has to be discerned during the optimization process of SGG. Therefore, one major challenge for WS-SGG
is graph matching, as we should consider the similarity of
both the nodes and their relationships. One previous work
VSPNet [52] converts the standard scene graph, where objects are nodes and relations are edges, to a bipartite graph
with one part object nodes and another part relations nodes,
where the role (subject, object) becomes the edge. It iteratively match each part of nodes, which fails to apply to

16393

