Me-Momentum: Extracting Hard Confident Examples
from Noisily Labeled Data
Yingbin Bai
Tongliang Liu*
Trustworthy Machine Learning Lab, University of Sydney

Abstract
Examples that are close to the decision boundary—that
we term hard examples, are essential to shape accurate
classifiers. Extracting confident examples has been widely
studied in the community of learning with noisy labels.
However, it remains elusive how to extract hard confident
examples from the noisy training data. In this paper, we
propose a deep learning paradigm to solve this problem,
which is built on the memorization effect of deep neural networks that they would first learn simple patterns, i.e., which
are defined by these shared by multiple training examples.
To extract hard confident examples that contain non-simple
patterns and are entangled with the inaccurately labeled
examples, we borrow the idea of momentum from physics.
Specifically, we alternately update the confident examples
and refine the classifier. Note that the extracted confident examples in the previous round can be exploited to
learn a better classifier and that the better classifier will
help identify better (and hard) confident examples. We
call the approach the “Momentum of Memorization” (MeMomentum). Empirical results on benchmark-simulated
and real-world label-noise data illustrate the effectiveness
of Me-Momentum for extracting hard confident examples,
leading to better classification performance.

1. Introduction
As training datasets are growing big while accurately labeling them is often expensive or sometimes even infeasible, cheap datasets with label noise are ubiquitous in many
real-world applications. Without any care, label noise will
degenerate the performance of learning algorithms, especially for those based on deep neural networks [57]. Learning with noisy labels [1] aims to reduce the side-effect of
label noise and therefore has become an important topic in
machine learning.
Existing methods for learning with noisy labels can be
divided into two categories: algorithms that result in sta* Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au).

tistically consistent or inconsistent classifiers. Methods in
the first category intent to design classifier-consistent algorithms [58, 14, 35, 7, 39, 56, 24, 54, 50, 45, 49, 20], where
classifiers learned by using the noisy data will statistically
converge to the optimal classifiers defined by clean data.
However, these methods rely heavily on the noise transition
matrix [23, 32, 51]. In real-world applications, it is hard to
learn the instance-dependent noise transition matrix [5]. To
be free of estimating the noise transition matrix, methods
in the second category employ heuristics to reduce the sideeffect of label noise [27, 25, 38, 33, 9, 8, 43, 41, 21, 19].
These methods were reported to empirically work well, especially in the setting of instance-dependent label noise.
One promising direction in the second category is to
extract examples with clean labels—confident examples—
[31, 40, 30, 6, 44, 34, 47, 48]. The idea is that compared
with the original noisy training data, the extracted examples are less noisy and thus will lead to a classifier with
better performance. Given only noisy data, state-of-the-art
methods exploit the memorization effect [57, 2] to extract
confident examples. The memorization effect will enable
deep neural networks to first learn patterns that are shared
by a majority of training examples. As clean labels are of
majority in each noisy class [29, 52], deep neural networks
would therefore first fit training data with clean labels, and
then gradually fit the examples with incorrect labels [4].
Therefore, early stopping [19, 36] and the small loss trick
[13, 10, 55] can be used to exploit confident examples.
Examples that are close to the decision boundary are
called hard examples. As illustrated in Figure 1, hard (confident) examples play an important role in shaping the decision boundary. It has also been widely studied in the traditional classification problem that hard examples are essential to train accurate classifiers [42, 3, 12, 11]. Notwithstanding the importance of hard confident examples, none
of the existing methods studies how to extract hard confident examples from noisy data. Note that extracting hard
confident examples is non-effortless. Since hard examples
are often of a small proportion and contain less discriminative information compared with the easy ones (these that are
far away from the decision boundary), they are often entan-

9312

