MVTN: Multi-View Transformation Network for 3D Shape Recognition
Abdullah Hamdi
Silvio Giancola
Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{abdullah.hamdi, silvio.giancola, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Multi-view projection methods have demonstrated their
ability to reach state-of-the-art performance on 3D shape
recognition. Those methods learn different ways to aggregate information from multiple views. However, the camera
view-points for those views tend to be heuristically set and
fixed for all shapes. To circumvent the lack of dynamism of
current multi-view methods, we propose to learn those viewpoints. In particular, we introduce the Multi-View Transformation Network (MVTN) that regresses optimal view-points
for 3D shape recognition, building upon advances in differentiable rendering. As a result, MVTN can be trained
end-to-end along with any multi-view network for 3D shape
classification. We integrate MVTN in a novel adaptive multiview pipeline that can render either 3D meshes or point
clouds. MVTN exhibits clear performance gains in the
tasks of 3D shape classification and 3D shape retrieval without the need for extra training supervision. In these tasks,
MVTN achieves state-of-the-art performance on ModelNet40,
ShapeNet Core55, and the most recent and realistic ScanObjectNN dataset (up to 6% improvement). Interestingly,
we also show that MVTN can provide network robustness
against rotation and occlusion in the 3D domain. The code is
available at https://github.com/ajhamdi/MVTN .

Figure 1. Multi-View Transformation Network (MVTN). We
propose a differentiable module that predicts the best view-points
for a task-specific multi-view network. MVTN is trained jointly
with this network without any extra training supervision, while
improving the performance on 3D classification and shape retrieval.

pressive performance, and in many instances, achieve stateof-the-art results in 3D shape classification and segmentation
[38, 67, 41, 37, 15]. Multi-view approaches bridge the gap
between 2D and 3D learning by solving a 3D task using 2D
convolutional architectures. These methods render several
views for a given 3D shape and leverage the rendered images to solve the end task. As a result, they build upon the
recent advances in 2D grid-based deep learning and leverage
larger image datasets for pre-training (e.g. ImageNet [59]) to
compensate for the general scarcity of labeled 3D datasets.
However, the manner of choosing the rendering view-points
for such methods remains mostly unexplored. Current methods rely on heuristics like random sampling in scenes [41]
or predefined canonical view-points in oriented datasets [67].
There is no evidence suggesting that such heuristics are empirically the best choice. To address this shortcoming, we
propose to learn better view-points by introducing a MultiView Transformation Network (MVTN). As shown in Fig. 1,
MVTN learns to regress view-points, renders those views
with a differentiable renderer, and trains the downstream
task-specific network in an end-to-end fashion, thus leading
to the most suitable views for the task. MVTN is inspired

1. Introduction
Given its success in the 2D realm, deep learning naturally
expanded to the 3D vision domain. In 3D, deep networks
achieve impressive results in classification, segmentation,
and detection. 3D deep learning pipelines operate directly on
3D data, commonly represented as point clouds [55, 57, 66],
meshes [18, 29], or voxels [52, 13, 24]. However, other
methods choose to represent 3D information by rendering
multiple 2D views of objects or scenes [61]. Such multi-view
methods are more similar to a human approach, where the
human visual system is fed with streams of rendered images
instead of more elaborate 3D representations.
Recent developments in multi-view methods show im-

1

