Training Weakly Supervised Video Frame Interpolation with Events
Zhiyang Yu† 1, 2 , Yu Zhang∗ 2, 3 , Deyuan Liu†2, 5 , Dongqing Zou2, 4 ,
Xijun Chen∗1 , Yebin Liu3 , and Jimmy Ren2, 4
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI, 3 Tsinghua University
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 5 Peking University

Abstract
Event-based video frame interpolation is promising as
event cameras capture dense motion signals that can greatly
facilitate motion-aware synthesis. However, training existing frameworks for this task requires high frame-rate videos
with synchronized events, posing challenges to collect real
training data. In this work we show event-based frame interpolation can be trained without the need of high framerate videos. This is achieved via a novel weakly supervised
framework that 1) corrects image appearance by extracting
complementary information from events and 2) supplants
motion dynamics modeling with attention mechanisms. For
the latter we propose subpixel attention learning, which
supports searching high-resolution correspondence efficiently on low-resolution feature grid. Though trained on
low frame-rate videos, our framework outperforms existing models trained with full high frame-rate videos (and
events) on both GoPro dataset and a new real event-based
dataset. Codes, models and dataset will be made available
at: https://github.com/YU-Zhiyang/WEVI.

Figure 1. Motivation of this work. For interpolating challenging
real-world videos, even the state-of-the-art Quadratic Video Interpolation (QVI) [48] fails to inferring correct motion. The eventbased method (EDVI) [21] generates better but still sub-optimal
reconstructions due to gap between training and testing. Capable
of being trained directly on the raw low frame-rate videos, our
approach possesses best generalization behavior. Due to lack of
ground truth inbetweens, an input frame is shown as reference.

1. Introduction
Modern dedicated cameras are now capable of capturing high frame rate videos (e.g. 240 FPS for Sony GoPro
series), allowing users to create professional slow motion
effect. However, most prevailing devices, like smartphones,
still cannot compete with them before overcoming various
challenges on hardware and software designing. It is thus
desired to develop computational techniques to synthesize
high temporal resolution videos from lower resolution ones.
Foremost among the challenges of video interpolation is
the loss of motion caused by the insufficient temporal sampling rate of the input video. Many previous works “hallucinate” the missing motion by assuming a parameterized
motion model (e.g. linear or quadratic flows [14, 48], phase
models [25, 24]) or data-driven models [13, 7, 34, 18, 32].
† The work is done during an internship at SenseTime Research.
∗ Corresponding authors: Yu Zhang (zhangyulb@gmail.com) and Xijun

Chen (chenxijun@hit.edu.cn).

However, despite the rapid advances on end-to-end learning video interpolation, the task is inherently ill-posed, with
large ambiguity that cannot be trivially addressed from only
the sparse set of input frames.
Characteristically for this age, event-based sensors [20]
start to play roles in solving ill-posed low-level tasks such as
deblurring [15, 33] and frame interpolation [47, 21]. Event
cameras capture per-pixel change of intensities at high temporal resolution and limited power cost, making them ideal
supplement to low frame-rate image sensors with the capability to capture dense motion signals [2]. Despite its potential, event signals have distinct mode discrepancy when
working with video frames. In recent works [15, 47, 21], it
is largely addressed with modern deep networks by translating events to image-space representations at dense temporal
sites. Nevertheless, collecting synchronized training events
and high frame-rate videos requires complicated hardware

14589

