Fourier Space Losses for Efficient Perceptual Image Super-Resolution
Dario Fuoli1
1

Luc Van Gool1,2

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Radu Timofte1
2

KU Leuven, Belgium

{dario.fuoli, vangool, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

0.28

Abstract

0.26

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) deals with the problem of reconstructing the high-frequency (HF) information from a lowresolution (LR) image x ∈ RH×W ×C , which are inherently lost after downsampling the high-resolution (HR) image y ∈ RrH×rW ×C due to the lower Nyquist frequency
in the LR space (r denotes the scaling factor). Recent single image SR (SISR) methods [4, 17, 22, 19, 10, 14] have
shown remarkable success at reconstructing the missing HF
details, with emphasis on accurate restoration of the fre-

0.24
0.22
0.20
LPIPS

Many super-resolution (SR) models are optimized for
high performance only and therefore lack efficiency due to
large model complexity. As large models are often not practical in real-world applications, we investigate and propose novel loss functions, to enable SR with high perceptual quality from much more efficient models. The representative power for a given low-complexity generator network
can only be fully leveraged by strong guidance towards the
optimal set of parameters. We show that it is possible to
improve the performance of a recently introduced efficient
generator architecture solely with the application of our
proposed loss functions. In particular, we use a Fourier
space supervision loss for improved restoration of missing
high-frequency (HF) content from the ground truth image
and design a discriminator architecture working directly in
the Fourier domain to better match the target HF distribution. We show that our losses’ direct emphasis on the frequencies in Fourier-space significantly boosts the perceptual image quality, while at the same time retaining high
restoration quality in comparison to previously proposed
loss functions for this task. The performance is further improved by utilizing a combination of spatial and frequency
domain losses, as both representations provide complementary information during training. On top of that, the trained
generator achieves comparable results with and is 2.4×
and 48× faster than state-of-the-art perceptual SR methods
RankSRGAN and SRFlow respectively.

Ours (L1 only)

0.18

Ours (WaveletSRNet loss)

0.16

SRFlow
ESRGAN

0.14

RankSRGAN
0.12

Ours (Full)
0.10
102

103
Runtime [ms]

Figure 1. Runtime [ms] vs. perceptual quality (LPIPS) [36] comparison with state-of-the-art methods on DIV2K validation set.
The disk area is proportional to the number of parameters. We
achieve the fastest runtimes with comparable perceptual quality to
much larger networks.

quency content in the ground truth frames. This is typically
performed with supervised training, where the ground truth
images y are downsampled with a known kernel, e.g. bicubic, to obtain the LR input images x.
While it may be desirable in some applications to restore the frequencies as close to the target as possible with
minimal assumptions, the ill-posed problem limits the SR
networks to generate higher frequency components, as the
training promotes conservative estimates imposed by the
pixel-wise supervision losses. This usually results in blurry
images, which appear to be of lower quality than their respective HR counterparts.
This issue has been addressed in the literature [20, 32]
by employing different losses, that are designed to promote
the higher frequencies for perceptually more pleasing images. These supervised objectives are often used in combination with generative adversarial networks [8] (GAN)
for additional distribution learning of the HF space. Conditional GAN-based learning enables the generation of plau-

2360

