Rational Polynomial Camera Model Warping for Deep Learning Based Satellite
Multi-View Stereo Matching
Jian Gao*
Jin Liu*
Shunping Ji†
School of Remote Sensing and information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{jian gao,liujinwhu,jishunping}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Satellite multi-view stereo (MVS) imagery is particularly
suited for large-scale Earth surface reconstruction. Differing from the perspective camera model (pin-hole model)
that is commonly used for close-range and aerial cameras, the cubic rational polynomial camera (RPC) model
is the mainstream model for push-broom linear-array satellite cameras. However, the homography warping used in
the prevailing learning based MVS methods is only applicable to pin-hole cameras. In order to apply the SOTA
learning based MVS technology to the satellite MVS task
for large-scale Earth surface reconstruction, RPC warping
should be considered. In this work, we propose, for the first
time, a rigorous RPC warping module. The rational polynomial coefficients are recorded as a tensor, and the RPC
warping is formulated as a series of tensor transformations.
Based on the RPC warping, we propose the deep learning
based satellite MVS (SatMVS) framework for large-scale
and wide depth range Earth surface reconstruction. We
also introduce a large-scale satellite image dataset consisting of 519 5120×5120 images, which we call the TLC
SatMVS dataset. The satellite images were acquired from
a three-line camera (TLC) that catches triple-view images
simultaneously, forming a valuable supplement to the existing open-source WorldView-3 datasets with single-scanline
images. Experiments show that the proposed RPC warping module and the SatMVS framework can achieve a superior reconstruction accuracy compared to the pin-hole fitting method and conventional MVS methods. Code and data
are available at https://github.com/WHU-GPCV/SatMVS.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) scene reconstruction from
multi-view optical images is a hot topic in both the computer vision and remote sensing fields. Currently, there
* Equally contributed.
† Corresponding author.

are two mainstream camera models: the perspective camera
model (i.e., the pin-hole model) and the cubic rational polynomial camera (RPC) model. The prevailing deep learning
based multi-view stereo (MVS) methods [4, 5, 10, 20, 21,
31, 32, 33] have been designed and developed for multiview images captured from pin-hole cameras. To date, the
deep learning based MVS task for RPC-based images, i.e.,
optical satellite images, has not been tackled.
The study of satellite MVS task is very important as
the multi-view satellite images captured from push-broom
linear-array cameras with the RPC model are the main data
source for large-scale 3D Earth surface reconstruction. In
the recent deep learning based MVS methods [32, 5, 10],
homography warping has been utilized to align images from
different viewpoints to a reference view through a set of
hypothetical fronto-parallel depth planes of the reference
camera [32]. Analogously, developing a specific warping
method for aligning multi-view satellite images to the reference image space could extend the deep learning based
MVS methods to satellite images. The primary contribution of this work is that we propose, for the first time, a
rigorous RPC warping module. Based on the RPC warping
module, we then propose the SatMVS framework for deep
learning based satellite MVS task. The SatMVS framework
utilizes RPC warping to align the multi-view satellite images through the hypothetical height planes in the world coordinate system instead of the front-parallel depth planes. It
features a multi-stage coarse-to-fine matching strategy on a
feature pyramid to tolerate the wide search range, considering the great topographic relief of the Earth’s surface and
high-capacity satellite images. The SatMVS framework can
also be used with most of the modern deep learning based
MVS methods by replacing the perspective model with the
RPC model and introducing the multi-stage strategy.
The other contribution is that we introduce a new opensource satellite MVS dataset (the TLC SatMVS dataset).
We believe that this is the first open-source satellite dataset
to be built from images collected by the push-broom threeline camera (TLC). The camera is mounted on the Ziyuan3 (ZY-3) satellite. This dataset will be a beneficial com-

6148

