LoOp: Looking for Optimal Hard Negative
Embeddings for Deep Metric Learning
Bhavya Vasudeva1 * Puneesh Deora1 * Saumik Bhattacharya2 Umapada Pal1 Sukalpa Chanda3
1
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India 2 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India
3
Østfold University College, Halden, Norway

Abstract
Deep metric learning has been effectively used to learn
distance metrics for different visual tasks like image retrieval, clustering, etc. In order to aid the training process, existing methods either use a hard mining strategy
to extract the most informative samples or seek to generate hard synthetics using an additional network. Such approaches face different challenges and can lead to biased
embeddings in the former case, and (i) harder optimization
(ii) slower training speed (iii) higher model complexity in
the latter case. In order to overcome these challenges, we
propose a novel approach that looks for optimal hard negatives (LoOp) in the embedding space, taking full advantage
of each tuple by calculating the minimum distance between
a pair of positives and a pair of negatives. Unlike miningbased methods, our approach considers the entire space between pairs of embeddings to calculate the optimal hard
negatives. Extensive experiments combining our approach
and representative metric learning losses reveal a significant boost in performance on three benchmark datasets1 .

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed approach. Given two
pairs of points in the embedding space, x1 , x2 from class A,
and y1 , y2 from class B, our method finds the optimal hard
negatives by calculating the minimum distance between the
curves joining these points.

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning tries to learn an embedding space,
where closeness between embeddings encodes the level of
semantic similarities between the data samples. This is
done by leveraging deep neural networks to learn the mapping between the data samples and the embedding space
and enforcing the embeddings belonging to the same class
to lie close while pushing those belonging to different
classes further apart. Deep metric learning-based methods
have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) results for several
tasks, like face recognition [2, 24, 20, 8], re-identification
[35, 19, 41, 30], image retrieval [31, 7], etc.
To train the deep networks, several loss functions with
desirable properties have been formulated, which enable the
* Equal contribution
1 Code available at https://github.com/puneesh00/LoOp

neural network to learn the mapping from the data space to
the embedding space. Conventional methods, such as contrastive loss [2, 9] which takes tuples with two samples and
triplet loss [24, 33] which takes three sample tuples, consider the similarity between few samples. In contrast, methods like lifted structure loss [25] aim to exploit all the samples present in a batch to learn more informative representations. Other methods [28, 21] that utilize several samples
in the loss have also been proposed.
However, even when considering the whole batch, not
all the samples are able to contribute to the loss term. This
is because many of them already satisfy the constraints
present in the loss. As a result, these samples are not sufficiently informative and lead to low gradient values. To
overcome this problem, the idea of using hard samples has

10634

