Structured Bird’s-Eye-View Traffic Scene Understanding from Onboard Images
Yigit Baran Can1 Alexander Liniger1 Danda Pani Paudel1 Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 2 VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven

Abstract
Estimate

Autonomous navigation requires structured representation of the road network and instance-wise identification of
the other traffic agents. Since the traffic scene is defined on
the ground plane, this corresponds to scene understanding
in the bird’s-eye-view (BEV). However, the onboard cameras of autonomous cars are customarily mounted horizontally for a better view of the surrounding, making this task
very challenging. In this work, we study the problem of extracting a directed graph representing the local road network in BEV coordinates, from a single onboard camera
image. Moreover, we show that the method can be extended to detect dynamic objects on the BEV plane. The
semantics, locations, and orientations of the detected objects together with the road graph facilitates a comprehensive understanding of the scene. Such understanding becomes fundamental for the downstream tasks, such as path
planning and navigation. We validate our approach against
powerful baselines and show that our network achieves superior performance. We also demonstrate the effects of
various design choices through ablation studies. Code:
https://github.com/ybarancan/STSU

1. Introduction
Road scene understanding is crucial for autonomous
driving since it forms the interface between perception and
planning. The fundamental task is to understand both
the road network structure and the other traffic agents in
the surrounding. Currently, the go-to solution is offline
generated HD-maps combined with a modular perception
stack [22, 41, 30, 36, 8]. For existing solutions to work,
not only the precise localization in the HD-map but also
understanding the dynamic parts of the scene is necessary [30, 44]. To achieve these requirements, most solutions
use several sensors, including cameras and LIDAR. However, using expensive sensors and offline HD-maps limit the
scalability of autonomous driving as they increase the cost
of operation and limit self-driving cars to operate in geographically restricted areas.

Individual
Centerlines
Image

Centerlines

Form Directed Graph

{yigit.can, alex.liniger, paudel, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

GT

Merge
Connected Connected

Connected

Estimate

Figure 1. Our method extracts a directed graph that represents the
local road network from a single frontal image. First, centerlines
are estimated alongside a directed graph where vertices are centerlines, and edges show the connectivity. Then the existence and direction of the edges are estimates. Green dots indicate start points,
and red dots indicate end points of centerlines. Traffic flows from
green to red. This representation can be achieved thanks to the
directional nature of the proposed method.

In this work we proposes an end-to-end vision method
that performs lane-graph extraction and object detection
given only a front-facing camera image. Our method directly estimates the graph structure of the road network and
spline curves representing centerlines of individual lanes,
as shown in Fig. 1. Besides estimating the road graph, our
model can also detect objects such as cars, pedestrians, and
others, directly on the BEV plane, as shown in Fig. 2. The
output format of our method is ideal for downstream planning [2, 9] and prediction [12, 45, 20, 37] tasks, which require both the lane-graph and the location and class of objects. In fact, such a requirement can also be understood
simply by observing the provided labels of existing datasets,
such as [4], which provide the labels in a structured form.
Often, existing approaches map the structured labels into
other forms, such as semantic masks, to perform scene understanding [14]. The downstream tasks, however, require
the structured form of these understandings [26, 34, 25, 19].
Understanding HD-maps is a challenging problem,
mainly due to the complex topological changes. Recovering
such topological structure coherently from a single image
remains to be an unexplored problem. This work addresses
this challenging problem for the first time while also detecting objects in the scene directly in the BEV coordinates.

15661

