ARAPReg: An As-Rigid-As Possible Regularization Loss for Learning
Deformable Shape Generators
Qixing Huang*
UT Austin

Xiangru Huang*
UT Austin & MIT

Bo Sun*
UT Austin

huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

xiangruhuang816@gmail.com

bosun@cs.utexas.edu

Zaiwei Zhang
UT Austin

Junfeng Jiang
Hohai University

Chandrajit Bajaj
UT Austin

zaiweizhang@utexas.edu

jiangjf.hhu@gmail.com

bajaj@cs.utexas.edu

Source

Target

With ARAPReg
Without ARAPReg
With ARAPReg
Without ARAPReg
Figure 1: Our approach learns a shape generator from a collection of deformable shapes. The shape generator is trained with
a novel as-rigid-as-possible regularization (ARAPReg) loss that promotes the preservation of multi-scale shape features.

Abstract
This paper introduces an unsupervised loss for training
parametric deformation shape generators. The key idea
is to enforce the preservation of local rigidity among the
generated shapes. Our approach builds on an approximation of the as-rigid-as possible (or ARAP) deformation
energy. We show how to develop the unsupervised loss
via a spectral decomposition of the Hessian of the ARAP
energy. Our loss nicely decouples pose and shape variations through a robust norm. The loss admits simple
closed-form expressions. It is easy to train and can be
plugged into any standard generation models, e.g., variational auto-encoder (VAE) and auto-decoder (AD). Experimental results show that our approach outperforms existing shape generation approaches considerably on public
benchmark datasets of various shape categories such as human, animal and bone. Our code and data are available at
https://github.com/GitBoSun/ARAPReg.

1. Introduction
This paper considers learning a parametric mesh generator from a deformable shape collection with shapes that
exhibit the same topology but undergo large geometric variations (see examples below of a deforming human, animal,
and bone). This problem arises in numerous visual computing and relevant fields such as recovery of neural morphogenesis, data-driven shape reconstruction, and image-based
reconstruction, to name just a few (c.f. [54]).
Deformable shapes differ from many other visual objects
(e.g., images and videos) because there are natural constraints underlying the shape space. One such example is
the local rigidity constraint; namely, corresponding surface
patches among neighboring shapes in the shape space undergo approximately rigid transformations. This constraint
manifests the preservation of geometric features (e.g., facial features of humans and toes of animals) among local
neighborhoods of the underlying shape space. An interesting problem thus is the use of this constraint to train
shape generators from a collection of training shapes, where

5815

