A-SDF: Learning Disentangled Signed Distance Functions
for Articulated Shape Representation
Jiteng Mu1 ,

Weichao Qiu2 , Adam Kortylewski2 , Alan Yuille2 ,
Nuno Vasconcelos1 , Xiaolong Wang1
1
UC San Diego, 2 Johns Hopkins University

Inputs
Laptop

Generated shapes at unseen articulations

Shape Space

MLP

MLP

Eyeglasses

45°
63°
80°

Stapler

(15°)

(-9°)

(-39°)

(-60°)

(45°, 15°)

(5°, 45°)

(45°, 45°)

(5°, 5°)

(45°)

(9°)

(78°)

90°

Joint Angle

(87°)

Figure 1: We represent articulated objects with separate codes for encoding shape and articulation. During inference, given an unseen
instance, our model first infers the shape and articulation codes via back-propagation. With the inferred shape code, we can generate shapes
at unseen angles by only changing the articulation code.

Abstract
Recent work has made significant progress on using implicit functions, as a continuous representation for 3D rigid
object shape reconstruction. However, much less effort has
been devoted to modeling general articulated objects. Compared to rigid objects, articulated objects have higher degrees of freedom, which makes it hard to generalize to unseen shapes. To deal with the large shape variance, we
introduce Articulated Signed Distance Functions (A-SDF)
to represent articulated shapes with a disentangled latent
space, where we have separate codes for encoding shape
and articulation. With this disentangled continuous representation, we demonstrate that we can control the articulation input and animate unseen instances with unseen
joint angles. Furthermore, we propose a Test-Time Adaptation inference algorithm to adjust our model during inference. We demonstrate our model generalize well to outof-distribution and unseen data, e.g., partial point clouds
and real-world depth images. Project page with code:
https://jitengmu.github.io/A-SDF/.

1. Introduction
Modeling articulated objects has wide applications in
multiple fields including virtual and augmented reality, object functional understanding, and robotic manipulation. To

understand articulated objects, recent works propose to train
deep networks for estimating per-part poses and the joint
angle parameters of an object instance in a known category [40, 82]. However, if we want to interact with the
articulated object (e.g., open a laptop), estimating its static
state is not sufficient. For example, an autonomous agent
needs to predict what the articulated object shape will be
like after interactions for planning its action.
In this paper, we introduce Articulated Signed Distance
Functions (A-SDF), a differentiable category-level articulated object representation, which can reconstruct and predict the object 3D shape under different articulations. A differentiable model is useful in applications requiring backpropagation through the model to adjust inputs, such as rendering in graphics and model-based control in robotics.
We build our articulated object model based on the deep
implicit Signed Distance Functions [58]. While implicit
functions have recently been widely applied in modeling
static object shape with fine details [64, 65, 72], much less
effort has been devoted to modeling general articulated objects. We observe that models with a single shape code input, such as DeepSDF [58], cannot encode the articulation
variation reliably. It is even harder for the models to generalize to unseen instances with unseen joint angles.
To improve the generalization ability, we propose to
113001

