Active Domain Adaptation via Clustering Uncertainty-weighted Embeddings
Viraj Prabhu1
Arjun Chandrasekaran∗,2
Kate Saenko3
1
2
Georgia Tech
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
{virajp,judy}@gatech.edu

achandrasekaran@tue.mpg.de

Judy Hoffman1
3
Boston University

saenko@bu.edu

Abstract
Generalizing deep neural networks to new target domains
is critical to their real-world utility. In practice, it may be feasible to get some target data labeled, but to be cost-effective
it is desirable to select a maximally-informative subset via
active learning (AL). We study the problem of AL under a
domain shift, called Active Domain Adaptation (Active DA).
We demonstrate how existing AL approaches based solely
on model uncertainty or diversity sampling are less effective
for Active DA. We propose Clustering Uncertainty-weighted
Embeddings (CLUE), a novel label acquisition strategy for
Active DA that performs uncertainty-weighted clustering to
identify target instances for labeling that are both uncertain
under the model and diverse in feature space. CLUE consistently outperforms competing label acquisition strategies
for Active DA and AL across learning settings on 6 diverse
domain shifts for image classification. Our code is available
at https://github.com/virajprabhu/CLUE.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks excel at learning from large labeled
datasets but struggle to generalize this knowledge to new target domains [32, 42]. This limits their real-world utility, as
it is impractical to collect a large new dataset for every new
deployment domain. Further, all target instances are usually
not equally informative, and it is far more cost-effective to
identify maximally informative target instances for labeling.
While Active Learning [2, 6, 8, 9, 35, 36] has extensively
studied the problem of identifying informative instances
for labeling, it typically focuses on learning a model from
scratch and does not operate under a domain shift. In many
practical scenarios, models are trained in a source domain
and deployed in a different target domain, often with additional domain adaptation [10, 17, 32, 44]. In this work, we
study the problem of active learning under such a domain
shift, called Active Domain Adaptation [29] (Active DA).
Concretely, given i) labeled data in a source domain, ii)
unlabeled data in a target domain, and iii) the ability to obtain labels for a fixed budget of target instances, the goal
of Active DA is to select target instances for labeling and
∗ Work done partially at Georgia Tech.

Uncertainty sampling

Dd

May sample miscalibrated,
redundant, or outlier instances

Diversity sampling

May sample instances already
well-aligned across domains

CLUE (Ours)

Samples uncertain and
diverse instances
Class A
Class B

Source
Target

Labeled
Unlabeled

Selected

Current class
boundary

Figure 1: The goal of Active Domain Adaptation [29] (Active
DA) is to adapt a source model to an unlabeled target domain by
acquiring labels for selected target instances via an oracle. Existing
active learning (AL) methods based solely on uncertainty [9, 30, 45]
or diversity-sampling [13, 35] are less effective for Active DA (Row
1, 2). We propose CLUE, an AL method designed for Active DA
that selects instances that are both uncertain (thus informative to the
model) and diverse in feature space (thus minimizing redundancy,
Row 3), and leads to more cost-effective adaptation than competing
AL and Active DA methods (Sec. 4.4).

learn a model with high accuracy on the target test set. Active DA has widespread utility as a means of cost-effective
adaptation from cheaper to more expensive sources of labels
(e.g. synthetic to real data), as well as when the quantity (e.g.
autonomous driving) or cost (e.g. medical diagnosis) of labeling in the target domain is prohibitive. Despite its practical
utility, it is a challenging task that has seen limited follow-up
work since its introduction over ten years ago [5, 29, 40].
The traditional AL setting typically focuses on techniques
to select samples to efficiently learn a model from scratch,
rather than adapting under a domain shift [36]. As a result, existing state-of-the art AL methods based on either
uncertainty or diversity sampling are less effective for Active
DA. Uncertainty sampling selects instances that are highly
uncertain under the model’s beliefs [8, 9, 20, 41]. Under a
domain shift, uncertainty estimates on the target domain may

8505

