Indoor Scene Generation from a Collection of Semantic-Segmented Depth
Images
Ming-Jia Yang*1,2 Yu-Xiao Guo2 Bin Zhou1 Xin Tong2
1
2
Beihang University
Microsoft Research Asia
{yangmingjia,zhoubin}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a method for creating 3D indoor scenes with
a generative model learned from a collection of semanticsegmented depth images captured from different unknown
scenes. Given a room with a specified size, our method
automatically generates 3D objects in a room from a randomly sampled latent code. Different from existing methods
that represent an indoor scene with the type, location, and
other properties of objects in the room and learn the scene
layout from a collection of complete 3D indoor scenes, our
method models each indoor scene as a 3D semantic scene
volume and learns a volumetric generative adversarial network (GAN) from a collection of 2.5D partial observations
of 3D scenes. To this end, we apply a differentiable projection layer to project the generated 3D semantic scene volumes into semantic-segmented depth images and design a
new multiple-view discriminator for learning the complete
3D scene volume from 2.5D semantic-segmented depth images. Compared to existing methods, our method not only
efficiently reduces the workload of modeling and acquiring 3D scenes for training, but also produces better object
shapes and their detailed layouts in the scene. We evaluate our method with different indoor scene datasets and
demonstrate the advantages of our method. We also extend
our method for generating 3D indoor scenes from semanticsegmented depth images inferred from RGB images of real
scenes. 1

1. Introduction
Real-world indoor scenes exhibit rich variations with different numbers, types, and layouts of the objects placed in a
room due to different interior designs and living activities.
Generating realistic 3D indoor scenes is an important task
for many applications, such as VR/AR, 3D game design,
and robotic navigation.
* This work is done when Ming-Jia Yang was an intern at MSRA
1 Code URL: https://github.com/mingjiayang/SGSDI

{yuxgu,xtong}@microsoft.com

Manually modeling indoor scenes with variant and realistic object layouts in a room is a labor-intensive task and
requires professional skills. Automatic scene generation
techniques try to model the properties and distributions of
the objects in real scenes and generate new 3D scenes in
two steps. For a room with a specified size and shape, these
methods first determine the layout (i.e. orientation and position) and properties (e.g. type and shape) of the objects
in the room. After that, they retrieve a CAD model of each
object from a 3D object database based on the object’s properties and then place the resulting CAD models in the room
according to their layout.
A set of methods have been developed for modeling
the properties and distributions of objects in indoor scenes.
Early methods use manually defined rules [12] or simple
statistic models [27, 4, 2, 5, 11, 17] computed from scene
instances for generating a specific type of scenes, which
are difficult to generalize to other types of scenes. Recent
deep-learning-based methods [8, 29, 25, 18, 24] learn a deep
neural network of the object properties and layouts from a
large collection of 3D scene instances that are difficult to be
modeled by skilled artists or captured from real scenes. By
simply modeling the object geometry with their sizes, these
methods fail to model concrete 3D object shapes and the
detailed object layouts determined by their shapes, such as
a chair with their seat under a desk or a TV inside a cabinet.
In this paper, we present a generative adversarial network
(GAN) for 3D indoor scene generation. Different from previous methods that represent the scene with object properties and layouts, our method models a 3D indoor scene
with a semantic scene volume, where each voxel is either
labeled as empty or the type of object that it belongs to.
Based on this representation, we design a volumetric GAN
model that takes the room size as input and synthesizes the
semantic scene volumes of the room that consist of different objects and their layouts from randomly sampled latent
vectors. After that, our method generates the final 3D indoor scene by replacing each volumetric object instance in
the volume with a CAD model retrieved from a 3D object
database based on their type and volumetric shape.

15203

