CvT: Introducing Convolutions to Vision Transformers
Haiping Wu1,2 *

Bin Xiao2†

Noel Codella2
Mengchen Liu2
Xiyang Dai2
Lu Yuan2 Lei Zhang2
1
2
McGill University
Microsoft Cloud + AI

haiping.wu2@mail.mcgill.ca, {bixi, ncodella, mengcliu, xidai, luyuan, leizhang}@microsoft.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Transformers [30, 9] have recently dominated a wide
range of tasks in natural language processing (NLP) [31].
The Vision Transformer (ViT) [10] is the first computer vision model to rely exclusively on the Transformer architecture to obtain competitive image classification performance at large scale. The ViT design adapts Transformer
* This work is done when Haiping Wu was an intern at Microsoft.
† Corresponding author

ViT

307M

32M
84

ImageNet top-1 accuracy (%)

928M

86

86M
20M

82

25M

80

CvT
DeiT

BiT

88 277M

ImageNet top-1 accuracy (%)

We present in this paper a new architecture, named Convolutional vision Transformer (CvT), that improves Vision
Transformer (ViT) in performance and efficiency by introducing convolutions into ViT to yield the best of both designs. This is accomplished through two primary modifications: a hierarchy of Transformers containing a new convolutional token embedding, and a convolutional Transformer
block leveraging a convolutional projection. These changes
introduce desirable properties of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to the ViT architecture (i.e. shift, scale,
and distortion invariance) while maintaining the merits of
Transformers (i.e. dynamic attention, global context, and
better generalization). We validate CvT by conducting extensive experiments, showing that this approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance over other Vision Transformers and ResNets on ImageNet-1k, with fewer parameters and lower FLOPs. In addition, performance gains
are maintained when pretrained on larger datasets (e.g.
ImageNet-22k) and fine-tuned to downstream tasks. Pretrained on ImageNet-22k, our CvT-W24 obtains a top-1 accuracy of 87.7% on the ImageNet-1k val set. Finally, our
results show that the positional encoding, a crucial component in existing Vision Transformers, can be safely removed in our model, simplifying the design for higher resolution vision tasks. Code will be released at https:
//github.com/microsoft/CvT.

CvT

T2T
PVT

TNT

60

80

82.5
82.0
81.5
81.0
80.5
80.0

78

CvT

ViT

(a)

BiT

20

40

Model Paramters (M)
(b)

Figure 1: Top-1 Accuracy on ImageNet validation compared to other methods with respect to model parameters. (a) Comparison to CNN-based model BiT [17] and
Transformer-based model ViT [10], when pretrained on
ImageNet-22k. Larger marker size indicates larger architectures. (b) Comparison to concurrent works: DeiT [29],
T2T [40], PVT [33], TNT [13] when pretrained on
ImageNet-1k.

architectures [9] from language understanding with minimal modifications. First, images are split into discrete nonoverlapping patches (e.g. 16 × 16). Then, these patches are
treated as tokens (analogous to tokens in NLP), summed
with a special positional encoding to represent coarse spatial information, and input into repeated standard Transformer layers to model global relations for classification.
Despite the success of vision Transformers at large scale,
the performance is still below similarly sized convolutional
neural network (CNN) counterparts (e.g., ResNets [14])
when trained on smaller amounts of data. One possible reason may be that ViT lacks certain desirable properties inherently built into the CNN architecture that make CNNs
uniquely suited to solve vision tasks. For example, images have a strong 2D local structure: spatially neighboring pixels are usually highly correlated. The CNN architecture forces the capture of this local structure by using
1 22

