Exploiting sample correlation for crowd counting with multi-expert network
Xinyan Liu1 , Guorong Li* 1,2 , Zhenjun Han1 , Weigang Zhang3 , Yifan Yang1 , Qingming Huang1,2,4 , Nicu Sebe5
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing China
Key Lab of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, UCAS, Beijing, China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
4
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, ICT, CAS, Beijing, China
5
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
liuxinyan 98@foxmail.com, {liguorong, hanzhj, qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn, wgzhang@hit.edu.cn, yangyifan@yeah.net,
sebe@disi.unitn.it
2

Abstract
Crowd counting is a difficult task because of the diversity of scenes. Most of the existing crowd counting methods adopt complex structures with massive backbones to
enhance the generalization ability. Unfortunately, the performance of existing methods on large-scale data sets is
not satisfactory. In order to handle various scenarios with
less complex network, we explored how to efficiently use the
multi-expert model for crowd counting tasks. We mainly focus on how to train more efficient expert networks and how
to choose the most suitable expert. Specifically, we propose a task-driven similarity metric based on sample’s mutual enhancement, referred as co-fine-tune similarity, which
can find a more efficient subset of data for training the expert network. Similar samples are considered as a cluster which is used to obtain parameters of an expert. Besides, to make better use of the proposed method, we design
a simple network called FPN with Deconvolution Counting Network, which is a more suitable base model for the
multi-expert counting network. Experimental results show
that multiple experts FDC (MFDC) achieves the best performance on four public data sets, including the large scale
NWPU-Crowd data set. Furthermore, the MFDC trained
on an extensive dense crowd data set can generalize well
on the other data sets without extra training or fine-tuning.1

1. Introduction
Crowd counting is a task that tries to estimate the number
of objects in an image, such as people, cars or animals. This
* Corresponding author
1 Code will be available at https://github.com/streamer-AP

Figure 1. The stability of the category pseudo-labels during 5
epochs of alternate training. The first row is result of our method,
and the second row is result of 8-way divide and grow training
method from IG-CNN[16].

task has attracted significant attention because of its various
scenarios application, such as security surveillance, human
traffic control, hot spot discovery etc.
Earlier data sets such as UCSD data set [2], Mall data
set [5], World Expo’10 data set [30] contain low density
crowd image with balanced number[19]. Previous methods have achieved reliable performance on such data set
[28, 29, 19, 22]. However, when it comes to more complex scenarios[32, 1, 11], the performance of existing methods will be significantly humiliated. This is because under these scenarios, there is large diversity of visual appearances because of distorted perspectives, variable scales,
unbalanced distributions and wide range of brightness, etc.
Consequently, single network based methods [12, 15, 17]
may perform well in one special scenes, but worse on others.
To deal with complex scenarios, some methods [16,
12, 17, 30] explored multi-expert structure, which usually

3215

