Contrasting Contrastive Self-Supervised Representation Learning Pipelines
Klemen Kotar1 , Gabriel Ilharco2 , Ludwig Schmidt2 , Kiana Ehsani1 , Roozbeh Mottaghi1,2
1
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI, 2 University of Washington
Abstract
In the past few years, we have witnessed remarkable
breakthroughs in self-supervised representation learning.
Despite the success and adoption of representations learned
through this paradigm, much is yet to be understood about
how different training methods and datasets influence performance on downstream tasks. In this paper, we analyze
contrastive approaches as one of the most successful and
popular variants of self-supervised representation learning.
We perform this analysis from the perspective of the training algorithms, pre-training datasets and end tasks. We
examine over 700 training experiments including 30 encoders, 4 pre-training datasets and 20 diverse downstream
tasks. Our experiments address various questions regarding the performance of self-supervised models compared
to their supervised counterparts, current benchmarks used
for evaluation, and the effect of the pre-training data on
end task performance. Our Visual Representation Benchmark (ViRB) is available at: https://github.com/
allenai/virb.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Our goal is to study recently proposed contrastive selfsupervised representation learning methods. We examine three
main variables in these pipelines: training algorithms, pre-training
datasets and end tasks. We consider 4 training algorithms, 4 pretraining datasets and 20 diverse end tasks for this study.

Learning compact and general representations that can
be used in a wide range of downstream tasks is one of the
holy grails of computer vision. In the past decade, we have
witnessed remarkable progress in learning representations
from massive amounts of labeled data [34, 55, 25]. More
recently, self-supervised representation learning methods
that do not rely on any explicit external annotation have
also achieved impressive performance [24, 38, 7, 23, 5].
Among the most successful approaches are contrastive selfsupervised learning methods that achieve results close to
their supervised counterparts. These methods typically
learn by contrasting latent representations of different augmentations, transformations or cluster assignments of images. With a sufficient amount of transformations and images to contrast, the model is driven to learn powerful representations.
The most common protocol for comparing representations learned by self-supervised methods is to pre-train

models on a large dataset such as ImageNet [15] without using class labels and then use the learned representations for training end tasks such as image classification,
object detection or segmentation. Although this protocol
has been widely adopted, it provides an incomplete picture
of progress, since the noticeable similarities between common pre-training and end tasks might lead to biased and
optimistic estimates of performance.
In this work, we provide a comprehensive study of representations learned by contrastive self-supervised methods.
We explore various alternatives for algorithms, pre-training
datasets and end tasks (Figure 1), covering a total of 735
experiments, using 4 algorithms, 4 pre-training datasets and
20 diverse end tasks. Our goal is to provide answers to the
following open questions: (1) Is supervised learning on ImageNet a good default encoder choice for end tasks? (2) Is
ImageNet accuracy a good metric for measuring progress

9949

