Group-Free 3D Object Detection via Transformers
†

Ze Liu1,2 * Zheng Zhang2 Yue Cao2 Han Hu2 Xin Tong2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
liuze@mail.ustc.edu.cn
2

Microsoft Research Asia

{zhez,yuecao,hanhu,xtong}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recently, directly detecting 3D objects from 3D point
clouds has received increasing attention. To extract object
representation from an irregular point cloud, existing methods usually take a point grouping step to assign the points
to an object candidate so that a PointNet-like network could
be used to derive object features from the grouped points.
However, the inaccurate point assignments caused by the
hand-crafted grouping scheme decrease the performance of
3D object detection.
In this paper, we present a simple yet effective method for
directly detecting 3D objects from the 3D point cloud. Instead of grouping local points to each object candidate, our
method computes the feature of an object from all the points
in the point cloud with the help of an attention mechanism
in the Transformers [42], where the contribution of each
point is automatically learned in the network training. With
an improved attention stacking scheme, our method fuses
object features in different stages and generates more accurate object detection results. With few bells and whistles,
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art 3D object detection performance on two widely used benchmarks, ScanNet V2 and SUN RGB-D. The code and models are publicly available at https://github.com/zeliu98/
Group-Free-3D

1. Introduction
3D object detection on point cloud simultaneously localizes and recognizes 3D objects from a 3D point set. As a
fundamental technique for 3D scene understanding, it plays
an important role in many applications such as autonomous
driving, robotics manipulation, and augmented reality.
Different from 2D object detection that works on 2D regular images, 3D object detection takes irregular and sparse
* This work is done when Ze Liu is an intern at MSRA.
† Contact person

Scene

RoI-Pooling

Voting

Group-Free

Figure 1. With the heuristic point grouping step, all points in blue
box of RoI-Pooling or blue ball of Voting are assigned and aggregated to derive the object features, resulting in wrong assignments.
Our group-free based approach automatically learn the contribution of all points to each object, which has ability to alleviate the
drawbacks of the hand-crafted grouping.

point cloud as input, which makes it difficult to directly apply techniques used for 2D object detection techniques. Recent studies [27, 35, 26, 51] infer the object location and extract object features directly from the irregular input point
cloud for object detection. In these methods, a point grouping step is required to assign a group of points to each object
candidate, and then computes object features from assigned
groups of points. For this purpose, different grouping strategies have been investigated. Frustum-PointNet [27] applies
the Frustum envelop of a 2D proposal box for point grouping. Point R-CNN [35] groups points within the 3D box
proposals to objects. VoteNet [26] determines the group as
the points which vote to the same (or spatially-close) center
point. Although these hand-crafted grouping schemes facilitate 3D object detection, the complexity and diversity of
objects in real scene may lead to wrong point assignments
(shown in Figure. 1) and degrade the 3D object detection
performance.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective technique for detecting 3D objects from point clouds without the

2949

