CrossCLR: Cross-modal Contrastive Learning For Multi-modal Video Representations
Mohammadreza Zolfaghari1∗ , Yi Zhu2 , Peter Gehler2 , Thomas Brox2
1
University of Freiburg 2 Amazon

Abstract
Contrastive learning allows us to flexibly define powerful losses by contrasting positive pairs from sets of negative
samples. Recently, the principle has also been used to learn
cross-modal embeddings for video and text, yet without exploiting its full potential. In particular, previous losses
do not take the intra-modality similarities into account,
which leads to inefficient embeddings, as the same content
is mapped to multiple points in the embedding space. With
CrossCLR, we present a contrastive loss that fixes this issue. Moreover, we define sets of highly related samples in
terms of their input embeddings and exclude them from the
negative samples to avoid issues with false negatives. We
show that these principles consistently improve the quality
of the learned embeddings. The joint embeddings learned
with CrossCLR extend the state of the art in video-text
retrieval on Youcook2 and LSMDC datasets and in video
captioning on Youcook2 dataset by a large margin. We
also demonstrate the generality of the concept by learning
improved joint embeddings for other pairs of modalities.

Modality A

a) MaxMargin

Modality B

c) CrossCLR

b) CLIP

False Negatives
Negatives Samples
Positive Samples

Figure 1. When learning a joint embedding between two modalities A and B, existing contrastive learning losses, such as MaxMargin [11, 24] and CLIP [34], ignore the possibility of false
negative samples and, thus, push semantically related concepts
apart. The proposed CrossCLR loss indentifies influential samples (large circles/boxes), removes them from the negative set
and increases their weight in the minibatch. Moreover, CrossCLR
adds intra-modal links to the loss.

and InfoNCE [44]. Usually positive pairs are defined as
synthetic, spatial [3, 33], or temporal variations of an instance [33]. Instance discrimination has been applied also
to cross-modal tasks, where positive pairs (or a set of positives) are sampled from the same time window (MILNCE [26], AVSA [30], CM-ACC [25]).
In this paper, we investigate two issues of existing crossmodal contrastive learning techniques. 1. The cross-modal
loss only ensures that the features from the two modalities map to proximate points in the joint embedding, but
they lack an explicit measure that also ensures that similar
features from the same modality stay close-by in the joint
embedding. In previous works, it is implicitly presumed
that the similarity between modalities, via transitivity, will
also preserve similarity within the modality. However, it
has not been shown that this is the case1 . If similar features
from the same modality map to far-apart points in the joint
embedding, the embedding lacks semantic meaning and,
thus, will generalize badly. 2. The focus of previous cross-

1. Introduction
Cross-modal tasks, especially tasks connecting video
and text, expand the influence and applicability of computer
vision. It enables, for example, video retrieval based on
text queries [11, 10, 24], image and video captioning [12],
and exploitation of text-based meta-data for visual feature
learning [26, 28, 57, 41]. Linking the different, not directly
comparable sources of data creates new challenges that do
not appear in visual-only learning.
In this paper, we consider cross-modal contrastive learning and introduce a loss that relates the data in a more
efficient manner than direct adoption of a loss designed
for vision-only data. Contrastive learning is based on the
definition of positive and negative samples relative to an
ankor point, which yields a flexible principle: pull together
an anchor and a positive sample in the embedding space,
and push apart the anchor from many negative samples.
Many implementations of this principle have been proposed: max-margin loss [14], triplet loss [46, 47, 18],

1 Since many previous works focus on unsupervised feature learning
rather than learning joint embeddings, they do not assume that the input
embeddings are meaningful, in the sense that semantically related concepts are initially close-by in the feature space. Therefore, preservation
of input similarities is meaningless to them. In this work, we do assume
that the input embeddings for each modality (e.g. ImageNet pretrained
features) already cover some semantics, and we target a joint embedding
that leverages these semantics across modalities.

∗ Work done during an internship at Amazon Tübingen.

1450

