Interpretable Image Recognition by Constructing Transparent Embedding Space
Jiaqi Wang, Huafeng Liu,* Xinyue Wang, Liping Jing*
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
{jiaqi.wang, huafeng, xinyuewang, lpjing}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Humans usually explain their reasoning (e.g. classification) by dissecting the image and pointing out the evidence
from these parts to the concepts in their minds. Inspired
by this cognitive process, several part-level interpretable
neural network architectures have been proposed to explain
the predictions. However, they suffer from the complex data
structure and confusing the effect of the individual part to
output category. In this work, an interpretable image recognition deep network is designed by introducing a plug-in
transparent embedding space (TesNet) to bridge the highlevel input patches (e.g. CNN feature maps) and the output categories. This plug-in embedding space is spanned
by transparent basis concepts which are constructed on
the Grassmann manifold. These basis concepts are enforced to be category-aware and within-category concepts
are orthogonal to each other, which makes sure the embedding space is disentangled. Meanwhile, each basis concept
can be traced back to the particular image patches, thus
they are transparent and friendly to explain the reasoning
process. By comparing with state-of-the-art interpretable
methods, TesNet is much more beneficial to classification
tasks, esp. providing better interpretability on predictions
and improve the final accuracy. The code is available at
https://github.com/JackeyWang96/TesNet.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks(CNNs) [20, 19, 29, 12,
14] have achieved surpassing performance in many visual
tasks, such as image recognition and detection. However,
besides the extraordinary discrimination power, CNNs and
their corresponding results are still hard to explain, which
severely limits their applications such as self-driving cars,
diagnosis of cancer and etc. Recently, more and more interpretable methods have been proposed on CNNs, in order
to open the black box of neural networks. Among them, an
* Corresponding authors.

Why is this bird classified as a Yellow-headed Blackbird?
The evidence for this bird is a Yellow-head Blackbird

The evidence for this bird is not a Cape Glossy Starling

looks like

looks like

looks like

looks unlike

…

looks unlike

looks unlike

Figure 1: Image of a Yellow-headed Blackbird and humans
usually explain their reasoning process through some parts
of the image which looks like some learned concepts of the
Yellow-headed Blackbird to classify the bird’s species.

intuitive strategy is to visualize the feature representation
hidden inside a CNN, but there is still a vast gap between
network visualization and semantic interpretations for neural networks.
Considering the examples in Figure 1, how would you
identify the bird image as a Yellow-headed Blackbird and
not a Cape Glossy Starling? Maybe you find that the bird’s
head, legs, and feathers look like those concepts of Yellowheaded Blackbird rather than Cape Glossy Starling. In other
words, you may gather the evidence in your mind and make
a final decision. Specifically, humans usually explain their
reasoning process by dissecting the image into object parts
and pointing out the evidence from these identified parts to
the concepts stored in his / her mind. Therefore, for the intelligent machine, it is an emergent issue to determine the
object parts and construct the concepts in order to implement interpretable image classification.
To enforce the CNN-based classifier with interpretability, the basis concepts are introduced as a plug-in component in CNN architecture [1]. From the cognitive point of
view [26], the interpretable concepts should cover the following characteristics: 1) Informative: the input data can
be efficiently represented in the space spanned by the ba-

895

