Unsupervised Deep Video Denoising
Dev Yashpal Sheth1∗ , Sreyas Mohan2 ,* Joshua L. Vincent3 , Ramon Manzorro3 , Peter A. Crozier3 ,
Mitesh M. Khapra1,6 , Eero P. Simoncelli2,4,5 , Carlos Fernandez-Granda2,5
1

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India, 2 Center for Data Science, New York University,
3
School for Engineering of Matter, Transport, and Energy, ASU,
4
Center for Neural Science, NYU and Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation,
5
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, NYU, 6 Robert Bosch Center for Data Science and AI.

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for video
denoising are typically trained with supervision, assuming
the availability of clean videos. However, in many applications, such as microscopy, noiseless videos are not available. To address this, we propose an Unsupervised Deep
Video Denoiser (UDVD1 ), a CNN architecture designed to
be trained exclusively with noisy data. The performance
of UDVD is comparable to the supervised state-of-the-art,
even when trained only on a single short noisy video. We
demonstrate the promise of our approach in real-world
imaging applications by denoising raw video, fluorescencemicroscopy and electron-microscopy data. In contrast to
many current approaches to video denoising, UDVD does
not require explicit motion compensation. This is advantageous because motion compensation is computationally
expensive, and can be unreliable when the input data are
noisy. A gradient-based analysis reveals that UDVD automatically adapts to local motion in the input noisy videos.
Thus, the network learns to perform implicit motion compensation, even though it is only trained for denoising.

1. Introduction
Video denoising is a fundamental problem in image processing, as well as an important preprocessing step for computer vision tasks. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[21] provide current state-of-the-art solutions for this problem [34, 35, 41, 43, 11, 9, 8, 6]. These networks are typically trained using a database of clean videos, which are
corrupted with simulated noise. However, in applications
such as microscopy, noiseless ground truth videos are often
not available. To address this issue, we propose a method
to train a video denoising CNN without access to super* equal contribution.
1 See https://sreyas-mohan.github.io/udvd/ for code and more results.

vised data, which we call Unsupervised Deep Video Denoising (UDVD). UDVD is inspired by the “blind-spot”
technique, recently introduced for unsupervised still image
denoising [22, 17, 2, 19], in which a CNN is trained to estimate each noisy pixel from the surrounding spatial neighborhood without including the pixel itself. Here, we propose a blind-spot architecture that processes the surrounding spatio-temporal neighborhood to denoise videos.
We show that UDVD is competitive with the current supervised state-of-the-art on standard benchmarks, despite
not having access to ground-truth clean videos during training (see Figure 1). Moreover, when combined with aggressive data augmentation and early stopping, it can produce high-quality denoising even when trained exclusively
on a single brief noisy video sequence (as few as 30
frames), outperforming unsupervised video denoising techniques (e.g. F2F[11] and MF2F [9]) which are pre-trained
with supervision. Finally, methods based on pre-training
are not suitable for imaging applications where clean data
is unavailable. In contrast, we demonstrate that UDVD can
effectively denoise three different real-world datasets: raw
videos from surveillance cameras, fluorescence-microscopy
videos of cells, and electron-microscopy videos of catalytic
nanoparticles.
The state-of-the-art performance of UDVD is unexpected. Nearly all existing approaches to video denoising [24, 1, 3, 25], including those based on deep CNNs [34,
41, 11, 13, 42], use estimates of optical flow to adaptively
compensate for the motion of objects in the video. Conventional wisdom suggest that ignoring such motion should
lead to denoising results in which moving content is blurred.
Contrary to this intuition, UDVD and some recent state-ofthe-art supervised methods for video denoising [35, 8, 6]
yield excellent empirical performance without explicit estimation of optical flow. How can is this achieved? We
use a gradient-based analysis to show that both UDVD and
supervised CNNs perform spatio-temporal adaptive filter-

1759

