Searching for Controllable Image Restoration Networks
Heewon Kim

Sungyong Baik
Myungsub Choi*
Janghoon Choi†
ASRI, Department of ECE, Seoul National University

Kyoung Mu Lee

{ghimhw, dsybaik, cms6539, ultio791, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a novel framework for controllable image
restoration that can effectively restore multiple types and
levels of degradation of a corrupted image. The proposed
model, named TASNet, is automatically determined by our
neural architecture search algorithm, which optimizes the
efficiency-accuracy trade-off of the candidate model architectures. Specifically, we allow TASNet to share the early
layers across different restoration tasks and adaptively adjust the remaining layers with respect to each task. The
shared task-agnostic layers greatly improve the efficiency
while the task-specific layers are optimized for restoration
quality, and our search algorithm seeks for the best balance
between the two. We also propose a new data sampling strategy to further improve the overall restoration performance.
As a result, TASNet achieves significantly faster GPU latency
and lower FLOPs compared to the existing state-of-the-art
models, while also showing visually more pleasing outputs.
The source code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/ghimhw/TASNet.

1. Introduction
Restoration of real-world corrupted images is a challenging problem since the types and the severity (or level) of
degradation are unknown. Previous works on blind image
super-resolution [4, 26] or blind deblurring [35, 14, 1] tackle
this problem by learning to predict the unknown degradation
kernel, and then using the predicted kernel to restore clean
images. Recently, controllable image restoration has been
gaining increased attention as alternative approaches. In this
scenario, instead of accepting a single restored image given
by the final model, users can control the output restoration to
generate multiple images and choose the output image that
best fits their preferences.
Early works on controllable image restoration (CIR) [15,
27, 31, 32] mostly consider a single type of degradation
and modulate the levels of restoration. For instance, the denoising model from [15] allows continuous modulation of
* Now at Google Research
† Now at Kookmin University

CResMD [16]

TASNet (Ours)

Figure 1: An example of controllable image restoration. Our
model generates visually more pleasing outputs while adjusting
restoration levels with 3 times faster GPU latency and 95.7%
reduced FLOPs compared to CResMD [16].

denoising a Gaussian noise with σ = 15 ∼ 75. More recently, CResMD [16] proposed an extended framework that
learns multiple types of degradation (Gaussian blur, Gaussian noise, and JPEG compression) jointly with a single
network, so that users can interactively adjust not only the
level but also the type of degradation. However, as more
flexible control is enabled, two new challenges arise for the
practical application of CIR models: 1) the high computation
cost of generating multiple images to choose from, and 2)
the difficulty of finding the true types and the levels of degradation, in which failing to do so may lead to significantly
deteriorated outputs.
To alleviate these limitations, we present TASNet, a novel
deep-learning-based CIR model that is optimized to achieve
better visual quality and substantially reduced computational complexity. Figure 1 demonstrates a sample result.
Our TASNet consists of two parts: task-agnostic layers and
task-specific layers, where we denote “task” as a restoration
problem w.r.t. a combination of degradation types and levels.
The task-agnostic part is composed of the early layers of the
baseline supernetwork, where the parameters of the layers
are shared across all tasks. Sharing the early layers greatly
improves the efficiency of CIR model, since we do not need
to re-compute the output of the shared layers each time a

14234

