Editing Conditional Radiance Fields
Steven Liu1 Xiuming Zhang1 Zhoutong Zhang1 Richard Zhang2 Jun-Yan Zhu2,3 Bryan Russell2
1
2
3
MIT
Adobe Research
CMU
http://editnerf.csail.mit.edu/

Abstract
A neural radiance field (NeRF) is a scene model supporting high-quality view synthesis, optimized per scene. In this
paper, we explore enabling user editing of a category-level
NeRF – also known as a conditional radiance field – trained
on a shape category. Specifically, we introduce a method for
propagating coarse 2D user scribbles to the 3D space, to
modify the color or shape of a local region. First, we propose
a conditional radiance field that incorporates new modular
network components, including a shape branch that is shared
across object instances. Observing multiple instances of the
same category, our model learns underlying part semantics
without any supervision, thereby allowing the propagation of
coarse 2D user scribbles to the entire 3D region (e.g., chair
seat). Next, we propose a hybrid network update strategy
that targets specific network components, which balances
efficiency and accuracy. During user interaction, we formulate an optimization problem that both satisfies the user’s
constraints and preserves the original object structure. We
demonstrate our editing approach on rendered views of three
shape datasets and show that it outperforms prior neural
editing approaches. Finally, we edit the appearance and
shape of a single-view real photograph and show that the
edit propagates to extrapolated novel views.

1. Introduction
3D content creation often involves manipulating highquality 3D assets for visual effects or augmented reality
applications, and part of a 3D artist’s workflow consists of
making local adjustments to a 3D scene’s appearance and
shape [26, 28]. Explicit representations give artists control of
the different elements of a 3D scene. For example, the artist
may use mesh processing tools to make local adjustments
to the scene geometry or change the surface appearance by
manipulating a texture atlas [62]. In an artist’s workflow,
such explicit representations are often created by hand or
procedurally generated.
While explicit representations are powerful, there remain significant technical challenges in automatically acquiring a high-quality explicit representation of a real-world

Figure 1: Editing a conditional radiance field. Given a conditional radiance field trained over a class of objects, we demonstrate
three editing applications: (A) color editing, (B) shape editing, and
(C) color/shape transfer. A user provides coarse scribbles over a
local region of interest or selects a target object instance. Local
edits propagate to the desired region in 3D and are consistent across
different rendered views.

scene due to view-dependent appearance, complex scene
topology, and varying surface opacity. Recently, implicit
continuous volumetric representations have shown highfidelity capture and rendering of a variety of 3D scenes
and overcome many of the aforementioned technical challenges [50, 66, 45, 59, 63]. Such representations encode the
captured scene in the weights of a neural network. The neural
network learns to render view-dependent colors from point
samples along cast rays, with the final rendering obtained via
alpha compositing [58]. This representation enables many
photorealistic view synthesis applications [41, 47]. However,
we lack critical knowledge in how to enable artists’ control
and editing in this representation.
Editing an implicit continuous volumetric representation
is challenging. First, how can we effectively propagate
sparse 2D user edits to fill the entire corresponding 3D region
in this representation? Second, the neural network for an implicit representation has millions of parameters. It is unclear

5773

