Dual Transfer Learning for Event-based End-task Prediction via Pluggable
Event to Image Translation
Lin Wang, Yujeong Chae, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
{wanglin, yujeong, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Event cameras are novel sensors that perceive the perpixel intensity changes and output asynchronous event
streams with high dynamic range and less motion blur. It
has been shown that events alone can be used for end-task
learning, e.g., semantic segmentation, based on encoderdecoder-like networks. However, as events are sparse and
mostly reflect edge information, it is difficult to recover original details merely relying on the decoder. Moreover, most
methods resort to the pixel-wise loss alone for supervision,
which might be insufficient to fully exploit the visual details from sparse events, thus leading to less optimal performance. In this paper, we propose a simple yet flexible twostream framework named Dual Transfer Learning (DTL) to
effectively enhance the performance on the end-tasks without adding extra inference cost. The proposed approach
consists of three parts: event to end-task learning (EEL)
branch, event to image translation (EIT) branch, and transfer learning (TL) module that simultaneously explores the
feature-level affinity information and pixel-level knowledge
from the EIT branch to improve the EEL branch. This simple yet novel method leads to strong representation learning
from events and is evidenced by the significant performance
boost on the end-tasks such as semantic segmentation and
depth estimation.

1. Introduction
Event cameras have recently received much attention in
the computer vision and robotics community for their distinctive advantages, e.g., high dynamic range (HDR) and
less motion blur [11]. These sensors perceive the intensity
changes at each pixel asynchronously and produce event
streams encoding time, pixel location, and polarity (sign)
of intensity changes. Although events are sparse and mostly
respond to the edges in the scene, it has been shown that it is
possible to use events alone for learning the end-tasks, e.g.,
semantic segmentation [1, 14], optical flow and depth estimation [15, 22, 55, 80], via deep neural networks (DNNs).
These methods usually follow the encoder-decoder-like net-

Figure 1: (a) There is no direct relation between EIT and EEL
in the prior-arts. (b) The proposed DTL framework by using EIT
branch as a pluggable unit and transferring both feature-level and
prediction-level information to enhance the performance of EEL.

work structures, e.g., [1, 14, 22], as shown in Fig. 1(a), and
are trained in a fully supervised manner. However, as events
mostly reflect edge information, unlike the canonical images, it is difficult to recover the original structural details
from events merely relying on the decoder (see Fig. 2(b)).
Importantly, learning from sparse events with the pixel-wise
loss (e.g., cross-entropy loss) alone for supervision often
fails to fully exploit visual details from events, thus leading
to less optimal performance.
The other line of research has shown the possibility of
generating images from events [24, 37, 48, 54, 58, 61, 66].
The generated images have been successfully applied to the
end-tasks, e.g., object recognition [48]; however, there exist two crucial problems. First, using these images as the
intermediate representations of events leads to considerable
inference latency. Second, there is no direct connection regarding the optimization process between two tasks. Indeed, the feature representations learned from image generation contain more structural details (see Fig. 2(c)), which
can be a good guide for learning end-tasks. However, these
crucial clues have been rarely considered and explored to
date. Moreover, some event cameras provide active pixel
sensor (APS) frames, which contain very crucial visual information; nonetheless, the potential has been scarcely explored to assist learning end-tasks from events.
Therefore, in this paper, we design a concise yet flexible framework to alleviate the above dilemmas. Motivated
by recent attempts for event-to-image translation [42, 48,
58, 61], transfer learning [31, 81], and multi-task learning

2135

