Bootstrap Your Own Correspondences
Mohamed El Banani
Justin Johnson
University of Michigan
{mbanani, justincj}@umich.edu

Abstract
Geometric feature extraction is a crucial component of
point cloud registration pipelines. Recent work has demonstrated how supervised learning can be leveraged to learn
better and more compact 3D features. However, those approaches’ reliance on ground-truth annotation limits their
scalability. We propose BYOC: a self-supervised approach
that learns visual and geometric features from RGB-D
video without relying on ground-truth pose or correspondence. Our key observation is that randomly-initialized
CNNs readily provide us with good correspondences; allowing us to bootstrap the learning of both visual and geometric features. Our approach combines classic ideas
from point cloud registration with more recent representation learning approaches. We evaluate our approach on indoor scene datasets and find that our method outperforms
traditional and learned descriptors, while being competitive
with current state-of-the-art supervised approaches.

1. Introduction
One’s ability to align two views of the same scene is
closely intertwined with their ability to identify corresponding points between the two views. The duality between
correspondence estimation and point cloud registration has
long been recognized and serves as the basis for many approaches in both problems . Given an accurate registration
of a scene, one can easily extract correspondences between
the two views. Conversely, given point correspondences,
one can easily register two views of a scene. Can we leverage this cycle to jointly learn both correspondence estimation and point cloud registration from scratch?
At the core of this cycle is the ability to generate good
feature descriptors for points in the scene. The prevailing approach to 3D feature learning relies on preregistered
scenes to sample ground-truth correspondences for the supervised training of a feature encoder. This is done by
sampling positive and negative feature pairs and applying
triplet [12, 32, 35, 57] or contrastive [3, 12, 56] losses.
While very successful, these approaches require us to have

Figure 1. BYOC estimates visual correspondences and uses them
to train a visual and a geometric encoder on RGB-D video frames.
At test time, it can successfully register raw point clouds.

already registered the raw depth or RGB-D scans to generate the training data. This limits this approach to data that
can be successfully registered with automated approaches
like COLMAP [46]. Ideally, we would leverage the success
of supervised approaches without relying on ground-truth
correspondence labels.
To this end, we propose Bootstrap Your Own Correspondences (BYOC): a self-supervised end-to-end approach
that learns point cloud registration by leveraging pseudocorrespondence labels. Our approach extracts pseudocorrespondences using the features of a randomly initialized feature encoder. We use the sampled correspondences
to register the point clouds and apply losses based on the
quality of the registration to train the feature encoders. This
allows us to slowly bootstrap1 the feature learning process
and learn from RGB-D scans without relying on any pose
or correspondence supervision.
1 We use bootstrap in its idiomatic rather than its statistical sense.

6433

