Scene Synthesis via Uncertainty-Driven Attribute Synchronization
Haitao Yang1

Zaiwei Zhang1
Siming Yan1
Yi Zheng2
Chandrajit Bajaj1
1

The University of Texas at Austin

Haibin Huang2
Chongyang Ma2
Qixing Huang1
2

Kuaishou Technology

Abstract
Developing deep neural networks to generate 3D scenes
is a fundamental problem in neural synthesis with immediate
applications in architectural CAD, computer graphics, as
well as in generating virtual robot training environments.
This task is challenging because 3D scenes exhibit diverse
patterns, ranging from continuous ones, such as object
sizes and the relative poses between pairs of shapes, to
discrete patterns, such as occurrence and co-occurrence
of objects with symmetrical relationships. This paper
introduces a novel neural scene synthesis approach that
can capture diverse feature patterns of 3D scenes. Our
method combines the strength of both neural network-based
and conventional scene synthesis approaches. We use
the parametric prior distributions learned from training
data, which provide uncertainties of object attributes and
relative attributes, to regularize the outputs of feed-forward
neural models. Moreover, instead of merely predicting a
scene layout, our approach predicts an over-complete set
of attributes. This methodology allows us to utilize the
underlying consistency constraints among the predicted
attributes to prune infeasible predictions. Experimental
results show that our approach outperforms existing methods
considerably. The generated 3D scenes interpolate the
training data faithfully while preserving both continuous
and discrete feature patterns.

1. Introduction
3D scene synthesis is a fundamental problem in deep
generative modeling. This task is challenging because 3D
scenes exhibit diverse patterns, ranging from continuous
ones, such as the size of each object and the relative
poses between pairs of shapes, to discrete patterns, such
as occurrence and co-occurrence of objects and symmetric
relations. Moreover, there are also generic geometric
constraints, e.g., synthesized objects in a 3D scene should
not inter-penetrate. Developing neural networks to capture
all feature patterns while enforcing geometric constraints
remains an open problem. Due to the diversity of feature

Figure 1: Randomly generated scenes (left) and their nearest
neighbours (right) in the training set in 3D-FRONT.

patterns and constraints, the popular approach of developing
a single data representation and training approach proves
insufficient.
This paper introduces a novel approach to synthesizing
3D scenes represented as a collection of objects. Each object
is encoded by its attributes such as size, pose, existence
indicator, and geometric codes (c.f. [42, 56]). The theme of
our approach is to look at 3D scene synthesis from hybrid
viewpoints. Our goal is to combine the strengths of different
approaches and representations that can capture diverse
feature patterns and enforce different constraints. We execute
this hybrid methodology at two levels.
First, instead of merely synthesizing the absolute attributes of each individual object, our approach predicts
an over-complete set of attributes which also include relative
attributes (e.g., relative poses) between object pairs. Such
relative attributes better capture spatial correlations among
objects compared to only synthesizing absolute attributes.
From a robust optimization point of view, over-complete
attributes possess generic consistency constraints, e.g., the
relative attributes should be consistent with object attributes.
These constraints allow us to prune infeasible attributes

5630

