Where are you heading? Dynamic Trajectory Prediction with Expert Goal
Examples
He Zhao
York University

Richard P. Wildes
York University

zhufl@eecs.yorku.ca

wildes@cse.yorku.ca

Abstract
Goal-conditioned approaches recently have been found
very useful to human trajectory prediction, when adequate
goal estimates are provided. Yet, goal inference is difficult
in itself and often incurs extra learning effort. We propose to
predict pedestrian trajectories via the guidance of goal expertise, which can be obtained with modest expense through
a novel goal-search mechanism on already seen training
examples. There are three key contributions in our study.
First, we devise a framework that exploits nearest examples
for high-quality goal position inquiry. This approach naturally considers multi-modality, physical constraints, compatibility with existing methods and is nonparametric; it
therefore does not require additional learning effort typical
in goal inference. Second, we present an end-to-end trajectory predictor that can efficiently associate goal retrievals
to past motion information and dynamically infer possible
future trajectories. Third, with these two novel techniques
in hand, we conduct a series of experiments on two broadly
explored datasets (SDD and ETH/UCY) and show that our
approach surpasses previous state-of-the-art performance
by notable margins and reduces the need for additional parameters. Code can be found at our project page1 .

1. Introduction
Video predictive understanding on motion patterns of
human or robotic agents is essential to many real-world
intelligent systems. Forecasting the future trajectories of
pedestrians in crowded scenes is an example of such research and recently has received considerable attention
[1, 12, 51, 20, 25]. It studies the ability of artificial vision
systems to anticipate the future motion of individuals from
current observations and therefore is of importance to a variety of allied areas, including self-driving vehicles, service
robots and surveillance systems [38].
Research on modeling pedestrian walking trajectories
has evolved from relatively simple physical motion models (e.g., social force [13] or constant velocity [42]) to more
1 https://github.com/JoeHEZHAO/expert_traj

Expert Repository

Similarity Searching

Goal Candidates

78% sim*
83% sim*
61% sim*

Query

3

1

2

Retrieval

Figure 1: Overview of the Query-Retrieval based framework. A test trajectory with unknown future goal position is matched with expert examples
that previously have been seen and stored in an expert repository. Comparisons are based on same observation length test (query) and stored expert example (shown as solid lines) trajectories. This step results in multimodal nearest trajectories with high similarity being retrieved, i.e., those
shown in purple, red and green, as well as their goal positions (denoted as
colored flags) as potential goals for subsequent full trajectory forecasting.

sophisticated efforts that take into account social compliance [30, 52, 41], enviromental awareness [27, 39, 44, 26]
as well as end-goal policies [29, 6]. Recent efforts have
found notable performance improvements by encoding goal
positions (also dubbed destinations or endpoints) together
with historically observed trajectories, with special effectiveness noticed in long-term prediction horizons. These
efforts operate essentially in two steps: (i) Inference of goal
positions from estimators typically trained in parallel with
trajectory estimators; (ii) subsequent trajectory prediction
that forecasts unseen movement, conditioned on both the
past motion history and the inferred goal information. In
nature, this scheme implicitly converts trajectory extrapolation to interpolation (i.e., bridging the pathway between
initial trajectories and goal positions).
Goal-based research has been seen in a variety of places,
e.g., motion planning [16] and reinforcement learning [17,
32, 8, 9]. These efforts either pre-define the desired goal
space with human supervision [7, 33] or leverage a learnable module to obtain that information directly from input,
e.g., preliminary states or raw images [32]. The latter is
favored by the general trajectory prediction field [29, 6],

7629

