LOKI: Long Term and Key Intentions for Trajectory Prediction
Harshayu Girase1,2, *,† Haiming Gang1,⇤ Srikanth Malla1 Jiachen Li1,2,†
Akira Kanehara3 Karttikeya Mangalam2 Chiho Choi1
1
Honda Research Institute USA 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 Honda R&D Co., Ltd.
{harshayugirase, jiachen li, mangalam}@berkeley.edu

akira kanehara@jp.honda

{hgang, smalla, cchoi}@honda-ri.com

Abstract
Recent advances in trajectory prediction have shown
that explicit reasoning about agents’ intent is important
to accurately forecast their motion. However, the current
research activities are not directly applicable to intelligent and safety critical systems. This is mainly because
very few public datasets are available, and they only consider pedestrian-specific intents for a short temporal horizon from a restricted egocentric view. To this end, we propose LOKI (LOng term and Key Intentions), a novel largescale dataset that is designed to tackle joint trajectory and
intention prediction for heterogeneous traffic agents (pedestrians and vehicles) in an autonomous driving setting. The
LOKI dataset is created to discover several factors that may
affect intention, including i) agent’s own will, ii) social interactions, iii) environmental constraints, and iv) contextual information. We also propose a model that jointly performs trajectory and intention prediction, showing that recurrently reasoning about intention can assist with trajectory prediction. We show our method outperforms stateof-the-art trajectory prediction methods by upto 27% and
also provide a baseline for frame-wise intention estimation.
The dataset is available at https://usa.honda-ri.
com/loki

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, there has been extensive research into predicting future trajectories of dynamic agents
in scenes, such as pedestrians and vehicles. This is an incredibly important and challenging task for safety critical
applications such as autonomous vehicles or social robot
navigation. While these methods have been significantly
advanced over recent years, very few benchmarks specifically test if these models can accurately reason about key
* Co-first author. The authorship order is randomly determined
† Work done during the internship at Honda Research Institute

Figure 1: We show that reasoning about long-term goals
and short-term intents plays a significant role in trajectory
prediction. With a lack of comprehensive benchmarks for
this purpose, we introduce a new dataset for intention and
trajectory prediction. An example use case is illustrated in
(a) where we predict the trajectory of the target vehicle. In
(b), long-term goals are estimated from agent’s own motion. Interactions in (c) and environmental constraints such
as road topology and lane restrictions in (d) influence the
agent’s short-term intent and thus future trajectories.
maneuvers such as sudden turns and lane changes of vehicles or pedestrians crossing the road. Traditional trajectory
error metrics may not capture performance on frame-level
maneuvers, which is critical for safe planning.
An intelligent trajectory prediction system should be
able to understand and model dynamic human behaviors.
The study of human behavior as goal-directed entities has
a long and rich interdisciplinary history across the subfields of psychology [1], neuroscience [2] and computer
vision [3]. The human decision making process is inherently hierarchical, consisting of several levels of reasoning
and planning mechanisms that operate in tandem to achieving respective short and long term desires. Recent works
have showed that explicitly reasoning about long-term goals
[3, 4, 5] and short-term intents [6, 7, 8] can assist with tra-

9803

