Rethinking Noise Synthesis and Modeling in Raw Denoising
Yi Zhang1

Hongwei Qin2
1

Xiaogang Wang1
2

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab

Hongsheng Li1

SenseTime Research

zhangyi@link.cuhk.edu.hk, qinhongwei@sensetime.com, {xgwang, hsli}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The lack of large-scale real raw image denoising dataset
gives rise to challenges on synthesizing realistic raw image noise for training denoising models. However, the real
raw image noise is contributed by many noise sources and
varies greatly among different sensors. Existing methods
are unable to model all noise sources accurately, and building a noise model for each sensor is also laborious. In
this paper, we introduce a new perspective to synthesize
noise by directly sampling from the sensor’s real noise. It
inherently generates accurate raw image noise for different camera sensors. Two efficient and generic techniques:
pattern-aligned patch sampling and high-bit reconstruction help accurate synthesis of spatial-correlated noise and
high-bit noise respectively. We conduct systematic experiments on SIDD and ELD datasets. The results show that (1)
our method outperforms existing methods and demonstrates
wide generalization on different sensors and lighting conditions. (2) Recent conclusions derived from DNN-based
noise modeling methods are actually based on inaccurate
noise parameters. The DNN-based methods still cannot outperform physics-based statistical methods. The code will be
available at https://github.com/zhangyi-3/.

1. Introduction
Learning-based methods have made great progress on
raw image denoising in recent years. However, collecting a large-scale real raw image dataset is time and manpower consuming. Therefore, most learning-based methods
on raw image denoising are trained with synthetic datasets,
which model and apply synthesis noise to clean images to
create noisy inputs. As a result, their denoising performances in real-world scenarios are significantly dependent
on the discrepancy between the synthetic noise and actual
noise in real raw images.
Existing methods for synthesizing raw image noise generally conducts the following two steps: (1) building a noise
model and optimizing the parameters by fitting the real
noise distribution, and (2) generating the synthetic noise

randomly from the noise model. According to the different
types of noise models, they can be divided into two categories: physics-based statistical methods and Deep Neural
Network (DNN)-based methods.
DNN-based methods [30, 1, 7] learn to model noise distribution from real datasets with deep generative networks
(e.g., GAN, Flow). Although the deep models have powerful representation capability, it is particularly hard for
them to generate accurate values for each pixel in denseprediction tasks. For example, in image generation, how to
generate realistic small details with less artifacts is a relatively challenging problem. While all DNN-based methods claim superior performances on SIDD dataset compared
with the physics-based noise models, we found that those
conclusions are built on the uncalibrated noise profiles of
the SIDD dataset (noise profiles for the Poisson-Gaussian
distribution).
Physics-based statistical methods [29, 14] are more
promising compared with the DNN-based methods since
they follow the physical process of the specific camera sensor and model various noise sources step by step according to the physical process from photos to digital numbers.
However, there also exist obvious limitations for physicsbased methods. First, it is impossible to accurately extract
and model all kinds of noise sources in the camera since
every electronic component of the camera can be a noise
source. Second, in most cases, modeling a noise source
is based on inaccurate distributions since the natural distributions for most noise sources are unknown. Third, the
real noise distributions vary dramatically in different cameras or lighting conditions (e.g., low-light), which makes
physics-based methods laborious. All those limitations hinder physics-based methods to achieve accurate noise modeling.
In this paper, we propose a new perspective for synthesizing realistic image noise. Specifically, instead of building the noise model first and then generating synthetic noise
from the noise model step by step, we synthesize the noise
by sampling directly from the real noise distribution.
We first describe the general raw image formation based
on the physical process and decompose the raw image noise

4593

