Minimal Solutions for Panoramic Stitching Given Gravity Prior
Yaqing Ding1 , Daniel Barath2 , Zuzana Kukelova3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
3
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
dingyaqing@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
When capturing panoramas, people tend to align their
cameras with the vertical axis, i.e., the direction of gravity.
Moreover, modern devices, e.g. smartphones and tablets,
are equipped with an IMU (Inertial Measurement Unit) that
can measure the gravity vector accurately. Using this prior,
the y-axes of the cameras can be aligned or assumed to be
already aligned, reducing the relative orientation to 1-DOF
(degree of freedom). Exploiting this assumption, we propose new minimal solutions to panoramic stitching of images taken by cameras with coinciding optical centers, i.e.
undergoing pure rotation. We consider six practical camera configurations, from fully calibrated ones up to a camera with unknown fixed or varying focal length and with or
without radial distortion. The solvers are tested both on
synthetic scenes, on more than 500k real image pairs from
the Sun360 dataset, and from scenes captured by us using
two smartphones equipped with IMUs. The new solvers
have similar or better accuracy than the state-of-the-art
ones and outperform them in terms of processing time.

1. Introduction
Panoramic image stitching is a fundamental problem in
computer vision. It is useful not only for creating visually
pleasing image mosaics, but also for combining inputs from
multiple cameras before further processing in downstream
tasks. The generated images cover a large field-of-view and
are useful in various applications, e.g. image-based localization [3], SLAM [25, 18], autonomous driving [33], sports
broadcasting [7], video surveillance [35], and augmented
and virtual reality [17, 27].
When solving this problem, we are given a sequence
of images taken from a single point in space with a camera rotating around some 3D axis. The objective is to map
the images into a common reference frame and to create a
larger image composed of the captured ones, thus, covering
a much wider field-of-view than each individual image. In

g

Figure 1: Panorama stitching with known gravity vector g.
other words, the goal is to estimate the unknown relative rotation and intrinsic parameters of cameras with coinciding
optical centers, i.e., cameras undergoing a pure rotational
motion. This problem is often considered to be solved in
the computer vision community, with a number of existing
solutions [15, 5, 10, 19, 6, 22]. However, in this paper, we
will show that the existing solutions do not exploit all available information that can be easily obtained from recent devices. This information can be used to simplify the problem
formulation and to speed up the solution.
A typical panorama stitching pipeline consists of the following three major steps.
1. Pair-wise matching: In the first step, image features are
obtained and tentative correspondences are matched between all image pairs.
2. Robust pair-wise estimation: From correspondences
found in the first step, the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of pairs of cameras are estimated robustly. Also, the
correspondences consistent with the parameters are selected. The robust estimation is usually based on solving
the stitching problem from a minimal number of input
correspondences, i.e., solving the problem using a minimal solver, in a RANSAC framework [5].
3. Bundle adjustment (BA): The pair-wise estimates of intrinsic and extrinsic parameters are refined jointly over
all images using a non-linear optimization.
In this paper, we address the second step of this pipeline,
i.e., the robust pair-wise estimation from a minimal number
of correspondences. Several minimal solvers exists that can
15579

