Perturbed Self-Distillation: Weakly Supervised Large-Scale Point Cloud
Semantic Segmentation
∗

Yachao Zhang1 , Yanyun Qu1* , Yuan Xie2 , Zonghao Li1 , Shanshan Zheng1 , Cuihua Li1
1
Xiamen University, 2 East China Normal University
yachaozhang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
{zonghaoli,shanshanzheng}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, chli@xmu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Currently, large-scale point cloud semantic segmentation
attracts more and more attention due to its broad applications in environmental perception, such as autonomous
driving, human-computer interaction, virtual reality, and
robotics. Great progress has been made in small-scale point
cloud semantic segmentation [15, 16, 31, 12, 11, 22, 24].
* Corresponding Author

Area5_storage4

Large-scale point cloud semantic segmentation has wide
applications. Current popular researches mainly focus on
fully supervised learning which demands expensive and tedious manual point-wise annotation. Weakly supervised
learning is an alternative way to avoid this exhausting annotation. However, for large-scale point clouds with few
labeled points, the network is difficult to extract discriminative features for unlabeled points, as well as the regularization of topology between labeled and unlabeled points is
usually ignored, resulting in incorrect segmentation results.
To address this problem, we propose a perturbed selfdistillation (PSD) framework. Specifically, inspired by selfsupervised learning, we construct the perturbed branch
and enforce the predictive consistency among the perturbed
branch and original branch. In this way, the graph topology of the whole point cloud can be effectively established
by the introduced auxiliary supervision, such that the information propagation between the labeled and unlabeled
points will be realized. Besides point-level supervision,
we present a well-integrated context-aware module to explicitly regularize the affinity correlation of labeled points.
Therefore, the graph topology of the point cloud can be further refined. The experimental results evaluated on three
large-scale datasets show the large gain (3.0% on average)
against recent weakly supervised methods and comparable
results to some fully supervised methods.

Area5_office39

Abstract

Baseline (RandLA-Net)

PSD

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Semantic segmentation results with 1% labeled points.
We improve the segmentation accuracy of the categories with high
structural similarity to other categories highlighted by the red box.

Recently, RandLA-Net [5] was proposed as an efficient
method for large-scale point cloud (∼ 106 points) semantic segmentation. However, the mainstream of all these
methods is built upon fully supervised learning, requiring
tremendous point-wise annotation. Unfortunately, such annotation involves a large amount of manual work. For example, it takes 22.3 minutes to annotate a scene of ScanNet
[2] on average [23].
To avoid the exhausting annotation, weakly supervised
methods are rising. Xu and Lee et al. [26] firstly proposed a weakly supervised method by labeling a tiny fraction points. This method utilizes multi-branch supervision
and a parameter-free graph-based smoothing item based on
Laplacian matrix, achieving comparable performance to its
fully supervised version with 10× fewer labeled points.
However, this method is limited as it can not directly be implemented to the large-scale point cloud with fewer labels,
due to the lack of learnable topological relationship and the
high computational complexity of the Laplacian matrix. In
addition, this method only uses point-level supervision, and
it is not easy to model the context. While in fully supervised
segmentation task, context information is implicitly learned
by U-Net-style structure [16, 5] or local feature aggregation [31, 22]. Due to the limited annotation of large-scale
scenarios, these techniques cannot meet the requirements

15520

