Multi-Target Adversarial Frameworks for Domain Adaptation
in Semantic Segmentation
Antoine Saporta1,2
1

Tuan-Hung Vu2
Sorbonne University

Matthieu Cord1,2
2
Valeo.ai

Patrick Pérez2

{antoine.saporta, tuan-hung.vu, matthieu.cord, patrick.perez}@valeo.com

Figure 1: Multi-target unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for semantic segmentation. In the standard single-target
setting, UDA methods produce good segmentation in the target domain they are trained on, but generalize poorly to other
unseen domains. Multi-target UDA aims at excelling in the multiple domains the model is trained on. (Top) The information
available during training is composed of source-domain RGB images with ground-truth semantic maps (green), here from
GTA5, and unannotated RGB images from target domain(s) (blue), here from IDD (‘target 1’) and Cityscapes (‘target T ’).
(Bottom) Test-time segmentation is on new images from the target domains, without knowing which domain they stem from.

Abstract
In this work, we address the task of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for semantic segmentation in presence of multiple target domains: The objective is to train
a single model that can handle all these domains at test
time. Such a multi-target adaptation is crucial for a variety of scenarios that real-world autonomous systems must
handle. It is a challenging setup since one faces not only
the domain gap between the labeled source set and the unlabeled target set, but also the distribution shifts existing
within the latter among the different target domains. To this
end, we introduce two adversarial frameworks: (i) multidiscriminator, which explicitly aligns each target domain
to its counterparts, and (ii) multi-target knowledge transfer, which learns a target-agnostic model thanks to a multiteacher/single-student distillation mechanism. The evaluation is done on four newly-proposed multi-target benchmarks for UDA in semantic segmentation. In all tested scenarios, our approaches consistently outperform baselines,
setting competitive standards for the novel task.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in domain adaptation help alleviate the
labeling efforts required for training fully-supervised models, which is especially helpful for tasks like semantic segmentation. Most previous works address the single-target
setting whose goal is to adapt from source to a particular target domain of interest, e.g. a specific urban area. However
in practice, the perception system is often put to test in various scenarios including different cities, weathers or lighting conditions. To deal with multiple test distributions, one
can straight-forwardly adopt single-target techniques by either (i) training multiple models for all target domains and
adaptively activating one at test time or (ii) merging all target data and treat them as being drawn from a single target
distribution. While the former strategy raises storage issues
for embedded platforms and is difficult to scale up, the latter
overlooks distribution shifts across different target domains.
In this work, we address multi-target unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) in semantic segmentation. We aim
to learn a single segmenter that achieves equally good performance in all target domains, simultaneously closing dis-

9072

