Meta-Baseline: Exploring Simple Meta-Learning for Few-Shot Learning
Yinbo Chen
UC San Diego

Zhuang Liu
UC Berkeley

Huijuan Xu
Penn State University

Abstract
Meta-learning has been the most common framework for
few-shot learning in recent years. It learns the model from
collections of few-shot classification tasks, which is believed
to have a key advantage of making the training objective
consistent with the testing objective. However, some recent works report that by training for whole-classification,
i.e. classification on the whole label-set, it can get comparable or even better embedding than many meta-learning
algorithms. The edge between these two lines of works
has yet been underexplored, and the effectiveness of metalearning in few-shot learning remains unclear. In this paper,
we explore a simple process: meta-learning over a wholeclassification pre-trained model on its evaluation metric.
We observe this simple method achieves competitive performance to state-of-the-art methods on standard benchmarks. Our further analysis shed some light on understanding the trade-offs between the meta-learning objective and
the whole-classification objective in few-shot learning. Our
code is available at https://github.com/yinboc/
few-shot-meta-baseline.

1. Introduction
While humans have shown incredible ability to learn
from very few examples and generalize to many different
new examples, the current deep learning approaches still
rely on a large scale of training data. To mimic this human ability of generalization, few-shot learning [3, 27] is
proposed for training networks to understand a new concept based on a few labeled examples. While directly learning a large number of parameters with few samples is very
challenging and most likely leads to overfitting, a practical
setting is applying transfer learning: train the network on
common classes (also called base classes) with sufficient
samples, then transfer the model to learn novel classes with
a few examples.
The meta-learning framework for few-shot learning follows the key idea of learning to learn. Specifically, it samples few-shot classification tasks from training samples be-

Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley

Xiaolong Wang
UC San Diego

longing to the base classes and optimizes the model to perform well on these tasks. A task typically takes the form
of N -way and K-shot, which contains N classes with K
support samples and Q query samples in each class. The
goal is to classify these N ⇥ Q query samples into the
N classes based on the N ⇥ K support samples. Under
this framework, the model is directly optimized on fewshot classification tasks. The consistency between the objectives of training and testing is considered as the key advantage of meta-learning. Motivated by this idea, many recent works [25, 5, 24, 28, 4, 21, 10, 30] focus on improving
the meta-learning structure, and few-shot learning itself has
become a common testbed for evaluating meta-learning algorithms.
However, some recent works find that training for wholeclassification, i.e. classification on the whole training labelset (base classes), provides the embedding that is comparable or even better than many recent meta-learning algorithms. The effectiveness of whole-classification models
has been reported in both prior works [5, 1] and some concurrent works [29, 26]. Meta-learning makes the form of
training objective consistent with testing, but why it turns
out to learn even worse embedding than simple wholeclassification? While there are several possible reasons,
e.g. optimization difficulty or overfitting, the answer has
not been clearly studied yet. It remains even unclear that
whether meta-learning is still effective compared to wholeclassification in few-shot learning.
In this work, we aim at exploring the edge between
whole-classification and meta-learning by decoupling the
discrepancies. We start with Classifier-Baseline: a wholeclassification method that is similarly proposed in concurrent works [29, 26]. In Classifier-Baseline, we first train
a classifier on base classes, then remove the last fullyconnected (FC) layer which is class-dependent. During test
time, it computes mean embedding of support samples for
each novel class as their centroids, and classifies query samples to the nearest centroid with cosine distance. We observe this baseline method outperforms many recent metalearning algorithms.
In order to understand whether meta-learning is still ef-

9062

