Co2 L: Contrastive Continual Learning
Hyuntak Cha

Jaeho Lee
Jinwoo Shin
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea

{hyuntak.cha, jaeho-lee, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in self-supervised learning show
that such algorithms learn visual representations that can be
transferred better to unseen tasks than cross-entropy based
methods which rely on task-specific supervision. In this paper, we found that the similar holds in the continual learning
context: contrastively learned representations are more robust against the catastrophic forgetting than ones trained
with the cross-entropy objective. Based on this novel observation, we propose a rehearsal-based continual learning
algorithm that focuses on continually learning and maintaining transferable representations. More specifically, the
proposed scheme (1) learns representations using the contrastive learning objective, and (2) preserves learned representations using a self-supervised distillation step. We
conduct extensive experimental validations under popular
benchmark image classification datasets, where our method
sets the new state-of-the-art performance. Source code is
available at https://github.com/chaht01/Co2L.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning algorithms show impressive performances on the task at hand, but it is well known that
they often struggle to retain their knowledge on previously
learned tasks after being trained on a new one [32]. To
mitigate such “catastrophic forgetting,” prior works in the
continual learning literature focus on preserving the previously learned knowledge using various types of information
about the past task. Replay-based approaches store a small
portion of past samples and rehearse the samples along with
present task samples [35, 29, 34, 5]. Regularization-based
approaches force the current model to be sufficiently close
to the past model—which may be informative about the past
task—in the parameter/functional space distance [25, 6, 39].
Expansion-based approaches allocate a unit (e.g., network
node, sub-network) for each task and keep the unit untouched
during the training for other tasks [38, 31].
In this paper, instead of asking how to isolate previous
knowledge from new knowledge, we draw attention to the
following fundamental question:

What type of knowledge is likely to be useful
for future tasks (and thus not get forgotten), and
how can we learn and preserve such knowledge?
To demonstrate its significance, consider the simple scenario
that the task at hand is to classify the given image as an
apple or a banana. An easy way to solve this problem is to
extract and use the color feature of the image; red means
apple, and yellow means banana. The color, however, will
no longer be useful if our future task is to classify another
set of images as apples or strawberries; color may not be
used anymore and eventually get forgotten. On the other
hand, if the model had learned more complicated features,
e.g., shape/polish/texture, the features may be re-used for
future tasks and remain unforgotten. This line of thoughts
suggests that forgetting does not only come from the limited
access to the past experience, but also from the innately restricted access to future events; to suffer less from forgetting,
learning more transferable representations in the first hand
may be as important as carefully preserving the knowledge
gained in the past.
To learn more transferable representations for continual
learning, we draw inspirations from a recent advance in
self-supervised learning, in particular, contrastive learning
[19, 10]. Contrastive methods learn representations using
the inductive bias that the prediction should be invariant
to certain input transformations instead of relying on taskspecific supervisions. Despite their simplicity, such methods
are known to be surprisingly effective; for ImageNet classification [37], contrastively trained representations closely
achieve the fully-supervised performance even without labels
[10] and outperform counterparts in the supervised case [24].
More importantly, while the methods are originally proposed
for better in-domain1 performance, recent works also show
that such methods provide significant performance gains on
unseen domains [10, 21]. Under a continual scenario, we
make a similar observation: contrastively learned representations suffer less from forgetting than the ones trained with
cross-entropy loss (see Section 5.2 for details).
1 The term ‘in-domain’ is used here for the setup where data distributions
for representation learning and linear classifier training are the same.

9516

