NPMs: Neural Parametric Models for 3D Deformable Shapes
Pablo Palafox1
1

Aljaž Božič1

Technical University of Munich
Latent
Code
Optimization

t1

Justus Thies1,2
2

Matthias Nießner1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

p1 p2 pN

s

Pose
MLP

Shape
MLP

t2

tN
Monocular Depth Sequence

Angela Dai1

t1
Shape

t2

tN

Posed Reconstruction

Figure 1: Given an input monocular depth sequence, our Neural Parametric Models (NPMs), composed of learned latent
shape and pose spaces, enable optimizing over the spaces to fit to the observations at test time, similar to traditional parametric
model fitting (e.g., SMPL [26]). NPMs can be constructed from a dataset of deforming shapes without strong requirements on
surface correspondence annotations or category-specific knowledge. Our implicit shape and pose spaces enable expression
of finer-scale details while providing a well-regularized space to fit to new observations of deforming shapes.

Abstract
Parametric 3D models have enabled a wide variety of
tasks in computer graphics and vision, such as modeling
human bodies, faces, and hands. However, the construction of these parametric models is often tedious, as it requires heavy manual tweaking, and they struggle to represent additional complexity and details such as wrinkles
or clothing. To this end, we propose Neural Parametric Models (NPMs), a novel, learned alternative to traditional, parametric 3D models, which does not require handcrafted, object-specific constraints. In particular, we learn
to disentangle 4D dynamics into latent-space representations of shape and pose, leveraging the flexibility of recent
developments in learned implicit functions. Crucially, once
learned, our neural parametric models of shape and pose
enable optimization over the learned spaces to fit to new
observations, similar to the fitting of a traditional parametric model, e.g., SMPL. This enables NPMs to achieve a significantly more accurate and detailed representation of observed deformable sequences. We show that NPMs improve
notably over both parametric and non-parametric state of
the art in reconstruction and tracking of monocular depth
sequences of clothed humans and hands. Latent-space interpolation as well as shape / pose transfer experiments further demonstrate the usefulness of NPMs. Code is publicly
available at https://pablopalafox.github.io/npms.

1. Introduction
Modeling deformable surfaces is fundamental towards
understanding the 4D world that we live in, as well as creating or manipulating dynamic content. While significant
progress has been made in understanding the reconstruction
of 3D shapes [12, 15, 16, 46, 37, 31], representing dynamic,
deforming surfaces remains challenging.
Over the past years, parametric 3D models have seen remarkable success for domain-specific representations, such
as for human bodies (e.g., SCAPE [2], SMPL [26], Adam
[20]), hands (MANO [43]), animals (SMAL [50]) and faces
([39], FLAME [23], [40]). These models have enabled a
wide range of exciting applications and are instrumental in
modeling deformable 3D objects. However, the construction of such a parametric model is a rather complex and tedious task, requiring notable manual intervention and incorporation of object-specific constraints in order for the parametric model to well-represent the space of possible shapes
and deformations. Moreover, such parametric models often struggle to represent additional complexity and details
of deforming shapes, e.g., clothing, hair, etc.
We propose Neural Parametric Models (NPMs), an alternative formulation to traditional parametric 3D models
where we learn a disentangled shape and pose representation that can be used like a traditional parametric model
to fit to new observations. We leverage the representation

12695

