Broaden Your Views for Self-Supervised Video Learning
Adrià Recasens1 Pauline Luc1 Jean-Baptiste Alayrac1 Luyu Wang1
Florian Strub1 Corentin Tallec1 Mateusz Malinowski1 Viorica Pătrăucean1 Florent Altché1
Michal Valko1 Jean-Bastien Grill1 Aäron van den Oord1 Andrew Zisserman1,2
1

DeepMind

2

VGG, Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Time

Abstract
Broad View

Most successful self-supervised learning methods are
trained to align the representations of two independent views
from the data. State-of-the-art methods in video are inspired
by image techniques, where these two views are similarly
extracted by cropping and augmenting the resulting crop.
However, these methods miss a crucial element in the video
domain: time. We introduce BraVe, a self-supervised learning framework for video. In BraVe, one of the views has
access to a narrow temporal window of the video while the
other view has a broad access to the video content. Our
models learn to generalise from the narrow view to the general content of the video. Furthermore, BraVe processes the
views with different backbones, enabling the use of alternative augmentations or modalities into the broad view such as
optical flow, randomly convolved RGB frames, audio or their
combinations. We demonstrate that BraVe achieves stateof-the-art results in self-supervised representation learning
on standard video and audio classification benchmarks including UCF101, HMDB51, Kinetics, ESC-50 and AudioSet.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, self-supervised methods have revolutionized the field of representation learning [17, 36, 68].
These methods directly learn from data without the need
for manually defined labels that are hard to get at scale.
Doing so, one can successfully leverage large amounts of
uncurated data to improve representations. Even more importantly, self-supervised learning enables richer training
tasks to be defined, compared to the standard approach of
trying to categorize diverse visual inputs into a fixed set of
categories. This has led to self-supervised representations
outperforming supervised ones on downstream tasks [33].
Video is a natural domain for self-supervised learning since
data is rich and abundant but hard to annotate at scale due to
the additional temporal complexity. However, most methods
† Correspondence to: Adrià Recasens (arecasens@google.com)

Narrow View

Prediction

Figure 1. Given a narrow view corresponding to a video clip of a
few seconds, BraVe is tasked with predicting a broad view that
spans a longer temporal context of the video in different modalities
(here visual and audio). Solving that task requires the representation
to extrapolate what happened before, during and after the narrow
view, and results in state-of-the-art video representations.

in the video domain take direct inspiration from methods
developed for images without fully taking advantage of its
distinctly different dimension: time.
In particular, one common aspect of self-supervised methods for images is to extract two views from a given instance
using the same general augmentation procedure, feed them
into a shared backbone, and extract a supervisory signal
from the fact that these two views originate from the same
source. This is true for most recent approaches irrespective of their underlying learning principle: contrastive approaches [17], clustering-based method [13], or regression
algorithms [68]. The same principle has been followed in
the video domain [4, 67]. Specifically, most video methods extract the different views from a source video clip in a
symmetric fashion with respect to time: all extracted views
have the same temporal extent in the video [4, 23, 45, 67].
However, doing so does not benefit from learning from information contained at different time scales.
In this paper, we introduce an algorithm dubbed

1255

