Change is Everywhere: Single-Temporal Supervised Object Change Detection
in Remote Sensing Imagery
Zhuo Zheng

Ailong Ma
Liangpei Zhang
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China

Yanfei Zhong∗

{zhengzhuo, maailong007, zlp62, zhongyanfei}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
For high spatial resolution (HSR) remote sensing images, bitemporal supervised learning always dominates
change detection using many pairwise labeled bitemporal
images. However, it is very expensive and time-consuming
to pairwise label large-scale bitemporal HSR remote sensing images. In this paper, we propose single-temporal supervised learning (STAR) for change detection from a new
perspective of exploiting object changes in unpaired images as supervisory signals. STAR enables us to train
a high-accuracy change detector only using unpaired labeled images and generalize to real-world bitemporal images. To evaluate the effectiveness of STAR, we design
a simple yet effective change detector called ChangeStar,
which can reuse any deep semantic segmentation architecture by the ChangeMixin module. The comprehensive experimental results show that ChangeStar outperforms the
baseline with a large margin under single-temporal supervision and achieves superior performance under bitemporal supervision. Code is available at https://github.
com/Z-Zheng/ChangeStar.

Multi-Temporal Earth Observation

Change Label

Paired Bitemporal Images
pairwise
annotate

Image
Registration

Imaging at the same area
ConvNet Change Detector
Learning from Bitemporal Supervision

(a) Conventional Bitemporal Supervised Learning
Single-Temporal Earth Observation

No
Operation

Change Label

Unpaired Single-Temporal Images
Image-wise
annotate

Imaging at different areas
ConvNet Change Detector
Learning from Single-Temporal Supervision

(b) STAR: Single-Temporal supervised leARning

Figure 1: Comparison of conventional bitemporal supervised learning and the proposed single-temporal supervised
learning for object change detection. By exploiting object
changes in arbitrary image pairs as the supervisory signals,
STAR makes it possible to learn a change detector from unpaired single-temporal images.

1. Introduction
Object change detection using multi-temporal high spatial resolution (HSR) remote sensing imagery is a meaningful but challenging fundamental task in remote sensing
and earth vision, which can provide more accurate object
change information of land surface for urban expansion, urban planning, environmental monitoring, and disaster assessment [14, 28, 8, 19, 11]. This task takes bitemporal
images as input and outputs pixel-wise object change.
The dominating change detection methods are based on
deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNet) toward highaccuracy and reliable geospatial object change detection in
complex application scenarios. Learning a ConvNet change
detector needs a large number of pairwise labeled bitemporal images with bitemporal supervision, as shown in Fig. 1

(a). However, pairwise labeling large-scale and high-quality
bitemporal HSR remote sensing images is very expensive
and time-consuming because of the extensive coverage of
remote sensing images. This significantly limits the realworld applications of the change detection technique.
We observed that the importance of pairwise labeled
bitemporal images lies in that the change detector needs
paired semantic information to define positive and negative samples for object change detection. These positive
and negative samples are usually determined by whether the
pixels at two different times have different semantics in the
same geographical area. The semantics of bitemporal pixels
controls the label assignment, while the positional consistency condition1 is only used to guarantee independent and

∗ corresponding author.

1 The bitemporal pixels should be at the same geographical position.

15193

