Discovering 3D Parts from Image Collections
Chun-Han Yao1 Wei-Chih Hung2
1
UC Merced 2 Waymo

Varun Jampani3 Ming-Hsuan Yang134
3
Google 4 Yonsei University

Figure 1: Discovering 3D parts form single-view image collections. Our method (LPD) enables self-supervised 3D part discovery while
learning to reconstruct object shapes from single-view images. Compared to other methods using different part constraints, LPD discovers
more faithful and consistent parts, which improve the reconstruction quality and allow part reasoning/manipulation.

Abstract
Reasoning 3D shapes from 2D images is an essential yet
challenging task, especially when only single-view images
are at our disposal. While an object can have a complicated shape, individual parts are usually close to geometric primitives and thus are easier to model. Furthermore,
parts provide a mid-level representation that is robust to
appearance variations across objects in a particular category. In this work, we tackle the problem of 3D part discovery from only 2D image collections. Instead of relying
on manually annotated parts for supervision, we propose
a self-supervised approach, latent part discovery (LPD).
Our key insight is to learn a novel part shape prior that
allows each part to fit an object shape faithfully while constrained to have simple geometry. Extensive experiments
on the synthetic ShapeNet, PartNet, and real-world Pascal 3D+ datasets show that our method discovers consistent object parts and achieves favorable reconstruction accuracy compared to the existing methods with the same
level of supervision. Our project page with code is at
https://chhankyao.github.io/lpd/.

1. Introduction
Recognizing and reasoning about objects surrounding us
is essential for many computer vision systems. While deep
learning models have been shown to perform well at recognizing [27, 46, 17] and localizing [13, 44, 35] objects
in a 2D image, reasoning 3D attributes of objects from a

single image remains a challenging task. Single-view 3D
reasoning is fundamentally ill-posed due to several factors
that cause ambiguous object appearance in 2D images, e.g.,
camera pose, self-occlusions, lighting, and material properties. Although objects in general have complicated shapes,
they can usually be decomposed into parts that have simpler
geometry and are relatively easy to model. Furthermore,
most object instances of a particular category share similar
part configurations, e.g., the wings, body, and tail of airplanes. In this work, we propose to tackle the problem by
discovering faithful and consistent 3D parts from 2D image
collections. Compared to existing single-view 3D reconstruction approaches that directly predict an object shape,
we aim to learn rich and dense part configurations which
form an entire object when combined.
Although several recent methods [48, 37, 3, 10, 33, 36,
41, 24] leverage part-based representations for 3D object
reasoning, they rely on either 3D object shapes or explicit
part annotations as supervision. Moreover, the learned parts
only serve as additional information and are not exploited
to improve 3D reconstruction. Considering that collecting ground-truth 3D shapes and the corresponding part labels is labor intensive, we follow a practical scenario where
only single-view images, 2D object silhouettes, and camera
viewpoints are available for model training. In contrast to
existing techniques, our method automatically discovers 3D
parts from image collections in a self-supervised manner.
A common practice to represent 3D parts is to use geometric primitives such as ellipsoids or cuboids [48]. They

12981

