Trash to Treasure: Harvesting OOD Data with Cross-Modal Matching
for Open-Set Semi-Supervised Learning
Junkai Huang1 * Chaowei Fang2 * Weikai Chen3 Zhenhua Chai4
Xiaolin Wei4 Pengxu Wei1 Liang Lin1 Guanbin Li1†
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Xidian University 3 Tencent America 4 Meituan

(a) Features extracted by our proposed method and MTCF [39]

Abstract

Our proposed method
Rotation Recognition

Open-set semi-supervised learning (open-set SSL) investigates a challenging but practical scenario where out-ofdistribution (OOD) samples are contained in the unlabeled
data. While the mainstream technique seeks to completely
filter out the OOD samples for semi-supervised learning
(SSL), we propose a novel training mechanism that could
effectively exploit the presence of OOD data for enhanced
feature learning while avoiding its adverse impact on the
SSL. We achieve this goal by first introducing a warm-up
training that leverages all the unlabeled data, including
both the in-distribution (ID) and OOD samples. Specifically, we perform a pretext task that enforces our feature
extractor to obtain a high-level semantic understanding of
the training images, leading to more discriminative features that can benefit the downstream tasks. Since the OOD
samples are inevitably detrimental to SSL, we propose a
novel cross-modal matching strategy to detect OOD samples. Instead of directly applying binary classification [39],
we train the network to predict whether the data sample is
matched to an assigned one-hot class label. The appeal of
the proposed cross-modal matching over binary classification is the ability to generate a compatible feature space
that aligns with the core classification task. Extensive experiments show that our approach substantially lifts the
performance on open-set SSL and outperforms the state-ofthe-art by a large margin.

1. Introduction
“One man’s trash is another man’s treasure.”
– Hector Urquhart
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) provides an effective
way of leveraging massive unlabeled data to improve the
performance of deep neural network when only limited labeled samples are available. Most existing SSL methods
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

CNN

Target Category Classifier
Pseudo-label
Guessing

Cross-modal matching
OOD Filtering

OOD Filtering
Dataset for open-set SSL,
consisting of labeled ID,
unlabeled ID and unknown
OOD samples

CNN

Binary OOD Classifier
Target Category Classifier

MTCF proposed in [39]

(b) Harvest OOD Samples

ID Samples

ID+OOD Samples

Rotation Recognition
CNN
Target Category Classifier

Figure 1: t-SNE [26] visualization of image features extracted from CIFAR100 [20]. Images of the same category
are shown in the same color. (a) Features learned by our
method are more compact and cleaner than those learned
by MTCF [39]. (b) By leveraging OOD samples in the proposed pretext training, we have achieved more discriminative feature space than using ID samples only.
assume that labeled and unlabeled data share the same category space. However, this assumption is difficult to satisfy
since it still requires tedious efforts to confirm the purity of
the unlabeled data. Very recently, Yu et al. [39] proposed a
more realistic setting called open-set semi-supervised learning (open-set SSL). Open-set SSL considers a more challenging but practical scenario where outliers, that do not
belong to the categories of the labeled data, may exist in the
unlabeled data. Resolving the open-set SSL problem has
crucial practical meanings as it can significantly reduce the
workload of data preparation in the actual applications.
A straightforward approach to cope with the out-ofdistribution (OOD) samples is to completely remove them

8310

