G RID T O P IX: Training Embodied Agents with Minimal Supervision
Unnat Jain1
1

Iou-Jen Liu1 Svetlana Lazebnik1 Aniruddha Kembhavi2
Luca Weihs2⇤ Alexander Schwing1⇤

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI
https://unnat.github.io/gridtopix/

Abstract
While deep reinforcement learning (RL) promises freedom from hand-labeled data, great successes, especially
for Embodied AI, require significant work to create supervision via carefully shaped rewards. Indeed, without shaped
rewards, i.e., with only terminal rewards, present-day Embodied AI results degrade significantly across Embodied AI
problems from single-agent Habitat-based PointGoal Navigation (SPL drops from 55 to 0) and two-agent AI2-THORbased Furniture Moving (success drops from 58% to 1%)
to three-agent Google Football-based 3 vs. 1 with Keeper
(game score drops from 0.6 to 0.1). As training from shaped
rewards doesn’t scale to more realistic tasks, the community needs to improve the success of training with terminal rewards. For this we propose G RID T O P IX: 1) train
agents with terminal rewards in gridworlds that generically
mirror Embodied AI environments, i.e., they are independent of the task; 2) distill the learned policy into agents
that reside in complex visual worlds. Despite learning from
only terminal rewards with identical models and RL algorithms, G RID T O P IX significantly improves results across
tasks: from PointGoal Navigation (SPL improves from 0 to
64) and Furniture Moving (success improves from 1% to
25%) to football gameplay (game score improves from 0.1
to 0.6). G RID T O P IX even helps to improve the results of
shaped reward training.

1. Introduction
The Embodied AI research community has developed
a host of capable simulated environments focused on the
challenges of navigation [58, 78], interaction [35, 77, 24],
manipulation [79, 32, 81], and simulation-to-real transfer [21, 50, 34]. Fast progress has been made within these
environments over the past few years, particularly in navigation heavy tasks such as PointGoal navigation [58, 75].
While early applications of deep RL to Embodied AI set
down the more challenging path of learning from terminal
⇤ denotes equal mentoring by LW and AS

PointGoal Navigation

Furniture Moving

3 vs. 1 with Keeper

SPL

Success

Game Score

(Habitat+Gibson)

69
55

64

(AI2-THOR)

62

58

(Google Football)

0.65
0.57

0.6

25

DirectPix

0.07

1

0.1
GridToPix
(ours)

DirectPix

Shaped rewards

GridToPix
GridToPix
(ours)

DirectPix

GridToPix
GridToPix
(ours)

Terminal rewards

Figure 1. Shaped vs. terminal rewards. Across three tasks, embodied AI agents fail to learn from terminal rewards using standard
RL methods despite achieving high performance when given carefully shaped rewards. When using our G RID T O P IX methodology,
the embodied AI agents successfully learn from terminal rewards
and sometimes even outperform DirectPix trained agents receiving
shaped rewards.

rewards1 [84], the pursuit of increasingly capable agents
has steered us towards employing large amounts of human
supervision [60, 2, 65, 28, 37], reward shaping [75, 67],
and task-specific architectures [12, 54]. The multitude of
rewards and auxiliary hyperparameters that are manually
tuned when training Embodied AI agents today is reminiscent of careful feature engineering [44, 17, 39] in computer
vision years ago.
While these design choices have got our field (and
agents) off the ground, it is hard to believe that this methodology will scale as tasks increase in complexity and physi1 I.e., reward structures in which the only goal dependent reward is
given at the end of an episode. Goal independent rewards, e.g., a timestep penalty, can be given at every step.

115141

