LookOut: Diverse Multi-Future Prediction and Planning for Self-Driving
Alexander Cui *,1,2 , Sergio Casas ∗,1,2 , Abbas Sadat ∗,1 , Renjie Liao 3 , Raquel Urtasun1,2
†
Waabi1 , University of Toronto2 , Google Brain3
{acui, sergio, asadat, urtasun}@waabi.ai, rjliao@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present L OOKO UT, a novel autonomy
system that perceives the environment, predicts a diverse
set of futures of how the scene might unroll and estimates
the trajectory of the SDV by optimizing a set of contingency
plans over these future realizations. In particular, we learn
a diverse joint distribution over multi-agent future trajectories in a traffic scene that covers a wide range of future
modes with high sample efficiency while leveraging the expressive power of generative models. Unlike previous work
in diverse motion forecasting, our diversity objective explicitly rewards sampling future scenarios that require distinct reactions from the self-driving vehicle for improved
safety. Our contingency planner then finds comfortable and
non-conservative trajectories that ensure safe reactions to
a wide range of future scenarios. Through extensive evaluations, we show that our model demonstrates significantly
more diverse and sample-efficient motion forecasting in a
large-scale self-driving dataset as well as safer and lessconservative motion plans in long-term closed-loop simulations when compared to current state-of-the-art models.

1. Introduction
Self-driving vehicles (SDVs) have the potential to enhance considerably the safety of our roads as, unlike humans, they can constantly scan the surrounding environment without getting distracted or being impaired while
driving. Key to the success of a self-driving vehicle is its
ability to perceive its surroundings and predict the future
trajectory of the traffic participants, particularly those that
might affect its decision making. These predictions are then
exploited by the motion planning module to plan a safe and
comfortable maneuver towards the goal.
Forecasting the behavior of traffic participants is very
challenging as humans do not always follow the rules of
the road and sometimes exhibit erratic behaviors. Furthermore, the scene might unroll in many possible ways in the
* Denotes equal contribution
† This work was done by all authors while at Uber ATG

SDV

SDV

Figure 1. We illustrate the fact that the future is highly uncertain
and multimodal by showing 2 distinct futures at the scene-level.
In such scenario, L OOKO UT plans a short-term executable action
that leads to 2 different contingent plans to stay safe in both cases.

future, depending heavily on the interactions between actors (e.g., at a merge, either actor A yields to actor B or
vice versa). While most works predict each actor’s future
independently [11, 10, 29, 8, 4], recent approaches model
actor interactions and can produce samples that explain the
full scene in a consistent manner [2, 33, 38, 5]. However, they require prohibitively large numbers of samples
to cover the long-tails of the distribution. This is problematic since these long tails are critical for safety, as failing to
take them into account might result in an accident (e.g., an
impaired driver running a red traffic light perpendicularly
to the SDV’s intended trajectory). Thus, there is a need to
develop prediction systems that can efficiently sample the
diverse set of possible futures. Unfortunately, existing approaches [46, 47] are not sample efficient as they trivially
encourage diversity in euclidean space, thus utilizing samples to cover irrelevant actors or actions that do not impact
the SDV’s behavior.
Furthermore, existing motion planners cannot take advantage of prediction systems that produce scene-consistent
samples [53, 13, 1, 36]. Instead, they optimize the expected
cost by sampling the marginal distribution of each actor independently, thus ignoring the fact that some of these futures cannot happen at the same time (e.g., either the horizontal or vertical traffic can flow at a 4-way stop, but not
both). These planners also assume that the SDV must commit to a single long-term trajectory, when in practice it can
execute a short-term action and re-plan as newer sensor observations become available. As a consequence, they result
in suboptimal and overly conservative trajectories [50, 39],

16107

