Online Knowledge Distillation for Efficient Pose Estimation
Zheng Li 1 , Jingwen Ye 2 , Mingli Song 2 , Ying Huang 1 , Zhigeng Pan 1 *
1
Hangzhou Normal University, 2 Zhejiang University
lizheng1@stu.hznu.edu.cn, {yejingwen,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, {yw52,zgpan}@hznu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing state-of-the-art human pose estimation methods
require heavy computational resources for accurate predictions. One promising technique to obtain an accurate yet
lightweight pose estimator is knowledge distillation, which
distills the pose knowledge from a powerful teacher model
to a less-parameterized student model. However, existing
pose distillation works rely on a heavy pre-trained estimator to perform knowledge transfer and require a complex
two-stage learning procedure. In this work, we investigate
a novel Online Knowledge Distillation framework by distilling Human Pose structure knowledge in a one-stage manner to guarantee the distillation efficiency, termed OKDHP.
Specifically, OKDHP trains a single multi-branch network
and acquires the predicted heatmaps from each, which are
then assembled by a Feature Aggregation Unit (FAU) as
the target heatmaps to teach each branch in reverse. Instead of simply averaging the heatmaps, FAU which consists
of multiple parallel transformations with different receptive
fields, leverages the multi-scale information, thus obtains
target heatmaps with higher-quality. Specifically, the pixelwise Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence is utilized to minimize the discrepancy between the target heatmaps and the
predicted ones, which enables the student network to learn
the implicit keypoint relationship. Besides, an unbalanced
OKDHP scheme is introduced to customize the student networks with different compression rates. The effectiveness of
our approach is demonstrated by extensive experiments on
two common benchmark datasets, MPII and COCO.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation aims to recognize and localize
all the human anatomical keypoints in a single RGB image. It’s a fundamental technique for high-level vision
tasks, such as action recognition [11], virtual reality [44]
and human-computer interaction. Since the invention of
DeepPose [55], deep neural networks have been the dom* Corresponding author

Figure 1. To obtain an efficient 4-Stack network, (a) FPD [66]
adopts a two-stage distillation scheme from the static pre-trained
8-Stack network. The proposed OKDHP distills the pose structural knowledge with both (b) Balance and (c) Unbalance architectures in one stage. The teacher is established online with the
FAU.

inant solution for human pose estimation, based on which,
the approaches [57, 61, 52] focus on exploiting richer representations with a sequential architecture and achieve stateof-the-art performance. However, the gains of such deep
learning based approaches often come with a cost of training and deploying the over-parameterized models, which
limits the deployment in resource-intensive mobile devices.
To reduce the computation cost and enhance the model efficiency, many efforts have been devoted to directly designing lightweight and real-time networks, e.g., PAF [4],
VNect [36] and MultiPoseNet [27].
As another powerful tool to achieve a good trade-off
between speed and accuracy, knowledge distillation [19]
follows the teacher-student paradigm. Traditional distillation utilizes a two-stage scheme that starts with a cumbersome pre-trained teacher model, then distills the knowledge
to a compact student model. In the field of pose estimation, recent works [66, 22] adopt a traditional offline distillation scheme which distills the knowledge from a large
pre-trained pose estimator (teacher) to a lightweight pose
estimator (student) as shown in Fig. 1(a). However, training such a heavy teacher model is time-consuming and a

11740

