Geometric Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation
Vitor Guizilini
Jie Li
Rares, Ambrus,
Adrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute (TRI), Los Altos, CA
{first.lastname}@tri.global
SYNTHIA

VKITTI2

Parallel Domain

Abstract
Simulators can efficiently generate large amounts of labeled synthetic data with perfect supervision for hard-tolabel tasks like semantic segmentation. However, they introduce a domain gap that severely hurts real-world performance. We propose to use self-supervised monocular depth estimation as a proxy task to bridge this gap
and improve sim-to-real unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA). Our Geometric Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
method (GUDA)1 learns a domain-invariant representation
via a multi-task objective combining synthetic semantic supervision with real-world geometric constraints on videos.
GUDA establishes a new state of the art in UDA for semantic segmentation on three benchmarks, outperforming methods that use domain adversarial learning, self-training, or
other self-supervised proxy tasks. Furthermore, we show
that our method scales well with the quality and quantity of
synthetic data while also improving depth prediction.

(a) Synthetic datasets (ground-truth)

Cityscapes

KITTI

DDAD

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning from geometric constraints is
used to learn tasks like depth and ego-motion directly
from unlabeled videos [13, 22, 24, 51, 76]. However,
tasks like semantic segmentation and object detection inherently require human-defined labels. A promising alternative to expensive manual labeling is to use synthetic
datasets [4, 9, 14, 45, 46]. Simulators can indeed be programmed to generate large quantities of diverse data with
accurate labels (cf. Fig. 1), including for optical and scene
flow [30, 44], object detection [42], tracking [14], action
recognition [9], and semantic segmentation [45, 46]. However, no simulator is perfect. Hence, effectively using synthetic data requires overcoming the sim-to-real domain gap,
a distribution shift between a source synthetic domain and
a target real one due to differences in content, scene geometry, physics, appearance, or rendering artifacts.
The goal of Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
is to improve generalization across this domain gap without any real-world labels. Most methods use adversar1 https://github.com/tri-ml/packnet-sfm

(b) Real-world datasets (predictions)

Figure 1: Our GUDA approach uses geometric selfsupervision on videos in a multi-task setting to achieve
state-of-the-art results in UDA for semantic segmentation.
ial learning for pixel or feature-level adaptation [3, 15,
27, 35, 54, 59, 69] or self-training by refining pseudolabels [31, 32, 73, 77, 78, 50]. These methods yield clear
improvements, but require learning multiple networks beyond the target one, are hard to train (adversarial learning), or limited to semantically close domains (iterative
diffusion of high-confidence pseudo-labels). Alternatively,
few works [53, 67] have explored simple image-level selfsupervised proxy tasks [20, 40, 33] to improve generalization across domains, but with only limited success for UDA
of semantic segmentation.
In this work, we introduce self-supervised monocular depth as a proxy task for UDA in semantic segmentation. We propose a multi-task mixed-batch training method combining synthetic supervision with a real18537

