Segmentation-grounded Scene Graph Generation
Siddhesh Khandelwal⇤,1,2
Mohammed Suhail⇤,1,2
Leonid Sigal1,2,3
1
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
2
3
Vector Institute for AI
CIFAR AI Chair
skhandel@cs.ubc.ca
suhail33@cs.ubc.ca
lsigal@cs.ubc.ca
Abstract
Scene graph generation has emerged as an important
problem in computer vision. While scene graphs provide
a grounded representation of objects, their locations and
relations in an image, they do so only at the granularity of
proposal bounding boxes. In this work, we propose the first,
to our knowledge, framework for pixel-level segmentationgrounded scene graph generation. Our framework is agnostic to the underlying scene graph generation method and
address the lack of segmentation annotations in target scene
graph datasets (e.g., Visual Genome [24]) through transfer
and multi-task learning from, and with, an auxiliary dataset
(e.g., MS COCO [29]). Specifically, each target object being detected is endowed with a segmentation mask, which
is expressed as a lingual-similarity weighted linear combination over categories that have annotations present in an
auxiliary dataset. These inferred masks, along with a Gaussian masking mechanism which grounds the relations at a
pixel-level within the image, allow for improved relation
prediction. The entire framework is end-to-end trainable
and is learned in a multi-task manner. Code is available at
github.com/ubc-vision/segmentation-sg.

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation, has emerged as a dominant
problem in computer vision literature over the last couple
of years [36, 44, 50, 51, 53]. The task involves producing
a graph-based grounded representation of an image, which
characterizes objects and their relationships. A scene graph
representation, first introduced in [50], encodes a scene as
a graph where nodes correspond to objects (encoding object instances with corresponding class labels and spatial locations) and directed edges corresponding to relationships.
The ultimate goal of scene graph generation is to produce
such representation from a raw image [24] or video [18].
Scene graph representations have proved to be important
⇤ Denotes equal contribution

Lady

Jacket

wearing
Plate

Building

holding
behind

Bag

Car

Lady

has

wearing
ho

ldi

ng

carrying

Window
Jacket

Building
Plate

behind

Bag

in front of

Car

in front of
has

Window

Figure 1. Segmentation-grounded scene graph generation. The
image on top is the output of an existing scene graph generation
method [45]. The bottom image is the output of augmenting our
approach to [45]. The effective grounding of objects to pixel-level
regions within the image leads to better relation predictions.

for a variety of higher level tasks (e.g., VQA[16, 45], image
captioning [10, 52] and others). Most approaches to date
have focused on appropriate modeling of context [51, 55],
data imbalance in labels [30, 44] and, most recently, structural dependencies among the output variables [42].
One of the dominant limitations of all existing scene
graph generation techniques, mentioned above, is the fact
that both the nodes (objects) and edges (relations) are
grounded to (rectangular) bounding boxes produced by the
object proposal mechanism directly (e.g., pre-trained as part
of R-CNN) or by taking a union of bounding boxes of objects involved in a relation. A more granular and accurate pixel-level grounding would naturally be more valuable. This has been shown to be the case in other visual and
visual-lingual tasks (e.g., referring expression comprehension [15, 31], video segmentation with referring expression
[22] and instance segmentation with Mask-RCNN [11]).
In addition, grounding to segmentations could improve the
overall performance of the scene graph generation by focus-

15879

