3DIAS: 3D Shape Reconstruction with Implicit Algebraic Surfaces
Mohsen Yavartanoo*
Jaeyoung Chung*
Reyhaneh Neshatavar
Kyoung Mu Lee
ASRI, Department of ECE, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{myavartanoo,robot0321,reyhanehneshat,kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
3D Shape representation has substantial effects on 3D
shape reconstruction. Primitive-based representations approximate a 3D shape mainly by a set of simple implicit
primitives, but the low geometrical complexity of the primitives limits the shape resolution. Moreover, setting a sufficient number of primitives for an arbitrary shape is challenging. To overcome these issues, we propose a constrained implicit algebraic surface as the primitive with few
learnable coefficients and higher geometrical complexities
and a deep neural network to produce these primitives. Our
experiments demonstrate the superiorities of our method in
terms of representation power compared to the state-of-theart methods in single RGB image 3D shape reconstruction.
Furthermore, we show that our method can semantically
learn segments of 3D shapes in an unsupervised manner.
The code is publicly available from this link.

1. Introduction
Single image 3D reconstruction is a procedure of capturing the structure and the surface of 3D shapes from single RGB images, which has various applications in computer vision, computer graphics, computer animation, and
augmented reality. Recent advanced methods have substantially improved 3D shape reconstruction with the advent of deep neural networks (DNNs). These methods can
be mainly categorized based on the representation of 3D
shapes into explicit-based [4, 1, 28] and implicit-based
[26, 10, 29, 12, 30] methods. Voxel-grid, as the most
straightforward explicit representation, is useful in many
applications. However, voxel-based methods generally suffer from large memory usage and quantization artifacts [37].
Polygon mesh [21, 41] has been introduced as alternative
representation. However, since many polygon mesh-based
methods start from a template mesh and deform it to reconstruct the target 3D shapes [41, 16], they can not produce
3D shapes with arbitrary topologies.
* equal contribution

Figure 1: The exploded view of 3DIAS representation. The
3D shapes consist of a union over the proposed constrained
implicit algebraic primitives with proper attributes.

On the other hand, implicit representations can approximate surfaces of 3D shapes as zero-sets of continuous
functions in the Euclidean space. Recent implicit-based
methods have shown some promises to reconstruct arbitrary shapes without any template. [29, 26, 40, 12, 30, 10]
These methods can be categorized into two mainstreams;
isosurface-based and primitive-based methods. Isosurfacebased methods generally generate a surface by employing a
neural network [29, 26] as an implicit function that assigns
negative and positive values or different probabilities to the
points lying inside and outside the shape. However, for each
time visualization, these methods require all the neural network parameters to extract the zero-sets by determining the
sign of many sample points in 3D space. Furthermore, these
representations are unsuitable for computer graphics and
virtual reality applications because they require additional
postprocessing like marching cubes to generate the final 3D

12446

