STVGBert: A Visual-linguistic Transformer based Framework
for Spatio-temporal Video Grounding
Rui Su
Platform & Content Group, Tencent

Qian Yu
College of Software, Beihang University

rayruisu@tencent.com

qianyu@buaa.edu.cn

Dong Xu*
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney
dong.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Spatio-temporal video grounding (STVG) aims to localize a spatio-temporal tube of a target object in an
untrimmed video based on a query sentence. In this work,
we propose a one-stage visual-linguistic transformer based
framework called STVGBert for the STVG task, which can
simultaneously localize the target object in both spatial and
temporal domains. Specifically, without resorting to pregenerated object proposals, our STVGBert directly takes a
video and a query sentence as the input, and then produces
the cross-modal features by using the newly introduced
cross-modal feature learning module ST-ViLBert. Based on
the cross-modal features, our method then generates bounding boxes and predicts the starting and ending frames to
produce the predicted object tube. To the best of our knowledge, our STVGBert is the first one-stage method, which can
handle the STVG task without relying on any pre-trained
object detectors. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
our newly proposed framework outperforms the state-ofthe-art multi-stage methods on two benchmark datasets VidSTG and HC-STVG.

1. Introduction
Vision and language play important roles for human to
understand the world. In recent years, with remarkable
progress of deep neural networks, various vision-language
tasks (e.g., image captioning [15, 22], dense video caption [37, 36] and visual grounding [10, 35]) have attracted
increasing attention from researchers.
Spatial-Temporal Video Grounding (STVG), which was
introduced in the recent work [39], is a new and challenging vision-language task. Given an untrimmed video and a
* Dong Xu is the corresponding author.

textual description of an object, the STVG task aims to produce a spatio-temporal tube (i.e., a sequence of bounding
boxes [21, 20]) for the target object described by the given
text description. Different from the existing grounding tasks
in images, both spatial and temporal localizations are required in the STVG task. Besides, how to effectively align
visual and textual information through cross-modal feature
learning in both spatial and temporal domains is also a key
issue for accurately localizing the target object, especially
in the challenging scenarios where different persons often
perform similar actions within one scene.
Spatial localization in images/videos is a related visual
grounding task, and spatial localization results have been
improved in recent works [13, 35, 14, 27, 30, 31, 12, 29,
2]. In most existing works, a pre-trained object detector is
often required to pre-generate object proposals. However,
these approaches suffer from the following limitations: (1)
The localization performance heavily relies on the quality
of the pre-generated object proposals. (2) It is difficult for
a pre-trained object detector to be well generalized to any
new datasets with unseen classes. (3) Additional training
data and computational cost are required for pre-training the
object detectors. Although the recent works [34, 10, 16, 33]
have attempted to remove the pre-generation process in the
image grounding task, such efforts have not been made for
the video grounding task.
For the STVG task, we are required to conduct localization both spatially and temporally. Intuitively, we can solve
this task by using a two-stage approach, in which the temporal visual grounding methods [5, 1] are first used to localize the starting and ending frames of the target objects, and
spatial localization is then performed by using the spatial
visual grounding approaches [3, 17, 29] on the temporally
trimmed videos. However, by handling the two sub-tasks
separately, the pipeline becomes more complicated as each
sub-task is handled by an independent network. Moreover,

1533

