Video Object Segmentation with Dynamic Memory Networks and Adaptive
Object Alignment
Shuxian Liang1, 2∗, Xu Shen2 , Jianqiang Huang2 , Xian-Sheng Hua2†
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
shuxian.lsx@zju.edu.cn, {shenxu.sx,jianqiang.hjq,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com
1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised video object segmentation (VOS) is a
task that distinguishes target objects from their background
at the pixel level in a video, where ground-truth masks of
∗ This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a research intern.
† Corresponding author.

View
Scale

first frame

intermediate frame

current frame

Pose

Misalignment

Motion

In this paper, we propose a novel solution for objectmatching based semi-supervised video object segmentation,
where the target object masks in the first frame are provided. Existing object-matching based methods focus on
the matching between the raw object features of the current
frame and the first/previous frames. However, two issues
are still not solved by these object-matching based methods. As the appearance of the video object changes drastically over time, 1) unseen parts/details of the object present
in the current frame, resulting in incomplete annotation in
the first annotated frame (e.g. view/scale changes). 2) even
for the seen parts/details of the object in the current frame,
their positions change relatively (e.g. pose changes/camera
motion), leading to a misalignment for the object matching. To obtain the complete information of the target object, we propose a novel object-based dynamic memory network that exploits visual contents of all the past frames. To
solve the misalignment problem caused by position changes
of visual contents, we propose an adaptive object alignment module by incorporating a region translation function
that aligns object proposals towards templates in the feature
space. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results on latest benchmark datasets DAVIS 2017 (J of 81.4% and F of
87.5% on the validation set) and YouTube-VOS (the overall
score of 82.7% on the validation set) with a very efficient
inference time (0.16 second/frame on DAVIS 2017 validation set). Code is available at: https://github.com/
liang4sx/DMN-AOA.

Incomplete Annotations

template

correspondence w/ alignment correspondence w/o alignment

Figure 1. Two issues for the object matching based VOS. In the
top two cases, corresponding parts (in red) of the query object do
not present in the first frame because of view/scale changes. The
bottom two cases show the misalignment problem caused by pose
changes and camera motion. Our method solve these issues by exploiting object-specific memories and aligning objects adaptively.

objects are provided in the first frame. The task is then to
predict the segmentation masks from the rest video frames.
One of the main challenges of VOS is that the appearances
of the target object can change drastically across frames due
to object movements, camera movements and occlusions.
For the semi-supervised video object segmentation community, the pixel matching based VOS (PVOS) and the object
matching based VOS (OVOS) are investigated in parallel
as two research topics. PVOS methods predict based on
cross-frame pixel correlations (e.g. [7, 20, 28, 35]). OVOS
methods predict by correlating proposal objects of the current frame with template objects of historical frames (e.g.
[4, 11, 29, 36]).
Existing OVOS methods focus on the matching between the raw object features of the proposals in the current frame and the templates in the first/previous frames

8065

