Multiview Pseudo-Labeling for Semi-supervised Learning from Video
Bo Xiong1

Haoqi Fan1
1

Kristen Grauman1,2

Facebook AI Research

2

Christoph Feichtenhofer1

University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
V

We present a multiview pseudo-labeling approach to
video learning, a novel framework that uses complementary
views in the form of appearance and motion information
for semi-supervised learning in video. The complementary
views help obtain more reliable “pseudo-labels” on unlabeled video, to learn stronger video representations than
from purely supervised data. Though our method capitalizes on multiple views, it nonetheless trains a model that is
shared across appearance and motion input and thus, by
design, incurs no additional computation overhead at inference time. On multiple video recognition datasets, our
method substantially outperforms its supervised counterpart,
and compares favorably to previous work on standard benchmarks in self-supervised video representation learning.

1. Introduction
3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [55, 8, 56,
17] have shown steady progress for video recognition, and
particularly human action classification, over recent years.
This progress also came with a shift from traditionally smallscale datasets to large amounts of labeled data [31, 6, 7] to
learn strong spatiotemporal feature representations. Notably,
as 3D CNNs are data hungry, their performance has never
been able to reach the level of hand-crafted features [57]
when trained ‘from-scratch’ on smaller scale datasets [49].
However, collecting a large-scale annotated video
dataset [21, 7] for the task at hand is expensive and tedious
as it often involves designing and implementing annotation
platforms at scale and hiring crowd workers to collect annotations. For example, a previous study [48] suggests it
takes at least one dollar to annotate a single video with 157
human activities. Furthermore, the resource intensive annotation process needs to be repeated for each task of interest or
when the label space needs to be expanded. Finally, another
dilemma that emerges with datasets collected from the web
is that the underlying content is vanishing over time, and

Model

F

Model

𝜕V

Model

𝜕t

V

F
𝜕V

𝜕t

Ensemble

Model
Model

Pseudo-label

Model

Figure 1: Multiview pseudo-labeling (MvPL) takes in multiple complementary views of a single unlabeled video clip,
in the form of RGB (V ), optical-flow (F ), and temporal
gradients ( ∂V
∂t ) and uses a shared model to perform semisupervised learning. After training, a single RGB view is
used for inference.

therefore the datasets need to be replenished in a recurring
fashion [50].
The goal of this work is semi-supervised learning in video
to learn from both labeled and unlabeled data, thereby reducing the amount of annotated data required for training.
Scaling video models with unlabeled data is a setting of high
practical interest, since collecting large amounts of unlabeled
video data requires minimal human effort. Still, thus far this
area has received far less attention than fully supervised
learning from video.
Most prior advances in semi-supervised learning in computer vision focus on the problem of image recognition.
“Pseudo-labeling” [38, 64, 61, 51] is a popular approach
to utilize unlabeled images. The idea is to use the predictions from a model as target labels and gradually add the

7209

