Incorporating Learnable Membrane Time Constant to Enhance Learning of
Spiking Neural Networks
Wei Fang1,2 , Zhaofei Yu1,2,3∗ , Yanqi Chen1,2 , Timothée Masquelier4 , Tiejun Huang1,2,3 , Yonghong Tian1,2 *
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, China
4
Centre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition (CERCO), UMR5549 CNRS - Univ. Toulouse 3, France
{fwei, yuzf12, chyq}@pku.edu.cn, timothee.masquelier@cnrs.fr, {tjhuang, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Output Spikes
1101 0 1

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have attracted enormous research interest due to temporal information processing capability, low power consumption, and high biological plausibility. However, the formulation of efficient
and high-performance learning algorithms for SNNs is still
challenging. Most existing learning methods learn weights
only, and require manual tuning of the membrane-related
parameters that determine the dynamics of a single spiking neuron. These parameters are typically chosen to be
the same for all neurons, which limits the diversity of neurons and thus the expressiveness of the resulting SNNs. In
this paper, we take inspiration from the observation that
membrane-related parameters are different across brain regions, and propose a training algorithm that is capable of
learning not only the synaptic weights but also the membrane time constants of SNNs. We show that incorporating
learnable membrane time constants can make the network
less sensitive to initial values and can speed up learning.
In addition, we reevaluate the pooling methods in SNNs
and find that max-pooling will not lead to significant information loss and have the advantage of low computation cost and binary compatibility. We evaluate the proposed method for image classification tasks on both traditional static MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10 datasets,
and neuromorphic N-MNIST, CIFAR10-DVS, DVS128 Gesture datasets. The experiment results show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art accuracy on
nearly all datasets, using fewer time-steps. Our codes are
available at https://github.com/fangw ei1234
56/Parametric-Leaky-Integrate-and-Fire
-Spiking-N euron.

* Corresponding author

Axon
Soma

V (t )

W

Dendrite
Synapse

w
I (t )

(a) Spiking neuron

(b) The membrane potential of a LIF neuron

Figure 1. (a) A Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron with membrane potential V , membrane time constant τ , input I(t) and
synaptic weight w. (b) The membrane potential V of the LIF neuron when constant input is received. Increasing or decreasing τ
will stretch the v = f (t) curve in the t direction while increasing
or decreasing w will stretch the v = f (t) curve in the V direction.

1. Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are viewed as the third
generation of neural network models, which are closer to
biological neurons in the brain [38]. Together with neuronal and synaptic states, the importance of spike timing
is also considered in SNNs. Due to their distinctive properties, such as temporal information processing capability,
low power consumption [49], and high biological plausibility [16], SNNs increasingly arouse researchers’ great interest in recent years. Nevertheless, it remains challenging
to formulate efficient and high-performance learning algorithms for SNNs.
Generally, the learning algorithms for SNNs can be
divided into unsupervised learning, supervised learning,
reward-based learning, and Artificial Neural Network
(ANN) to SNN conversion methodologies. Either way,
we find that most existing learning methods only consider learning the synaptic-related parameters like synaptic weights and treat the membrane-related parameters as

2661

