Estimating Egocentric 3D Human Pose in Global Space
Jian Wang1,2 Lingjie Liu1,2 Weipeng Xu3 Kripasindhu Sarkar1,2 Christian Theobalt1,2
1
MPI Informatics 2 Saarland Informatics Campus 3 Facebook Reality Labs
{jianwang,lliu,ksarkar,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

xuweipeng@fb.com

Abstract
Egocentric 3D human pose estimation using a single
fisheye camera has become popular recently as it allows
capturing a wide range of daily activities in unconstrained
environments, which is difficult for traditional outside-in
motion capture with external cameras. However, existing
methods have several limitations. A prominent problem
is that the estimated poses lie in the local coordinate system of the fisheye camera, rather than in the world coordinate system, which is restrictive for many applications.
Furthermore, these methods suffer from limited accuracy
and temporal instability due to ambiguities caused by the
monocular setup and the severe occlusion in a strongly
distorted egocentric perspective. To tackle these limitations, we present a new method for egocentric global 3D
body pose estimation using a single head-mounted fisheye camera. To achieve accurate and temporally stable
global poses, a spatio-temporal optimization is performed
over a sequence of frames by minimizing heatmap reprojection errors and enforcing local and global body motion
priors learned from a mocap dataset. Experimental results
show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Traditional optical motion capture system with external,
outside-in facing cameras is restrictive for many pose estimation applications that require the person to be able to
roam around in a larger space, beyond a fixed recording
volume. Examples are mobile interaction applications, pose
estimation in large-scale workplace environments, or many
AR/VR applications. To enable this, methods for egocentric
3D human pose estimation using head- or body-mounted
cameras were researched. These methods are mobile, flexible, and have the potential to capture a wide range of daily
human activities even in large-scale cluttered environments.
Some egocentric capture methods study the estimation
of face [9, 8, 21] and hand motions [38, 40, 27, 39], while
the estimation of the global full body pose has been less

Hardware

Egocentric Images

Global 3D Pose

Figure 1. Given challenging egocentric videos, our method produces realistic and accurate 3D global pose sequence.

explored. Mo2 Cap2 [45] and xR-egopose [43] use a single head-mounted fisheye camera to capture the 3D skeletal body pose in a marker-less way. Both methods have
demonstrated compelling 3D pose estimation results while
still suffering from an important limitation: They estimate
the local 3D body pose in egocentric camera space, while
not being able to obtain the body pose with global position
and orientation in the world coordinate system. Henceforth,
we will refer to the former as “local pose”, in order to distinguish it from the “global pose” defined in the world coordinate system. Local pose capture alone is insufficient for
many applications. For example, captured local body poses
are not enough to animate the locomotion of a virtual avatar
in xR environments, which requires global poses.
A straightforward solution is to simply project the local pose into the world coordinate system with the egocentric camera pose estimated by the SLAM. However, the obtained global poses exhibit significant inaccuracies. First,
they show notable temporal jitters as the video frames are
processed independently without taking temporal frame coherence. Second, they often show tracking failure due to

11500

