Context-Sensitive Temporal Feature Learning for Gait Recognition
Xiaohu Huang* 1 , Duowang Zhu* 1 , Hao Wang1 , Xinggang Wang1 , Bo Yang2 , Botao He2 , Wenyu Liu1 ,
and Bin Feng†1
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan FiberHome Digital Technology Co., Ltd

2

Abstract
Although gait recognition has drawn increasing research
attention recently, it remains challenging to learn discriminative temporal representation since the silhouette differences are quite subtle in spatial domain. Inspired by the
observation that humans can distinguish gaits of different subjects by adaptively focusing on temporal sequences
with different time scales, we propose a context-sensitive
temporal feature learning (CSTL) network in this paper,
which aggregates temporal features in three scales to obtain motion representation according to the temporal contextual information. Specifically, CSTL introduces relation modeling among multi-scale features to evaluate feature importances, based on which network adaptively enhances more important scale and suppresses less important
scale. Besides that, we propose a salient spatial feature
learning (SSFL) module to tackle the misalignment problem caused by temporal operation, e.g., temporal convolution. SSFL recombines a frame of salient spatial features by extracting the most discriminative parts across the
whole sequence. In this way, we achieve adaptive temporal learning and salient spatial mining simultaneously. Extensive experiments conducted on two datasets demonstrate
the state-of-the-art performance. On CASIA-B dataset, we
achieve rank-1 accuracies of 98.0%, 95.4% and 87.0% under normal walking, bag-carrying and coat-wearing conditions. On OU-MVLP dataset, we achieve rank-1 accuracy of 90.2%. The source code will be published at
https://github.com/OliverHxh/CSTL.

1. Introduction
Gait recognition is a long-distance biological identification technology, which relies on the walking patterns of
* Contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: fengbin@hust.edu.cn.

(a) Two sequences from subject ’53’ and ’119’ on CASIA-B can be distinguished relying on short-term temporal clues, e.g., several frames at the
beginning.

(b) Two sequences from subject ’39’ and ’77’ on CASIA-B, which have to
be distinguished relying on long-term temporal clues, e.g., all of the frames.

Figure 1. Illustration that humans can distinguish gaits of various
subjects by adaptively focusing on temporal fragments with different time scales. Color bar indicates the human focus distribution.
Darker color represents more attention needed for corresponding
frames. Best viewed in color.

human beings, and reveals great application potential on
identity recognition [20, 1, 22]. Although gait recognition
has drawn increasing research attention recently, it remains
challenging to learn discriminative temporal representation
since the silhouette differences in spatial domain are quite
subtle.
Moreover, as mentioned in [6], body parts possess diverse motion patterns which requires temporal modeling to
take multi-scale representation into consideration. Multilayer temporal convolution has been widely used in current
methods [6, 28, 18, 31, 32] to model temporal information
in multiple scales. They aggregated multi-scale temporal
features in a summation or a concatenation way. However,
these manners are not flexible enough to adapt to variation
of complex motion and realistic factors, i.e., occlusion of
clothing and change of camera viewpoints, since the fusion
method of multi-scale features is fixed. Thus, the performance is hindered especially considering gait is a kind of
fine-grained motion pattern, whose identification of sub-

12909

