Robust Small-scale Pedestrian Detection with Cued Recall via Memory Learning
Jung Uk Kim*
Sungjune Park*
Yong Man Ro†
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST, South Korea
{jukim0701,sungjune-p,ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Although the visual appearances of small-scale objects
are not well observed, humans can recognize them by associating the visual cues of small objects from their memorized appearance. It is called cued recall. In this paper,
motivated by the memory process of humans, we introduce
a novel pedestrian detection framework that imitates cued
recall in detecting small-scale pedestrians. We propose a
large-scale embedding learning with the large-scale pedestrian recalling memory (LPR Memory). The purpose of
the proposed large-scale embedding learning is to memorize and recall the large-scale pedestrian appearance via
the LPR Memory. To this end, we employ the large-scale
pedestrian exemplar set, so that, the LPR Memory can recall the information of the large-scale pedestrians from the
small-scale pedestrians. Comprehensive quantitative and
qualitative experimental results validate the effectiveness of
the proposed framework with the LPR Memory.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is one of the important research topics in the computer vision field [21, 28, 42, 60]. It has
attracted considerable attention in real-world applications
such as video surveillance [3, 56] and autonomous driving
systems [12, 23]. To detect pedestrians, various modalities
have been utilized. The most commonly used modality is
the visible modality (e.g. RGB) which is intuitive to human
eyes [13]. Also, the thermal modality has been adopted
for pedestrian detection recently [17, 24, 25]. The thermal
modality has the advantage that it is robust to illumination
variation [32] and weather conditions [22].
Despite the strengths of both modalities, pedestrian detection still has a problem in detecting small-scale pedestrians [41, 49]. Although some efforts have been made to
mitigate the small-scale issue [29, 53], small-scale pedestrian detection has an inherent problem. As shown in the
top of Figure 1, different from the large-scale pedestrian,
the visual appearance of the small-scale pedestrian is often
* Both authors have contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author

Small-scale Pedestrian Large-scale Pedestrian

Small-scale Pedestrian Large-scale Pedestrian

: Large-scale Pedestrian
: Small-scale Pedestrian
: Background

: Large-scale Pedestrian
: Small-scale Pedestrian
: Background

Visible Modality

(a)

Thermal Modality

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison between the small- and large-scale pedestrians (top) and t-SNE visualization of their latent features (bottom)
in (a) visible and (b) thermal modalities. Due to the lack of visual
information in the small-scale pedestrians, their latent faetures are
hard to be separated from the background.

blurred and obscure in both modalities (we divide the smalland large-scales according to [22]). We further visualize the
small- and large-scale pedestrians with the background in
the feature space using t-SNE [51]. As shown in the bottom of Figure 1, the large-scale pedestrian (blue) and the
background (red) could be separated from each other easily.
However, feature distributions of the small-scale pedestrian
(green) and the background (red) are not distinguishable, so
that, it is difficult to discriminate between the small-scale
pedestrians and the background. Since the visual appearance of the small-scale pedestrians is insufficient, the deep
networks are more likely to miss the small-scale pedestrians [41, 49, 55].
To tackle the above problem in small-scale pedestrian
detection, we consider how humans distinguish the smallscale pedestrians. As observed in Figure 1, the deep networks are likely to miss the small-scale pedestrians, because they have a lack of visual information. Nevertheless,
humans are capable of identifying small-scale pedestrians,
even with insufficient visual information. In cognitive psychology, humans recognize small-scale objects by recalling large-scale ones from their memories based on cues ob-

3050

