MonteFloor: Extending MCTS for
Reconstructing Accurate Large-Scale Floor Plans

1

Sinisa Stekovic1 , Mahdi Rad1 , Friedrich Fraundorfer1 , Vincent Lepetit2,1
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
2
Université Paris-Est, École des Ponts ParisTech, Paris, France
{sinisa.stekovic, rad, fraundorfer}@icg.tugraz.at, vincent.lepetit@enpc.fr
Project page: https://www.tugraz.at/index.php?id=52770

Abstract
We propose a novel method for reconstructing floor plans
from noisy 3D point clouds. Our main contribution is a
principled approach that relies on the Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) algorithm to maximize a suitable objective
function efficiently despite the complexity of the problem.
Like previous work, we first project the input point cloud to
a top view to create a density map and extract room proposals from it. Our method selects and optimizes the polygonal shapes of these room proposals jointly to fit the density
map and outputs an accurate vectorized floor map even for
large complex scenes. To do this, we adapt MCTS, an algorithm originally designed to learn to play games, to select the room proposals by maximizing an objective function
combining the fitness with the density map as predicted by
a deep network and regularizing terms on the room shapes.
We also introduce a refinement step to MCTS that adjusts
the shape of the room proposals. For this step, we propose
a novel differentiable method for rendering the polygonal
shapes of these proposals. We evaluate our method on the
recent and challenging Structured3D and Floor-SP datasets
and show a significant improvement over the state-of-theart, without imposing any hard constraints nor assumptions
on the floor plan configurations.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding from images is one of the main topics in computer vision, as it aims both at replicating one of
the key abilities of human beings and producing solutions
for many applications such as robotics or augmented reality. We focus here on the creation of a structured floor
plan where each room of an indoor environment is represented as a polygon with one edge per wall. Many types of
input have been considered: Monocular perspective color
views [18, 19, 22, 31], panoramic views [32, 38, 40], depth

Point cloud
Density map
Our result
Figure 1: Given a density map i.e. the top view of the 3D
point cloud of a floor, we retrieve an accurate floor map that
successfully recovers a variety of room shapes.

maps [36, 39]. Here, we focus on unstructured 3D point
clouds as in [2, 7, 23, 26], as they can now be generated
easily with an RGB-D camera and can cover an entire floor.
To estimate the floor plan from a given point cloud,
[7, 23] proposes to first project the point cloud into a virtual top view to create a ’density map’, as the walls, the
main features for creating the floor map, appear relatively
clearly in the density map. As shown in Figure 1, the density maps can be noisy, and it is still challenging to represent the rooms as vector drawings with a minimal number
of edges as a human designer would do especially for nonManhattan floor maps. To deal with this complexity, [7]
proposes a graph-based solution with a sound energy term
but still assumes the existence of some dominant wall directions in the scene.
In this paper, we also aim at estimating a floor plan from
a density map. Our contribution is a method, which we call
MonteFloor, that is conceptually simple and robust and returns high-quality floor plans. Figure 1 shows an example
from the Floor-SP test set that demonstrates we can reconstruct complex floor maps, including very large ones with
complex room shapes without having to tune hyperparameters.
Like [7], our method starts from room proposals generated by Mask-RCNN [17] from the density map. However,

16034

