Learning to Track with Object Permanence
Pavel Tokmakov

Jie Li
Wolfram Burgard
Toyota Research Institute

Adrien Gaidon

first.last@tri.global

Abstract
Tracking by detection, the dominant approach for online
multi-object tracking, alternates between localization and
association steps. As a result, it strongly depends on the
quality of instantaneous observations, often failing when
objects are not fully visible. In contrast, tracking in humans is underlined by the notion of object permanence:
once an object is recognized, we are aware of its physical
existence and can approximately localize it even under full
occlusions. In this work, we introduce an end-to-end trainable approach for joint object detection and tracking that
is capable of such reasoning. We build on top of the recent CenterTrack architecture, which takes pairs of frames
as input, and extend it to videos of arbitrary length. To this
end, we augment the model with a spatio-temporal, recurrent memory module, allowing it to reason about object locations and identities in the current frame using all the previous history. It is, however, not obvious how to train such
an approach. We study this question on a new, large-scale,
synthetic dataset for multi-object tracking, which provides
ground truth annotations for invisible objects, and propose
several approaches for supervising tracking behind occlusions. Our model, trained jointly on synthetic and real
data, outperforms the state of the art on KITTI and MOT17
datasets thanks to its robustness to occlusions.

1. Introduction
Consider the video sequence from the KITTI dataset [24]
shown in Figure 1. A man on the left walks behind the
moving car and is not visible anymore. Yet, there is no
question that he is still there, and did not simply vanish.
Moreover, we can approximately infer his location at that
moment. This capability is known to cognitive scientists
as object permanence, and is observed in infants at a very
early age [3, 53]. In adults, understanding that occluded
objects do not disappear is important for tasks like driving.
In this work, we propose a deep learning-based method for
multi-object tracking that is capable of such reasoning.
Virtually all modern multi-object tracking algorithms

Figure 1. Video frames from the KITTI dataset with outputs of
CenterTrack [66] (above), and our method (below). By modeling
object permanence, our approach is able to hallucinate trajectories
of fully occluded instances, such as the person behind the car.

operate in the tracking-by-detection paradigm. That is, they
use an existing object detector to localize objects of interest in every frame of a video, and then link them into
tracks, either in an online [9, 11], or in an offline manner [5, 6, 10, 34, 42]. In this work we focus on the online
setting, where a method needs to associate current detections with previously established trajectories [9, 54, 59, 62].
A major limitation of these methods is that the localization
step is completely independent from the previous history,
thus, once an object becomes partially or fully occluded,
the detector fails and the trajectory gets broken (see Figure 1, top). Recently, several approaches combine detection
and tracking in a single model [7, 66]. They take pairs of
frames as input and output detections together with pairwise associations. While these methods improve tracking
robustness, they can only handle single-frame occlusions.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end trainable, online approach for multi-object tracking that leverages object
permanence as an inductive prior. To this end, we first extend the recent CenterTrack architecture [66] from pairs of
frames as input to arbitrary video sequences. The frames
are processed by a convolutional gated recurrent unit (Con-

10860

