CANet: A Context-Aware Network for Shadow Removal
Zipei Chen1 , Chengjiang Long2 ,* Ling Zhang3 , Chunxia Xiao1∗†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
2
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
3
Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China
czpp19@whu.edu.cn, cjfykx@gmail.com, zhling@wust.edu.cn, cxxiao@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel two-stage contextaware network named CANet for shadow removal, in which
the contextual information from non-shadow regions is
transferred to shadow regions at the embedded feature
spaces. At Stage-I, we propose a contextual patch matching (CPM) module to generate a set of potential matching pairs of shadow and non-shadow patches. Combined
with the potential contextual relationships between shadow
and non-shadow regions, our well-designed contextual feature transfer (CFT) mechanism can transfer contextual information from non-shadow to shadow regions at different scales. With the reconstructed feature maps, we remove shadows at L and A/B channels separately. At StageII, we use an encoder-decoder to refine current results
and generate the final shadow removal results. We evaluate our proposed CANet on two benchmark datasets and
some real-world shadow images with complex scenes. Extensive experimental results strongly demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed CANet and exhibit superior performance to state-of-the-arts. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/Zipei-Chen/CANet.

1. Introduction
Shadow is a natural phenomenon appearing when the
light is partially or completely blocked. As a fundamental challenge in the field of computer vision, the existence of shadow in images or videos inevitably degrades
the accuracy and effectiveness of general application tasks
such as intrinsic image decomposition [21, 10], visual
recognition [25, 17, 24, 14], object detection and tracking [28, 1, 2], trajectory prediction [27, 33], single image
super-resolution [40, 39] and image captioning [6]. Therefore, shadow removal is important and necessary to im* This work was co-supervised by Chengjiang Long and Chunxia Xiao.
† Corresponding author.

prove the visual effects and avoid the performance drop on
the above-mentioned computer vision tasks. However, due
to the complex interactions of geometry and illumination,
shadow removal remains a challenging problem.
Current shadow removal methods can be mainly divided
into two categories: physical-based methods [8, 7, 12, 19,
29, 38, 43] and learning-based methods [31, 35, 15, 36,
5, 42, 44]. Compared to physical-based methods, which
apply a physical model to analyze each pixel’s intensities, learning-based methods analyze the image in feature
maps. Recently, learning-based methods with proper model
have presented potential advantages [42, 15, 30]. However,
these methods mainly focus on increasing the receptive field
of the model without considering other particular contextsensitive shadow-aware components, which may easily ignore the contextual matching information hidden in images.
In this paper, we propose a novel two-stage contextaware network CANet for shadow removal in an end-toend manner. As shown in Figure 1, our CANet integrates
a contextual patch matching (CPM) module and a contextual feature transfer (CFT) mechanism at Stage-I and takes
Stage-II as a refinement step for shadow removal. In particular, the CPM module is designed to search for the corresponding potential relationships between shadow and nonshadow patches, which demonstrates the contextual mapping between shadow and non-shadow regions. The CFT
mechanism is utilized to transfer the contextual feature at
different scales from non-shadow regions to shadow regions
based on the output patch matching pairs from the CPM
module and the extracted contextual features.
Our CPM module is designed as a dual-head structure
network with the shared patch feature extractor to predict
the degree of context matching between two patches from
the image, as well as determine the type of the patch pair
without a shadow mask. We only focus on contextual information transfer from non-shadow regions to shadow regions. Therefore we can define three types of patch pairs,
i.e., (1) both from shadow or non-shadow regions, (2) the
first one from the shadow region and the second one from

4743

