Learn to Cluster Faces via Pairwise Classification
Junfu Liu,* Di Qiu,* Pengfei Yan†, Xiaolin Wei
Meituan

Abstract
Face clustering plays an essential role in exploiting massive unlabeled face data. Recently, graph-based face clustering methods are getting popular for their satisfying performances. However, they usually suffer from excessive
memory consumption especially on large-scale graphs, and
rely on empirical thresholds to determine the connectivities
between samples in inference, which restricts their applications in various real-world scenes. To address such problems, in this paper, we explore face clustering from the pairwise angle. Specifically, we formulate the face clustering
task as a pairwise relationship classification task, avoiding
the memory-consuming learning on large-scale graphs. The
classifier can directly determine the relationship between
samples and is enhanced by taking advantage of the contextual information. Moreover, to further facilitate the efficiency of our method, we propose a rank-weighted density
to guide the selection of pairs sent to the classifier. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves stateof-the-art performances on several public clustering benchmarks at the fastest speed and shows a great advantage in
comparison with graph-based clustering methods on memory consumption.

1. Introduction
Massive face data are accessible on the Internet nowadays, thus boosting the development of face analysis technology [1, 13]. However, the large-scale unlabeled face data
has resulted in quite high annotation prices, and human annotations are not always reliable. Therefore, exploiting unlabeled face data has attracted great interest. Aiming at assigning pseudo labels to unlabeled face images, face clustering is a fundamental face analysis task and has wide applications in real-world scenarios like the dataset preparation
or cleaning for face recognition [22, 23] and photo albums
management [19].
Traditional clustering methods suffer from impractical
assumptions and their performances could be sensitive to
* Co-first authors. liujeff97@gmail.com, qiudi@meituan.com
† Corresponding author. yanpengfei03@meituan.com

Choose an empirical threshold

Graph Learning

> threshold

memory-consuming
≤ threshold

(a) Graph-based methods

Pairwise
Classification
memory-friendly

(b) Our method

Figure 1. An overview of the main differences between popular
graph-based face clustering methods and ours. The nodes with different colors represent different classes. (a) Graph-based methods
focus on the learning of discriminative embeddings but need to set
an empirical threshold to connect or disconnect samples. (b) Our
method can directly determine the pairwise relationship through a
classifier and generate the final clusters. Besides, by dealing with
the face clustering task from graph-level to pair-level, our method
largely reduces the memory consumption.

hyper-parameters. For instance, DBSCAN [2] assumes
clusters to be in the same density, and the performance of
K-Means [3] highly depends on the original k. Recently,
graph-based face clustering methods have drawn much attention for their satisfying performances by learning representative embeddings without making oversimplified assumptions [4, 5, 6]. But the computational costs and demands for memory usage stand out especially on large-scale
face clustering scenes, due to the surprisingly high price of
learning on large graphs [20, 26]. And some works have
been proposed to alleviate such problems. In [7], Yang et al.
designed a graph convolutional network-based confidence
estimator to select nodes with large confidence, which reduces the number of highly overlapped subgraphs and leads
to promotions on efficiency. Although the confidence estimator contains only one single layer, an out-of-memory issue still occurs when dealing with large-scale graphs, as will

3845

