DRIVE: Deep Reinforced Accident Anticipation with Visual Explanation
Wentao Bao, Qi Yu, Yu Kong
Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology
{wb6219, qi.yu, yu.kong}@rit.edu

Abstract
Action

With increasing demand for autonomous driving, anticipating possible future accidents is becoming the central
consideration to guarantee a safe driving strategy [3, 40, 2].
Given a dashcam video, an accident anticipation model
aims to tell the driving system if and when a traffic accident
will occur in the near future. Despite remarkable advances
in visual perception [10, 14, 20], the decision-making of
driving control has long been studied in isolation with vision perception research for the autonomous driving scenario [26, 36]. We target at bridging this gap by investigating a key research question: where do drivers look when
predicting possible future accidents? This will lead to a visually explainable model that associates the low-level visual
attention and high-level accident anticipation.

⋮

1. Introduction

(𝑎1 , 𝑎2 , … , 𝑎 𝑇 )

Next Fixation

(𝑃1 , 𝑃2 , … , 𝑃𝑇 )

Reward
(Early & Correct & Attentive)

⋮

Traffic accident anticipation aims to accurately and
promptly predict the occurrence of a future accident from
dashcam videos, which is vital for a safety-guaranteed
self-driving system. To encourage an early and accurate decision, existing approaches typically focus on capturing the cues of spatial and temporal context before a
future accident occurs. However, their decision-making
lacks visual explanation and ignores the dynamic interaction with the environment. In this paper, we propose Deep
ReInforced accident anticipation with Visual Explanation,
named DRIVE. The method simulates both the bottom-up
and top-down visual attention mechanism in a dashcam observation environment so that the decision from the proposed stochastic multi-task agent can be visually explained
by attentive regions. Moreover, the proposed dense anticipation reward and sparse fixation reward are effective
in training the DRIVE model with our improved reinforcement learning algorithm. Experimental results show that
the DRIVE model achieves state-of-the-art performance on
multiple real-world traffic accident datasets. Code and pretrained model are available at https://www.rit.edu/
actionlab/drive.

Accident Score

Agent

State

Environment

Figure 1: The Markov decision process of the DRIVE
model. The neural network agent (left) learns to exploit
visual attentive state (bottom) to predict the actions including the accident score and the next fixation (top), which in
return explore the driving environment (right) to maximize
the total reward (middle).

The traffic accident anticipation is far from being solved
due to the following challenges. First, the visual cues of a
future accident are vital to training a discriminative model
but in practice, they are difficult to be captured from the limited and noisy video data before the accident occurs. Previous works take advantage of object detection and learn the
accident visual cues by either soft attention in [3] or graph
relational learning in [2]. In this paper, we propose to explicitly learn the visual attention behavior to address where
to look such that accident risky regions can be localized.
Second, it is intrinsically a trade-off between an early decision and a correct decision since the earlier to anticipate
an accident, the harder to make the decision right due to
fewer accident-relevant cues. Existing works [3, 2] simply
address the trade-off by training supervised deep learning
models with an exponentially weighted classification loss.
In this paper, we address this trade-off by formulating the
task as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), where exploration and exploitation can be dynamically balanced in a
driving environment. In the context of accident anticipation, the MDP model aims to exploit the immediate visual
cues for accident anticipation and also explore more possibilities of accident scoring and attention allocation.
Our proposed DRIVE model is illustrated with the MDP

7619

