ODAM: Object Detection, Association, and Mapping using Posed RGB Video
Kejie Li1, 2 , Daniel DeTone2 , Steven Chen2 , Minh Vo2 , Ian Reid1 , Hamid Rezatofighi3 , Chris Sweeney2 ,
Julian Straub2 , and Richard Newcombe2
1

The University of Adelaide, 2 Facebook Reality Labs Research, 3 Monash University

Abstract

...

Localizing objects and estimating their extent in 3D is
an important step towards high-level 3D scene understanding, which has many applications in Augmented Reality
and Robotics. We present ODAM, a system for 3D Object
Detection, Association, and Mapping using posed RGB
videos. The proposed system relies on a deep learning frontend to detect 3D objects from a given RGB frame and associate them to a global object-based map using a graph neural network (GNN). Based on these frame-to-model associations, our back-end optimizes object bounding volumes,
represented as super-quadrics, under multi-view geometry
constraints and the object scale prior. We validate the proposed system on ScanNet where we show a significant improvement over existing RGB-only methods.

Input:
Posed RGB images

Output:
Object-based mapping with super-quadrics

Figure 1: ODAM overview. Given a posed RGB video,
ODAM estimates oriented 3D bounding volumes of objects
represented by super-quadrics in a scene.

1. Introduction

be obtained from the proposed reconstruction system.

Endowing machine perception with the capability of inferring 3D object-based maps brings AI systems one step
closer to semantic understanding of the world. This task requires building a consistent 3D object-based map of a scene.
We focus on the space between the category-level semantic reconstructions [29] and object-based maps with renderable dense object models [27, 45] and represent objects by
the 3D bounding volumes from posed RGB frames. As an
analogy to the use of 2D bounding boxes (BBs) in images,
a 3D bounding volume presents a valuable abstraction of
location and space, enabling for example, object-level planning for robots [13, 15], learning scene-level priors over objects [55], or anchoring information on object instances. A
robust way of inferring bounding volumes and associated
views of individual objects in a scene is a stepping stone toward reconstructing, embedding and describing the objects
with advanced state-of-the-art methods such as NeRF [32],
and GRAF [47], which commonly assume a set of associated frames observing an object or part of a scene that can

Nevertheless, this task of localizing objects and estimating their extents in 3D using RGB-only videos presents a
number of challenges. First, despite the impressive success
of deep learning methods for 2D object detectors [7, 16, 43],
recent efforts that formulate 3D object mapping as a singleview 3D detection problem [5, 24, 33] suffer from accuracy due to the depth-scale ambiguity in the perspective
projection (as demonstrated empirically in Sec. 4.2). Second, unlike estimation of 3D points from multiple 2D observations that has been studied extensively in SfM and
SLAM [6, 14, 22, 34, 53], there has been little work and
consensus on how to leverage multi-view constraints for 3D
bounding volume location and extent [35, 60]. Specifically,
the representation for 3D volume and how to formulate a
suitable energy function remain open questions. Third, the
crucial problem that needs to be solved prior to multi-view
optimization is the associations of detections of individual
3D object instances from different viewpoints, where unlike SfM or SLAM incorrect association noticeably biases

5998

