RGB-D Saliency Detection via Cascaded Mutual Information Minimization
Jing Zhang1 Deng-Ping Fan2,? Yuchao Dai3 Xin Yu4 Yiran Zhong5 Nick Barnes1 Ling Shao2
1
Australian National University 2 IIAI 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University
4
University of Technology Sydney 5 SenseTime

Abstract
Existing RGB-D saliency detection models do not explicitly encourage RGB and depth to achieve effective multimodal learning. In this paper, we introduce a novel multistage cascaded learning framework via mutual information minimization to explicitly model the multi-modal information between RGB image and depth data. Specifically, we first map the feature of each mode to a lower
dimensional feature vector, and adopt mutual information
minimization as a regularizer to reduce the redundancy between appearance features from RGB and geometric features from depth. We then perform multi-stage cascaded
learning to impose the mutual information minimization
constraint at every stage of the network. Extensive experiments on benchmark RGB-D saliency datasets illustrate
the effectiveness of our framework. Further, to prosper
the development of this field, we contribute the largest (7×
larger than NJU2K) COME15K dataset, which contains
15,625 image pairs with high quality polygon-/scribble/object-/instance-/rank-level annotations. Based on these
rich labels, we additionally construct four new benchmarks
with strong baselines and observe some interesting phenomena, which can motivate future model design. Source code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
JingZhang617/cascaded_rgbd_sod.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection models are trained to discover the regions of an image that attract human attention. Conventionally, saliency detection is performed mostly on RGB
images only [37, 44, 22, 43, 36]. With the availability of
depth data as shown in Table 1, RGB-D saliency detection
[46, 35, 51, 53] attracts great attention. The extra depth data
provides real-world geometric information, which is useful
for scenarios when the foreground shares similar appearance to the background. Further, the robustness of depth
? Deng-Ping Fan (dengpfan@gmail.com) is the corresponding author.
Work was done while Jing Zhang was an IIAI intern mentored by DengPing Fan.

Image

Depth

GT

BBSNet

Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of saliency prediction of a state-of-the-art
RGB-D saliency detection model, e.g. BBSNet [12], with ours.

sensors (e.g. Microsoft Kinect) against lighting changes can
also benefit the saliency detection task.
As RGB and depth data capture different information
about the same scene, existing RGB-D saliency detection
models [35, 1, 3, 2, 53, 49, 30, 12, 19, 33, 51] focus on modeling the complementary information of the RGB image
and depth data implicitly by using different fusion strategies. Three main fusion strategies have been widely studied:
early fusion [38, 46], late fusion [41, 16, 36] and cross-level
fusion [35, 1, 3, 2, 53, 49, 30, 12, 19, 33, 51, 25]. Although
performance improvement can be achieved with effective
fusion strategies, there are no constraints on the network
design that force it to learn complementary information between the two modalities, and we cannot explicitly evaluate
the contribution of depth data in those models [52].
As a multi-modal learning task, a trained model should
maximize the joint entropy of different modalities within
the network capacity. Maximizing the joint entropy is also
equal to the minimization of mutual information, which
prevents a network from focusing on redundant information. To explicitly model the complementary information
between the RGB image and depth data, we introduce a
multi-stage cascaded learning framework via mutual information minimization. Specifically, we introduce mutual information minimization as regularizer (as shown in Fig. 2)
to achieve two main benefits: 1) explicitly modeling the redundancy between appearance features and geometric features; 2) effectively fusing appearance features and geometric features with the mutual information minimization constraint. The produced saliency maps in Fig. 1 illustrate effectiveness of our solution.

4338

