Transformer-based Dual Relation Graph for Multi-label Image Recognition
Jiawei Zhao1 * Ke Yan2 Yifan Zhao1 Xiaowei Guo2 Feiyue Huang2 Jia Li1,3†
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{zhaojiaweii, zhaoyf, jiali}@buaa.edu.cn,

{kerwinyan, scorpioguo, garyhuang}@tencent.com

Abstract
The simultaneous recognition of multiple objects in one
image remains a challenging task, spanning multiple events
in the recognition field such as various object scales, inconsistent appearances, and confused inter-class relationships.
Recent research efforts mainly resort to the statistic label
co-occurrences and linguistic word embedding to enhance
the unclear semantics. Different from these researches, in
this paper, we propose a novel Transformer-based Dual
Relation learning framework, constructing complementary
relationships by exploring two aspects of correlation, i.e.,
structural relation graph and semantic relation graph. The
structural relation graph aims to capture long-range correlations from object context, by developing a cross-scale
transformer-based architecture. The semantic graph dynamically models the semantic meanings of image objects
with explicit semantic-aware constraints. In addition, we
also incorporate the learnt structural relationship into the
semantic graph, constructing a joint relation graph for robust representations. With the collaborative learning of
these two effective relation graphs, our approach achieves
new state-of-the-art on two popular multi-label recognition
benchmarks, i.e. MS-COCO and VOC 2007 dataset.

1. Introduction
Multi-label image recognition aims at assigning multiple labels for multiple objects presented in one natural image. As a fundamental task in computer vision, multi-label
image recognition can serve as prerequisites for many applications, such as weakly supervised localization and segmentation [12, 15, 44], attribute recognition [25, 22] , scene
understanding [29] and recommendation systems [39, 19].
Benefiting from the development of deep learning techniques [17, 30], recent CNN-based architectures have made
significant process in distinguishing multiple objects. But
* Works done while interning at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Jia Li is the Corresponding author. URL: http://cvteam.net

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed dual relations. a) Structural relation provides long-term contextual relations for recognizing snowboard, while b) semantic relation builds dynamic correlations of co-occurred classes. These two relations jointly form
a structural and semantic-aware image understanding.

the accurate parsing of multi-label images still faces great
challenges, including various object scales, inconsistent visual appearances, and confused inter-class relationships.
One intuitive solution for discovering visual consistency
is to enhance the feature representation with self-attention
mechanisms [46, 34, 16]. For example, Wang et al. [34]
propose to automatically discover the attentional regions
with a recurrent neural network, introducing discriminative
features for representation learning. Beyond these improvements, Guo et al. [16] propose the assumption for visual
perception consistency of attention regions and then amplify these regions by a visual consistency loss. Although
the spatial representations of CNNs are strengthened by
these techniques, the multi-label dependencies are not explicitly modeled, which is crucial for the understanding of
multi-label relationships.
To tackle this problem, recent ideas propose to learn
the inter-class relationships based on the co-occurrences of
multiple classes (e.g., the snowboard should be attached
with higher confidence if person occurs). Pioneer works
tend to model this relationship with Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [32, 2, 40], while the co-occurred labels can
be gradually refined in the sequential predictions. Inspired
by the advanced improvements of Graph Convolutional

163

