Generalized and Incremental Few-Shot Learning by
Explicit Learning and Calibration without Forgetting
Anna Kukleva1
1

Hilde Kuehne2,3

Bernt Schiele1

2

MPI for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus CVAILab, Goethe University Frankfurt 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge

1st Phase

Abstract

In this paper we are interested in two practically important
learning scenarios, namely generalized few-shot learning
(GFSL) [13, 36, 32, 39] and incremental few-shot learning
(IFSL) [43, 6]. In both scenarios it is possible to learn a
performant classifier for a set of base classes for which many
training samples exist. However, for the novel classes, only
few training samples are available such that a novel class
learning is challenging. Additionally, in generalized fewshot learning and in incremental learning it is important to
prevent catastrophic forgetting of the base classes during
novel class learning. Last, but not least, classifier calibration
across classes has to be addressed, due to the imbalance
in the amount of training samples. While previous work
focuses on addressing a subset of these challenges [13, 36,
23, 43, 6], in this paper we aim to address all three.
To this end, we propose a three phase framework to
explicitly address these challenges. The first phase is
devoted to general representation learning as in previous
work [13, 36, 47]. Here, we utilize a large base dataset
https://github.com/annusha/LCwoF

3rd Phase

base:

base & novel:
calibration

prevent forgetting

Both generalized and incremental few-shot learning have
to deal with three major challenges: learning novel classes
from only few samples per class, preventing catastrophic
forgetting of base classes, and classifier calibration across
novel and base classes. In this work we propose a three-stage
framework that allows to explicitly and effectively address
these challenges. While the first phase learns base classes
with many samples, the second phase learns a calibrated
classifier for novel classes from few samples while also preventing catastrophic forgetting. In the final phase, calibration is achieved across all classes. We evaluate the proposed
framework on four challenging benchmark datasets for image and video few-shot classification and obtain state-of-theart results for both generalized and incremental few shot
learning.

1. Introduction

2nd Phase

novel:
learning & calibration
novelJ
baseJ
novelN
baseB

baseJ
novelJ —

baseJ
novelJ i

baseJ i
novelJ

Figure 1: Overview of the performance of our framework during
different phases. J indicates performance in the joint space, B and
N denote performance in the base and novel spaces respectively.
During the 1st phase we train the model on the base classes. During
the 2nd phase we try to achieve a high performance on novel classes
in the joint space and prevent forgetting of base classes. In the
3rd phase we calibrate the two classifiers and achieve balanced
performance between base and novel classes. T-SNE plots show
the performance of the test samples at each phase. The symbol size
shows the confidence of the model for the sample.

for pretraining and obtain high performance for base classification. In the second phase we concentrate on learning
novel classes. In contrast to the prior work, we pay special attention to training a calibrated classifier for the novel
classes while simultaneously preventing catastrophic forgetting for the base classes. More specifically we propose
base-normalized cross entropy that amplifies the softmax
output of novel classes to overcome the bias towards the
base classes, and simultaneously enforce the model to preserve previous knowledge via explicit weight constraints. In
the third phase we address the problem of calibrating the
overall model across base and novel classes. In Fig. 1 we
show how the model develops during all three phases by
plotting the test accuracy of base and novel classes in the

9020

