Manifold Alignment for Semantically Aligned Style Transfer
Jing Huo1 , Shiyin Jin1 , Wenbin Li1∗ , Jing Wu2 , Yu-Kun Lai2 , Yinghuan Shi1 , Yang Gao1
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University

Content & Style

Gatys et al.

WCT

AdaIN

LST

CNNMRF

AvatarNet

STROTSS

MST

Ours

Content & Style

User Editing

User Editing

Ours Original

Ours Editing

Content & Style

Content Map

Style Map

Ours Original

Ours Editing

Figure 1: The first two rows show comparisons with some state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Three kinds of SOTA methods are compared,
where Gatys et al. [5], WCT [13], AdaIN [8], LST [12] are global statistics based methods, CNNMRF [11] and AvatarNet [23] are local
patch based methods, and STROTSS [10] and MST [29] are semantic region based methods. The proposed method is the best in semantic
structure preservation. The third row shows our user editing and semantic map guided style transfer results.

Abstract
Most existing style transfer methods follow the assumption that styles can be represented with global statistics
(e.g., Gram matrices or covariance matrices), and thus address the problem by forcing the output and style images to
have similar global statistics. An alternative is the assumption of local style patterns, where algorithms are designed
to swap similar local features of content and style images.
However, the limitation of these existing methods is that they
neglect the semantic structure of the content image which
may lead to corrupted content structure in the output. In
this paper, we make a new assumption that image features
from the same semantic region form a manifold and an image with multiple semantic regions follows a multi-manifold
distribution. Based on this assumption, the style transfer problem is formulated as aligning two multi-manifold
distributions and a Manifold Alignment based Style Transfer (MAST) framework is proposed. The proposed framework allows semantically similar regions between the output and the style image share similar style patterns. Moreover, the proposed manifold alignment method is flexible
to allow user editing or using semantic segmentation maps
∗ Corresponding author.

as guidance for style transfer. To allow the method to be
applicable to photorealistic style transfer, we propose a
new adaptive weight skip connection network structure to
preserve the content details. Extensive experiments verify
the effectiveness of the proposed framework for both artistic and photorealistic style transfer. Code is available at
https://github.com/NJUHuoJing/MAST.

1. Introduction
The goal of style transfer is to synthesize an output image by transferring the target style to a given content image.
Currently, most methods [5, 8, 13, 12] make the assumption
that image styles can be represented by global statistics of
deep features, such as Gram matrices or covariance matrices. Such global statistics capture the style from the whole
image, and are applied to the content image without differentiation of the contents inside. However, for images containing different semantic parts, such global statistics are insufficient to represent the multiple styles required for proper
style transfer. As shown in the first two rows of Figure 1,
although the overall appearances of the results from Gatys
et al. [5], AdaIN [8], WCT [13] and LST [12] look like the
style image, they sometimes fail to preserve the local semantic structure of the content image, leading to corrupted

14861

