Mean Shift for Self-Supervised Learning
Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani1, * Ajinkya Tejankar1, * Hamed Pirsiavash1,2
1 University of Maryland, Baltimore County

Abstract
Most recent self-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms
learn features by contrasting between instances of images
or by clustering the images and then contrasting between
the image clusters. We introduce a simple mean-shift algorithm that learns representations by grouping images together without contrasting between them or adopting much
of prior on the structure or number of the clusters. We
simply “shift” the embedding of each image to be close
to the “mean” of the neighbors of its augmentation. Since
the closest neighbor is always another augmentation of the
same image, our model will be identical to BYOL when
using only one nearest neighbor instead of 5 used in our
experiments. Our model achieves 72.4% on ImageNet linear evaluation with ResNet50 at 200 epochs outperforming
BYOL. Also, our method outperforms the SOTA by a large
margin when using weak augmentations only, facilitating
adoption of SSL for other modalities. Our code is available
here: https://github.com/UMBCvision/MSF

1. Introduction
Most current visual recognition algorithms are supervised, meaning that they learn from large scale annotated
images or videos. However, in many applications, the annotation process may be expensive, biased, ambiguous, or
involve privacy concerns. Self-supervised learning (SSL)
algorithms aim to learn rich representations from unlabeled
images or videos. Such learned representations can be used
along with small annotated data to provide an accurate visual recognition model. We are interested in developing better SSL models using unlabeled images.
Some recent SSL models learn by contrasting between
instances of images. They pull different augmentations of
an image instance together while pushing them away from
other image instances [23, 11]. Some other SSL methods
cluster the unlabeled images to a set of clusters with the
hope that each cluster will contain semantically similar im* Equal contribution

2 University of California, Davis

ages. Then, a model that predicts those clusters learns rich
representations similar to supervised learning with labels
[9, 52, 10].
These clustering methods also can be considered as contrastive learning since they contrast between different clusters of images. For instance, the SoftMax layer in deep clustering method [9] encourages an image to be assigned to the
correct single cluster and not the other clusters.
Also, most clustering algorithms have strong priors on
the overall structure of the clusters. For instance, deep
clustering (k-means) using Euclidean distance encourages
spherical cluster shapes which we believe is unnecessary
for the purpose of SSL methods.
Recently, BYOL [22] showed that it is possible to learn
rich representations without contrasting between image instances. BYOL [22] works by simply pulling the two views
of an image closer without any contrast with other images.
The better performance of BYOL [22] compared to MoCo
hints that contrasting with other images may be a limiting
constraint. For instance, in MoCo [23], since the negative
images are sampled randomly, they may be from the same
category as the query, resulting in degraded representations.
[42] tries to resolve this issue by not treating all negatives
equally negative.
Inspired by mean shift clustering, we generalize BYOL
to a simple yet effective SSL method where a data point is
pulled closer to not only its other augmentations but also
the nearest neighbors (NNs) of its augmentation. Unlike
DeepCluster [9], SwAV [10], and SeLA [52] that use explicit, mutually exclusive cluster assignment, our method
uses mean-shift algorithm that groups similar images together locally without explicit cluster assignment. Moreover, unlike k-means clustering, mean-shift does not have
strong priors on the shape, size, or number of the clusters.
This makes mean-shift suitable for SSL where such priors
are not known. Compared to MoCo [23], SimCLR [11],
SwAV [10] and few others, our method never contrasts between different images or even cluster centers.
Since we need a large set of embeddings to search for
nearest neighbors, we adopt the memory bank idea [23]
to maintain a random set of embeddings. Also, since the

10326

