A Machine Teaching Framework for Scalable Recognition
Pei Wang
UC, San Diego

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC, San Diego

pew062@ucsd.edu

nuno@ucsd.edu

Abstract

…
teach real humans

We consider the scalable recognition problem in the finegrained expert domain where large-scale data collection
is easy whereas annotation is difficult. Existing solutions
are typically based on semi-supervised or self-supervised
learning. We propose an alternative new framework, MEMORABLE, based on machine teaching and online crowdsourcing platforms. A small amount of data is first labeled
by experts and then used to teach online annotators for
the classes of interest, who finally label the entire dataset.
Preliminary studies show that the accuracy of classifiers
trained on the final dataset is a function of the accuracy
of the student annotators. A new machine teaching algorithm, CMaxGrad, is then proposed to enhance this accuracy by introducing explanations in a state-of-the-art machine teaching algorithm. For this, CMaxGrad leverages
counterfactual explanations, which take into account student predictions, thereby proving feedback that is studentspecific, explicitly addresses the causes of student confusion, and adapts to the level of competence of the student.
Experiments show that both MEMORABLE and CMaxGrad
outperform existing solutions to their respective problems.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning in computer vision has been
largely driven by large-scale datasets. Many breakthroughs,
made across various tasks, have benefited from large-scale
and well-curated datasets like ImageNet for object recognition [6], COCO for object detection and segmentation [23],
Kinetics for action recognition [19], etc. These datasets
usually contain common objects, scenes, or actions and thus
can be scalably annotated on crowdsourcing platforms such
as Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) [14]. When this is
possible, we say that learning is scalable. However, this
is usually not the case for expert domains, such as biology or medical imaging. While data collection can still be
easy in these domains, annotations require highly specialized and domain-specific knowledge. For example, while it

augment







Figure 1: The proposed MEMORABLE framework is a new solution to the problem of large-scale recognition in fine-grained domains. 1
⃝ A large-scale raw dataset (D) is collected and a small
subset delivered to experts, who produce a labeled dataset Dl ; 2
⃝
A neural network is trained on Dl or semi-supervised trained on
Dl ∪ Du , where Du = D − Dl ; 3
⃝ A teaching tutorial, composed
of a teaching set L of images and associated explanations, is created from Dl with the CMaxGrad algorithm, and used to teach
human annotators the target categories; 4
⃝ human annotators label
the unlabeled data Du . Finally, the classifier is re-trained on the
fully labeled datset D. (Red and blue cylinders represent whether
data is labeled or not.)

is easy to crawl the web or deploy cameras in the wild to
collect a large number of animal images, it is usually expensive to recruit the biologists or taxonomists needed to
label them. The resulting lack of large annotated datasets
hampers the application of deep learning to expert domains.
For example, the largest existing bird dataset, NAbirds, only
contains about 48k instances [37]. Even the recent and
largest biological dataset, iNaturalist, contains only about
850k instances [38]. This is smaller than ImageNet, proposed about 10 years ago, and pales in comparison to the
largest datasets of everyday objects, e.g. Open Images with
9M images [20].
Since labeling is difficult in expert fine-grained domains,
scalable learning must take advantage of small expertlabeled datasets and large amounts of unlabeled data. This
motivated extensive research on less label-intensive forms
of learning, including few-shot learning, transfer learning,
semi-supervised learning, and self-supervised learning. For
example, models pre-trained on an everyday domain by supervised learning are frequently transferred to a target finegrained domain by fine-tuning. Another strategy is to learn
a good feature extractor by self-supervised learning, which

4945

