IntraTomo: Self-supervised Learning-based Tomography
via Sinogram Synthesis and Prediction
Guangming Zang

Ramzi Idoughi

Rui Li
KAUST

Peter Wonka

Wolfgang Heidrich

Abstract
We propose IntraTomo, a powerful framework that combines the benefits of learning-based and model-based approaches for solving highly ill-posed inverse problems in the
Computed Tomography (CT) context. IntraTomo is composed
of two core modules: a novel sinogram prediction module,
and a geometry refinement module, which are applied iteratively. In the first module, the unknown density field
is represented as a continuous and differentiable function,
parameterized by a deep neural network. This network is
learned, in a self-supervised fashion, from the incomplete
or/and degraded input sinogram. After getting estimated
through the sinogram prediction module, the density field is
consistently refined in the second module using local and
non-local geometrical priors. With these two core modules,
we show that IntraTomo significantly outperforms existing
approaches on several ill-posed inverse problems, such as
limited angle tomography with a range of 45 degrees, sparse
view tomographic reconstruction with as few as eight views,
or super-resolution tomography with eight times increased
resolution. The experiments on simulated and real data
show that our approach can achieve results of unprecedented
quality.

1. Introduction
Computed tomography (CT) is a powerful imaging tool
that enables the examination of internal structures of the
scanned object in a non-destructive and non-invasive manner.
The computed tomography technique is often associated
with medical X-ray tomography. However, it has numerous
other applications at different scales and involving various
techniques to produce the projections such as: industrial
X-ray CT [17, 69], synchrotron X-ray tomographic microscopy [19, 56], electron tomography microscopy [46] and
visible light tomography [31, 70]. Tomography techniques
operate on a set of projections of the scanned object from
different angles. Reconstruction algorithms are applied to
retrieve a density field representing the object from these
projections. Mathematically, the reconstruction process is an

Figure 1. (a) Taking a limited angles CT measurements as input,
(b) our proposed method successfully restores the 3D density
field with both high-frequency details and geometric structures
for a Covid19 patient (covid19-A-0070) [30]. (c) A comparison
with other SOTA approaches using PSNR and SSIM metrics. A
stochastic model-based approach [13] (Stochastic) fails to retrieve
the field’s boundary (red box). Deep shape image prior [23, 62]
(Deep prior) struggles to reconstruct fine details (black box).

inverse problem with Nv unknowns (number of pixels/voxels
representing the object) calculated using the Nθ ×Np known
parameters (number of projections times the number of pixels for each projection). Ideally, the acquisition process
provides a large number of projections that are uniformly
sampled over the angular space.
However, in several applications, the data is captured for a
limited number of projections or using a non-uniform angular
sampling. For example, in medical CT, reducing the number
of projections is employed as means to reduce the dosage of
the X-ray radiation. On the other hand, in tilt-series electron
tomography microscopy, the scanned sample can only be
rotated for a limited range of angles, which results in a nonuniform angular sampling and a corresponding loss of resolution in the axial direction, also known as the “missing wedge
problem”. The former acquisition scenario is known as
sparse-view tomography, while the latter is known as limited-

1960

