TempNet: Online Semantic Segmentation on Large-scale Point Cloud Series
Yunsong Zhou 1 Hongzi Zhu 1 * Chunqin Li 1 Tiankai Cui 1 Shan Chang 2 * Minyi Guo 1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Donghua University
{zhouyunsong,hongzi,supermelcq,cuitiankai,guo-my}@sjtu.edu.cn changshan@dhu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
In order to better perceive the driving context, most automated vehicles are equipped with LiDAR sensors to continuously acquire point cloud data. The performance of
an online semantic segmentation algorithm for a time series of point cloud frames referred to as point cloud series,
is essential for an automated vehicle to make correct decisions in real-time. For example, a commercial off-theshelf (COTS) LiDAR with 128 channels [7] could produce
10 frames per second with each frame containing a large
number of around 480,000 points. Due to the discrete and
* Co-corresponding authors

Squeeze
SegV2
Ground
truth
Squeeze
SegV2

Online semantic segmentation on a time series of point
cloud frames is an essential task in autonomous driving.
Existing models focus on single-frame segmentation, which
cannot achieve satisfactory segmentation accuracy and offer unstably ﬂicker among frames. In this paper, we propose
a light-weight semantic segmentation framework for largescale point cloud series, called TempNet, which can improve
both the accuracy and the stability of existing semantic segmentation models by combining a novel frame aggregation
scheme. To be computational cost-efﬁcient, feature extraction and aggregation are only conducted on a small portion
of key frames via a temporal feature aggregation (TFA) network using an attentional pooling mechanism, and such enhanced features are propagated to the intermediate non-key
frames. To avoid information loss from non-key frames, a
partial feature update (PFU) network is designed to partially update the propagated features with the local features
extracted on a non-key frame if a large disparity between
the two is quickly assessed. As a result, consistent and
information-rich features can be obtained for each frame.
We implement TempNet on ﬁve state-of-the-art (SOTA) point
cloud segmentation models and conduct extensive experiments on the SemanticKITTI dataset. Results demonstrate
that TempNet outperforms SOTA competitors by wide margins with little extra computational cost.

Ground
truth

Abstract

Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 3

Figure 1. Segmentation examples of using SequeezeSegV2, a
SOTA single-frame segmentation method, on two sequences of
three consecutive point cloud frames. It can be seen that applying
such schemes to point cloud series leads to unstable and inaccurate
results, e.g., errors denoted by circles suddenly appear.

sparse spatial distribution nature of point cloud data, semantic segmentation on large-scale point cloud series is a
more difﬁcult task compared with semantic segmentation of
videos. Given the restricted computational power of an automated vehicle, a practical semantic segmentation method
for point cloud series should meet the following two requirements. First, the segmentation results should be accurate so that automated vehicles can make correct driving
decisions based on the results. Second, the method should
be real-time, which means that any frame of point cloud in
the series should be correctly segmented within a certain
bounded time. Otherwise, the returned results may become
invalid or useless.
In the literature, a number of point cloud semantic segmentation methods [27, 22, 16] have been proposed, which
mainly focus on one single and static point cloud frame and
may generate inconsistent segmentation results when dealing with consecutive frames of point clouds. For instance,
as shown in Figure 1, when using SequeezeSegV2 [31], a

7118

