Dynamic Surface Function Networks for Clothed Human Bodies
Andrei Burov1
1

Technical University of Munich

Matthias Nießner1
2

Justus Thies1,2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Figure 1: We introduce dynamic surface function networks which are trained on a short RGB-D input video sequence of a
clothed human. Our continuous surface representation allows the modeling of clothes as well as the dynamic pose dependent
deformations. We parametrize this representation by the kinematic model of SMPL [28], which facilitates full pose control at
inference time (e.g., through joint rotations). Here, we show an animation sequence taken from the MOSH [29, 35] dataset.

Abstract
We present a novel method for temporal coherent reconstruction and tracking of clothed humans. Given a monocular RGB-D sequence, we learn a person-specific body
model which is based on a dynamic surface function network. To this end, we explicitly model the surface of the
person using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) which is embedded into the canonical space of the SMPL body model.
With classical forward rendering, the represented surface
can be rasterized using the topology of a template mesh.
For each surface point of the template mesh, the MLP is
evaluated to predict the actual surface location. To handle
pose-dependent deformations, the MLP is conditioned on
the SMPL pose parameters. We show that this surface representation as well as the pose parameters can be learned
in a self-supervised fashion using the principle of analysisby-synthesis and differentiable rasterization. As a result,
we are able to reconstruct a temporally coherent mesh sequence from the input data. The underlying surface representation can be used to synthesize new animations of
the reconstructed person including pose-dependent deformations.

1. Introduction
Digital capture of human bodies is a rapidly growing
research area in computer vision and computer graphics.
There are many high impact applications, in particular, in
the field of telepresencing and man-machine interaction that
rely on the reconstruction of the surface as well as the motion of a person. For instance, for telepresencing in virtual
reality (VR) or augmented reality (AR), the ultimate goal is
to photo-realistically re-render the people who want to interact with each other. A key challenge is to capture and reproduce the natural motions, including the dynamically changing surface (especially clothing). In our work, we present
a novel representation for the surface of a clothed human
called dynamic surface function networks which captures
pose-dependent surface deformations such as wrinkles of
the clothing. In contrast to recent works on implicit representations [11, 6, 23], our representation explicitly models
the surface of the human. Both representations have their
advantages and disadvantages. We use an explicit surface
representation to leverage fast forward rendering (exploiting the rasterization units of a GPU), and global surface
correspondences between different frames. Specifically, our
dynamic surface function network is attached to the surface
of the SMPL [28] body model which gives us access to the
10754

