SLAMP: Stochastic Latent Appearance and Motion Prediction
Adil Kaan Akan1
Erkut Erdem2
Aykut Erdem1
Fatma Güney1
1
Koç University Is Bank AI Center, Istanbul, Turkey
2
Hacettepe University Computer Vision Lab, Ankara, Turkey
{kakan20,aerdem,fguney}@ku.edu.tr

erkut@cs.hacettepe.edu.tr

https://kuis-ai.github.io/slamp

Abstract
Motion is an important cue for video prediction and often utilized by separating video content into static and dynamic components. Most of the previous work utilizing motion is deterministic but there are stochastic methods that
can model the inherent uncertainty of the future. Existing
stochastic models either do not reason about motion explicitly or make limiting assumptions about the static part. In
this paper, we reason about appearance and motion in the
video stochastically by predicting the future based on the
motion history. Explicit reasoning about motion without history already reaches the performance of current stochastic
models. The motion history further improves the results by
allowing to predict consistent dynamics several frames into
the future. Our model performs comparably to the stateof-the-art models on the generic video prediction datasets,
however, significantly outperforms them on two challenging real-world autonomous driving datasets with complex
motion and dynamic background.

1. Introduction
Videos contain visual information enriched by motion.
Motion is a useful cue for reasoning about human activities
or interactions between objects in a video. Given a few
initial frames of a video, our goal is to predict several frames
into the future, as realistically as possible. By looking at
a few frames, humans can predict what will happen next.
Surprisingly, they can even attribute semantic meanings to
random dots and recognize motion patterns [15]. This shows
the importance of motion to infer the dynamics of the video
and to predict the future frames.
Motion cues have been heavily utilized for future frame
prediction in computer vision. A common approach is to
factorize the video into static and dynamic components
[30, 20, 22, 6, 9, 21, 14, 28]. First, most of the previous
methods are deterministic and fail to model the uncertainty
of the future. Second, motion is typically interpreted as local

Figure 1: Comparison of the first prediction frames (11th)
SLAMP (left) vs. state-of-the-art method, SRVP [8] (right)
on KITTI [10] (top) and Cityscapes [3] (bottom) datasets.
Our method can predict both foreground and background
objects better than SRVP. Full sequence predictions can be
seen in Supplementary.
changes from one frame to the next. However, changes in
motion follow certain patterns when observed over some
time interval. Consider scenarios where objects move with
near-constant velocity, or humans repeating atomic actions
in videos. Regularities in motion can be very informative
for future frame prediction. In this work, we propose to
explicitly model the change in motion, or the motion history,
for predicting future frames.
Stochastic methods have been proposed to model the inherent uncertainty of the future in videos. Earlier methods
encode the dynamics of the video in stochastic latent variables which are decoded to future frames in a deterministic
way [4]. We first assume that both appearance and motion
are encoded in the stochastic latent variables and decode
them separately into appearance and motion predictions in
a deterministic way. Inspired by the previous deterministic
methods [7, 20, 9], we also estimate a mask relating the
two. Both appearance and motion decoders are expected to
predict the full frame but they might fail due to occlusions
around motion boundaries. Intuitively, we predict a probabilistic mask from the results of the appearance and motion
decoders to combine them into a more accurate final prediction. Our model learns to use motion cues in the dynamic
parts and relies on appearance in the occluded regions.
14728

