On Generating Transferable Targeted Perturbations
Muzammal Naseer⇤,† , Salman Khan† , Munawar Hayat§ , Fahad Shahbaz Khan†, , Fatih Porikli‡
⇤
Australian National University, Australia, § Monash University, Australia, ‡ Qualcomm, USA
†
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
Linköping University, Sweden
muzammal.naseer@anu.edu.au, {salman.khan,fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae, munawar.hayat@monash.edu.au

While the untargeted black-box transferability of adversarial perturbations has been extensively studied before,
changing an unseen model’s decisions to a specific ‘targeted’ class remains a challenging feat. In this paper,
we propose a new generative approach for highly transferable targeted perturbations (TTP). We note that the existing methods are less suitable for this task due to their
reliance on class-boundary information that changes from
one model to another, thus reducing transferability. In contrast, our approach matches the perturbed image ‘distribution’ with that of the target class, leading to high targeted transferability rates. To this end, we propose a new
objective function that not only aligns the global distributions of source and target images, but also matches the
local neighbourhood structure between the two domains.
Based on the proposed objective, we train a generator
function that can adaptively synthesize perturbations specific to a given input. Our generative approach is independent of the source or target domain labels, while
consistently performs well against state-of-the-art methods
on a wide range of attack settings. As an example, we
achieve 32.63% target transferability from (an adversarially weak) VGG19BN to (a strong) WideResNet on ImageNet val. set, which is 4⇥ higher than the previous best
generative attack and 16⇥ better than instance-specific iterative attack. Code is available at: https://github.
com/Muzammal-Naseer/TTP .

1. Introduction
We study the challenging problem of targeted transferability of adversarial perturbations. In this case, given an
input sample from any source category, the goal of the adversary is to change the decision of an unknown model to
a specific target class (e.g., misclassify any painting image to Fire truck, see Fig. 1). This task is significantly
more difficult than merely changing the decision to a ran-

Target
Domain
Source
Domain

Parachute

Abstract

Fire Truck

fatih.porikli@gmail.com

Natural Images

Q

OR

4
OR

<
Target

Paintings

Latent Space

Adversarial

Augmented
Adversarial

Maximize Distribution Agreement

Q : Augmenter

4 : Generator

< : Discriminator

Figure 1: Attack Overview (TTP): Instead of finding perturbations
specific to a class-boundary information learned by a model, TTP
seeks to match global distribution statistics between the source and
the target domains. Specifically, our generator function is trained
to maximize agreement between the perturbed source distribution,
its augmented version and the target distribution in the feature
space. Importantly, our attack can function in an unsupervised
fashion and does not require source domain to be the same as target (e.g., perturbations can be learned from paintings to transfer
on natural images).

dom target class or any similar class (e.g., changing ‘cat’
to ‘aeroplane’ is more difficult than altering the decision
to ‘dog’). Target transferability can therefore lead to goaldriven adversarial perturbations that provide desired control over the attacked model. However, target transferability remains challenging for the current adversarial attacks
[25, 23, 4, 43, 14, 13, 12, 20, 41] that transfer adversarial
noise in a black-box setting, where architecture and training
mechanism of the attacked model remain unknown, and the
attack is restricted within a certain perturbation budget.
We observe that modest performance of existing meth-

7708

