CAG-QIL: Context-Aware Actionness Grouping via Q Imitation Learning
for Online Temporal Action Localization

Hyolim Kang, Kyungmin Kim, Yumin Ko, Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University
{hyolimkang,kyungminkim,yuminko,seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Temporal action localization has been one of the most
popular tasks in video understanding, due to the importance
of detecting action instances in videos. However, not much
progress has been made on extending it to work in an online fashion, although many video related tasks can benefit
by going online with the growing video streaming services.
To this end, we introduce a new task called Online Temporal
Action Localization (On-TAL), in which the goal is to immediately detect action instances from an untrimmed streaming video. The online setting makes the new task very challenging as the actionness decision for every frame has to be
made without access to future frames and also because postprocessing methods cannot be used to modify past action
proposals. We propose a novel framework, Context-Aware
Actionness Grouping (CAG) as a solution for On-TAL and
train it with the imitation learning algorithm, which allows
us to avoid sophisticated reward engineering. Evaluation
of our work on THUMOS14 and Activitynet1.3 shows significant improvement over non-naive baselines, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach. As a by-product, our
method can also be used for the Online Detection of Action Start (ODAS), in which our method also outperforms
previous state-of-the-art models.

1. Introduction
Fueled by flourishing video platforms, video understanding tasks are drawing substantial attention in the computer vision research community. Among many video understanding tasks, Temporal Action Localization (TAL),
the task of extracting action instances from an untrimmed
video, has been one of the most popular topics. A plethora
of works have been done in TAL [32, 30, 5, 8, 44, 22, 43,
39, 41, 19, 1], implying the importance of action instances

Streaming video

…

…

34:15

34:17

34:19

34:21

34.23

time flow

Current input frame

Play-by-play text
Temporal location

Action instance
detected!

Action

…

…

34.17 ~ 34.23

Baseball Pitch

…

…

…

…

Figure 1. Example of play-by-play system applied on the video
from THUMOS14.

in video understanding
However, detecting action instances from streaming
videos has received no attention, even though more video
streaming services are being provided which require realtime and online approaches. In contrast, many online algorithms are being introduced in other video understanding tasks such as object detection and tracking [2, 36, 28],
video object segmentation [25], and video instance segmentation [40]. We argue that temporal action localization can
also benefit by going online, as it can provide valuable information for many practical real-world applications that involve online video understanding.
Popular sports websites provide a feature called live
play-by-play system that shows the progress of a sports
game in real-time. To be able to develop an AI-based playby-play system, the algorithm needs to detect both the start,
the end time and the class information of the occurring
action in an online manner. Previous temporal action localization methods cannot be used as they operate in an
offline fashion, requiring the whole video sequence to be
seen. Figure 1 shows an application of the online temporal

13729

