Removing Adversarial Noise in Class Activation Feature Space
Dawei Zhou1 , Nannan Wang1 ,* Chunlei Peng1 , Xinbo Gao2 , Xiaoyu Wang3 , Jun Yu4 , Tongliang Liu5
1
Xidian University, 2 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), 4 University of Science and Technology of China
5
The University of Sydney
dwzhou.xidian@gmail.com, {nnwang,clpeng}@xidian.edu.cn, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn
fanghuaxue@gmail.com, harryjun@ustc.edu.cn, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial noise. Pre-processing based defenses could largely
remove adversarial noise by processing inputs. However,
they are typically affected by the error amplification effect,
especially in the front of continuously evolving attacks. To
solve this problem, in this paper, we propose to remove adversarial noise by implementing a self-supervised adversarial training mechanism in a class activation feature space.
To be specific, we first maximize the disruptions to class
activation features of natural examples to craft adversarial examples. Then, we train a denoising model to minimize the distances between the adversarial examples and
the natural examples in the class activation feature space.
Empirical evaluations demonstrate that our method could
significantly enhance adversarial robustness in comparison
to previous state-of-the-art approaches, especially against
unseen adversarial attacks and adaptive attacks.

Natural
examples
airplane

horse

dog

dog

deer

frog

cat

bird

cat

PGD

FWA

AA
dog
cat
bird
Figure 1. A visual illustration of class activation maps of natural
examples and adversarial examples. The adversarial examples are
crafted by distinct types of non-targeted attacks, e.g., PGD [28],
FWA [39] and AA [6]. Although adversarial noise is imperceptible
in pixel level, there exists obvious discrepancies between the class
activation maps of natural examples and adversarial examples.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. Adversarial examples are maliciously crafted by adding imperceptible but adversarial
noise on natural examples [11, 35, 15, 23, 26, 38]. The
vulnerability of DNNs poses a potential threat to many
decision-critical deep learning applications, such as image
processing [21, 14, 47, 33, 17, 27] and natural language
processing [34]. Thus, it is important to find an effective
defense against adversarial noise.
Previous researches show that adversarial robustness of
target models could be enhanced by processing inputs with
certain transformations [12, 7, 29, 13, 23]. However, preprocessing based defenses may suffer from the error amplification effect, in which small residual adversarial noise
* Corresponding author

is amplified to a large perturbation in internal layers of the
target model and leads to misleading predictions [23]. Furthermore, these pre-processing based approaches are shown
to be less effective in front of unseen adversarial attacks
[39, 6, 45] as the adversarial perturbations of adversarial
examples they used may not be the maximum in internal
layers (see Section 4).
The class activation mapping technique [48] gives us an
inspiration to solve this problem. Given a classification network, the class activation mapping technique could identify the importance of image regions by projecting back the
class weights of the output layer on to the last convolutional
features and performing a linear sum of the weighted features [48]. We find that although adversarial noise is imperceptible in pixel level, there exists obvious discrepancies

7878

