Learning Action Completeness from Points
for Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization
Pilhyeon Lee1
1

Hyeran Byun1,2 *

Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University
2
Graduate school of AI, Yonsei University
{lph1114, hrbyun}@yonsei.ac.kr

Golf
Swing

Abstract

Golf
Swing

Action
Background
time

We tackle the problem of localizing temporal intervals of
actions with only a single frame label for each action instance for training. Owing to label sparsity, existing work
fails to learn action completeness, resulting in fragmentary
action predictions. In this paper, we propose a novel framework, where dense pseudo-labels are generated to provide
completeness guidance for the model. Concretely, we first
select pseudo background points to supplement point-level
action labels. Then, by taking the points as seeds, we search
for the optimal sequence that is likely to contain complete
action instances while agreeing with the seeds. To learn
completeness from the obtained sequence, we introduce two
novel losses that contrast action instances with background
ones in terms of action score and feature similarity, respectively. Experimental results demonstrate that our completeness guidance indeed helps the model to locate complete
action instances, leading to large performance gains especially under high IoU thresholds. Moreover, we demonstrate the superiority of our method over existing state-ofthe-art methods on four benchmarks: THUMOS’14, GTEA,
BEOID, and ActivityNet. Notably, our method even performs comparably to recent fully-supervised methods, at
the 6× cheaper annotation cost. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Pilhyeon.

1. Introduction
The goal of temporal action localization lies in locating
starting and ending timestamps of action instances and classifying them. Thanks to the various applications [33, 45,
48], it has drawn much attention from researchers, leading
to the rapid and remarkable progress in the fully-supervised
setting (i.e., frame-level labels) [27, 41, 43, 50]. Meanwhile,
there appear attempts to reduce the prohibitively expensive
cost of annotating individual frames by devising weaklysupervised models with video-level labels [7, 32, 46, 56].
* Corresponding author

Point-level labels
Model
Action scores

Input video

time

(for GolfSwing class)

Completeness guidance

Seeds

time

Search

time

Optimal sequence

Figure 1: Simplified illustration of our idea. We use points
as seeds to find the optimal sequence, which in turn provides
completeness guidance to the model.
However, they fall largely behind the fully-supervised counterparts, mainly on account of their weak ability to distinguish action and background frames [17, 18, 38, 52].
To narrow the performance gap between them, another
level of weak supervision has been proposed recently,
namely the point-supervised setting. In this setting, only a
single timestamp (point) with its action category is annotated for each action instance during training. In terms of
the labeling cost, point-level labels require a negligible extra
cost compared to video-level ones, while being 6× cheaper
than frame-level ones (50s vs. 300s per 1-min video) [31].
Despite the affordable cost, it offers coarse locations as
well as the total number of action instances, thus bringing a strong ability in spotting actions to the models. Consequently, point-supervised methods show comparable or
even superior performances to fully-supervised counterparts under low intersection over union (IoU) thresholds.
However, it has been revealed that they suffer from incomplete predictions, resulting in highly inferior performances
in the case of high IoU thresholds. We conjecture that this
problem is attributed to the sparse nature of point-level labels that induces the models to learn only a small part of actions rather than the full extent of action instances. In other
words, they fail to learn action completeness from the point
annotations. Although SF-Net [31] mines pseudo action and
background points to alleviate the label sparsity, they are
discontinuous and thus do not provide completeness cues.

13648

