Self-supervised Transfer Learning for Hand Mesh Recovery from Binocular
Images
Zheng Chen Sihan Wang Yi Sun* Xiaohong Ma
Dalian University of Technology, China
{czheng,sylbia w}@mail.dlut.edu.cn,{lslwf,maxh}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional methods for RGB hand mesh recovery usually need to train a separate model for each dataset with the
corresponding ground truth and are hardly adapted to new
scenarios without the ground truth for supervision. To address the problem, we propose a self-supervised framework
for hand mesh estimation, where we pre-learn hand priors
from existing hand datasets and transfer the priors to new
scenarios without any landmark annotations. The proposed
approach takes binocular images as input and mainly relies on left-right consistency constraints including appearance consensus and shape consistency to train the model to
estimate the hand mesh in new scenarios. We conduct experiments on the widely used stereo hand dataset, and the
experimental results verify that our model can get comparable performance compared with state-of-the-art methods
even without the corresponding landmark annotations. To
further evaluate our model, we collect a large real binocular dataset. The experimental results on the collected real
dataset also verify the effectiveness of our model qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Hand mesh recovery from RGB images has always been
an important research task in the field of computer vision. It
has a wide range of applications, such as virtual reality, human computer interaction, robotics and so on. With the development of deep learning [6, 8] and the existence of some
large hand datasets [19, 11], hand mesh recovery from RGB
images has made great progress. However, a challenge of
the hand mesh recovery is that many existing methods usually need a large labeled hand dataset [10, 5] for training. In
the case of insufficient annotations or even in the most extreme case without any landmark annotations in unseen real
scenarios, it is very difficult to obtain accurate hand mesh
prediction results. In this paper, we are specifically inter* Corresponding author.

ested in self-supervised hand mesh recovery to deal with
the extreme case without any landmark annotations in unseen real scenarios.
It is very challenging to tackle this self-supervised mesh
recovery task. Some previous methods generate synthetic
datasets [5] for estimating the hand mesh coordinates. But
the model trained on the synthetic hand dataset can hardly
be adapted to the real data due to the domain gap, which
limits their application in the real environment. Other methods more or less need landmark annotations for supervision. They propose several weakly-supervised methods and
use 2D hand joints and/or depth map to train their network [1, 17, 4]. Since these approaches heavily rely on
large-scale 2D pose annotations, they also have limited generalizability when applied to unseen images in new scenarios.
Unlike previous methods, our approach is based on the
insight in cognitive science that human baby can adapt to
a novel concept by correlating it with old concepts without receiving an explicit supervision. Therefore, we present
a novel self-supervised learning approach that transfer the
hand priors learned from past hand estimation tasks into
new scenarios and regresses the network parameters of hand
mesh prediction with no ground truth landmark available.
In order to preserve certain past experience and adapt to a
new unlabeled environment, our approach explores a form
of self-supervised objective which learns hand mesh from
easily accessible binocular images by left-right consistency
without ground truth landmark.
The most crucial objective in this paper is to move away
any kind of landmark supervision to improve generalizability in new scenarios. Since there are already some existing large labeled hand datasets [10, 5], our approach can
make better use of these datasets to obtain the initial mesh
estimate. For more accurate estimates in an unseen environment without any landmark annotations, we propose to
learn from previous experience and regress the hand mesh
vertices with binocular images by left-right consistency.
Both the appearance consensus and shape consistency of
self-supervised objectives are carefully designed. As will

11626

