LaLaLoc: Latent Layout Localisation in Dynamic, Unvisited Environments
Henry Howard-Jenkins
Active Vision Laboratory
University of Oxford
henryhj@robots.ox.ac.uk

Jose-Raul Ruiz-Sarmiento
Machine Perception and
Intelligent Robotics Group
University of Málaga

Victor Adrian Prisacariu
Active Vision Laboratory
University of Oxford
victor@robots.ox.ac.uk

jotaraul@uma.es

Abstract
We present LaLaLoc to localise in environments without the need for prior visitation, and in a manner that is
robust to large changes in scene appearance, such as a
full rearrangement of furniture. Specifically, LaLaLoc performs localisation through latent representations of room
layout. LaLaLoc learns a rich embedding space shared between RGB panoramas and layouts inferred from a known
floor plan that encodes the structural similarity between locations. Further, LaLaLoc introduces direct, cross-modal
pose optimisation in its latent space. Thus, LaLaLoc enables fine-grained pose estimation in a scene without the
need for prior visitation, as well as being robust to dynamics, such as a change in furniture configuration. We
show that in a domestic environment LaLaLoc is able to accurately localise a single RGB panorama image to within
8.3cm, given only a floor plan as a prior.

1. Introduction
Camera relocalisation is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Image-based relocalisation represents the goal
of estimating the camera pose of an unseen image, given
some prior knowledge about the surrounding environment.
In this paper, we tackle the task of localisation in an environment that has not been previously visited, and one in which
there may be considerable scene dynamics – an area where
significant scope for improvement has been identified [37].
To address this, we propose to localise with respect to
a known floor plan and the layout visible at a location
within the scene. Floor plan-based localisation is particularly suited for the long-term localisation setting as, while
objects and furniture may have moved, items represented
in a structural floor plan, such as walls, floors and ceilings,
will remain static. Therefore, it enables localisation over a
long period of time without requiring continual re-training
or re-mapping. In addition, in this formulation we only need
the floor plan as prior, thus removing the need for previous

visitation of the target environment, i.e. without a training
trajectory of images.
We present LaLaLoc, which performs floor plan-based
localisation through latent representations of room layout.
This layout latent space is cross-modal, shared between
layouts inferred from the floor plan and the RGB panoramas queried at inference time. More specifically LaLaLoc
performs localisation in two stages, depicted in Figure 1.
The first stage provides a coarse estimate of pose through
cross-modal retrieval. For the second stage, we propose a
cross-modal direct optimisation of pose through differentiable rendering.
Differentiable rendering has been shown to be effective
for object pose estimation [23, 12]. But these works typically rely on like-for-like rendering losses, such as the pixelwise error between the rendered and target images. However, since LaLaLoc operates across multiple modes of data
between query and prior, the prediction of a common data
mode would be required for the comparison losses. Instead,
we propose to optimise for pose directly in the layout latent space. Through this formulation, LaLaLoc is able to
accurately align the floor plan to a cluttered RGB panorama
without ever explicitly predicting its layout.
The contributions of this paper can be summarised as:
• We propose LaLaLoc, a highly accurate localisation
method that is robust to scene dynamics such as the
configuration of furniture, and able to localise in a new
scene without prior visitation.
• We introduce direct pose optimisation in the latent
space. This allows for cross-modal pose optimisation,
without the need for a decoder to traverse data modes
for the computation of the matching cost.
• Through experimental evaluation, we demonstrate the
accuracy of LaLaLoc as well as validate its formulation. This includes showing that the representation of
room layout has significant influence on the efficacy
of layout-based localisation and cannot be used interchangeably.

10107

