Superpoint Network for Point Cloud Oversegmentation
Le Hui, Jia Yuan, Mingmei Cheng, Jin Xie∗ , Xiaoya Zhang and Jian Yang∗
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{le.hui, yajha, chengmm, csjxie, zhangxiaoya, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Superpoints are formed by grouping similar points with
local geometric structures, which can effectively reduce
the number of primitives of point clouds for subsequent
point cloud processing. Existing superpoint methods mainly
focus on employing clustering or graph partition to generate superpoints with handcrafted or learned features.
Nonetheless, these methods cannot learn superpoints of
point clouds with an end-to-end network. In this paper, we
develop a new deep iterative clustering network to directly
generate superpoints from irregular 3D point clouds in
an end-to-end manner. Specifically, in our clustering
network, we first jointly learn a soft point-superpoint association map from the coordinate and feature spaces of
point clouds, where each point is assigned to the superpoint
with a learned weight. Furthermore, we then iteratively
update the association map and superpoint centers so
that we can more accurately group the points into the
corresponding superpoints with locally similar geometric
structures. Finally, by predicting the pseudo labels of the
superpoint centers, we formulate a label consistency loss
on the points and superpoint centers to train the network.
Extensive experiments on various datasets indicate that our
method not only achieves the state-of-the-art on superpoint
generation but also improves the performance of point
cloud semantic segmentation. Code is available at https:
//github.com/fpthink/SPNet.

1. Introduction
Superpoints are an oversegmentation of point clouds,
which can semantically group points of similar geometric
features. They can capture redundancy of point clouds
and greatly reduce the computational cost of subsequent
∗ Corresponding authors

Le Hui, Jia Yuan, Mingmei Cheng, Jin Xie, Xiaoya Zhang and Jian
Yang are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu
Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, China.

point cloud processing algorithms. Due to the representational and computational efficiency of superpoints, they
are becoming increasingly popular for use in point cloud
processing tasks such as 3D object modeling [4] and point
cloud semantic segmentation [26, 21]. Nonetheless, due
to the complex geometric structures of point clouds, how
to group geometrically similar points to form accurate
superpoints is still a challenging problem.
In the past few years, research efforts have been dedicated to superpoint generation of point clouds. Most of
superpoint generation methods rely on the hand-crafted
features of point clouds to group similar points by employing the clustering or graph partition methods. For
example, in the voxel cloud connectivity segmentation
(VCCS) method [33], the spatial connectivity and fast point
feature histograms (FPFHs) of point clouds are used as
the local features to cluster superpoints. Lin et al. [29]
proposed a subset selection method to generate superpoints,
where the FPFHs of point clouds are also used to characterize the local structures of point clouds. Guinard et
al. [14] extracted the local linearity, planarity, scattering and
verticality features of point clouds to generate superpoints
with a greedy graph-cut algorithm [24]. However, the
performance of these methods is limited by the handcrafted
features of point clouds. Lately, the supervised superpoint
(SSP) method [21] uses a deep network to obtain deep
embeddings of point clouds and combines them with a
graph-structured deep metric learning to oversegment point
clouds. Nonetheless, it still uses the optimization-based
method in [14] to generate superpoints. Therefore, SSP is
not an end-to-end superpoint generation method. Recently,
in [18], the differentiable SLIC superpixel method on 2D
images is proposed for end-to-end training by constructing
a soft association map. We build upon the idea for end-toend superpoint generation on 3D point clouds, which can
be integrated into other trainable deep neural networks for
point cloud processing tasks.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective end-toend framework to generate superpoints on 3D point clouds.
In our framework, we develop a deep iterative clustering
network to learn the association map between the points

5510

