Learning Generative Models of Textured 3D Meshes from Real-World Images
Dario Pavllo

Jonas Kohler

Thomas Hofmann

Aurelien Lucchi

Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich

Latent dimension for "light intensity"

Figure 1. Left: we focus on GANs, where our generator outputs a triangle mesh and a UV-mapped texture. Middle: our method learns
to synthesize textured 3D meshes given a real-world collection of 2D images. Top-right: we showcase a setting where we train a single
model to generate all classes. This model successfully disentangles some factors of the 3D environment (e.g. lighting/shadows) without
explicit supervision. Bottom-right: we also demonstrate a conditional model that generates meshes from 3D semantic layouts.

Abstract
Recent advances in differentiable rendering have
sparked an interest in learning generative models of textured 3D meshes from image collections. These models
natively disentangle pose and appearance, enable downstream applications in computer graphics, and improve the
ability of generative models to understand the concept of
image formation. Although there has been prior work on
learning such models from collections of 2D images, these
approaches require a delicate pose estimation step that exploits annotated keypoints, thereby restricting their applicability to a few specific datasets. In this work, we propose
a GAN framework for generating textured triangle meshes
without relying on such annotations. We show that the performance of our approach is on par with prior work that
relies on ground-truth keypoints, and more importantly, we
demonstrate the generality of our method by setting new
baselines on a larger set of categories from ImageNet –
for which keypoints are not available – without any classspecific hyperparameter tuning. We release our code at
https://github.com/dariopavllo/textured-3d-gan

1. Introduction
Most of the recent literature in the field of generative
models focuses on 2D image generation [36, 54, 22, 3, 23],
which largely ignores the fact that real-world images depict
2D projections of 3D objects. Constructing 3D generative
models presents multiple advantages, including a fully disentangled control over shape, appearance, pose, as well as
an explicit representation of spatial phenomena such as occlusions. While the controllability aspect of 2D generative
models can be improved to some extent by disentangling
factors of variation during the generation process [53, 40,
21, 22], the assumptions made by these approaches have
been shown to be unrealistic without an inductive bias [33].
It is thus unclear whether 2D architectures can reach the
same degree of controllability as a native 3D representation.
As a result, a growing line of research investigates learning textured 3D mesh generators in both GAN [39, 4] and
variational settings [15]. These approaches are trained with
2D supervision from a collection of 2D images, but require
camera poses to be known in advance as learning a joint distribution over shapes, textures, and cameras is particularly
difficult. Usually, the required camera poses are estimated
from keypoint annotations using a factorization algorithm

13879

