Uniformity in Heterogeneity:
Diving Deep into Count Interval Partition for Crowd Counting
Changan Wang1∗ Qingyu Song1∗ Boshen Zhang1 Yabiao Wang1
Ying Tai1 Xuyi Hu1,3 Chengjie Wang1† Jilin Li1 Jiayi Ma4 Yang Wu2
1
Tencent Youtu Lab, 2 Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG
3
Department of Electronic & Electrical Engineering, University College London, United Kingdom
4
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{changanwang, boshenzhang, caseywang, yingtai, jasoncjwang, jerolinli}@tencent.com,
qingyusong@zju.edu.cn, zceexhu@ucl.ac.uk, jyma2010@gmail.com, dylanywu@tencent.com

Count Values Increase

Abstract
……

……

Recently, the problem of inaccurate learning targets in
𝑐𝑐𝑚𝑚−1 crowd counting draws increasing attention. Inspired by a
𝑡𝑡𝑚𝑚−2
𝑡𝑡few
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 pioneering work, we solve this problem by trying to
predict the indices of pre-defined interval bins of counts in< 𝑡𝑡𝑚𝑚−2 𝑐𝑐
𝑐𝑐
stead of the count values themselves. However, an inappro𝑐𝑐
𝑐𝑐
priate interval setting might make the count error contribu< 𝑡𝑡1
tions from different intervals extremely imbalanced, leading to inferior counting performance. Therefore, we propose
novel count interval partition criterion called Uniclassamap
form Error Partition (UEP), which always keeps the execode
𝑐𝑐1 pected counting error contributions equal for all intervals
Predictedto minimize the prediction risk. Then to mitigate the inClass
evitably introduced discretization errors in the count quantization process, we propose another criterion called Mean
Count Prediction
Count Proxies (MCP). The MCP criterion selects the best
count proxy for each interval to represent its count value
during inference, making the overall expected discretization error of an image nearly negligible. As far as we are
aware, this work is the first to delve into such a classification task and ends up with a promising solution for count
interval partition. Following the above two theoretically
demonstrated criterions, we propose a simple yet effective model termed Uniform Error Partition Network (UEPNet), which achieves state-of-the-art performance on several challenging datasets. The codes will be available at:
TencentYoutuResearch/CrowdCounting-UEPNet.
𝑚𝑚−2
1

0

𝑐𝑐0

𝑡𝑡0

𝑐𝑐1

sum

𝑚𝑚−1

The task of crowd counting estimates the number of people in given images or videos. It has drawn remarkable at∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

3.27 3.91
2.15 2.91

3

1. Introduction

……

density map

𝑡𝑡0

𝑐𝑐1

𝛿𝛿1

𝑡𝑡1

Target Generation

……

𝑐𝑐2 , … , 𝑐𝑐𝑚𝑚−3 𝑐𝑐𝑚𝑚−2
𝑐𝑐𝑚𝑚−1
𝑡𝑡𝑚𝑚−3
𝑡𝑡𝑚𝑚−2
𝑡𝑡𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
𝑡𝑡1
𝑡𝑡𝑚𝑚−3 ≤ 3.27 < 𝑡𝑡𝑚𝑚−2
𝑡𝑡0 ≤ 2.15 < 𝑡𝑡1

Count Encode

𝛿𝛿1

Decoded
Count

𝑐𝑐𝑚𝑚−2 𝑐𝑐𝑚𝑚−1
𝑐𝑐1

𝑐𝑐3

class map

Count Decode

𝑐𝑐1

Predicted
Class

Count Prediction

Figure 1: The illustration of our counting pipeline. For
image patches with count values between ti and ti+1 , our
UEPNet learns to classify them into one (i.e., ci+1 ) of the m
intervals. The count interval borders (t0 , ..., tm−2 ) are determined by the proposed UEP criterion to ensure the minimum expected prediction error. We assign the ground truth
class of a patch by the count interval it falling into. During
inference, for a patch classified to the interval class of ci ,
we set its predicted count to be the count proxy value σi of
ci . And the count proxy is a specific value selected from
that interval with our proposed MCP criterion.
tention in recent years, since its wide range of practical applications in public safety. Currently, most existing state-ofthe-art methods adopt density maps [1, 18, 19] as the targets
and learn with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).
However, the widely used learning targets, i.e., the density maps, are actually inaccurate and tend to be noisy, as
discussed in [1, 12, 17, 20, 23]. These imperfect density
maps are caused by several factors, such as empirically selected Gaussian kernels, large density variations and label-

3234

