SeLFVi: Self-supervised Light-Field Video Reconstruction from Stereo Video
Prasan Shedligeri1†
Florian Schiffers2
Sushobhan Ghosh2
Oliver Cossairt2
Kaushik Mitra1
IIT Madras, India

Northwestern University, USA

ee16d409@ee.iitm.ac.in

Input Stereo Sequence
(shown as Red-Cyan anaglyph)

1. Introduction
Photography and videography has become ubiquitous in
our modern lives due to the availability of simple-to-use
imaging hardware. With steadily increasing image quality,
consumers long for intuitive and simple processing for postcapture finetuning of their images. LF imaging has emerged
as a promising imaging technique to overcome the limitations of conventional photography such as post-capture focus control, novel view synthesis, and post-capture depthof-field control. With video acquisition surging in popu-

Refocused Videos

Near focus

Far focus

Frame T+20

Light-field imaging is appealing to the mobile devices
market because of its capability for intuitive post-capture
processing. Acquiring light field (LF) data with high angular, spatial and temporal resolution poses significant challenges, especially with space constraints preventing bulky
optics. At the same time, stereo video capture, now available on many consumer devices, can be interpreted as a
sparse LF-capture. We explore the application of small
baseline stereo videos for reconstructing high fidelity LF
videos.
We propose a self-supervised learning-based algorithm
for LF video reconstruction from stereo video. The selfsupervised LF video reconstruction is guided via the geometric information from the individual stereo pairs and the
temporal information from the video sequence. LF estimation is further regularized by a low-rank constraint based
on layered LF displays. The proposed self-supervised algorithm facilitates advantages such as post-training finetuning on test sequences and variable angular view interpolation and extrapolation. Quantitatively the reconstructed
LF videos show higher fidelity than previously proposed unsupervised approaches.We demonstrate our results via LF
videos generated from publicly available stereo videos acquired from commercially available stereoscopic cameras.
Finally, we demonstrate that our reconstructed LF videos
allow applications such as post-capture focus control and
region-of-interest (RoI) based focus tracking for videos.

Corner views of the
predicted LF video

Frame T

Abstract

Frame T+10

†

2

Frame T+5

1

Self-supervised light field (LF) video reconstruction from stereo video
and application to synthetic defocus effects and post-capture focus control
Original baseline Extended baseline

Self-supervised novel LF view
prediction beyond input baseline

Ours

Ours (Finetuned)

Disparity

Disparity

Cropped
LF

Cropped
LF

Self-supervised finetuning of model
for novel test sequences

Figure 1: We propose a self-supervised algorithm for LF video
reconstruction from a stereo video, enabling applications such as
post-capture focus control for videos. Our proposed algorithm allows for post-training fine-tuning on test sequences and variable
angular view interpolation as well as extrapolation.

larity, LF video capture could enable simple post-capture
focus control for videos acquired on consumer devices.
However, acquiring LF video data at useful frame-rates remains challenging. For example, commercial LF cameras
such as Lytro acquire LF videos at only 3 frames per second (fps) [45]. This is mainly because of the trade-off between angular, spatial, and temporal resolution. Modern
cameras easily capture videos at 720p resolution at a reasonable frame-rate of 30 fps. Ignoring the challenges of
complex LF sensor, capturing a LF video at reasonable angular resolution of 7 × 7 requires a staggering ~50× more
bandwidth. This is equivalent to capturing a 50MP video
at 30 fps, something that is currently unimaginable for consumer devices.

2491

