Square Root Marginalization for Sliding-Window Bundle Adjustment
Nikolaus Demmel

David Schubert Christiane Sommer Daniel Cremers
Technical University of Munich

Vladyslav Usenko

{nikolaus.demmel,d.schubert,c.sommer,cremers,vlad.usenko}@tum.de

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel square root slidingwindow bundle adjustment suitable for real-time odometry
applications. The square root formulation pervades three
major aspects of our optimization-based sliding-window
estimator: for bundle adjustment we eliminate landmark
variables with nullspace projection; to store the marginalization prior we employ a matrix square root of the Hessian; and when marginalizing old poses we avoid forming normal equations and update the square root prior directly with a specialized QR decomposition. We show that
the proposed square root marginalization is algebraically
equivalent to the conventional use of Schur complement
(SC) on the Hessian. Moreover, it elegantly deals with
rank-deficient Jacobians producing a prior equivalent to
SC with Moore–Penrose inverse. Our evaluation of visual
and visual-inertial odometry on real-world datasets demonstrates that the proposed estimator is 36% faster than the
baseline. It furthermore shows that in single precision, conventional Hessian-based marginalization leads to numeric
failures and reduced accuracy. We analyse numeric properties of the marginalization prior to explain why our square
root form does not suffer from the same effect and therefore
entails superior performance.

ground truth
VIO-32 (ours)
VIO-32
min

104
10 4
0
10 4
104

VIO-64 (ours)
VIO-32 (ours)
VIO-64
VIO-32
0

1000

2000

3000

Figure 1. Top: estimated visual-inertial odometry trajectories on
the eurocMH01 sequence. The conventional baseline VIO-64
works well with double-precision floats, but fails in single precision
(VIO-32). In contrast, the proposed square root estimator
√
VIO-32 even in single precision retains the same accuracy. It
processes the whole sequence in 26 s on a desktop CPU (7.1x
faster than real time). Bottom: smallest eigenvalue σmin of the
marginalization prior Hessian Hm evolving over time (linear y−8
axis for |σmin | < 10 , logarithmic elsewhere). We expect values
close to zero (positive semi-definite Hessian with gauge freedom).
While the conventional (squared) formulation in single precision
leads to negative eigenvalues with large magnitude, accumulating
error, and (ultimately) numerical failure, the proposed square root
approach has σmin of bounded magnitude and remains stable.

1. Introduction
Visual odometry has been a key component in environment mapping, robot navigation and autonomous systems
for a long time. With low-cost devices, such as smartphones
or robot vacuum cleaners becoming increasingly prevalent
in our daily lives, we see a growing need to solve odometry
problems in a fast and robust manner. In addition, scalable
solutions on specialized hardware require algorithms to run
with limited floating point precision.
To keep the system size bounded with a fixed number
This work was supported by the ERC Advanced Grant SIMULACRON and by the German Science Foundation Grant CR 250/20-1
“Splitting Methods for 3D Reconstruction and SLAM”.

of state variables over time, marginalization is a commonly
used technique, where the remaining sub-problem can be
interpreted in terms of a marginal distribution with the same
solution as before. However, for the implementation of
the marginalization prior as well as the solution of the associated optimization problem, there are multiple options.
The Schur complement technique is an easy-to-implement
choice that many state-of-the-art odometry and SLAM systems employ, but it relies on the Hessian matrix of the linearized system. While this is not a problem in many applications, the fact that the square of the Jacobian and thus
a squared condition number are involved in SC may lead

13260

