MonoIndoor: Towards Good Practice of Self-Supervised
Monocular Depth Estimation for Indoor Environments

1

Pan Ji*1 , Runze Li*1,2 , Bir Bhanu2 , Yi Xu1
OPPO US Research Center, InnoPeak Technology, Inc. 2 University of California Riverside

Abstract
Self-supervised depth estimation for indoor environments is more challenging than its outdoor counterpart in
at least the following two aspects: (i) the depth range of indoor sequences varies a lot across different frames, making
it difficult for the depth network to induce consistent depth
cues, whereas the maximum distance in outdoor scenes
mostly stays the same as the camera usually sees the sky;
(ii) the indoor sequences contain much more rotational motions, which cause difficulties for the pose network, while
the motions of outdoor sequences are pre-dominantly translational, especially for driving datasets such as KITTI. In
this paper, special considerations are given to those challenges and a set of good practices are consolidated for
improving the performance of self-supervised monocular
depth estimation in indoor environments. The proposed
method mainly consists of two novel modules, i.e., a depth
factorization module and a residual pose estimation module, each of which is designed to respectively tackle the
aforementioned challenges. The effectiveness of each module is shown through a carefully conducted ablation study
and the demonstration of the state-of-the-art performance
on three indoor datasets, i.e., EuRoC, NYUv2 and 7-Scenes.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation plays an essential role in a variety of
3D perceptual tasks, such as autonomous driving, virtual
reality (VR), and augmented reality (AR). In this paper, we
tackle the problem of estimating the depth map from a single image in a self-supervised manner. Compared to the supervised methods [5, 8], self-supervision [9, 46, 12] frees us
from having to capture the ground-truth depth using depth
sensors (e.g., LiDAR) and therefore, it is more attractive in
scenarios where obtaining the ground-truth is not possible.
* Joint first authorship.
P. Ji is the corresponding author (peterji530@gmail.com). R. Li’s contribution was made during an internship
with OPPO US Research Center.

Recently, self-supervised methods [12] have achieved
significant success, producing depth prediction that is comparable to that produced by the supervised methods [14, 8].
For example, on the KITTI dataset [10], Monodepth2 [12]
achieves an absolute relative depth error (AbsRel) of 10.6%,
which is not far from the AbsRel of 7.2% by supervised
DORN [8]. However, most of these self-supervised depth
prediction methods [9, 46, 12] are only evaluated on outdoor
datasets such as KITTI, leaving their performance opaque
for indoor environments. A few methods [45, 44] have considered indoor self-supervised depth prediction, but their
performance still trail far behind the one on the outdoor
datasets by methods such as [9, 46, 12] or the supervised
counterparts [8, 41] on indoor datasets. For instance, on the
indoor NYUv2 dataset [33], the method by Zhao et al. [44]
reaches an AbsRel of 18.9%, which is much higher than
what Monodepth2 can achieve on KITTI.
In view of the performance discrepancies between the
indoor and outdoor scenes, we examine what makes indoor depth prediction more challenging than the outdoor
case. Our first conjecture is that this is partly due to the
fact that the scene depth range of indoor sequences varies
a lot more than in the outdoor. This results in more difficulties for the depth network in inducing consistent depth
cues across images. Our second observation is that the pose
network, which is commonly used in self-supervised methods [46, 12], tends to have large errors in rotation prediction. A similar finding in [47] shows that predicted poses
have much higher rotational errors (e.g., 10 times larger)
than geometric SLAM [26] even after using a recurrent
pose network. This problem is not prominent on KITTI
because the motions therein are mostly translational. However, since indoor datasets are often captured by hand-held
cameras [33] or MAVs [31] which inevitably undergo frequent rotations, the inaccurate rotation prediction becomes
detrimental to the self-supervised training of a depth model
for indoor environments.
Given the above considerations, we propose MonoIndoor, a monocular self-supervised depth estimation method
tailored for indoor environments. Our MonoIndoor consists
of two novel modules: a depth factorization module and a

12787

