UVStyle-Net: Unsupervised Few-shot Learning of 3D Style Similarity Measure
for B-Reps
Peter Meltzer1,3 , Hooman Shayani1,3 , Amir Khasahmadi1 , Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman2 , Aditya Sanghi1 ,
and Joseph Lambourne1
1

Autodesk AI Lab, 2 Autodesk Research, 3 UCL

Abstract
Boundary Representations (B-Reps) are the industry
standard in 3D Computer Aided Design/Manufacturing
(CAD/CAM) and industrial design due to their fidelity in
representing stylistic details. However, they have been ignored in the 3D style research. Existing 3D style metrics
typically operate on meshes or point clouds, and fail to account for end-user subjectivity by adopting fixed definitions
of style, either through crowd-sourcing for style labels or
hand-crafted features. We propose UVStyle-Net, a style similarity measure for B-Reps that leverages the style signals in
the second order statistics of the activations in a pre-trained
(unsupervised) 3D encoder, and learns their relative importance to a subjective end-user through few-shot learning.
Our approach differs from all existing data-driven 3D style
methods since it may be used in completely unsupervised
settings, which is desirable given the lack of publicly available labeled B-Rep datasets. More importantly, the fewshot learning accounts for the inherent subjectivity associated with style. We show quantitatively that our proposed

Style Signals

1. Introduction
B-Reps are the de facto standard for industrial design,
and the representation most widely used in the consumer
product and automotive industries where style is of great
importance. B-Reps offer unparalleled editability in a compact, memory efficient representation, they are not discrete/sampled (as per mesh/point cloud) offering precise
boundaries with continuous smooth surfaces/edge curves.

Query Nearest Neighbours

...

Content Embedding

(a)

INorm

...

Pre-trained
B-Rep Encoder
(Unsupervised)

method with B-Reps is able to capture stronger style signals
than alternative methods on meshes and point clouds despite its significantly greater computational efficiency. We
also show it is able to generate meaningful style gradients
with respect to the input shape, and that few-shot learning
with as few as two positive examples selected by an enduser is sufficient to significantly improve the style measure.
Finally, we demonstrate its efficacy on a large unlabeled
public dataset of CAD models. Source code and data are
available at github.com/AutodeskAILab/UVStyle-Net.

Re-Center

triu

End user selects positive and/or negative examples for few-shot user defined style metric learning

(b)
B-Rep Input

Figure 1: Overview of UV-StyleNet: Grams of activations are normalized and extracted for each layer. The weights applied to each layer
define the meaning of style. (a) Top-10 query results using uniform layer weights w (b) Top-10 query results using w? based on the
user-selected examples (positive in green, negative in red). In this example, w? ≈ [0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0]> . Zoom to see fillets/stylistic details.

9690

