PIRenderer: Controllable Portrait Image Generation via Semantic Neural
Rendering
Yurui Ren1 Ge Li 1 Yuanqi Chen1 Thomas H. Li2,1 Shan Liu3
School of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University 3 Tencent America
1

{yrren,geli,cyq373}@pku.edu.cn

tli@aiit.org.cn

Abstract
Generating portrait images by controlling the motions
of existing faces is an important task of great consequence
to social media industries. For easy use and intuitive control, semantically meaningful and fully disentangled parameters should be used as modifications. However, many
existing techniques do not provide such fine-grained controls or use indirect editing methods i.e. mimic motions of
other individuals. In this paper, a Portrait Image Neural
Renderer (PIRenderer) is proposed to control the face motions with the parameters of three-dimensional morphable
face models (3DMMs). The proposed model can generate
photo-realistic portrait images with accurate movements
according to intuitive modifications. Experiments on both
direct and indirect editing tasks demonstrate the superiority of this model. Meanwhile, we further extend this model
to tackle the audio-driven facial reenactment task by extracting sequential motions from audio inputs. We show
that our model can generate coherent videos with convincing movements from only a single reference image and a
driving audio stream. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/RenYurui/PIRender.

1. Introduction
Portrait images are one of the most important photographic depictions that are widely used in daily life. Being able to edit portrait images by intuitively controlling the
poses and expressions of given faces (see Fig. 1) is an important task with a large variety of applications in the fields
of virtual reality, film production, and next-generation communication. However, enabling such editing is extremely
challenging since it requires the algorithm to perceive reliable 3D geometric shapes of given faces. Meanwhile, the
acuteness of the human visual system towards portrait images requires the algorithm to generate photo-realistic faces
and backgrounds, which makes the task even harder.

shanl@tencent.com

Target
Motion
Source
Image

Target
Image
Source
Image

Target
Source Audio
Image

Figure 1. Example results produced by our PIRenderer. This
model can generate photo-realistic portrait images according to the
user-specified motions (top), motions of another individual (middle), and motions generated from audios (bottom).

Recently, advances in Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [14] have made tremendous progress in synthesizing realistic faces [5, 22, 9]. Some methods [3, 42]
driven from GANs tackle this task with image translation
techniques, where the goal is to train a model such that
the conditional distribution of the generated images given
input instructions (e.g. edges) resembles that of real images. Some follow-up algorithms achieve better generalization by proposing efficient deformation modules [45, 49,
30, 8, 28, 31] or injecting source neural textures to targets [41, 6]. However, the vast majority of existing methods
use indirect and subject-specific motion descriptors such
as edges [42, 41, 28], semantic segmentation [8], or key-

13759

