Localize to Binauralize: Audio Spatialization from Visual Sound Source
Localization
Kranthi Kumar Rachavarapu
Aakanksha
Vignesh Sundaresha
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India

Rajagopalan A. N.

{kranthi.rachavarapu, aakankshajha30, vigneshsundaresh}@gmail.com

raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Videos with binaural audios provide immersive viewing
experience by enabling 3D sound sensation. Recent works
attempt to generate binaural audio in a multimodal learning
framework using large quantities of videos with accompanying binaural audio. In contrast, we attempt a more challenging problem – synthesizing binaural audios for a video
with monaural audio in a weakly semi-supervised setting.
Our key idea is that any down-stream task that can be solved
only using binaural audios can be used to provide proxy
supervision for binaural audio generation, thereby reducing the reliance on explicit supervision. In this work, as a
proxy-task for weak supervision, we use Sound Source Localization with only audio. We design a two-stage architecture called Localize-to-Binauralize Network (L2BNet). The
first stage of L2BNet is a Stereo Generation (SG) network
employed to generate two-stream audio from monaural audio using visual frame information as guidance. In the second stage, an Audio Localization (AL) network is designed
to use the synthesized two-stream audio to localize sound
sources in visual frames. The entire network is trained endto-end so that the AL network provides necessary supervision for the SG network. We experimentally show that our
weakly-supervised framework generates two-stream audio
containing binaural cues. Through user study, we further
validate that our proposed approach generates binauralquality audio using as little as 10% of explicit binaural supervision data for the SG network.

1. Introduction
The perception of movement is primarily guided by rich
visual cues in animals. This can be attributed to its evolutionary advantages over other modalities like sound. However, audio contains localization information that can be exploited, albeit not as richly as the visual modality. For example, consider a situation where you are talking to a friend
on the sidewalk. The road is busy. Even if you are not fac-

xR(t)

xL(t)

xR(t)

xL(t)

L2BNet

xmono(t)

Localization Map

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Binaural cues enable us to localize different instruments in live musical performances even with our eyes closed. (b)
We use saliency maps to model localization information and use it
to convert monaural audio to binaural audio.

ing the road, you are aware of vehicles zooming past. If
you listen carefully, you can also figure out the direction of
movement. Fig. 1(a) illustrates a similar phenomenon for
live musical performances.
According to [18], there are two major factors that allow us to spatialize using just the sounds we hear, namely,
Interaural Time Difference (ITD) and Interaural Level Difference(ILD). ITD is the time difference between the same
sound reaching each ear, and ILD is the amplitude difference between them. In the commonly used recording setups, a monoaural track is recorded using a single microphone. It aggregates sound signals from various sources and
consequently loses such difference information. Binaural
recordings use two microphones embedded inside a dummy
head-model with realistic ear pinna to model closely the
sound that would have fallen on a person’s eardrums had
they been present on site and preserves the localization information.
Despite being introduced many years ago, binaural audio
recordings are relatively scarce, especially for videos. This
can be attributed primarily to the fact that special equipment with multiple microphones is required for recording

1930

