A Unified 3D Human Motion Synthesis Model via Conditional Variational
Auto-Encoder ∗
Yujun Cai1 , Yiwei Wang2 , Yiheng Zhu6 , Tat-Jen Cham1 , Jianfei Cai3 , Junsong Yuan5 , Jun Liu7 , Chuanxia Zheng1 ,
Sijie Yan8 , Henghui Ding1 , Xiaohui Shen6 , Ding Liu6 , Nadia Magnenat Thalmann4
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
{yujun001,ding0093,chuanxia001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, astjcham@ntu.edu.sg
2
National University of Singapore wangyw seu@foxmail.com
3
Monash University, Australia jianfei.cai@monash.edu, 4 University of Geneva Thalmann@miralab.ch
5
State University of New York at Buffalo University, Buffalo, NY, USA jsyuang@buffalo.edu
6
ByteDance Research {yiheng.zhu,shenxiaohui,liuding}@bytedance.com
7
SUTD, Singapore jun liu@sutd.edu.sg, 8 The Chinese University of Hong Kong yysijie@gmail.com

Abstract
We present a unified and flexible framework to address
the generalized problem of 3D motion synthesis that covers the tasks of motion prediction, completion, interpolation, and spatial-temporal recovery. Since these tasks have
different input constraints and various fidelity and diversity
requirements, most existing approaches only cater to a specific task or use different architectures to address various
tasks. Here we propose a unified framework based on Conditional Variational Auto-Encoder (CVAE), where we treat
any arbitrary input as a masked motion series. Notably, by
considering this problem as a conditional generation process, we estimate a parametric distribution of the missing
regions based on the input conditions, from which to sample
and synthesize the full motion series. To further allow the
flexibility of manipulating the motion style of the generated
series, we design an Action-Adaptive Modulation (AAM) to
propagate the given semantic guidance through the whole
sequence. We also introduce a cross-attention mechanism
to exploit distant relations among decoder and encoder features for better realism and global consistency. We conducted extensive experiments on Human 3.6M and CMUMocap. The results show that our method produces coherent and realistic results for various motion synthesis tasks,
∗ This research is supported by Institute for Media Innovation, Nanyang
Technological University (IMI-NTU) and the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its International Research Centres in Singapore
Funding Initiative. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of National Research Foundation, Singapore. This research
is also supported in part by Monash FIT Start-up Grant and SenseTime
Gift Fund, National Science Foundation Grant CNS1951952 and SUTD
project PIE-SGP-Al-2020-02.

with the synthesized motions distinctly adapted by the given
action labels.

1. Introduction
Generating realistic and plausible human body animation with specified actions has been a widely explored but
challenging task in computer vision and graphics [29, 4]. To
synthesize smooth and natural motions, traditional methods
[30, 32] rely on the availability of complex pose specifications, which are time-consuming and expensive to obtain.
Recent deep learning approaches [5, 60, 56, 55, 17, 20,
61, 58] have investigated generating plausible human motions. However, since different motion synthesis tasks have
different goals and expectations (as seen in Figure 1), many
approaches are either restricted to one type of motion synthesis task or use different methods to address the various tasks. For example, much work [6, 14, 37, 63] is focused on the motion prediction task, typically adopting recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures to predict future frames sequentially, with new ones dependent only on
previously generated frames. Although performing well in
motion prediction, these approaches are not directly suited
for generalizing to other motion synthesis tasks such as motion completion, interpolation, and spatial-temporal recovery, as shown in Figure 1, for which both forward and backward dependencies should be exploited. Moreover, many
methods [5, 60, 56] are focused on minimizing the reconstruction error between the ground truth and generated motion sequences, while less considering motion diversity and
human-likeness, which are also significant for realistic generation. Furthermore, in precise motion animation, it is

11645

