PR-RRN: Pairwise-Regularized Residual-Recursive Networks for
Non-rigid Structure-from-Motion
Haitian Zeng1 , Yuchao Dai2 , Xin Yu3 , Xiaohan Wang1,3 , Yi Yang4 *
Baidu Research1 , Northwestern Polytechnical University2 ,
University of Technology Sydney3 , Zhejiang University4
zenghaitian@baidu.com; daiyuchao@gmail.com; xin.yu@uts.edu.au;
xiaohan.wang-3@student.uts.edu.au; yee.i.yang@gmail.com

Abstract

Latent
Space

We propose PR-RRN, a novel neural-network based
method for Non-rigid Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM). PRRRN consists of Residual-Recursive Networks (RRN) and
two extra regularization losses. RRN is designed to effectively recover 3D shape and camera from 2D keypoints with
novel residual-recursive structure. As NRSfM is a highly
under-constrained problem, we propose two new pairwise
regularization to further regularize the reconstruction. The
Rigidity-based Pairwise Contrastive Loss regularizes the
shape representation by encouraging higher similarity between the representations of high-rigidity pairs of frames
than low-rigidity pairs. We propose minimum singularvalue ratio to measure the pairwise rigidity. The Pairwise
Consistency Loss enforces the reconstruction to be consistent when the estimated shapes and cameras are exchanged
between pairs. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on CMU MOCAP and PASCAL3D+ dataset.

Push
Pull

Contrastive
Regularization

* Corresponding author.

(a)

Latent Representation

(b)

Estimated
Shapes &
Cameras

Mapping Function
New views of
Estimated Shapes

ℱ, #

Shapes &
Cameras from
New Views

ℱ, #

ℱ, #

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of 3D object shapes and camera motions from 2D observations is an important problem in computer vision. When the object is rigid, this problem is defined as rigid Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and it can be
solved reliably using existing methods like [40]. Non-Rigid
Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM) relaxes the assumption of
a rigid object in SfM to a deforming one, leading to a more
general and challenging problem.
NRSfM is known to be an under-constrained problem if
the shape is allowed to deform arbitrarily in each observation. To make this problem tractable, a standard assumption
is that in each frame the 3D shape is a linear combination
of a small number of basis shapes [4]. With this assumption, NRSfM is formulated as factorizing the stacked ob-

Push

Swap
Cameras &
Reproject

ℱ, #

Consistent Regularization

Figure 1. Illustration of pairwise losses. (a) Proposed pairwise
contrastive regularization ‘pushes’ or ‘pulls’ the representations
based on pairwise rigidity (similarity) of 2D shapes. (b) Consistent
regularization forces the networks to produce consistent shape and
camera estimation given new views of estimated shapes.

servation matrix into three component matrices: cameras,
coefficients and basis. Previous researches exploit various
constraints to solve this factorization problem, involving
orthogonal constraint on the camera matrix [11, 47], restricting the basis to 3D shapes [46]. Different from those
constraints on cameras or basis, another important category
of approaches applied constraints to the coefficient matrix,
including smooth trajectories over time in original coeffi-

5600

