Triggering Failures: Out-Of-Distribution detection by learning from local
adversarial attacks in Semantic Segmentation
Victor Besnier1,3,4
Andrei Bursuc2
David Picard3
Alexandre Briot1
1. Valeo, Créteil, France
2. Valeo.ai, Paris, France
3. LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
4. ETIS UMR8051, CY Université, ENSEA, CNRS, Cergy France

Abstract

1. Introduction
For real-world decision systems such as autonomous vehicles, accuracy is not the only performance requirement
and it often comes second to reliability, robustness, and
safety concerns [40], as any failure carries serious consequences. Component modules of such systems frequently
rely on Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) which have emerged
as a dominating approach across numerous tasks and benchmarks [59, 21, 20]. Yet, a major source of concern is related
to the data-driven nature of DNNs as they do not always
generalize to objects unseen in the training data. Simple
uncertainty estimation techniques, e.g., entropy of softmax
predictions [11], are less effective since modern DNNs are
consistently overconfident on both in-domain [19] and outof-distribution (OOD) data samples [46, 25, 23]. This hin-

ObsNet+LAA

MC Dropout

90
AuRoc

Deep Ensemble
85

80

75

ConfidNet

ODIN

Gauss. Pert.

MCP
Void

0.5

1

1.5

2

14

TFLOPs
Ablation
on
epsilon
on test-time
CamVid OOD
Figure 1: Evaluation of precision vs.
computational

cost on CamVid OOD. Existing methods for OOD detection in
ObsNet
semantic 54
segmentation are either accurate but
slow (e.g., MC
Dropout [17], Deep Ensemble [30]) or fastMC
butDropout
inaccurate (e.g.,
Maximum52Class Prediction [25]). In contrast, our method ObsNet+LAA is both accurate and fast. Additional baselines and
evaluation datasets are available in §4.3.
fprat95tpr

In this paper, we tackle the detection of out-of-distribution
(OOD) objects in semantic segmentation. By analyzing the
literature, we found that current methods are either accurate or fast but not both which limits their usability in real
world applications. To get the best of both aspects, we propose to mitigate the common shortcomings by following four
design principles: decoupling the OOD detection from the
segmentation task, observing the entire segmentation network instead of just its output, generating training data for
the OOD detector by leveraging blind spots in the segmentation network and focusing the generated data on localized
regions in the image to simulate OOD objects. Our main contribution is a new OOD detection architecture called ObsNet
associated with a dedicated training scheme based on Local
Adversarial Attacks (LAA). We validate the soundness of our
approach across numerous ablation studies. We also show it
obtains top performances both in speed and accuracy when
compared to ten recent methods of the literature on three
different datasets.

95

50

48 the performance of downstream components
ders further
relying on their predictions. Dealing successfully with the
“unknown46unknown”, e.g., by launching an alert or failing
gracefully, is crucial.

In this44work we address OOD detection for semantic
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
segmentation, an essential and common task for visual
epsilon
perception in autonomous vehicles. We consider “Out-ofdistribution”, pixels from a region that has no training labels associated with. This encompasses unseen objects, but
also noise or image alterations. The most effective methods
for OOD detection task stem from two major categories of
approaches: ensembles and auxiliary error prediction modules. DeepEnsemble (DE) [30] is a prominent and simple
ensemble method that exposes potentially unreliable predictions by measuring the disagreement between individual
DNNs. In spite of the outstanding performance, DE is com1

15701

