FloorPlanCAD: A Large-Scale CAD Drawing Dataset for Panoptic Symbol
Spotting
Zhiwen Fan1 †
Lingjie Zhu1 †
1
Alibaba A.I. Labs

Honghua Li1
Xiaohao Chen1
Siyu Zhu1
Ping Tan1,2
2
†
Simon Fraser University
Equal contribution

Abstract
Access to large and diverse computer-aided design
(CAD) drawings is critical for developing symbol spotting algorithms. In this paper, we present FloorPlanCAD, a large-scale real-world CAD drawing dataset containing over 10,000 floor plans, ranging from residential
to commercial buildings. CAD drawings in the dataset
are all represented as vector graphics, which enable us
to provide line-grained annotations of 30 object categories. Equipped by such annotations, we introduce the
task of panoptic symbol spotting, which requires to spot
not only instances of countable things, but also the semantic of uncountable stuff. Aiming to solve this task,
we propose a novel method by combining Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), which captures both non-Euclidean and Euclidean features and can be trained end-to-end. The proposed CNN-GCN method achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance on the task of semantic symbol spotting, and
help us build a baseline network for the panoptic symbol spotting task. Our contributions are three-fold: 1)
to the best of our knowledge, the presented CAD drawing dataset is the first of its kind; 2) the panoptic symbol spotting task considers the spotting of both thing instances and stuff semantic as one recognition problem; and
3) we presented a baseline solution to the panoptic symbol
spotting task based on a novel CNN-GCN method, which
achieved SOTA performance on semantic symbol spotting.
We believe that these contributions will boost research in
related areas. The dataset and code is publicly available at
https://floorplancad.github.io/.

1. Introduction
The perception of 2D computer-aided design (CAD)
drawings plays a crucial role for creating 3D prototypes,
also known as “digital twins”, see Figure 1, in architecture,
engineering and construction (AEC) industries. A CAD
drawing typically conveys accurate geometric and rich se-

(a) Floor plan

(b) Facade and 3D model

Figure 1: The rich semantic, accurate location and detailed
3D shape (right top) of windows (light blue), blind windows
(blue), railings (orange) and walls (dark red) are faithfully
encoded in the CAD drawings of a floor plan (left) and its
south facade (right bottom).

Figure 2: Various sink symbols from our FloorPlanCAD
dataset. The style and appearance of a symbol depend on
the producer of the drawing.
mantic information of a cross section of a 3D design. By
integrating information from a group of CAD drawings, the
according 3D model can be precisely reconstructed. For example, 3D buildings can be faithfully encoded by a bunch
of 2D floor plans, which are detailed CAD drawings compose of line segments, arcs, curves, and texts, see Figure 1.
Automatic perception of CAD drawings will lead to efficient 3D modeling approaches, saving vast amount of labor
work. That is especially true for architectures, which usually contain massive components and might cost months for
creating detailed 3D models.
Symbol spotting refers to the recognition of graphic
symbols embedded in the context of large digital drawings [31]. It is typically carried out as query-by-example

10128

