Guided Point Contrastive Learning for
Semi-supervised Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Li Jiang1

Shaoshuai Shi1 Zhuotao Tian1 Xin Lai1 Shu Liu2 Chi-Wing Fu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SmartMore

Jiaya Jia1,2

{lijiang, zttian, xinlai, cwfu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
ssshi@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

sliu@smartmore.com

Abstract
Rapid progress in 3D semantic segmentation is inseparable from the advances of deep network models, which highly
rely on large-scale annotated data for training. To address
the high cost and challenges of 3D point-level labeling, we
present a method for semi-supervised point cloud semantic
segmentation to adopt unlabeled point clouds in training to
boost the model performance. Inspired by the recent contrastive loss in self-supervised tasks, we propose the guided
point contrastive loss to enhance the feature representation
and model generalization ability in semi-supervised setting.
Semantic predictions on unlabeled point clouds serve as
pseudo-label guidance in our loss to avoid negative pairs
in the same category. Also, we design the confidence guidance to ensure high-quality feature learning. Besides, a
category-balanced sampling strategy is proposed to collect positive and negative samples to mitigate the class imbalance problem. Extensive experiments on three datasets
(ScanNet V2, S3DIS, and SemanticKITTI) show the effectiveness of our semi-supervised method to improve the prediction quality with unlabeled data.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud semantic segmentation is a fundamental
and essential perception task for many downstream applications [20, 34, 45, 16]. Existing deep-learning-based methods for the task heavily rely on the availability and quantity
of labeled point cloud data for the model training. However, 3D point-level labeling is time-consuming and laborintensive. Compared with point cloud labeling, point cloud
collection requires much less effort, mainly by means of 3D
scanning followed by some data post-processing. Hence,
we are motivated to explore semi-supervised learning (SSL)
for improving the data efficiency and performance of deep
segmentation models with unlabeled point clouds.
While SSL has been widely explored for tasks on 2D
images [9, 21, 39, 27, 48, 29, 17], it is rather underexplored
for 3D point clouds. To achieve SSL, a common strategy

Input Point Cloud

Without Pseudo Guidance

With Our Pseudo Guidance

Figure 1. Visualizations of feature embeddings for unlabeled data
under different loss strategies, separately trained on the indoor
ScanNet V2 [6] (top) and outdoor SemanticKITTI [2] (bottom)
with 20% labeled data. Our proposed pseudo guidance enhances
the feature learning, with feature embeddings in different categories being better separated (middle vs. right columns).

is consistency regularization [21, 39], which aligns features
of the same image/pixel under different perturbations for
maintaining the prediction consistency when exploiting unlabeled data. Our method shares this common ground in
SSL by encouraging similar and robust features for matched
3D point pairs with different transformations. Yet, inspired
by the contrastive loss applied in self-supervised learning [10, 47, 11, 3], we further enhance the feature representation by proposing the guided point contrastive loss to additionally enlarge the distance between inter-category features by using the semantic predictions as guidance in the
semi-supervised setting.
Contrastive learning starts with works on 2D images,
and is recently extended by PointContrast [44] to 3D point
clouds as a pre-training pretext task in a self-supervised setting. The point contrastive loss encourages the matched
positive point pairs to be similar in the embedding space
while pushing away the negative pairs. Yet, without any
label, negative pairs in the same category may also be sampled, especially for large objects (e.g., sofa) and redundant background classes (e.g., floor and wall); these negative pairs actually weaken the features’ discriminative ability. Unlike PointContrast, we leverage a few labeled point

6423

