ARCH++: Animation-Ready Clothed Human Reconstruction Revisited

1

Tong He1,2 *, Yuanlu Xu1∗ , Shunsuke Saito1 , Stefano Soatto2 , Tony Tung1
2
Facebook Reality Labs Research, USA
University of California, Los Angeles, USA

{simpleig,soatto}@cs.ucla.edu, {merayxu,shunsuke.saito16}@gmail.com, tony.tung@fb.com

Input

Abstract
We present ARCH++, an image-based method to reconstruct 3D avatars with arbitrary clothing styles. Our reconstructed avatars are animation-ready and highly realistic, in both the visible regions from input views and the
unseen regions. While prior work shows great promise
of reconstructing animatable clothed humans with various
topologies, we observe that there exist fundamental limitations resulting in sub-optimal reconstruction quality. In
this paper, we revisit the major steps of image-based avatar
reconstruction and address the limitations with ARCH++.
First, we introduce an end-to-end point based geometry encoder to better describe the semantics of the underlying
3D human body, in replacement of previous hand-crafted
features. Second, in order to address the occupancy ambiguity caused by topological changes of clothed humans in
the canonical pose, we propose a co-supervising framework
with cross-space consistency to jointly estimate the occupancy in both the posed and canonical spaces. Last, we
use image-to-image translation networks to further refine
detailed geometry and texture on the reconstructed surface,
which improves the fidelity and consistency across arbitrary
viewpoints. In the experiments, we demonstrate improvements over the state of the art on both public benchmarks
and user studies in reconstruction quality and realism.

1. Introduction
Digital humans have become an increasingly important
building block for numerous AR/VR applications, such as
video games, social telepresence [48, 39] and virtual try-on.
Towards truly immersive experiences, it is crucial for these
avatars to obtain higher level of realism that goes beyond
the uncanny valley [45]. Building a photorealistic avatar involves many manual works by artists or expensive capture
systems under controlled environments [14, 21, 49], limiting access and increasing cost. Therefore, it is vital to revolutionize reconstruction techniques with minimal prerequisite (e.g., a selfie) for future digital human applications.
Recent human models reconstructed from a single image combine category-specific data prior with image ob* This work was done as part of Tong He’s internship at Facebook,
Sausalito, CA, USA. The corresponding author is Yuanlu Xu.

Posed Reconstruction

Avatar Reconstruction

Figure 1. Given an image of a subject in arbitrary pose (left), our
method could generate photorealistic avatars in both the posed input space (middle) as well as auto-rigged canonical space (right).

servations [72, 31, 66]. Among which, template-based approaches [32, 34, 67, 3, 9] nevertheless suffer from lack of
fidelity and difficulty supporting clothing variations; while
non-parametric reconstruction methods [55, 75, 56, 23],
e.g., using implicit surface functions, do not provide intuitive ways to animate the reconstructed avatar despite impressive fidelity. In the recent work ARCH [26], the authors propose reconstructing non-parametric human model
using pixel-aligned implicit functions [55] in a canonical
space, where all reconstructed avatars are transformed to a
common pose. To do so, a parametric human body model
is exploited to determine the transformations. By transferring skinning weights, which encode how much each vertex is influenced by the transformation of each body joint,
from the underling body model, the reconstruction results
are ready to animate. However, we observe that the advantages of a parametric body model and pixel-aligned implicit
functions are not fully exploited.
In this paper we introduce ARCH++, which revisits the
major steps of animatable avatar reconstruction from images and addresses the limitations in the formulation and
representation of the prior work. First, current implicit
function based methods mainly use hand-crafted features
as the 3D space representation, which suffers from depth
ambiguity and lacks human body semantic information. To
address this, we propose an end-to-end geometry encoder

11046

