Contact-Aware Retargeting of Skinned Motion
Ruben Villegas 1

Duygu Ceylan 1
1

Source Motion

SAN

Aaron Hertzmann 1
Adobe Research

Ours

Source Video

Jimei Yang 1
Rempe et al., 2020

Jun Saito 1
Ours

Figure 1. Our contact-aware motion retargeting method reduces interpenetration and preserves self-contacts on characters
with different geometries in a unified framework while existing methods, like Skeleton-Aware Networks (SAN) [2], do not
(Left). In addition, our method generalizes to unseen motions estimated from videos; qualitatively improving noticeable
interpenetration in recent human motion estimation methods.

Abstract
This paper introduces a motion retargeting method that
preserves self-contacts and prevents interpenetration. Selfcontacts, such as when hands touch each other or the torso
or the head, are important attributes of human body language and dynamics, yet existing methods do not model or
preserve these contacts. Likewise, interpenetration, such as
a hand passing into the torso, are a typical artifact of motion estimation methods. The input to our method is a human motion sequence and a target skeleton and character
geometry. The method identifies self-contacts and ground
contacts in the input motion, and optimizes the motion to
apply to the output skeleton, while preserving these contacts and reducing interpenetration. We introduce a novel
geometry-conditioned recurrent network with an encoderspace optimization strategy that achieves efficient retargeting while satisfying contact constraints. In experiments, our
results quantitatively outperform previous methods and we
conduct a user study where our retargeted motions are rated
as higher-quality than those produced by recent works. We
also show our method generalizes to motion estimated from
human videos where we improve over previous works that
produce noticeable interpenetration.

1. Introduction
Self-contact, where one part of a person’s body comes
into contact with another part, is crucial to how we perceive
human motion. Self-contact often indicates different behaviors or emotional states. For example, people might rest
their head in their hands if they are concerned or thought-

ful, whereas certain dance moves require one’s hands to be
placed on one’s hips. Conversely, implausible self-contacts,
such as hands passing through each other, ruin the physical plausibility of a motion. Hence, handling self-contact
is crucial for reconstructing, interpreting, and synthesizing
human motion. Note that synthesizing contact for a skinned
character requires knowledge of the character’s 3D geometry; it cannot be accurately determined from skeleton alone.
This paper introduces a motion retargeting algorithm that
preserves both self-contact and ground contact, while also
reducing interpenetration. Our retargeting algorithm takes
an input human motion and a target character, and produces
a plausible animation that manifests how that target character might perform the input motion. Our method first identifies self-contact and foot contacts in the input motion. We
use an energy function that preserves these contacts in the
output motion, while reducing interpenetration in the output. We reason about self-contacts from the character’s geometry and foot contacts from the character skeleton, in order to guarantee that contacts will be accurately transferred
in the skinned and rendered motion. Our approach generalizes to any mesh geometry and topology regardless of the
number of vertices in the mesh.
Due to the difficultly of directly optimizing a full motion sequence, we build on previous work and train a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) to perform retargeting. We
find that an RNN does not perfectly satisfies contact constraints given its efficient inference. Therefore, we propose
encoder-space optimization, in which we refine the RNN’s
predictions by iteratively optimizing the hidden units of
RNN’s encoder. This process allows our method to efficiently satisfy constraints, by taking advantage of the

9720

