SLIM: Self-Supervised LiDAR Scene Flow and Motion Segmentation
Stefan Andreas Baur*1,2 , David Josef Emmerichs*1,5 , Frank Moosmann1 , Peter Pinggera1 ,
Björn Ommer4,5 and Andreas Geiger2,3
1
Mercedes-Benz AG, Stuttgart 2 MPI-IS, Tübingen 3 University of Tübingen
4
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich 5 Heidelberg University
firstname[ middlename].lastname@daimler.com
ommer@uni-heidelberg.de andreas.geiger@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Recently, several frameworks for self-supervised learning of 3D scene flow on point clouds have emerged. Scene
flow inherently separates every scene into multiple moving
agents and a large class of points following a single rigid
sensor motion. However, existing methods do not leverage this property of the data in their self-supervised training routines which could improve and stabilize flow predictions. Based on the discrepancy between a robust rigid egomotion estimate and a raw flow prediction, we generate a
self-supervised motion segmentation signal. The predicted
motion segmentation, in turn, is used by our algorithm to
attend to stationary points for aggregation of motion information in static parts of the scene. We learn our model
end-to-end by backpropagating gradients through Kabsch’s
algorithm and demonstrate that this leads to accurate egomotion which in turn improves the scene flow estimate. Using our method, we show state-of-the-art results across multiple scene flow metrics for different real-world datasets,
showcasing the robustness and generalizability of this approach. We further analyze the performance gain when performing joint motion segmentation and scene flow in an ablation study. We also present a novel network architecture
for 3D LiDAR scene flow which is capable of handling an
order of magnitude more points during training than previously possible.

1. Introduction
Reasoning about the motion of dynamic objects in a
scene is crucial for robotic applications such as autonomous
driving. One representation for such motion is scene flow,
a set of displacement vectors between two consecutive time
frames, forming a 3D vector field Ft→t+1 . Its application
allows to transform points Pt recorded in the first frame
∗ Joint first authors with equal contribution.

Figure 1: Scene Flow Prediction by SLIM. Flow vectors
are colored by their direction and magnitude as illustrated
with the color wheel. Our method correctly annotates the
background as static and produces consistent results for the
two vehicles, matching the ground truth scene flow.
(t+1)

(t)

into the second frame via pi
= pi + fi . Another representation is the binary classification of points into either
moving or stationary, known as motion segmentation.
This paper tackles the problem of simultaneous LiDAR
scene flow estimation and motion segmentation using a
deep network. Existing works treat these two problems independently. Most of them rely on large amounts of labeled
data to obtain state-of-the-art results (see Section 2.2). Selfsupervised learning attempts to alleviate this problem, but
existing scene flow networks using weak or self-supervision
have critical drawbacks: Currently, all of them require
downsampling of point clouds from around 128,000 points
for typical LiDAR frames to no more than 8,192 points during training or they train and evaluate on datasets with 1-to1 point correspondences, see Section 2.4.
Our approach trains well even on datasets with no 1to-1 correspondences and can handle one to two orders of
magnitude more points per point cloud than previous approaches for self-supervised scene flow. We build on top of
RAFT [39], the state-of-the-art for optical flow, and extend

13126

