Self-supervised 3D Skeleton Action Representation Learning with Motion
Consistency and Continuity

†

Yukun Su1,2 , Guosheng Lin3 , and Qingyao Wu1,2

†

1

School of Software and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
suyukun666@gmail.com, gslin@ntu.edu.sg, qyw@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) has been proved
very effective and it can help boost the performance in
learning representations from unlabeled data in the image
domain. Yet, very little is explored about its usefulness in 3D
skeleton-based action recognition understanding. Directly
applying existing SSL techniques for 3D skeleton learning,
however, suffers from trivial solutions and imprecise representations. To tackle these drawbacks, we consider perceiving the consistency and continuity of motion at different
playback speeds are two critical issues. To this end, we propose a novel SSL method to learn the 3D skeleton representation in an efficacious way. Specifically, by constructing a
positive clip (speed-changed) and a negative clip (motionbroken) of the sampled action sequence, we encourage the
positive pairs closer while pushing the negative pairs to
force the network to learn the intrinsic dynamic motion consistency information. Moreover, to enhance the learning
features, skeleton interpolation is further exploited to model
the continuity of human skeleton data. To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, extensive experiments are
conducted on Kinetics, NTU60, NTU120, and PKUMMD
datasets with several alternative network architectures. Experimental evaluations demonstrate the superiority of our
approach and through which, we can gain significant performance improvement without using extra labeled data.

1. Introduction
In recent years, 3D action recognition based on skeleton
has made remarkable progress through learning discrimina† Corresponding authors.

1x-speed

...

...

...

...

2x-speed

(a) Motion Consistency

(b) Motion Continuity

Figure 1. An illustrative example (i.e., “jump up”) of our main
idea. (a) Motion consistency. Although the two clips are sampled
consecutively (1x speed) and alternately (2x speed), respectively,
we can easily tell they are similar because they share the same
underlying skeletal movements and the consistent motion trends.
(b) Motion continuity. When the sampling interval is set to 2
frames, the complemented motion of the interval frames should
make the whole temporal motion look natural and coherent.

tive features with deep learning networks [31, 33, 37, 49].
However, these methods rely heavily on supervision, and
collecting such labels is very time-consuming and laborintensive. This makes the development of unsupervised
learning techniques and the use of a large amount of unlabeled data the urgent needs, and among them a powerful approach is self-supervised learning (SSL). In image domain,
as images contain rich information that is beneficial to feature extraction, many effective SSL techniques [3, 6, 11, 38]
are well exploited. Comparatively, for tasks over skeleton
data which represent a person by 3D coordinate positions
of key joints, it becomes very challenging to leverage SSL
techniques to learn discriminative motion representation.
Some recent methods [53, 18] attempt to solve these
challenges by directly adopting the existing video SSL tech-

13328

