Shape Self-Correction for Unsupervised Point Cloud Understanding
Ye Chen1∗ , Jinxian Liu1,2∗ , Bingbing Ni1,2† , Hang Wang1,2 , Jiancheng Yang1 , Ning Liu1† , Teng Li3 , Qi Tian4
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
Huawei Hisilicon, 3 Huawei Car BU, 4 Huawei Cloud & AI
{chenye123, liujinxian, nibingbing, wang--hang, jekyll4168, ningliu}@sjtu.edu.cn
liteng@ahu.edu.cn

tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract

Pretext Task
Discern

1. Introduction
3D shape understanding is in tremendous demand due to
many important tasks like autonomous driving. Point cloud
is a simple but effective representation of 3D data, which
makes it popular for 3D vision analysis. With the help of
extensive manually-labeled supervised information, many
ingenious works [21, 22, 26, 40, 17, 42, 20, 14, 18] are proposed to directly consume point clouds and achieve remark† Co-corresponding authors:Bingbing Ni, Ning Liu
∗ Equal contributions

Feature
Extractor

We develop a novel self-supervised learning method
named Shape Self-Correction for point cloud analysis. Our
method is motivated by the principle that a good shape
representation should be able to find distorted parts of a
shape and correct them. To learn strong shape representations in an unsupervised manner, we first design a shapedisorganizing module to destroy certain local shape parts
of an object. Then the destroyed shape and the normal
shape are sent into a point cloud network to get representations, which are employed to segment points that belong
to distorted parts and further reconstruct them to restore
the shape to normal. To perform better in these two associated pretext tasks, the network is constrained to capture
useful shape features from the object, which indicates that
the point cloud network encodes rich geometric and contextual information. The learned feature extractor transfers
well to downstream classification and segmentation tasks.
Experimental results on ModelNet, ScanNet and ShapeNetPart demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance among unsupervised methods. Our framework
can be applied to a wide range of deep learning networks
for point cloud analysis and we show experimentally that
pre-training with our framework significantly boosts the
performance of supervised models.

Correct
destroy shape parts
Segmentation
Feature
Extractor

Features

Classification

Downstream Tasks

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. As shown, we
destroy the shape parts with certain heuristic methods and
there is a huge mismatch between the distorted parts and the
normal parts. We can easily distinguish the distorted parts
because we know the geometric characteristics of the object. Hence we think a strong representation which encodes
effective structure information should also have the ability.
We destroy shape parts and train a network to distinguish
the destroyed parts and restore them to normal unsupervisedly in a pretext task. Success in the pretext task indicates
the network captures strong shape representations, which
can transfer well to downstream tasks.

able performance on 3D vision tasks like classification, detection and segmentation. However, an enormous amount
of 3D point cloud data has not been effectively utilized because of the expensive labeling. Hence utilizing these unlabeled data to perform effective representation learning is an
important opportunity for 3D analysis.
Unsupervised learning on point clouds aims to learn
useful information and representations from points without manually-labeled supervised information, which opens
up the possibility to take advantage of unlabeled data.
Several works focus on 3D unsupervised feature learning
through using autoencoders and generative adversarial networks [2, 8, 15, 43, 47, 7]. Certain recently devoted selfsupervised works [10, 25, 11, 1, 31] design target related

8382

