Single Image Defocus Deblurring
Using Kernel-Sharing Parallel Atrous Convolutions
Hyeongseok Son

Junyong Lee
Sunghyun Cho
POSTECH

Seungyong Lee

{sonhs, junyonglee, s.cho, leesy}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel deep learning approach for
single image defocus deblurring based on inverse kernels.
In a defocused image, the blur shapes are similar among
pixels although the blur sizes can spatially vary. To utilize
the property with inverse kernels, we exploit the observation that when only the size of a defocus blur changes while
keeping the shape, the shape of the corresponding inverse
kernel remains the same and only the scale changes. Based
on the observation, we propose a kernel-sharing parallel
atrous convolutional (KPAC) block specifically designed by
incorporating the property of inverse kernels for single image defocus deblurring. To effectively simulate the invariant
shapes of inverse kernels with different scales, KPAC shares
the same convolutional weights among multiple atrous convolution layers. To efficiently simulate the varying scales of
inverse kernels, KPAC consists of only a few atrous convolution layers with different dilations and learns per-pixel scale
attentions to aggregate the outputs of the layers. KPAC also
utilizes the shape attention to combine the outputs of multiple convolution filters in each atrous convolution layer,
to deal with defocus blur with a slightly varying shape.
We demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance with a much smaller number of parameters
than previous methods.

1. Introduction
Defocus blur of an image occurs when the light ray from
a point in the scene forms a circle of confusion (COC) on
the camera sensor. The aperture shape and lens design of the
camera determine the blur shape, and the blur size varies
upon the depth of a scene point and intrinsic camera parameters. In a defocused image, the spatial variance of the
blur size is large, while that of the blur shape is relatively
small. Single image defocus deblurring remains a challenging problem as it is hard to accurately estimate and remove
defocus blur spatially varying in both size and shape.

The conventional two-step approach [2, 23, 5, 18, 4, 11,
14] reduces the complexity of defocus deblurring by assuming an isotropic kernel for the blur shape, such as disc [2, 5]
or Gaussian [23, 18, 11, 14]. Based on the assumption, the
approach first estimates a defocus map containing the perpixel blur size of a defocused image, then uses the defocus map to perform non-blind deconvolution [8, 15, 12] on
the image. However, real-world defocused images may have
more complex kernel shapes than disc or Gaussian, and the
discrepancy often hinders accurate defocus map estimation
and successful defocus deblurring.
Recently, Abuolaim and Brown [1] proposed DPDNet,
the first end-to-end defocus deblurring network, that learns
to directly deblur a defocused image without relying on a
restrictive blur model. They also presented a defocus deblurring dataset that includes stereo images attainable from
a dual-pixel sensor camera. Thanks to the end-to-end learning and the strong supervision provided by the dual-pixel
dataset, DPDNet outperforms two-step approaches on deblurring of real-world defocused images. Still, the deblurred
results tend to include ringing artifacts or remaining blur, as
the conventional encoder-decoder architecture of DPDNet
confines its capability in handling spatially variant blur [34].
In this paper, we propose a novel deep learning approach
for single image defocus deblurring based on inverse kernels. It was shown that deconvolution of an image with a
given blur kernel can be performed by convolving the image with an inverse kernel [30], where the inverse kernel
could be computed from the given blur kernel using Fourier
transform. Xu et al. [29] trained a deep network to learn uniform deconvolution by introducing the property of pseudo
inverse kernel into the network. Similarly, we train our network to learn the deconvolution operation by capitalizing
the specific characteristics of inverse kernels needed for defocus deblurring. However, due to the spatially varying nature of defocus blur, the inverse kernel required for defocus
deblurring also changes per pixel. Training a deep network
to learn deconvolution operations of varying inverse kernels
would be challenging even with the guidance of defocused

2642

