Single-shot Hyperspectral-Depth Imaging with Learned Diffractive Optics
Seung-Hwan Baek* †
* KAIST

Hayato Ikoma‡
Daniel S. Jeon*
Yuqi Li§
Gordon Wetzstein‡
Min H. Kim*
†

Princeton University

‡

Stanford University

1. Introduction
Spectral information is crucial for a plethora of applications in the fields of remote sensing, food/agriculture, medical imaging, and defense [28, 11, 1, 26, 5]. In parallel,
depth imaging also has been developed for decades and now
serves as a critical functionality for robotics, autonomous
driving, mobile photography, and augmented/mixed reality [17, 36, 15]. These two imaging modalities recently
started to be merged as hyperspectral-depth (HS-D) imaging that has various applications in ornithology, geology, biology, arts, and cultural heritage [22, 56, 23, 50, 12, 31, 35].
Specifically, single-shot HS-D imaging has applications
such as analyzing living biological samples and geometricspectral scene understanding from a moving camera on a
vehicle or a hand-held camera.
To capture both spectrum and depth, existing HS-D

KAUST

2.0 m

Input
(a) Prototype

(b) HS-D PSF

Radiance

Imaging depth and spectrum have been extensively studied in isolation from each other for decades. Recently,
hyperspectral-depth (HS-D) imaging emerges to capture
both information simultaneously by combining two different imaging systems; one for depth, the other for spectrum. While being accurate, this combinational approach
induces increased form factor, cost, capture time, and alignment/registration problems. In this work, departing from
the combinational principle, we propose a compact singleshot monocular HS-D imaging method. Our method uses
a diffractive optical element (DOE), the point spread function of which changes with respect to both depth and spectrum. This enables us to reconstruct spectrum and depth
from a single captured image. To this end, we develop a
differentiable simulator and a neural-network-based reconstruction method that are jointly optimized via automatic
differentiation. To facilitate learning the DOE, we present
a first HS-D dataset by building a benchtop HS-D imager
that acquires high-quality ground truth. We evaluate our
method with synthetic and real experiments by building an
experimental prototype and achieve state-of-the-art HS-D
imaging results.

§

0.4 m

Abstract

Wolfgang Heidrich§

0.5
0.4

Reconstruction

(c) Spectral reconstruction
2.0
GT
Ours

0.3
0.2
0.1

Wavelength [nm]
450 500 550 600 650
(d) Hyperspectral image

[m]

0.0

0.4
(e) Depth map

Figure 1. (a) Our compact single-shot HS-D imaging method uses
an optimized DOE that creates (b) a PSF that varies with spectrum and depth. (c) – (e) It encodes spectral-depth information in
the captured image, from which we simultaneously reconstruct a
depth map and a hyperspectral image from 420 nm to 680 nm with
10 nm bandwidth.

imaging systems follow a combinational approach; they independently capture spectral and depth information with
separate imaging systems, and combine the results after
the fact [22, 47, 12, 50]. This enables accurate acquisition of both data by exploiting decade-long research in each
regime. However, this combinational design fundamentally
limits the potentials of HS-D imaging as it inevitably increases form factor, cost, capture time with additional alignment/registration problems.
In this work, instead of relying on two different imaging
systems and combining them, we propose a first compact
single-shot HS-D imaging method that uses a single diffractive optical element (DOE) in front of a conventional camera sensor. Our key intuition is that depth and spectrum are
closely coupled in DOE-based imaging systems, thus allowing for single-shot capturing of an HS-D image. However,
it is nontrivial to design a DOE that distinctively varies with
scene depth and spectrum for HS-D imaging. To solve this
problem, we implement a fully differentiable image simulator that synthesizes a sensor image for a given DOE height
profile, building on recent advances in automatic differentiation and Fourier optics [38, 8, 51, 42, 41, 43, 49]. Combined with a convolutional neural network (CNN) that estimates depth and spectrum from a sensor image, we build an
end-to-end differentiable pipeline from the DOE profile to

2651

