On Equivariant and Invariant Learning of Object Landmark Representations
Zezhou Cheng
Jong-Chyi Su
Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{zezhoucheng, jcsu, smaji}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Given a collection of images, humans are able to discover landmarks by modeling the shared geometric structure
across instances. This idea of geometric equivariance has
been widely used for the unsupervised discovery of object
landmark representations. In this paper, we develop a simple
and effective approach by combining instance-discriminative
and spatially-discriminative contrastive learning. We show
that when a deep network is trained to be invariant to geometric and photometric transformations, representations
emerge from its intermediate layers that are highly predictive
of object landmarks. Stacking these across layers in a “hypercolumn” and projecting them using spatially-contrastive
learning further improves their performance on matching
and few-shot landmark regression tasks. We also present a
unified view of existing equivariant and invariant representation learning approaches through the lens of contrastive
learning, shedding light on the nature of invariances learned.
Experiments on standard benchmarks for landmark learning,
as well as a new challenging one we propose, show that the
proposed approach surpasses prior state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Learning in the absence of labels is a challenge for existing machine learning and computer vision systems. Despite
recent advances, the performance of unsupervised learning
remains far below that of supervised learning, especially for
few-shot image understanding tasks. This paper considers
the task of unsupervised learning of object landmarks from a
collection of images. The goal is to learn representations that
can be used to establish correspondences across objects, and
to predict landmarks such as eyes and noses when provided
with a few labeled examples.
One way of inferring structure is to reason about the
global appearance in terms of disentangled factors such
as geometry and texture. This is the basis of alignment
based [27, 37] and generative modeling based approaches
Code and data are available at https://people.cs.umass.
edu/~zezhoucheng/contrastive_landmark/

Φ" 𝑥 , Φ# (𝑥 ! ) ≫ Φ" 𝑥 , Φ#! (𝑥′)

Φ" (𝒙)

Φ 𝑥 , Φ(𝑥 ! ) ≫ Φ 𝑥 , Φ(𝑧)

Φ#! (𝒙′)

Φ(𝒛)

Φ(𝒙)

Φ# (𝒙′)

Φ(𝒙′)

𝑣′
𝑣 = 𝑔𝑢
𝑢

𝒙

𝒙! = 𝒈𝒙
(a) Equivariant learning

𝒙

𝒙! = 𝒈𝒙
(b) Invariant learning

𝒛

Compact Representation
Compress
Hypercolumn

Upsample

Input

Representation
Prediction
Feature extraction
(c) Landmark prediction and matching

Matching

Figure 1. Equivariant and invariant learning. (a) Equivariant
learning requires representations across locations to be invariant to a
geometric transformation g while being distinctive across locations.
(b) Invariant learning encourages the representations to be invariant
to transformations while being distinctive across images. Thus both
can be seen as instances of contrastive learning. (c) A hypercolumn
feature and its compact representation are highly predictive of
object landmarks.

for landmark discovery [28, 29, 47, 57, 61, 65]. An alternate
is to learn a representation that geometrically transforms
in the same way as the object, a property called geometric
equivariance (Fig. 1a) [49–51]. However, useful invariances
may not be learned (e.g., the raw pixel representation itself
is equivariant), limiting their applicability in the presence of
clutter, occlusion, and inter-image variations.
A different line of work has proposed instance discriminative contrastive learning as an unsupervised objective [3, 5, 13, 21, 23, 25, 26, 40, 52, 58, 69]. The goal is to
learn a representation Φ that has higher similarity between
an image x and its transformation x0 than with a different
one z, i.e., hΦ(x), Φ(x0 )i  hΦ(x), Φ(z)i, as illustrated in
Fig. 1b. A combination of geometric (e.g., cropping and
scaling) and photometric (e.g., color jittering and blurring)
19897

