Continuous Copy-Paste for One-stage Multi-object Tracking and Segmentation
Zhenbo Xu1,2,3,4,5∗ , Ajin Meng1∗ , Zhenbo Shi1 , Wei Yang1† , Zhi Chen1 , Liusheng Huang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Beihang Univ, Beijing Key Lab Digital Media, Sch Comp Sci & Engn, Beijing, China
4
Beihang Univ, State Key Lab Virtual Real Technol & Syst, Beijing, China
5
ShiFang Technology Inc., Hangzhou, China
†

Corresponding Author.

Abstract
Current one-step multi-object tracking and segmentation
(MOTS) methods lag behind recent two-step methods. By
separating the instance segmentation stage from the tracking stage, two-step methods can exploit non-video datasets
as extra data for training instance segmentation. Moreover,
instances belonging to different IDs on different frames,
rather than limited numbers of instances in raw consecutive frames, can be gathered to allow more effective hard
example mining in the training of trackers. In this paper,
we bridge this gap by presenting a novel data augmentation
strategy named continuous copy-paste (CCP). Our intuition
behind CCP is to fully exploit the pixel-wise annotations
provided by MOTS to actively increase the number of instances as well as unique instance IDs in training. Without
any modifications to frameworks, current MOTS methods
achieve significant performance gains when trained with
CCP. Based on CCP, we propose the first effective one-stage
online MOTS method named CCPNet, which generates instance masks as well as the tracking results in one shot.
Our CCPNet surpasses all state-of-the-art methods by large
margins (3.8% higher sMOTSA and 4.1% higher MOTSA
for pedestrians on the KITTI MOTS Validation) and ranks
1st on the KITTI MOTS leaderboard. Evaluations across
three datasets also demonstrate the effectiveness of both
CCP and CCPNet. Our codes are publicly available at:
https://github.com/detectRecog/CCP.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) [30] is of fundamental importance in the field of autonomous driving and video
surveillance. Recently, multi-object tracking and segmentation (MOTS) [23] is introduced as a popular extension
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

E-mail:

qubit@ustc.edu.cn

of bounding box (bbox) based MOT. MOTS provides perpixel segmentation masks that locate objects more accurately than relative coarse bboxes. As instance masks precisely delineate the visible object boundaries in crowded
scenes, MOTS largely eliminates the ambiguities caused by
severely overlapped bboxes in both detection and tracking.
Current one-step MOTS approaches struggle to adapt
an additional re-ID branch to existing instance segmentation methods to obtain both instance masks and their re-ID
features in a single forward pass. Voigtlaender et al. [23]
build TRCNN upon Mask-RCNN and adopt a fully connected layer to predict association vectors for object proposals. Also built on Mask-RCNN, MOTSNet [16] proposes a
novel mask-pooling layer to focus on the foreground segment area rather than bboxes in the association vector extraction. Recently, two-step methods PointTrack [26] and
PointTrack++ [27] separate the tracking phase from the instance segmentation phase and convert the compact image
representation to un-ordered 2D point cloud representation
for learning discriminative instance embeddings. This separation brings two advantages: (i) Extra frame-level instance
segmentation datasets can also be used for training [26]; (ii)
The training data for tracking is not restricted to consecutive
frames, thus allowing more unique instance IDs in training
mini-batches [27]. When tracking on the instance segmentation results produced by TRCNN, PointTrack reduces ID
switches (IDS) by 55% [26]. To date, the main successes
have been primarily in multi-step approaches [12, 26, 27].
The significant gap between one-step methods and multistep methods suggests that combing tracking with instance
segmentation is a non-trivial problem.
In this paper, we posit that two major causes for the
performance gap between one-step methods and multi-step
methods [26, 27] are: (i) Challenging training data for instance segmentation are limited; (ii) High-quality training
samples for tracking are limited. As pixel-level annotations
required by MOTS are known to be expensive to obtain,

15323

