DiagViB-6: A Diagnostic Benchmark Suite for Vision Models in the Presence of
Shortcut and Generalization Opportunities
Elias Eulig1,2, * Piyapat Saranrittichai1,3 Chaithanya Kumar Mummadi1,3
Kilian Rambach1 William Beluch1 Xiahan Shi1 Volker Fischer1, *
1
Bosch Center for AI (BCAI) 2 Heidelberg University 3 University of Freiburg
Abstract

1. Introduction
Despite their state-of-the-art performance on object classification tasks, deep neural networks (DNN) are highly
prone to shortcut learning [8, 33, 11]. Instead of learning
holistic representations and decision rules that can generalize beyond the training data, DNNs overly rely on socalled shortcut opportunities (SO), which occur when the
target class is highly correlated to one or very few easy-torepresent input factors [12]. This leads to poor generalization on many out-of-distribution (OOD) settings, e.g. ImageNet trained DNNs are biased towards texture and fail to
generalize under texture-shape cue conflict evaluation [8].
While humans are also prone to shortcut learning in cer* Corresponding authors. Contact via elias@eeulig.com or
volker.fischer@de.bosch.com.

shape factor
(predicted)

Common deep neural networks (DNNs) for image classification have been shown to rely on shortcut opportunities
(SO) in the form of predictive and easy-to-represent visual
factors. This is known as shortcut learning and leads to impaired generalization. In this work, we show that common
DNNs also suffer from shortcut learning when predicting
only basic visual object factors of variation (FoV) such as
shape, color, or texture. We argue that besides shortcut opportunities, generalization opportunities (GO) are also an
inherent part of real-world vision data and arise from partial independence between predicted classes and FoVs. We
also argue that it is necessary for DNNs to exploit GO to
overcome shortcut learning. Our core contribution is to introduce the Diagnostic Vision Benchmark suite DiagViB-6,
which includes datasets and metrics to study a network’s
shortcut vulnerability and generalization capability for six
independent FoV. In particular, DiagViB-6 allows controlling the type and degree of SO and GO in a dataset. We
benchmark a wide range of popular vision architectures and
show that they can exploit GO only to a limited extent.

?
2

test (OOD)

4

shortcut
opp.

3
blue red green
hue factor

gen.
opp.

train

Figure 1: Exemplar study in our proposed benchmark. The
network is trained to predict factor classes 2, 4, 3 for the
shape factor with varying hue. All five depicted training combinations are uniformly shown during training. The
shape 2 co-occurs solely with the blue class of the hue
factor, which poses a shortcut opportunity. The shapes 4
and 3 occur uniformly with hue red and green; these
combinations pose a generalization opportunity, since they
reduce the predictiveness of the hue factor for the shape
factor. Test accuracy is computed on examples from OOD
factor combinations to evaluate a model’s shortcut vulnerability in the context of the given generalization opportunity.
tain cases, such as object classification under context-based
cue conflict settings [29], the biological model remains
largely unaffected by shortcuts when it comes to predicting basic object factors of variation (FoV) such as shape,
hue or texture. This “shortcut-immunity” w.r.t. basic
FoV is just as necessary for intelligent systems; thus, efforts towards improving model generalization are of utmost
importance.
Existing literature studies shortcut behavior in DNNs
mainly in the context of object classification. In this work,
we address a more fundamental variant of shortcut learning,
focusing specifically on the prediction of basic FoV themselves, similar to [12]. In the context of FoV prediction, we
refer to different manifestations of a factor as factor classes.
For example, “red” and “green” are factor classes for the
factor hue, whereas “circle” and “elephant shape” are fac-

10655

