Hierarchical Kinematic Probability Distributions for 3D Human Shape and Pose
Estimation from Images in the Wild
Akash Sengupta
University of Cambridge

Ignas Budvytis
University of Cambridge

Roberto Cipolla
University of Cambridge

as2562@cam.ac.uk

ib255@cam.ac.uk

rc10001@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of 3D human body
shape and pose estimation from an RGB image. This is often an ill-posed problem, since multiple plausible 3D bodies
may match the visual evidence present in the input - particularly when the subject is occluded. Thus, it is desirable
to estimate a distribution over 3D body shape and pose
conditioned on the input image instead of a single 3D reconstruction. We train a deep neural network to estimate
a hierarchical matrix-Fisher distribution over relative 3D
joint rotation matrices (i.e. body pose), which exploits the
human body’s kinematic tree structure, as well as a Gaussian distribution over SMPL body shape parameters. To further ensure that the predicted shape and pose distributions
match the visual evidence in the input image, we implement
a differentiable rejection sampler to impose a reprojection
loss between ground-truth 2D joint coordinates and samples from the predicted distributions, projected onto the image plane. We show that our method is competitive with
the state-of-the-art in terms of 3D shape and pose metrics
on the SSP-3D and 3DPW datasets, while also yielding a
structured probability distribution over 3D body shape and
pose, with which we can meaningfully quantify prediction
uncertainty and sample multiple plausible 3D reconstructions to explain a given input image.

1. Introduction
3D human body shape and pose estimation from an
RGB image is a challenging computer vision problem,
partly due to its under-constrained nature wherein multiple 3D human bodies may explain a given 2D image,
especially when the subject is significantly occluded, as
is common for in-the-wild images. Several recent works
[53, 20, 27, 26, 46, 63, 12, 37, 14, 40, 39, 54, 35, 52] use
deep neural networks to regress a single body shape and
pose solution, which can result in impressive 3D body reconstructions given sufficient visual evidence in the input
image. However, when visual evidence of the subject’s
shape and pose is obscured, e.g. due to occluding objects

Figure 1. 3D reconstruction samples and per-vertex uncertainty
corresponding to the predicted hierarchical shape and pose distributions computed from the given input images.

or self-occlusions, a single solution does not fully describe
the space of plausible 3D reconstructions. In contrast, we
aim to estimate a structured probability distribution over
3D body shape and pose, conditioned on the input image,
thereby allowing us to sample any number of plausible 3D
reconstructions and quantify prediction uncertainty over the
3D body surface, as shown in Figure 1.
We use the SMPL body model [32] to represent human
shape and pose. Identity-dependent body shape is parameterised by coefficients of a PCA basis - hence, a simple
multivariate Gaussian distribution over the shape parameters is suitable. Body pose is parameterised by relative 3D
joint rotations along the SMPL kinematic tree, which may
be represented using rotation matrices. Regressing rotation
matrices using neural networks is non-trivial, since they lie
in SO(3), a non-linear 3D manifold with a different topology to R3×3 or R9 , the space in which unconstrained neural network outputs lie. However, one can define probability density functions over the Lie group SO(3), such as
the matrix-Fisher distribution [33, 11, 22], the parameter of
which is an element of R3×3 and may be easily regressed
with a neural network [34]. We propose a hierarchical probability distribution over relative 3D joint rotations along the
SMPL kinematic tree, wherein the probability density function of each joint’s relative rotation matrix is a matrix-Fisher
distribution conditioned on the parents of that joint in the

11219

