Worldsheet: Wrapping the World in a 3D Sheet
for View Synthesis from a Single Image
Ronghang Hu1
Nikhila Ravi1
Alexander C. Berg1
Deepak Pathak2
1
2
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Carnegie Mellon University

(a) input view

(b) scene mesh in a sheet

(c) novel view 1

(d) novel view 2

(e) novel view 3

input view

novel view 1

novel view 2

input view

novel view 1

novel view 2

input view

novel view 1

novel view 2

input view

novel view 1

novel view 2

Figure 1: We synthesize novel views from large viewpoint changes given a single input RGB image (shown in a) by wrapping
a mesh sheet (shown in b) onto the image, and rendering it from novel viewpoints (shown in c, d, e). Plausible novel views
are generated for outdoor scenes, outdoor objects, indoor scenes, indoor objects and even paintings with high resolution
(960 × 960) input. Please see continuously synthesized views at worldsheet.github.io (Image sources: [49, 13, 25, 28]).

Abstract
We present Worldsheet, a method for novel view synthesis using just a single RGB image as input. The main insight
is that simply shrink-wrapping a planar mesh sheet onto
the input image, consistent with the learned intermediate
depth, captures underlying geometry sufficient to generate
photorealistic unseen views with large viewpoint changes.
To operationalize this, we propose a novel differentiable
texture sampler that allows our wrapped mesh sheet to be
textured and rendered differentiably into an image from a
target viewpoint. Our approach is category-agnostic, endto-end trainable without using any 3D supervision, and requires a single image at test time. We also explore a simple extension by stacking multiple layers of Worldsheets to
better handle occlusions. Worldsheet consistently outperforms prior state-of-the-art methods on single-image view
synthesis across several datasets. Furthermore, this simple

idea captures novel views surprisingly well on a wide range
of high-resolution in-the-wild images, converting them into
navigable 3D pop-ups. Video results and code are available
at https://worldsheet.github.io.

1. Introduction
A 2D image is the projection of an underlying 3D world,
but as humans, we have no trouble in understanding this
structure and imagining how an image will look from other
views. Consider the train shown in Figure 1, we can seamlessly predict other views from a single image based on the
abstractions we have learned from past experience of seeing several trains, or similar shaped objects from different
views. Enabling machines with such an ability to reason
about 3D from a single image will bring trillions of still
photos to life, with wide applications in virtual reality, animation, image editing, and robotics.
12528

