Mutual Supervision for Dense Object Detection
Ziteng Gao
Limin WangB
Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
The classification and regression head are both indispensable components to build up a dense object detector,
which are usually supervised by the same training samples
and thus expected to have consistency with each other for
detecting objects accurately in the detection pipeline. In
this paper, we break the convention of the same training
samples for these two heads in dense detectors and explore
a novel supervisory paradigm, termed as Mutual Supervision (MuSu), to respectively and mutually assign training
samples for the classification and regression head to ensure this consistency. MuSu defines training samples for
the regression head mainly based on classification predicting scores and in turn, defines samples for the classification
head based on localization scores from the regression head.
Experimental results show that the convergence of detectors trained by this mutual supervision is guaranteed and
the effectiveness of the proposed method is verified on the
challenging MS COCO benchmark. We also find that tiling
more anchors at the same location benefits detectors and
leads to further improvements under this training scheme.
We hope this work can inspire further researches on the interaction of the classification and regression task in detection and the supervision paradigm for detectors, especially
separately for these two heads.

1. Introduction
Object detection has been drawing interest from researchers for decades as one of the fundamental visual tasks
in the computer vision community, especially with the rise
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The community has witnessed the fast evolution of both the methodology and the performance of detectors from region-based
ones [8, 24, 10, 1, 4, 18], to one-stage dense ones [20, 23,
22, 29, 37, 32] and then to end-to-end transformer-based
detectors [3, 41]. Among these methods, one-stage detectors, also known as dense detectors, are favored in terms
of both the speed and accuracy, as well as the fast convergence due to their tiling anchors densely to cover objects
B: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

Vanilla FCOS

Inconsistency

Input image
classification confidence

IoUs

Our Proposed MuSu

Figure 1. Inconsistency from the classification head and regression head between spatial distributions of classification confidence and IoUs with ground truth predicted in a converged FCOS
detector and our MuSu-trained detector. The brighter the pixel
looks, the higher the value stands for. The classification confidence is a product of the output of the classification head and centerness estimation as FCOS does in the NMS process. Note that
this input image is a training image in MS COCO and the converged FCOS still suffers the inconsistency between classification
and regression head. Our MuSu alleviates this inconsistency.

of various scales and aspect ratios and directly predicting
bounding boxes with labels with these anchors.
As detection task is about classifying and localizing
simultaneously, object detectors are expected to produce
bounding boxes with both correct classification labels and
fine localization, and of course dense detectors are no exceptions. For a dense detector, these two tasks are usually
done with specialized classification and regression heads.
For the same input feature map from the backbone network,
these two heads are expected to function differently: the
classification head translates it into classification scores invariant with small shifts while the regression head transforms it to shift-equivalent localizing offsets from anchors
to bounding boxes, which incurs intrinsic inconsistency between these two tasks.
An accurate dense object detector is supposed to produce
high-quality bounding boxes with correct labels, which requires that these two heads of different functionalities coordinate at the same spatial location of final outputs. In other
words, converged detectors should ensure spatial consis-

3641

