MAAS: Multi-modal Assignation for Active Speaker Detection
Juan León Alcázar1 , Fabian Caba Heilbron2 , Ali K. Thabet1 & Bernard Ghanem1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), 2 Adobe Research

jc.leon@uniandes.edu.co, caba@adobe.com, ali.thabet@kaust.edu.sa, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

a) Individual Analysis

Abstract
Active speaker detection requires a mindful integration
of multi-modal cues. Current methods focus on modeling
and fusing short-term audiovisual features for individual
speakers, often at frame level. We present a novel approach
to active speaker detection that directly addresses the multimodal nature of the problem and provides a straightforward strategy, where independent visual features (speakers) in the scene are assigned to a previously detected
speech event. Our experiments show that a small graph
data structure built from local information can approximate
an instantaneous audio-visual assignment problem. Moreover, the temporal extension of this initial graph achieves a
new state-of-the-art performance on the AVA-ActiveSpeaker
dataset with a mAP of 88.8%.

1. Introduction
Active speaker detection aims at identifying the current speaker (if any) from a set of candidate face detections in an arbitrary video. This research problem is an
inherently multi-modal task that requires the integration of
subtle facial motion patterns and the characteristic waveform of speech. Despite its multiple applications such as
speaker diarization [3, 44, 46, 48], human-computer interaction [16, 58] and bio-metrics [34, 40], the detection of
active speakers in-the-wild remains an open problem.
Current approaches for active speaker detection are
based on recurrent neural networks [41, 43] or 3D convolutional models [1, 6, 60]. Their main focus is to jointly
model the audio and visual streams to maximize the performance of single speaker prediction over short sequences.
Such an approach is suitable for single speaker scenarios,
but is overly simplified for the general (multi-speaker) case.
The general (multi-speaker) scenario has two major challenges. First, the presence of multiple speakers allows for
incorrect face-voice assignations. For instance, false positives emerge when facial gestures closely resemble the motion patterns observed while speaking (e.g. laughing, grinning). Second, it must enforce temporal consistency over
multi-modal data, which quickly evolves over time, e.g.,
when active speakers switch during a fluid conversation.
In this paper, we address the general multi-speaker prob-

?

?

Speech Event

Speech Event

b) Holistic Assignation

Speech Event

Figure 1. Audiovisual assignment for active speaker detection.
Active speaker detection is highly ambiguous. Even if we analyze
joint audiovisual information, unrelated facial gestures can easily
resemble the natural motion of lips while speaking. In a) we show
two face crops from a sequence, where a speech event was detected. The gestures, illumination, and capture angle make it hard
to asses which face (if any) is the active speaker. Our strategy b)
focuses on the attribution of speech segments in video. If a speech
event is detected, we holistically analyse every speaker along with
the audio track to discover the most likely active speaker.

lem in a principled manner. Our key insight is that, instead
of optimizing active speaker predictions over individual audiovisual embeddings, we can jointly model a set of visual
representations from every speaker in the scene along with
a single audio representation extracted from the shared audio track. While simple, this modification allows us to map
the active speaker detection task into an assignation problem, whose goal is to match multiple visual representations
with a singleton audio embedding. Figure 1 illustrates some
of the challenges in active speaker detection and provides a
general insight for our approach.
Our approach, dubbed “Multi-modal Assignation for
Active Speaker detection” (MAAS) relies on multi-modal
graph neural networks [27, 50] to approach the local (framewise) assignation problem, but it is flexible enough to also
propagate information from a long-term analysis window
by simply updating the underlying graph connectivity. In
this framework, we define the active speaker as the local
visual representation with the highest affinity to the audio
embedding. Our empirical findings highlight that reformulating the problem into a multi-modal assignation problem
brings sizable improvements over current state-of-the-art

265

