Act the Part:
Learning Interaction Strategies for Articulated Object Part Discovery
Samir Yitzhak Gadre1
Kiana Ehsani2
Shuran Song1
1
2
Columbia University
Allen Institute for AI
https://atp.cs.columbia.edu
Abstract
People often use physical intuition when manipulating
articulated objects, irrespective of object semantics. Motivated by this observation, we identify an important embodied task where an agent must play with objects to recover
their parts. To this end, we introduce Act the Part (AtP)
to learn how to interact with articulated objects to discover and segment their pieces. By coupling action selection and motion segmentation, AtP is able to isolate structures to make perceptual part recovery possible without semantic labels. Our experiments show AtP learns efficient
strategies for part discovery, can generalize to unseen categories, and is capable of conditional reasoning for the
task. Although trained in simulation, we show convincing
transfer to real world data with no fine-tuning. A summery video, interactive demo, and code will be available
at https://atp.cs.columbia.edu.

1. Introduction
How do people and animals make sense of the physical world? Studies from cognitive science indicate observing the consequences of one’s actions plays a crucial role
[17, 38, 3]. Gibson’s influential work on affordances argues
visual objects ground action possibilities [14]. Work from
Tucker et al. goes further, suggesting what one sees affects
what one does [44]. These findings establish a plausible
biological link between seeing and doing. However, in an
age of data-driven computer vision, static image and video
datasets [40, 24, 2] have taken center stage.
In this paper, we aim to elucidate connections between
perception and interaction by investigating articulated object part discovery and segmentation. In this task, an agent
must recover part masks by choosing strategic interactions
over a few timesteps. We do not assume dense part labels
or known kinematic structure [1, 23]. We also do not interact randomly [33]. Rather, we learn an agent capable of
holding and pushing, allowing us to relax the assumption
that objects are fixed to a ground plane [28]. Our task and

Figure 1. Interaction for Part Discovery. Passive part segmentation algorithms require detailed annotation and cannot generalize
to new categories. While motion can help discover new objects,
prior work cannot infer actions for understanding individual parts.
Our work, Act the Part, learns interaction strategies that expose
parts and generalize to unseen categories.

approach novelty are highlighted in Fig. 1.
Segmentation from strong supervision and random interaction is widely studied; however, creating informative motion to enable category level generalization while relaxing
supervision is less explored in the community. We identify the following hurdles, which make this direction salient
and difficult. Motion cannot be assumed in a scene as objects seldom move spontaneously. Even with agent interaction, not all actions create perceivable motion to give insight
about articulation. Actions might activate only a small number of parts, so diversity of action and aggregation of potentially noisy perceptual discoveries is necessary. Generalization of interaction and perception to unseen categories without retraining or fine-tuning is also desirable. These facets
are often overlooked in prior work but are at the heart of this
paper.
To address these challenges, we introduce Act the Part
(AtP), which takes visual observations, interacts intelligently, and outputs part masks. Our key insight is to couple

15752

