Instances as Queries
Yuxin Fang1∗ , Shusheng Yang1,2 ,* Xinggang Wang1†, Yu Li2 ,
Chen Fang3 , Ying Shan2 , Bin Feng1 , Wenyu Liu1
1

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG 3 Tencent

Abstract

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a fundamental yet challenging
computer vision task that requires an algorithm to assign
a pixel-level mask with a category label for each instance
of interest in image. Prevalent state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods are based on high performing object detectors and follow a multi-stage paradigm. Among which,
the Mask R-CNN family [22, 25, 32, 5, 10, 44] is the most
successful one, where the regions-of-interest (RoI) for instance segmentation is extracted via a region-wise pooling
operation (e.g., RoIPool [23, 20] or RoIAlign [22]) based on
the box-level localization information from the region proposal network (RPN) [41], or the previous stage bounding* Equal contributions. This work was done while Shusheng Yang was
interning at Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG.
† Corresponding author, E-mail: xgwang@hust.edu.cn.

COCO Mask AP

We present QueryInst, a new perspective for instance
segmentation. QueryInst is a multi-stage end-to-end system that treats instances of interest as learnable queries,
enabling query based object detectors, e.g., Sparse RCNN, to have strong instance segmentation performance.
The attributes of instances such as categories, bounding
boxes, instance masks, and instance association embeddings are represented by queries in a unified manner. In
QueryInst, a query is shared by both detection and segmentation via dynamic convolutions and driven by parallellysupervised multi-stage learning. We conduct extensive experiments on three challenging benchmarks, i.e., COCO,
CityScapes, and YouTube-VIS to evaluate the effectiveness
of QueryInst in object detection, instance segmentation, and
video instance segmentation tasks. For the first time, we
demonstrate that a simple end-to-end query based framework can achieve the state-of-the-art performance in various instance-level recognition tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/hustvl/QueryInst.

50

Mask R-CNN

Cascade Mask R-CNN

HTC

CondInst

SOLO V2

QueryInst

45

40

35
0

5
Frame Per Second (FPS)

10

Figure 1: AP vs. FPS on COCO test-dev. QueryInst outperforms current state-of-the-art methods in terms of both
accuracy and speed. The speed is measured using a single
Titan Xp GPU.

box prediction [4, 5]. The final instance mask is obtained
via feeding the RoI feature into the mask head, which is a
small fully convolutional network (FCN) [35].
Recently, DETR [7] is proposed to reformulate object
detection as a query based direct set prediction problem,
whose input is mere 100 learned object queries. Follow-up
works [63, 44, 45, 19, 60, 16] in object detection improve
this query based approach and achieve comparable performance with state-of-the-art detectors such as Cascade RCNN [4]. The results show that query based instance-level
perception is a very promising research direction. Thus,
enabling query based detection framework to perform instance segmentation is highly desirable. However, we find
that it is inefficient to integrate the previous successful practices in Cascade Mask R-CNN [5] and HTC [10], which are
state-of-the-art mask generation solutions in the non-query
based paradigm, directly into query based detectors for instance mask generation. Therefore, an instance segmentation method tailored for the query based end-to-end framework is urgently needed.
To bridge this gap, we propose QueryInst (Instances as

6910

