Scaling-up Disentanglement for Image Translation
Aviv Gabbay
Yedid Hoshen
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
Project webpage: http://www.vision.huji.ac.il/overlord

Abstract
Image translation methods typically aim to manipulate
a set of labeled attributes (given as supervision at training time e.g. domain label) while leaving the unlabeled attributes intact. Current methods achieve either: (i) disentanglement, which exhibits low visual fidelity and can only
be satisfied where the attributes are perfectly uncorrelated.
(ii) visually-plausible translations, which are clearly not
disentangled. In this work, we propose OverLORD, a single framework for disentangling labeled and unlabeled attributes as well as synthesizing high-fidelity images, which
is composed of two stages; (i) Disentanglement: Learning
disentangled representations with latent optimization. Differently from previous approaches, we do not rely on adversarial training or any architectural biases. (ii) Synthesis:
Training feed-forward encoders for inferring the learned
attributes and tuning the generator in an adversarial manner to increase the perceptual quality. When the labeled
and unlabeled attributes are correlated, we model an additional representation that accounts for the correlated attributes and improves disentanglement. We highlight that
our flexible framework covers multiple settings as disentangling labeled attributes, pose and appearance, localized
concepts, and shape and texture. We present significantly
better disentanglement with higher translation quality and
greater output diversity than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Learning disentangled representations for different factors of variation in a set of observations is a fundamental problem in machine learning. Such representations can
facilitate generalization to downstream generative and discriminative tasks such as novel image synthesis [39] and
person re-identification [9], as well as improving interpretability [14], reasoning [34] and fairness [6]. A popular
task which benefits from disentanglement is image translation, in which the goal is to translate a given input im-

age from a source domain (e.g. cats) to an analogous image in a target domain (e.g. dogs). Although this task is
generally poorly specified, it is often satisfied under the assumption that images in different domains share common
attributes (e.g. head pose) which can remain unchanged
during translation. In this paper, we divide the set of all
attributes that define a target image precisely into two subsets; (i) labeled attributes: the attributes that are supervised
at training time e.g. whether the image belongs to the “cats”
or “dogs” domain; (ii) unlabeled attributes: all the remaining attributes that we do not have supervision for e.g. breed
of the animal, head pose, background etc. While several
methods (e.g. LORD [10], StarGAN [4], Fader Networks
[20]) have been proposed for disentangling labeled and unlabeled attributes, we explain and show why they can not
deal with cases where the labeled and unlabeled attributes
are correlated. For example, when translating cats to dogs,
the unlabeled breed (which specifies fur texture or facial
shape) is highly correlated with the domain label (cat or
dog), and can not be translated between species. This dependency motivates the specification of more fine-grained
attributes that we wish the translated image to have. Several
methods as MUNIT [16], FUNIT [23] and StarGAN-v2 [5]
attempt to learn a domain-dependent style representation
which ideally should account for the correlated attributes.
Unfortunately, we show that despite their visually pleasing results, the translated images still retain many domainspecific attributes of the source image. As demonstrated
in Fig. 2, when translating dogs to wild animals, current
methods transfer facial shapes which are unique to dogs and
should not be transferred precisely to wild animals, while
our model transfers the semantic head pose more reliably.
In this work, we analyze the different settings for disentanglement of labeled and unlabeled attributes. In the
case where they are perfectly uncorrelated, we improve over
LORD [10] and scale to higher perceptual quality by a novel
synthesis stage. In cases where the labeled and unlabeled
attributes are correlated, we rely on the existence of spatial
transformations which can retain the correlated attributes

6783

