Domain-Aware Universal Style Transfer
Kibeom Hong 1

Seogkyu Jeon1
Huan Yang3
Jianlong Fu3
1
Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University
2
Graduate school of AI, Yonsei University
3
Microsoft Research

{huayan,jianf}@microsoft.com

Artistic

Photo-realistic

{cha2068,jone9312,hrbyun}@yonsei.ac.kr

Hyeran Byun1,2*

Content

Reference

(a) Ours

(b) AdaIN [10]

(c) WCT [15] (d) Avatar-Net [24] (e) SANet [21]

(f) AAMS [30] (g) PhotoWCT [16] (h) WCT 2 [31]

Figure 1. Stylization results. Given input pairs (a fixed content and four references from photo and art domains), we compare our method
(a) with both artistic transfer methods (b-f) and photo-realistic methods (g-h). While previous works fail to generate plausible results with
references coming from the opposite domains, our model successfully conducts style transfer in both domains. (Best viewed in color.)

Abstract
Style transfer aims to reproduce content images with the
styles from reference images. Existing universal style transfer methods successfully deliver arbitrary styles to original images either in an artistic or a photo-realistic way.
However, the range of “arbitrary style” defined by existing works is bounded in the particular domain due to their
structural limitation. Specifically, the degrees of content
preservation and stylization are established according to a
predefined target domain. As a result, both photo-realistic
and artistic models have difficulty in performing the desired
style transfer for the other domain. To overcome this limitation, we propose a unified architecture, Domain-aware
Style Transfer Networks (DSTN) that transfer not only the
style but also the property of domain (i.e., domainness) from
* Corresponding author

a given reference image. To this end, we design a novel
domainness indicator that captures the domainness value
from the texture and structural features of reference images.
Moreover, we introduce a unified framework with domainaware skip connection to adaptively transfer the stroke and
palette to the input contents guided by the domainness indicator. Our extensive experiments validate that our model
produces better qualitative results and outperforms previous methods in terms of proxy metrics on both artistic
and photo-realistic stylizations. All codes and pre-trained
weights are available at Kibeom-Hong/Domain-Aware-StyleTransfer.

1. Introduction
Recreating an image with the style of another image has
been a long-standing research topic. As a seminal work,
Gatys et al. [5] propose the neural style transfer with deep
features extracted from pre-trained networks, i.e., VGG-19

14609

