CDNet: Centripetal Direction Network for Nuclear Instance Segmentation
Hongliang He1,2 Zhongyi Huang1 Yao Ding3 Guoli Song2 Lin Wang1,2
Qian Ren1,2 Pengxu Wei4 Zhiqiang Gao2 Jie Chen1,2 *
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{hehl,hzhongyi,wangl1212,renq2019}@pku.edu.cn, dingyao16@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
{songgl,gaozhq,chenj}@pcl.ac.cn, weipx3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Nuclear instance segmentation is a challenging task due
to a large number of touching and overlapping nuclei in
pathological images. Existing methods cannot effectively
recognize the accurate boundary owing to neglecting the
relationship between pixels (e.g., direction information). In
this paper, we propose a novel Centripetal Direction Network (CDNet) for nuclear instance segmentation. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne centripetal direction feature as a class of
adjacent directions pointing to the nuclear center to represent the spatial relationship between pixels within the
nucleus. These direction features are then used to construct a direction difference map to represent the similarity within instances and the differences between instances.
Finally, we propose a direction-guided reﬁnement module,
which acts as a plug-and-play module to effectively integrate auxiliary tasks and aggregate the features of different
branches. Experiments on MoNuSeg and CPM17 datasets
show that CDNet is signiﬁcantly better than the other methods and achieves the state-of-the-art performance. The
code is available at https://github.com/honglianghe/CDNet.

1. Introduction
Nuclear instance segmentation techniques enable accurate quantitative characterizations of nuclear size and shape
(e.g., circularity and aspect ratio), which are key components of the study of cancerous tissues [9]. However, a
whole-slide image contains tens of thousands of nuclei of
various types (as shown in Fig. 1(a)∼(b)), and nuclei display a great deal of inter- and intra-instance variability be-

(a)

(d)

(e)

(h)

(b)

(c)

(f)

(g)

(j)
(i)

Figure 1. The schematic illustration of nuclear instance segmentation with different methods. (a) is a whole-slide image; (b) is
a local region; (c) is the ground-truth boundary corresponding to
(b); (d) and (f) denote the probability maps based on two kinds of
existing methods, and (e) and (g) reﬂect the limitations of these
existing methods on overlapping boundaries; (h)∼(j) are obtained
from our CDNet, in which (h) is the centripetal direction feature;
(i) is the direction difference map, and (j) is the corresponding
boundary map. The red line in (j) indicates that CDNet effectively
identiﬁes the boundaries of overlapping regions.

cause of their appearances, surroundings by organs, disease
types, and even digital scanner brands. In particular, tumour nuclei tend to be present in clusters and lead to clustered overlapping instances, which also provides challenge
for accurate segmentation of nuclear instances.
To tackle the above challenges of nuclear instance seg-

* Corresponding authors

4026

