HPNet: Deep Primitive Segmentation Using Hybrid Representations
Siming Yan1

Zhenpei Yang1
Chongyang Ma2
Haibin Huang2
1
1
Etienne Vouga
Qixing Huang
1
2
The University of Texas at Austin
Kuaishou Technology

Abstract
This paper introduces HPNet, a novel deep-learning
approach for segmenting a 3D shape represented as a
point cloud into primitive patches. The key to deep
primitive segmentation is learning a feature representation
that can separate points of different primitives. Unlike
utilizing a single feature representation, HPNet leverages
hybrid representations that combine one learned semantic
descriptor, two spectral descriptors derived from predicted
geometric parameters, as well as an adjacency matrix
that encodes sharp edges. Moreover, instead of merely
concatenating the descriptors, HPNet optimally combines
hybrid representations by learning combination weights.
This weighting module builds on the entropy of input features.
The output primitive segmentation is obtained from a meanshift clustering module. Experimental results on benchmark
datasets ANSI and ABCParts show that HPNet leads to
significant performance gains from baseline approaches.

1. Introduction
The geometry of man-made objects can be frequently
analysed in terms of primitive surface patches (planes,
spheres, cylinders, cones, and other simple parametric
surfaces). Decomposing a 3D model into primitive surfaces
is of fundamental importance with applications in reverse
engineering, shape compression, shape understanding, shape
editing, and robot learning. Primitive segmentation is the
task of grouping and labeling points on an object based on
primitive shape, and is fundamentally challenging due to the
large search space and the fact that primitive patches may
only approximately fit the object.
This paper introduces a deep learning model called
HPNet. It takes as input a point cloud (optionally including
normals) and outputs a segmentation of the point cloud into
primitives, with a type label for each primitive segment
(see Figure 1). The main idea of HPNet is to combine
traditional tried-and-true geometric heuristics for primitive
detection (for instance, algebraic relations between points
and shape primitives, and segmentation from sharp edges)
with a deep primitive detection approach based on powerful
feature learning. We achieve this union through the use of

!"#$%

Figure 1: HPNet takes a point cloud as input and outputs
detected primitive patches. It can handle diverse primitives
at different scales. The detected primitives have smooth
boundaries.
a hybrid point descriptor that combines a learned semantic
descriptor and two spectral descriptors. The first spectral
descriptor is derived from the adjacency matrix between
the input points and predicted primitive parameters. The
second spectral descriptor is built based on the adjacency
matrix that models sharp edges. In both cases, the spectral
approach unifies all primitive segmentation cues as point
descriptors. It also rectifies the inputs to the spectral modules,
e.g., incorrect predictions of primitive parameters. Given the
point descriptors, HPNet employs a mean-shift clustering
module to perform primitive segmentation. We also present
an effective approach to train HPNet.
A key insight that allows HPNet to succeed on a
wide diversity of input shapes is that different types of
features have different power on different types of models.
For example, when planar shapes are prominent, spectral
descriptors are very effective, as eigenvectors of edge-aware
adjacency operators localize strongly on the planar patches
and segment them robustly. In contrast, the semantic
descriptors are more useful for complex curved shapes, such
as patches of cones and cylinders, in which local curvature
information is sufficient to determine the shape parameters.
HPNet exploits this insight by using adaptive weights to
combine different types of features. A weighting module
automatically computes the relative weighting for different
types of descriptors, based on an entropy measure of each
descriptor which estimates the importance of that descriptor
for clustering.
We evaluate HPNet on two benchmark datasets, i.e.,
ANSI [14] and ABCParts [23]. With only points as input,

2753

