Temporal Knowledge Consistency for Unsupervised Visual Representation
Learning
Weixin Feng1 * Yuanjiang Wang2 * † Lihua Ma2 Ye Yuan2 Chi Zhang2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 1 Megvii Technology2
fengweixin@bupt.edu.cn, wangyuanjiang@megvii.com
{malihua, yuanye, zhangchi}@megvii.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
The rise of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(DCNN) [23, 28, 46] has led to significant success in computer vision benchmarks [8, 13, 33]. The excellent performance of supervised DCNN always relies on a large quantity of manually labeled data, which is costly to collect
[18, 51]. Unsupervised representation learning has been
attracted more and more interest, for it can learn a good
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

This paper is supported by the National Key R&D Plan of the Ministry
of Science and Technology (Project No.2020AAA0104400).

𝜔"

proportion(%)

The instance discrimination paradigm has become dominant in unsupervised learning. It always adopts a teacherstudent framework, in which the teacher provides embedded knowledge as a supervision signal for the student. The
student learns meaningful representations by enforcing instance spatial consistency with the views from the teacher.
However, the outputs of the teacher can vary dramatically
on the same instance during different training stages, introducing unexpected noise and leading to catastrophic forgetting caused by inconsistent objectives. In this paper, we
first integrate instance temporal consistency into current
instance discrimination paradigms, and propose a novel
and strong algorithm named Temporal Knowledge Consistency (TKC). Specifically, our TKC dynamically ensembles
the knowledge of temporal teachers and adaptively selects
useful information according to its importance to learning
instance temporal consistency. Experimental result shows
that TKC can learn better visual representations on both
ResNet and AlexNet on linear evaluation protocol while
transfer well to downstream tasks. All experiments suggest
the good effectiveness and generalization of our method.
Code will be made available.

𝛼

𝜔$%"
𝜔#

𝜔$

Iterations(k)

Figure 1. Mainstream unsupervised methods adopt the teacherstudent framework, where the teacher is an EMA ensemble of previous student encoders. This figure illustrates the proportion of
previous students in the teacher with respect to training steps. The
red curve shows that the EMA teacher ensembles the previous encoders by a predesigned factor α, where only alomst encoders in
the very close steps are ensembled. Our TKC (the green curve)
reuses the early models and adaptively learns the importance ω for
each of them, thus leads to temporal consistent representations.

representation without human annotations. These methods
are generally to manually design a pretext task to learn representations, such as image in-painting [42], colorization
[9, 60, 30, 31], rotate predicting [18, 6, 14] and clustering [2, 62, 4]. All these pretext tasks are based on specific domain knowledge, which has poor generation on various downstream tasks. Recently, instance discrimination
[51, 21, 5, 19, 36] paradigm has led to remarkable progress
in unsupervised representation learning and even surpasses
the supervised pre-training on extensive downstream tasks
[36, 21].
The instance discrimination paradigm treats each sample itself as its own category and trains the CNN to sep-

10170

