Continual Neural Mapping:
Learning An Implicit Scene Representation from Sequential Observations
Zike Yan1 Yuxin Tian2 Xuesong Shi3 Ping Guo3 Peng Wang3 Hongbin Zha1
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
PKU-SenseTime Machine Vision Joint Lab
2
School of Automation Sceience and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University
3
Intel Labs China
zike.yan@pku.edu.cn, tianyuxin@buaa.edu.cn,
{xuesong.shi, ping.guo, patricia.p.wang}@intel.com, zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Continual
Neural
Mapping
Batch
Training

t

Figure 1: Continual neural mapping learns scene properties from sequential data. By memorizing past experience within
shared weights of a single network, we eliminate the need to store the entire sets of data or learn from scratch at each time.

Abstract
Recent advances have enabled a single neural network to
serve as an implicit scene representation, establishing the
mapping function between spatial coordinates and scene
properties. In this paper, we make a further step towards
continual learning of the implicit scene representation directly from sequential observations, namely Continual Neural Mapping. The proposed problem setting bridges the gap
between batch-trained implicit neural representations and
commonly used streaming data in robotics and vision communities. We introduce an experience replay approach to
tackle an exemplary task of continual neural mapping: approximating a continuous signed distance function (SDF)
from sequential depth images as a scene geometry representation. We show for the first time that a single network
can represent scene geometry over time continually without
catastrophic forgetting, while achieving promising tradeoffs between accuracy and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Scene representations convert visual sensory data into
compact forms. Recent trends [58, 34] show that the mapping function y = f (x; θ) between the spatial coordinate
x and the scene property y can serve as an implicit scene
representation parameterized by a single neural network θ.
Such a new paradigm has drawn significant attention: the
neural network defined in a continuous and differentiable
function space can be trained to recover fine-grained details
at scene scale with efficient memory consumption, which
offers great benefits over alternatives.
However, batch training of the implicit neural representation is impractical and inefficient when dealing with possibly unending streams of data. To handle the sequential
observations and obtain a globally consistent representation over time, conventional approaches turn to a data fusion paradigm. A discretized scene representation is predefined in memory-inefficient parameter space and updated
according to perceived observations at each time. The gap
between the emerging neural representation paradigm and

15782

