BossNAS: Exploring Hybrid CNN-transformers with Block-wisely
Self-supervised Neural Architecture Search
Changlin Li1 ,
1

Tao Tang2 , Guangrun Wang3,4 , Jiefeng Peng3 ,
Xiaodan Liang2 ,* Xiaojun Chang6

GORSE Lab, Dept. of DSAI, Monash University
4

University of Oxford

5

2

Sun Yat-sen University

Alibaba Group

6

3

Bing Wang5 ,

DarkMatter AI Research

RMIT University

changlin.li@monash.edu,
{trent.tangtao,wanggrun,jiefengpeng,xdliang328}@gmail.com,
fengquan.wb@alibaba-inc.com, xiaojun.chang@rmit.edu.au

Label

Label

Abstract
A myriad of recent breakthroughs in hand-crafted neural architectures for visual recognition have highlighted the
urgent need to explore hybrid architectures consisting of
diversified building blocks. Meanwhile, neural architecture
search methods are surging with an expectation to reduce
human efforts. However, whether NAS methods can efficiently and effectively handle diversified search spaces with
disparate candidates (e.g. CNNs and transformers) is still
an open question. In this work, we present Block-wisely
Self-supervised Neural Architecture Search (BossNAS), an
unsupervised NAS method that addresses the problem of inaccurate architecture rating caused by large weight-sharing
space and biased supervision in previous methods. More
specifically, we factorize the search space into blocks and
utilize a novel self-supervised training scheme, named ensemble bootstrapping, to train each block separately before
searching them as a whole towards the population center.
Additionally, we present HyTra search space, a fabric-like
hybrid CNN-transformer search space with searchable downsampling positions. On this challenging search space, our
searched model, BossNet-T, achieves up to 82.5% accuracy
on ImageNet, surpassing EfficientNet by 2.4% with comparable compute time. Moreover, our method achieves superior
architecture rating accuracy with 0.78 and 0.76 Spearman
correlation on the canonical MBConv search space with ImageNet and on NATS-Bench size search space with CIFAR100, respectively, surpassing state-of-the-art NAS methods.1

1. Introduction
The development of neural network architectures has
brought about significant progress in a wide range of visual
recognition tasks over the past several years. Representative
* Corresponding Author.
1 Code: https://github.com/changlin31/BossNAS.

(a) NAS with large weight-sharing space (39 ).

(b) Block-wise NAS with biased supervision.

(c) Block-wisely self-supervised NAS.

Figure 1: Comparision of three NAS schemes. Red arrows
represent the supervision during training and searching.
examples of such models include ResNet [25], SENet [31],
MobileNet [30] and EfficientNet [64]. Recently, the newly
emerging attention-based architectures are coming to the
forefront in the vision field, challenging the dominance of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). This exciting breakthrough in vision transformers led by ViT [20] and DETR
[8], are achieving competitive performance on various vision tasks, such as image classification [20, 66, 79, 14, 9],
object detection [8, 90, 62], semantic segmentation [88], and
others [26, 50, 33]. As suggested by prior works [20, 62, 3],
hybrids of CNNs and transformers can outperform both pure
transformers and pure CNNs.
Despite the large advances brought about by network
design, manually finding well-optimized hybrid architectures can be challenging, especially as the number of design
choices increases. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is a
popular approach to reducing the human effort in network
architecture design by automatically searching for optimal

12281

