Image Inpainting via Conditional Texture and Structure Dual Generation
Xiefan Guo1,2 Hongyu Yang2 * Di Huang1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{xfguo,hongyuyang,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep generative approaches have recently made considerable progress in image inpainting by introducing structure priors. Due to the lack of proper interaction with image texture during structure reconstruction, however, current solutions are incompetent in handling the cases with
large corruptions, and they generally suffer from distorted
results. In this paper, we propose a novel two-stream network for image inpainting, which models the structureconstrained texture synthesis and texture-guided structure reconstruction in a coupled manner so that they better
leverage each other for more plausible generation. Furthermore, to enhance the global consistency, a Bi-directional
Gated Feature Fusion (Bi-GFF) module is designed to exchange and combine the structure and texture information
and a Contextual Feature Aggregation (CFA) module is developed to reﬁne the generated contents by region afﬁnity learning and multi-scale feature aggregation. Qualitative and quantitative experiments on the CelebA, Paris
StreetView and Places2 datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Xiefan-Guo/CTSDG.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting [3] refers to the process of reconstructing damaged regions of an image while simultaneously
maintaining its overall consistency, which is a typical lowlevel visual task with many practical applications, such as
photo editing, distracting object removal, and restoring corrupted parts.
As with most computer vision problems, image inpainting has been largely advanced by the widespread use of
deep learning during the past decade. Different from the
traditional methods [2, 5] that gradually ﬁll in missing areas
by searching for the most similar patches from known regions, the deep generative ones [19, 7, 31, 33] capture more
high-level semantics and do a better job for images with
* Corresponding author.

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1: High-quality inpainting results. From left to right:
(a) input corrupted images, (b) our reconstructed structures,
(c) our ﬁlled results, and (d) ground-truth images.

non-repetitive patterns. There also exists another trend to
combine the advantages of deep generative and traditional
patch-based methods for image inpainting [35, 30, 24, 15],
delivering inpainting contents with both realistic textures
and plausible semantics. Moreover, updated versions of
vanilla convolution are investigated [13, 27, 36], where operations are masked and normalized to be conditioned only
on valid pixels, achieving promising performance for irregular corruptions. Nevertheless, the methods above expose
a common drawback in recovering the global structure of
the image, as a generative network is not as powerful as expected for this issue.
To deal with this problem, a number of multi-stage methods are proposed to explicitly incorporate structure modeling, which hallucinate structures of missing regions in the
ﬁrst stage and use them to guide pixel generation in the second stage. For instance, EdgeConnect [18] encodes such
structures by edges, while [20] and [28] adopt intermediate edge-preserved smooth images and foreground contours. These alternatives show the results with improved
structures and textures. Unfortunately, acquiring reasonable edges from corrupted images is itself a very challeng-

14134

