Artificial Fingerprinting for Generative Models:
Rooting Deepfake Attribution in Training Data
Ning Yu1,2 * Vladislav Skripniuk3∗ Sahar Abdelnabi3 Mario Fritz3
1
University of Maryland 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{ningyu,vladislav}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Photorealistic image generation has reached a new level
of quality due to the breakthroughs of generative adversarial networks (GANs). Yet, the dark side of such deepfakes,
the malicious use of generated media, raises concerns about
visual misinformation. While existing research work on
deepfake detection demonstrates high accuracy, it is subject
to advances in generation techniques and adversarial iterations on detection countermeasure techniques. Thus, we
seek a proactive and sustainable solution on deepfake detection, that is agnostic to the evolution of generative models, by introducing artificial fingerprints into the models.
Our approach is simple and effective. We first embed
artificial fingerprints into training data, then validate a surprising discovery on the transferability of such fingerprints
from training data to generative models, which in turn appears in the generated deepfakes. Experiments show that
our fingerprinting solution (1) holds for a variety of cuttingedge generative models, (2) leads to a negligible side effect
on generation quality, (3) stays robust against image-level
and model-level perturbations, (4) stays hard to be detected
by adversaries, and (5) converts deepfake detection and attribution into trivial tasks and outperforms the recent stateof-the-art baselines. Our solution closes the responsibility
loop between publishing pre-trained generative model inventions and their possible misuses, which makes it independent of the current arms race.

1. Introduction
In the past years, photorealistic image generation has
been rapidly evolving, benefiting from the invention of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [16] and its successive
breakthroughs [39, 17, 35, 5, 25, 26, 27, 50, 51]. Given
the level of realism and diversity that generative models can
achieve today, detecting generated media, well known as
* Equal contribution.

{sahar.abdelnabi,fritz}@cispa.saarland

deepfakes, attributing their sources, and tracing their legal
responsibilities become infeasible to human beings.
Moreover, the misuse of deepfakes has been permeating
to each corner of social media, ranging from misinformation of political campaigns [24] to fake journalism [44, 40].
This motivates tremendous research efforts on deepfake detection [53] and source attribution [34, 49, 46]. These techniques aim to counter the widespread of malicious applications of deepfakes by automatically identifying generated
visual contents and tracking their sources. Most of them
rely on low-level visual patterns in GAN-generated images [34, 49, 46, 19, 57] or frequency mismatch [13, 56, 14].
However, these techniques are unable to sustainably and
robustly prevent deepfake misuse in the long run; as generative models evolve, they learn to better match the true
distribution causing fewer artifacts [53]. Besides, detection
countermeasures are also continuously evolving [12, 6, 53].
Motivated by this, we tackle deepfake detection and attribution through a different lens, and propose a proactive
and sustainable solution for detection, which is simple and
effective. In specific, we aim to introduce artificial fingerprints into generative models that enable identification and
tracing. Figure 1 depicts our pipeline; we first embed artificial fingerprints into the training data using image steganography [4, 42]. The generative model is then trained with its
original protocol without modification. This makes our solution agnostic and plug-and-play for arbitrary models. We
then show a surprising discovery on the transferability of
such fingerprints from training data to the model: the same
fingerprint information that was encoded in the training data
can be decoded from all generated images.
We achieve deepfake detection by classifying images
with matched fingerprints in our database as fake and images with random detected fingerprints as real. We also
achieve deepfake attribution when we allocate different fingerprints for different generative models. Our solution thus
closes the responsibility loop between generative model inventions and their possible misuses. It prevents the misuse
of published pre-trained generative models by enabling in-

14448

