A Unified Objective for Novel Class Discovery
Enrico Fini1
1

Enver Sangineto1

Stéphane Lathuilière2

Zhun Zhong1 * Moin Nabi3

Elisa Ricci1,4

University of Trento, Trento, Italy 2 LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
3
SAP AI Research, Berlin, Germany 4 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy

Previous Works

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of Novel Class Discovery (NCD). NCD aims at inferring novel object categories in an unlabeled set by leveraging from prior knowledge of a labeled set containing different, but related
classes. Existing approaches tackle this problem by considering multiple objective functions, usually involving specialized loss terms for the labeled and the unlabeled samples respectively, and often requiring auxiliary regularization terms. In this paper we depart from this traditional
scheme and introduce a UNified Objective function (UNO)
for discovering novel classes, with the explicit purpose
of favoring synergy between supervised and unsupervised
learning. Using a multi-view self-labeling strategy, we generate pseudo-labels that can be treated homogeneously with
ground truth labels. This leads to a single classification objective operating on both known and unknown classes. Despite its simplicity, UNO outperforms the state of the art
by a significant margin on several benchmarks (≈+10% on
CIFAR-100 and +8% on ImageNet). The project page is
available at : https://ncd-uno.github.io.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has enabled astounding progresses in
computer vision. However, the necessity of large annotated
training sets for these models is often a limiting factor. For
instance, training a deep neural network for classification
requires a large amount of labeled data for each class of
interest. This constraint is even more severe in scenarios
where collecting sufficient data for each class is expensive
or even impossible, as for instance in medical applications.
To alleviate these problems, Novel Class Discovery
(NCD) [7, 6, 8] has recently emerged as a practical solution. NCD aims at training a network that can simultaneously classify a set of labeled classes while discovering
new ones in an unlabeled image set. The basic motivation
* Corresponding author

Supervised
Objective(s)

Auxiliary
Objective(s)

Clustering
Objective(s)

"cat"
"dog"

Uni ed Objective (UNO)
This Work

Figure 1: A visual comparison of our UNified Objective
(UNO) with previous works. Existing approaches tackle
NCD using multiple objective functions such as supervised,
clustering and auxiliary objectives. On the contrary, we
devise a single classification objective operating on both
known and unknown classes.
behind this setting is that the network can benefit from the
supervision available on the labeled set to learn rich image
representations that can be transferred to discover unknown
classes in the unlabeled set. At training time, data are split
into a set of labeled images and a set of unlabeled images,
assuming disjoint sets of classes. These two sets are used
to train a single network to classify both the known and the
unknown classes. Note that this problem is similar but different from semi-supervised learning [22, 24], because, in
the latter, the working assumption is that labeled and unlabeled sets share the same classes. Differently, in NCD,
the two sets of classes are supposed to be disjoint. Moreover, differently from common clustering [1, 25] scenarios,
in an NCD framework, labeled data can be utilized at training time, and the challenge consists in transferring the supervised knowledge on the known classes to improve clustering of the unknown ones.
Most NCD methods usually perform an initial supervised pretraining step on the labeled set, followed by a clus-

9284

