Weakly Supervised Representation Learning with Coarse Labels
Qi Qian2 * Hao Li1 Rong Jin2 Juhua Hu3
1
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
2
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA, 98004, USA
3
School of Engineering and Technology
University of Washington, Tacoma, WA, 98402, USA

Yuanhong Xu1

{yuanhong.xuyh, qi.qian, lihao.lh, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com, juhuah@uw.edu

Abstract
Images

With the development of computational power and techniques for data collection, deep learning demonstrates a
superior performance over most existing algorithms on visual benchmark data sets. Many efforts have been devoted
to studying the mechanism of deep learning. One important observation is that deep learning can learn the discriminative patterns from raw materials directly in a taskdependent manner. Therefore, the representations obtained
by deep learning outperform hand-crafted features significantly. However, for some real-world applications, it is too
expensive to collect the task-specific labels, such as visual
search in online shopping. Compared to the limited availability of these task-specific labels, their coarse-class labels
are much more affordable, but representations learned from
them can be suboptimal for the target task. To mitigate
this challenge, we propose an algorithm to learn the finegrained patterns for the target task, when only its coarseclass labels are available. More importantly, we provide
a theoretical guarantee for this. Extensive experiments on
real-world data sets demonstrate that the proposed method
can significantly improve the performance of learned representations on the target task, when only coarse-class information is available for training.

1. Introduction
Deep learning attracts more and more attentions due to
its tremendous success in computer vision [11, 14, 19] and
NLP applications [7, 21]. With modern neural networks,
deep learning can even achieve a better performance than
human beings on certain fundamental tasks [14, 26]. The
improvement from deep learning makes many applications,
e.g., autonomous driving [5], visual search [23], questionanswering system [30], etc., become feasible.
* Corresponding author

32-class

128-class

Individual

Figure 1. Illustration of different patterns learned from different
tasks on the same synthetic data consisting of 512 images. According to different combinations of patches, three tasks are included:
32 coarse-class classification (i.e., 32-class with big patches),
128-class classification (i.e., 128-class with small patches) and
instance-level classification (i.e., Individual with big and small
patches). The detailed setting of the experiment can be found in
supplementary.

Compared with many existing models, which are designed for hand-crafted features, deep learning works in an
end-to-end learning manner. It can explore the most discriminative patterns (i.e., features) from raw materials directly for a specific task. Without an explicit phase of generating features, deep learning demonstrates a significant
improvement over existing methods [14, 19]. Using the features generated by deep learning, conventional methods can
also perform better than the counterpart with hand-crafted
features [2, 8, 11, 12]. This observation implies that neural
networks can learn the task-related patterns sufficiently.
In deep learning, representations are often learned with
respect to a specific task. Therefore, different patterns can
be extracted even on the same data set for different application scenarios as shown in the example of Fig. 1. This

10593

