Deep 3D Mask Volume for View Synthesis of Dynamic Scenes
Kai-En Lin1
1

Lei Xiao2

Feng Liu2

Guowei Yang1

University of California, San Diego
Abstract

Image view synthesis has seen great success in reconstructing photorealistic visuals, thanks to deep learning and
various novel representations. The next key step in immersive virtual experiences is view synthesis of dynamic scenes.
However, several challenges exist due to the lack of highquality training datasets, and the additional time dimension for videos of dynamic scenes. To address this issue,
we introduce a multi-view video dataset, captured with a
custom 10-camera rig in 120FPS. The dataset contains 96
high-quality scenes showing various visual effects and human interactions in outdoor scenes. We develop a new algorithm, Deep 3D Mask Volume, which enables temporallystable view extrapolation from binocular videos of dynamic
scenes, captured by static cameras. Our algorithm addresses the temporal inconsistency of disocclusions by identifying the error-prone areas with a 3D mask volume, and
replaces them with static background observed throughout
the video. Our method enables manipulation in 3D space as
opposed to simple 2D masks, We demonstrate better temporal stability than frame-by-frame static view synthesis methods, or those that use 2D masks. The resulting view synthesis videos show minimal ﬂickering artifacts and allow for
larger translational movements.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in view synthesis have shown promising results in creating immersive virtual experiences from
images. Nonetheless, in order to reconstruct compelling
and intimate interaction with the virtual scene, the ability
to incorporate temporal information is much needed. In this
paper, we study a speciﬁc setup where the input videos are
from static, binocular cameras and novel views are mostly
extrapolated from the input videos, similar to the case in
StereoMag[48]. We believe that this case is useful as dualand multi-camera smartphones are gaining traction and it
could also prove to be interesting for 3D teleconferencing,
surveillance or playback on virtual reality headsets. Moreover, we can acquire the dataset from a static camera rig
as shown in Fig.1. Although we can apply state-of-the-art
image view synthesis algorithms [48, 41, 28, 37] on each individual video frame, the results lack temporal consistency
and often show ﬂickering artifacts. The issues mostly come

2

Ravi Ramamoorthi1

Facebook Reality Labs

from the unseen occluded regions as the algorithm predicts
them on a per-frame basis. The resulting estimations are
not consistent across the time dimension and it causes some
regions to become unstable when shown in a video.
In this paper, we address the temporal inconsistency
when extrapolating views by exploiting the static background information across time. To this end, we employ
a 3D mask volume, which allows manipulation in 3D space
as opposed to a 2D mask, to reason about moving objects in
the scene and reuse static background observations across
the video. As shown in Fig.4, we ﬁrst promote the instantaneous and background inputs into two sets of multiplane
images (MPI)[48] via an MPI network. Then, we warp the
same set of input images to create a temporal plane sweep
volume, providing information about the 3D structure of
the scene. The mask network converts this volume to a 3D
mask volume which allows us to blend between the two sets
of MPIs. Finally, the blended MPI volume can render novel
views with minimal ﬂickering artifacts.
To train this network, we also introduce a new multiview video dataset to address the lack of publicly available
data. We build a custom camera rig comprised of 10 action cameras and capture high-quality 120FPS videos with
the static rig (see Fig.1). Our dataset contains 96 dynamic
scenes of various outdoor environments and human interactions. We show that the proposed method generates temporally stable results against previous state-of-the-art methods, while only using two input views.
Our contributions can be summarized as:
• a multi-view video dataset composed of 96 dynamic
scenes (Sec. 3);
• a novel 3D volumetric mask able to segment dynamic objects from static background in 3D, producing higher-quality and temporally stable results than
state-of-the-art methods (Sec. 4.2).

2. Related Work
Our goal is to achieve temporally stable view synthesis
on dynamic scenes. We are inspired by several previous
methods in view synthesis and space-time synthesis.

2.1. View synthesis
View synthesis is a complicated problem which has become a popular ﬁeld of research in computer vision and
graphics. Earlier lines of work utilize dense sampling from

1749

