Towards Memory-Efficient Neural Networks
via Multi-Level in situ Generation
Jiaqi Gu, Hanqing Zhu, Chenghao Feng, Mingjie Liu, Zixuan Jiang, Ray T. Chen, David Z. Pan
The University of Texas at Austin
{jqgu, hqzhu, fengchenghao1996, jay liu, zixuan}@utexas.edu, {chen, dpan}@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNN) have shown superior performance in a variety of tasks. As they rapidly evolve,
their escalating computation and memory demands make it
challenging to deploy them on resource-constrained edge
devices. Though extensive efficient accelerator designs,
from traditional electronics to emerging photonics, have
been successfully demonstrated, they are still bottlenecked
by expensive memory accesses due to tremendous gaps
between the bandwidth/power/latency of electrical memory and computing cores. Previous solutions fail to fullyleverage the ultra-fast computational speed of emerging
DNN accelerators to break through the critical memory
bound. In this work, we propose a general and unified
framework to trade expensive memory transactions with
ultra-fast on-chip computations, directly translating to performance improvement. We are the first to jointly explore
the intrinsic correlations and bit-level redundancy within
DNN kernels and propose a multi-level in situ generation
mechanism with mixed-precision bases to achieve on-the-fly
recovery of high-resolution parameters with minimum hardware overhead. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
proposed joint method can boost the memory efficiency by
10-20× with comparable accuracy over four state-of-theart designs, when benchmarked on ResNet-18/DenseNet121/MobileNetV2/V3 with various tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated
record-breaking performance in a variety of intelligent
tasks. Modern DNN models and datasets keep growing
rapidly, which demonstrate critical conflicts with resourceconstrained applications. Stringent constraints in efficiency,
latency, and power in practical applications raise a surging
need to develop more efficient computing solutions.
Extensive efficient neural network (NN) accelerators
have been designed to support such domain-specific com-

putations. In electrical domain, hardware-efficient digital platforms have been demonstrated, e.g., Eyeriss [5, 6],
EIE [19], TPU [26]. Due to the high efficiency of analog computing, electrical analog accelerators gain much
momentum recently, e.g., ReRAM-crossbar-based matrix
multiplication engines [41, 45, 49]. As a promising substitute for electrical designs to continue Moore’s law, optical computing provides order-of-magnitude higher efficiency than electrical counterparts. In optical computing domain, photonic accelerators are proposed to provide considerably more efficient solutions to AI acceleration [12–16, 33, 35, 37, 42–44, 47, 51, 58, 61].
However, memory performance turns out to be the critical bottleneck since it fails to match the computing capability of emerging cores. Especially for emerging accelerators,
e.g., ReRAM-based and photonics-based engines, the enormous latency, power, and bandwidth gap between memory
and computing engines severely prohibits the full utilization
of their advanced computing power.
Previous efforts towards memory-efficient accelerator
designs focus on weight quantization [20, 38, 60], pruning
with sparsity exploration [9, 20, 21, 30, 50, 55], structured
weight matrices [11, 14, 31, 49], slim architectures [2, 7, 25],
better hardware scheduling [34, 56], low-rank approximation [10, 30, 46, 53, 54, 57], etc. However, limited research
has been done to thoroughly investigate the intrinsic redundancy in CNN kernels. It is in high demand to provide a
unique memory optimization strategy that fully exploits the
potentials of advanced ultra-fast AI acceleration platforms.
Therefore, in this work, we propose a unified framework that generalizes prior low-rank solutions for memoryefficient NN designs via a multi-level in situ weight generation technique with mixed-precision quantization. We are
the first to jointly explore multi-level redundancy in channel, kernel, and bitwidth based on a strong intuition on the
intrinsic correlations within convolutions. A photonic case
study of in situ weight generator is presented to show how
our method can help unleash the full power of emerging
neuromorphic computing systems. The main contributions
of this work are as follows,

5229

