Common Objects in 3D:
Large-Scale Learning and Evaluation of Real-life 3D Category Reconstruction
Jeremy Reizenstein1

Roman Shapovalov1

Philipp Henzler2

Patrick Labatut1

David Novotny1

{reizenstein,romansh,lsbordone,plabatut,dnovotny}@fb.com
1

Facebook AI Research

Luca Sbordone1

2

{p.henzler}@cs.ucl.ac.uk

University College London

https://github.com/facebookresearch/co3d

Figure 1: We introduce the Common Objects in 3D (CO3D) dataset comprising 1.5 million multi-view images of almost
19k objects from 50 MS-COCO categories annotated with accurate cameras and 3D point clouds (visualized above).

Abstract
Traditional approaches for learning 3D object categories have been predominantly trained and evaluated on
synthetic datasets due to the unavailability of real 3Dannotated category-centric data. Our main goal is to facilitate advances in this field by collecting real-world data in
a magnitude similar to the existing synthetic counterparts.
The principal contribution of this work is thus a large-scale
dataset, called Common Objects in 3D, with real multi-view
images of object categories annotated with camera poses
and ground truth 3D point clouds. The dataset contains a
total of 1.5 million frames from nearly 19,000 videos capturing objects from 50 MS-COCO categories and, as such,
it is significantly larger than alternatives both in terms of
the number of categories and objects.
We exploit this new dataset to conduct one of the first
large-scale “in-the-wild” evaluations of several new-view-

synthesis and category-centric 3D reconstruction methods.
Finally, we contribute NerFormer - a novel neural rendering method that leverages the powerful Transformer to reconstruct an object given a small number of its views.

1. Introduction
Recently, the community witnessed numerous advances
in deeply learning to reconstruct category-centric 3D models. While a large variety of technical approaches was proposed [56, 62, 13, 25, 26, 46, 8], they are predominantly
trained and benchmarked either on synthetic data [6], or on
real datasets of specific object categories such as birds [62]
or chairs [37]. The latter is primarily a consequence of a
lack of relevant real-world datasets with 3D ground truth.
Our main goal is therefore to collect a large-scale open
real-life dataset of common objects in the wild annotated
110901

