Geometry-Aware Self-Training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
on Object Point Clouds
Longkun Zou1,2 , Hui Tang1 , Ke Chen1,3∗ , and Kui Jia1,3,4 *
1

South China University of Technology, 2 DexForce Technology Co., Ltd
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 4 Pazhou Laboratory

{eelongkunzou, eehuitang}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {chenk, kuijia}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
The point cloud representation of an object can have a
large geometric variation in view of inconsistent data acquisition procedure, which thus leads to domain discrepancy due to diverse and uncontrollable shape representation cross datasets. To improve discrimination on unseen distribution of point-based geometries in a practical and feasible perspective, this paper proposes a new
method of geometry-aware self-training (GAST) for unsupervised domain adaptation of object point cloud classification. Specifically, this paper aims to learn a domain-shared
representation of semantic categories, via two novel selfsupervised geometric learning tasks as feature regularization. On one hand, the representation learning is empowered by a linear mixup of point cloud samples with their
self-generated rotation labels, to capture a global topological configuration of local geometries. On the other
hand, a diverse point distribution across datasets can be
normalized with a novel curvature-aware distortion localization. Experiments on the PointDA-10 dataset show that
our GAST method can significantly outperform the state-ofthe-art methods. Source codes and pre-trained models are
available at https://github.com/zou-longkun/
GAST.

1. Introduction
The point cloud is a popular shape representation widely
adopted in 3D object classification [29, 42, 30, 38], owing to
its simple structure and easy acquisition. Specifically, point
clouds can be generated via point sampling on the surface of
object models, which is the recent typical solution to generate synthetic datasets for point cloud classification, e.g.
the ShapeNet [5] and ModelNet [41] benchmarks. Beyond
* Corresponding authors

Unlabeled Target Data

Labeled Source Data

Self-paced Self-training
Semantic Adaptation

Self-supervised Learning
Geometric Information

0.75

0.45

0.95

0.75

Figure 1: Concept of our geometry-aware self-training
UDA on point cloud classification. We compare conventional self-paced self-training semantic adaptation (highlighted in green) and the proposed geometry-aware selftraining (with both blocks). Note that the gray numbers in
the bottom are predicted classification probabilities for target testing point clouds from the ScanNet [9] (i.e. the two
target examples on the top left), which can verify the effectiveness of our self-supervised geometry-aware feature
regularization on semnatic representation.
synthetic point clouds, a large-scale size of point clouds as a
raw output of popular 3D sensors such as LiDAR and depth
cameras can be collected in practice. Synthetic point clouds
of each dataset typically follow a strategy, e.g. uniformly
sampling over the whole object surface in the ShapeNet
[5], and thus are under the controllable generation procedure. Point clouds existing in real world have a large geometric variation in view of the existence of realistic sensor noises, non-uniform point distribution, and single-view
coverage of unclosed surface due to self-occlusion. In view
of this, point-based shape representation can have the shifts
of distribution, which desires domain adaptation techniques
to improve generalization of point cloud classifiers.
On one hand, a large number of synthetic point clouds

6403

