Telling the What while Pointing to the Where:
Multimodal Queries for Image Retrieval
Soravit Changpinyo

Jordi Pont-Tuset Vittorio Ferrari Radu Soricut
Google Research

{schangpi,jponttuset,vittoferrari,rsoricut}@google.com

Abstract

A horse in a city,

a occluding a bike

Most existing image retrieval systems use text queries
as a way for the user to express what they are looking
for. However, fine-grained image retrieval often requires the
ability to also express where in the image the content they
are looking for is. The text modality can only cumbersomely
express such localization preferences, whereas pointing is a
more natural fit. In this paper, we propose an image retrieval setup with a new form of multimodal queries, where
the user simultaneously uses both spoken natural language
(the what) and mouse traces over an empty canvas (the
where) to express the characteristics of the desired target
image. We then describe simple modifications to an existing image retrieval model, enabling it to operate in this
setup. Qualitative and quantitative experiments show that
our model effectively takes this spatial guidance into account, and provides significantly more accurate retrieval results compared to text-only equivalent systems.

1. Introduction
Gargantuan amounts of pictures are taken and shared
every day, at an ever accelerating pace. Finding the picture that one has in mind should be easier and faster than
painfully scrolling through hundreds of pictures in a digitalcamera roll. Building effective image retrieval systems for
finding specific images among large collections is, therefore, of paramount importance. To speed the search up,
image retrieval systems build an index that represents a
collection of images by automatically analyzing their content [83, 53, 21, 66, 43, 62, 70, 71, 17, 37, 44, 39, 12].
A query is a description of what a user is looking for
in an image, a translation of their mental model of the target image into a concrete form that can be understood by
a retrieval system. At a coarse level, a query can be a list
of specific classes of objects (e.g., cars, people) the user
wants to be contained by the target image [67]. At a finergrained level is a natural language description of its contents [70, 71, 17, 37, 44, 39, 12]. The latter is the most
common paradigm in the recent literature, partly due to the

and a car.

b

A horse in a city, occluding a bike and a car. The
horse is on the left side of
the image, in a very close
shot, cut below its neck...

A horse in a city,

c occluding a bike
and a car.

Figure 1: Different types of textual queries to represent the
what and the where in the target image: (a) spatial information is
usually lacking in textual descriptions and (b) it is cumbersome to
express in written form, while (c) it is natural using mouse traces
synchronized with the text.

availability of captioning datasets that can be used as training and testing data [42, 10, 78, 55]. These types of queries
generally focus on what is present in the image, but fall
short of expressing where in the image the user expects it.
As an example, consider the image in Fig. 1. One textual
query could be “A horse in a city, occluding a bike and a
car” (Fig. 1a). The retrieved image, while not the one the
user had in mind, is a perfect match for this description: the
what in the image is similar to the intended target. Expressing the where part using the textual query is not only cumbersome for the user to write, but also hard for the retrieval
system to process (Fig. 1b).
In this paper, we propose a new query modality where
the user describes the characteristics of the desired target
image simultaneously using spoken natural language, the
what, and mouse traces over an empty canvas, the where
(Fig. 1c). Roughly pointing to an object’s location comes
naturally to humans [18, 13] and is an effective way of communicating the image layout the user has in mind. When the
localization information is also temporally aligned with the
natural language query, it becomes a natural grounding signal that can be exploited to make retrieval more precise.
We propose an image retrieval model that takes this new
type of multimodal query as input. We start from an image-

12136

