DC-ShadowNet: Single-Image Hard and Soft Shadow Removal Using
Unsupervised Domain-Classifier Guided Network

1

Yeying Jin1 , Aashish Sharma1 , and Robby T. Tan1,2
National University of Singapore, 2 Yale-NUS College

jinyeying@u.nus.edu, aashish.sharma@u.nus.edu, robby.tan@{nus,yale-nus}.edu.sg

Abstract
Shadow removal from a single image is generally still
an open problem. Most existing learning-based methods
use supervised learning and require a large number of
paired images (shadow and corresponding non-shadow images) for training. A recent unsupervised method, MaskShadowGAN [13], addresses this limitation. However, it
requires a binary mask to represent shadow regions, making it inapplicable to soft shadows. To address the problem,
in this paper, we propose an unsupervised domain-classifier
guided shadow removal network, DC-ShadowNet. Specifically, we propose to integrate a shadow/shadow-free domain classifier into a generator and its discriminator, enabling them to focus on shadow regions. To train our network, we introduce novel losses based on physics-based
shadow-free chromaticity, shadow-robust perceptual features, and boundary smoothness. Moreover, we show that
our unsupervised network can be used for test-time training that further improves the results. Our experiments show
that all these novel components allow our method to handle
soft shadows, and also to perform better on hard shadows
both quantitatively and qualitatively than the existing stateof-the-art shadow removal methods.

(a) Input Image

(b) Ground Truth

(c) Mask-ShadowGAN [13]

(d) Our DC-ShadowNet

Figure 1. Exiting state-of-the-art shadow removal methods like
Mask-ShadowGAN [13] fail to remove soft shadows properly and
create artifacts (see regions inside red boxes). Compared to it, our
method generates a better shadow-free output.

1. Introduction
Shadow removal from a single image can benefit many
applications, such as image editing, scene relighting, etc.,
[19, 17, 16]. Unfortunately, in general, removing shadows from a single image is still an open problem. Existing physics-based methods for shadow removal [7, 6, 10]
are based on entropy minimization that can capture the invariant features of shadow and non-shadow regions belong
to the same surfaces in the log-chromaticity space. These
methods, however, tend to fail, particularly when the image
surfaces are close to achromatic (e.g. gray or white surfaces), and are not designed to handle soft shadow images.
† This work is supported by MOE2019-T2-1-130.

Unlike physics-based methods, deep-learning methods,
e.g. [24, 27, 14, 20, 1, 21], are more robust to different
conditions of image surfaces and lighting. However, most
of these methods are based on fully-supervised learning,
which means that for training, they require pairs of shadow
and their corresponding non-shadow images. To collect
these image pairs in a large amount, particularly for images
containing diverse scenes and shadows can be considerably
expensive.
Recently, Hu et al. propose an unsupervised method,
Mask-ShadowGAN [13], the network architecture of which
is based on CycleGAN [34]. To remove shadows, the
method mainly relies on adversarial training that employs

5027

