Vis2Mesh: Efficient Mesh Reconstruction from Unstructured Point Clouds of
Large Scenes with Learned Virtual View Visibility

Abstract
We present a novel framework for mesh reconstruction
from unstructured point clouds by taking advantage of the
learned visibility of the 3D points in the virtual views and
traditional graph-cut based mesh generation. Specifically,
we first propose a three-step network that explicitly employs
depth completion for visibility prediction. Then the visibility information of multiple views is aggregated to generate a 3D mesh model by solving an optimization problem considering visibility in which a novel adaptive visibility weighting in surface determination is also introduced to
suppress line of sight with a large incident angle. Compared
to other learning-based approaches, our pipeline only exercises the learning on a 2D binary classification task, i.e.,
points visible or not in a view, which is much more generalizable and practically more efficient and capable to deal
with a large number of points. Experiments demonstrate
that our method with favorable transferability and robustness, and achieve competing performances w.r.t. state-ofthe-art learning-based approaches on small complex objects and outperforms on large indoor and outdoor scenes.
Code is available at https://github.com/GDAOSU/vis2mesh.

1. Introduction
3D surface reconstruction is essential to drive many computer vision and VR/AR applications, such as vision-based
localization, view rendering, animation, and autonomous
navigation. With the development of 3D sensors, e.g., LiDAR or depth sensors, we can directly capture accurate 3D
point clouds. However, determining surfaces from unstructured point clouds remains a challenging problem, especially for point clouds of objects of complex shapes, varying point density, completeness, and volumes. A favorable
mesh reconstruction method should be 1) capable of recovering geometric details captured by the point clouds; 2) robust and generalizable to different scene contexts; 3) scalable to large scenes and tractable in terms of memory and
* Contribution initiated and performed at ETH Zürich.
† Corresponding author. Email: qin.324@osu.edu

Rongjun Qin†
The Ohio State University

Room1 (100K pts)

Zhaopeng Cui*
Zhejiang University

Dragon Park (5M pts)

Shuang Song
The Ohio State University

Points

Our Reconstruction

Figure 1. Examples of reconstructed surfaces with our approach
on both indoor and large outdoor scenes. The number of points
ranges from thousands to millions.

computation.
Typical reconstruction methods either explicitly explore
the local surface recovery through connecting neighboring points (e.g. Delaunay Triangulation [5]), or sort solutions globally through implicit surface determination (e.g.
Screened Poisson Surface Reconstruction [21, 22] ). However, both of them favor high-density point clouds. With
the development of 3D deep learning, many learning-based
methods have demonstrated their strong capability when
reconstructing mesh surfaces from moderately dense or
even comparatively sparse point clouds of complex objects.
However, these end-to-end deep architectures, on one hand,
encode the contextual/scene information which often runs
into generalization issues; on the other hand, the heavy networks challenge the memory and computations when scaling up to large scenes.
The point visibility in views has been shown as a good
source of information, which can greatly benefit surface reconstruction [47]. For example, a 3D point visible on a
physical image view alludes to the fact the line of sight from

6514

