HRegNet: A Hierarchical Network for
Large-scale Outdoor LiDAR Point Cloud Registration
Fan Lu1 , Guang Chen1, *, Yinlong Liu2 , Lijun Zhang1 , Sanqing Qu1 , Shu Liu3 , Rongqi Gu4
1
Tongji University, 2 Technische Universität München, 3 ETH Zurich, 4 Westwell lab
{lufan,guangchen,tjedu zhanglijun,2011444}@tongji.edu.cn
Yinlong.Liu@tum.de, liush@ethz.ch, rongqi.gu@westwell-lab.com

Source
point cloud

Abstract
Point cloud registration is a fundamental problem in 3D
computer vision. Outdoor LiDAR point clouds are typically
large-scale and complexly distributed, which makes the registration challenging. In this paper, we propose an efficient
hierarchical network named HRegNet for large-scale outdoor LiDAR point cloud registration. Instead of using all
points in the point clouds, HRegNet performs registration
on hierarchically extracted keypoints and descriptors. The
overall framework combines the reliable features in deeper
layer and the precise position information in shallower layers to achieve robust and precise registration. We present
a correspondence network to generate correct and accurate
keypoints correspondences. Moreover, bilateral consensus
and neighborhood consensus are introduced for keypoints
matching and novel similarity features are designed to incorporate them into the correspondence network, which significantly improves the registration performance. Besides,
the whole network is also highly efficient since only a small
number of keypoints are used for registration. Extensive experiments are conducted on two large-scale outdoor LiDAR
point cloud datasets to demonstrate the high accuracy and
efficiency of the proposed HRegNet. The project website is
https://ispc-group.github.io/hregnet.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration aims to estimate the optimal
rigid transformation between two point clouds, which is a
fundamental problem in 3D computer vision and plays an
important role in many applications such as robotics [27]
and autonomous driving [24].
Iterative Closest Point (ICP) [3] is the best-known
method to solve point cloud registration problem. However,
ICP highly relies on the initial guesses of the transformation
for iteration and can easily get stuck into local minimum
* Corresponding author: guangchen@tongji.edu.cn

P
Feature
Extraction

X 1

D1

Feature
Extraction
X 2

D2 

Aligned
point clouds

t
Fine
Registration


R

R2

t2

Fine
Registration

Feature
Extraction
X 3

D3

Target
point cloud

P
Feature
Extraction

X 1

D1

Feature
Extraction
X 2

D2 

Feature
Extraction
R3

t3

X 3

D3

Coarse
Registration

Figure 1. Network architecture of the proposed HRegNet. The
point clouds P are hierarchically downsampled to small sets of
keypoints X and descriptors D. We perform coarse registration
in the bottom layer to leverage the reliable features for keypoints
matching and fine registration is followed to refine the transformation by exploiting the precise position information in upper layers.

due to the non-convexity of the problem. Several variants
of ICP [31, 23, 37] have been proposed to achieve global
optimal estimation, however, are typically time-consuming
for large-scale point clouds.
Recently, deep learning has achieved great success in numerous 3D computer vision tasks such as 3D object detection and semantic segmentation [13]. There also emerge a
number of deep learning-based methods for point cloud registration. However, existing methods are mostly designed
for object-level point clouds [35, 1, 36, 39, 19] or indoor
point clouds [5, 14, 25, 11]. Compared to object-level or
indoor point clouds, outdoor LiDAR point clouds typically
have higher sparsity, larger spatial range and a more complex and variable distribution, which makes the registration

16014

