Boosting Monocular Depth Estimation with Lightweight 3D Point Fusion
Lam Huynh1
1

Phong Nguyen1

University of Oulu

2

Jiri Matas2

Esa Rahtu3

Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
In this paper, we propose enhancing monocular depth
estimation by adding 3D points as depth guidance. Unlike existing depth completion methods, our approach performs well on extremely sparse and unevenly distributed
point clouds, which makes it agnostic to the source of the
3D points. We achieve this by introducing a novel multiscale 3D point fusion network that is both lightweight and
efficient. We demonstrate its versatility on two different
depth estimation problems where the 3D points have been
acquired with conventional structure-from-motion and LiDAR. In both cases, our network performs on par with stateof-the-art depth completion methods and achieves significantly higher accuracy when only a small number of points
is used while being more compact in terms of the number of parameters. We show that our method outperforms
some contemporary deep learning based multi-view stereo
and structure-from-motion methods both in accuracy and in
compactness.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from 2D images is a classical computer
vision problem that has been mostly tackled with methods
from multiple view geometry [15, 45]. Conventional stereo,
structure-from-motion and SLAM approaches are already
well-established and integrated to many practical applications. However, they rely on feature detection and matching that can be challenging especially when the scene lacks
distinct details, and as a result the 3D reconstruction often
becomes sparse and incomplete.
More recently, learning-based approaches have been introduced that enable dense depth estimation by exploiting
priors learned from training images. In particular, monocular depth estimation that leverages only a single image together with learned priors has become a popular area of research, where deep neural networks are used to implement
models that directly predict a depth map for given input image [39, 4, 17, 33, 55, 19]. While the basic idea is simple
and attractive, the accuracy of the monocular depth estimation methods is limited by the lack of strong geometric con-

3

Janne Heikkilä1

Tampere University

straints such as parallax. Thus, considerably more accurate
depth maps can be achieved with deep learning based multiview stereo methods [53, 54, 34, 2]. However, the accuracy
comes at the cost of increased computational complexity as
multiple images need to be aggregated by the network to
produce a single depth map.
Another approach for dense depth estimation is to start
from depth sensors like LiDARs, and use depth completion
to interpolate the missing depth values based on RGB data.
Despite of impressive results achieved by recent methods
such as [56, 36, 18] they are mainly suitable for cases with
relatively high 3D point density, but do not perform well
with sparse point clouds.
In this paper, we start from monocular depth estimation and use a set of 3D points as constraints to obtain
high-quality and dense depth maps as illustrated in Figure 1. The main difference of our approach to previous
depth completion methods is that the point cloud can be
extremely sparse and unevenly sampled, which enables using various methods for acquiring the 3D data, including
conventional multi-view stereo, structure-from-motion and
SLAM pipelines but also range sensors such as LiDARs.
We argue that sparsity is important as it provides flexibility and cost savings to depth sensing. For example, in mobile imaging, existing AR frameworks, i.e. ARCore [23],
ARKit [22], and AREngine [24], provide sparse 3D point
clouds, while in robotics and autonomous driving applications, low-resolution range sensors become sufficient. To
this end, we propose a novel learning-based scheme for fusing RGB and 3D point data. More specifically, our contributions are the following:
• We introduce a novel multi-scale 3D point fusion neural network architecture, which is more lightweight
than the existing state-of-the-art depth completion
methods while being able to efficiently exploit the geometric constraints provided by a sparse set of 3D
points.
• We demonstrate state-of-the-art results on NYUDepth-v2 and KITTI datasets with a network that uses
only a fraction of the number of parameters compared
to the other recent architectures.

12767

