SIMstack: A Generative Shape and Instance Model for Unordered Object Stacks
Zoe Landgraf1 , Raluca Scona1 , Tristan Laidlow1 , Stephen James1
Stefan Leutenegger2 and Andrew J. Davison1 *†‡

Abstract
By estimating 3D shape and instances from a single view,
we can capture information about an environment quickly,
without the need for comprehensive scanning and multiview fusion. Solving this task for composite scenes (such
as object stacks) is challenging: occluded areas are not
only ambiguous in shape but also in instance segmentation; multiple decompositions could be valid. We observe
that physics constrains decomposition as well as shape
in occluded regions and hypothesise that a latent space
learned from scenes built under physics simulation can
serve as a prior to better predict shape and instances in occluded regions. To this end we propose SIMstack, a depthconditioned Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE), trained on a
dataset of objects stacked under physics simulation. We formulate instance segmentation as a centre voting task which
allows for class-agnostic detection and doesn’t require setting the maximum number of objects in the scene. At test
time, our model can generate 3D shape and instance segmentation from a single depth view, probabilistically sampling proposals for the occluded region from the learned
latent space. Our method has practical applications in
providing robots some of the ability humans have to make
rapid intuitive inferences of partially observed scenes. We
demonstrate an application for precise (non-disruptive) object grasping of unknown objects from a single depth view.

1. Introduction
While humans are intuitively able to interpret partially
observed scenes using geometric reasoning and prior experience, estimating 3D shape from RGB or depth images is
challenging in computer vision due to ambiguity — many
3D shapes can explain a 2D observation. The classical approach to generate 3D shapes from depth images involves
* Research presented in this paper has been supported by Dyson
Technology Ltd.
† 1 Zoe Landgraf, Raluca Scona, Tristan Laidlow, Stephen James
and Andrew J. Davison are with the Dyson Robotics Laboratory, Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK.
zoe.landgraf15@imperial.ac.uk
‡2 Stefan Leutenegger is with the Smart Robotics Lab, Department of
Computing, Imperial College London, UK.

Figure 1: Top to bottom: SIMstack outputs object shapes and
instances from a single depth view on two YCB sequences and two
real data examples, one with a fully occluded object supporting a
leaning box (3rd row), for which our model predicts a plausible
proposition. Right: Grasping demo setup (green: target object).
taking images from all sides of an object and fusing the reprojected points into a common 3D representation such as
a truncated signed distance function (TSDF) [29]. However, apart from the exhaustive nature of the task, it is often
impossible to reach all required viewpoints to generate a
watertight surface reconstruction [12].
This drawback has led researchers to explore learning
based approaches to reconstruct 3D shapes, such as learning to complete partial reconstructions [12, 11, 40] and predicting scenes [39] or objects [52, 51] from a single depth
image. In parallel, researchers explore 3D shape prediction
for scenes [30, 15, 38] and objects [9, 49, 53] from single
or multi-view RGB data. While most of these approaches
work with pointclouds, voxel occupancy grids or TSDF representations, some have explored alternative representations
such as parametric surface elements [16], 2D sketches [45],
graph neural networks [13], and the increasingly popular
implicit neural surface representations [31, 26, 5].
To our knowledge, no existing work has explored 3D
shape prediction with instance segmentation for multiple
objects from a single depth image. Single view shape prediction allows to quickly estimate 3D occupancy, while instance segmentation is crucial for interactive tasks such as

13012

