FASA: Feature Augmentation and Sampling Adaptation
for Long-Tailed Instance Segmentation

1

Yuhang Zang1 Chen Huang2 Chen Change Loy1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{zang0012, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent methods for long-tailed instance segmentation
still struggle on rare object classes with few training data.
We propose a simple yet effective method, Feature Augmentation and Sampling Adaptation (FASA), that addresses the
data scarcity issue by augmenting the feature space especially for rare classes. Both the Feature Augmentation (FA)
and feature sampling components are adaptive to the actual training status — FA is informed by the feature mean
and variance of observed real samples from past iterations, and we sample the generated virtual features in a
loss-adapted manner to avoid over-fitting. FASA does not
require any elaborate loss design, and removes the need
for inter-class transfer learning that often involves large
cost and manually-defined head/tail class groups. We show
FASA is a fast, generic method that can be easily plugged
into standard or long-tailed segmentation frameworks, with
consistent performance gains and little added cost. FASA is
also applicable to other tasks like long-tailed classification
with state-of-the-art performance. 1 2

1. Introduction
A growing number of methods are proposed to learn
from long-tailed data in vision tasks like face recognition [17], image classification [29] and instance segmentation [13]. We focus on the problem of long-tailed instance
segmentation, which is particularly challenging due to the
class imbalance issue. State-of-the-art methods [1, 4, 14,
25] often fail to handle this issue and witness a large performance drop on rare object classes. Fig. 1 exemplifies the
struggle of the competitive Mask R-CNN [14] baseline on
highly imbalanced LVIS v1.0 dataset [13]. We can see that
there are about 300 rare classes in the tail that have no more
than 102 positive object instances. Such scarce training data
result in poor performance for most of the tail classes, with
1 GitHub: https://github.com/yuhangzang/FASA.
2 Project page: https://www.mmlab-ntu.com/project/fasa/index.html.

chen-huang@apple.com

near-zero class probabilities predicted for them.
To address the data scarcity issue, one intuitive option
is to over-sample images that contain the tail-class objects [13]. But the downside is that the over-sampled images will include more head-class objects at the same time
due to the class co-occurrence within images. Hence for
the instance segmentation task, re-sampling at the instance
level is more desirable than at image level. Another option
is data augmentation for considered objects, either in image
space (e.g., random flipping) or in feature space (i.e., feature
augmentation, on object regional features). Along this line,
many methods have proven effective by augmenting the image/feature space of rare classes. The feature augmentation
methods already show benefits for face recognition [44, 26],
person Re-ID [26] and classification [20, 6]. However, these
methods require manual design of class groups, e.g., using
heuristics like class size. And they often involve two stages
of feature training and feature transfer, which induce additional cost.
Feature augmentation remains little explored for longtailed instance segmentation tasks. In this paper, we present
an efficient and effective method, called Feature Augmentation and Sampling Adaptation (FASA). FASA does not require any elaborate transfer learning or loss design [23, 34,
41]. As a result, FASA keeps its simplicity, has extremely
low complexity, while remains highly adaptive during training. In the proposed method, we perform online Feature
Augmentation (FA) for each class. The FA module generates class-wise virtual features using a distributional prior
with its statistics calculated from previously observed real
samples. This allows FA to capture class distributions and
adapts to evolving feature space.
The augmented features can still be limiting for rare
classes. This is because the observed feature variance is
often small with few training examples. To overcome this
problem, we adapt the sampling density of virtual features
for each class. This way, our synthesized virtual features
still live in the true feature manifold, just with different
sampling probabilities to avoid under-fitting or over-fitting.
We propose an adaptive sampling method here: when aug-

3457

