Preservational Learning Improves Self-supervised Medical Image Models by
Reconstructing Diverse Contexts
Hong-Yu Zhou1 * Chixiang Lu1 *

Sibei Yang2

Xiaoguang Han4

Yizhou Yu1,3†

1

The University of Hong Kong 2 ShanghaiTech University 3 Deepwise AI Lab
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
{whuzhouhongyu, luchixiang}@gmail.com, yangsb@shanghaitech.edu.cn, hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn,
yizhouy@acm.org

1 0 1 0 1 0 0

Abstract

⊙

Preserving maximal information is one of principles of
designing self-supervised learning methodologies. To reach
this goal, contrastive learning adopts an implicit way which
is contrasting image pairs. However, we believe it is not
fully optimal to simply use the contrastive estimation for
preservation. Moreover, it is necessary and complemental
to introduce an explicit solution to preserve more information. From this perspective, we introduce Preservational
Learning to reconstruct diverse image contexts in order to
preserve more information in learned representations. Together with the contrastive loss, we present Preservational
Contrastive Representation Learning (PCRL) for learning
self-supervised medical representations. PCRL provides
very competitive results under the pretraining-finetuning
protocol, outperforming both self-supervised and supervised counterparts in 5 classification/segmentation tasks
substantially. Codes are available at https://github.
com/Luchixiang/PCRL.

1. Introduction
It is common practice that training deep neural networks
often requires a large amount of manually labeled data. This
requirement is easy to satisfy in natural images as both the
cost of labor and the difficulty of labeling can be acceptable. However, in medical image analysis, reliable medical annotations usually come from domain experts’ diagnoses which are hard to access considering the scarcity of
target disease, the protection of patient’s privacy and the
limited medical resources. To address these problems, selfsupervised learning has been widely adopted as a practical
* First two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Encoder
Contrast

Decoder
GO

Reconstruction

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of proposed method. GO
stands for global operations which convert feature maps to
feature vectors. The blue feature vector comes from the momentum encoder. vec(T ) represents the indicator vector of
T which contains a set of transformation functions. Each
component in vec(T ) is 1 or 0 denoting whether the corresponding transformation is applied or not. ⊙ stands for a
channel-wise multiplication operation.

way to learn medical image representations without manual
annotations.
Nowadays, contrastive representation learning has been
widely applied and outstandingly successful in medical image analysis [51, 33, 6]. The goal of contrastive learning
is to learn invariant representations via contrasting medical image pairs, which can be regarded as an implicit way
to preserve maximal information. Nonetheless, we think it
is still beneficial and complemental to explicitly preserve
more information in addition to the contrastive loss. To
achieve this goal, an intuitive solution is to reconstruct the
original inputs using learned representations so that these
representations can preserve the information closely related
to the inputs. However, we discover that directly adding a
plain reconstruction branch for restoring the original inputs
would not significantly improve the learned representations.
To address this problem, we introduce Preservational Contrastive Representation Learning to reconstruct diverse contexts using representations learned from the contrastive loss.

3499

