On the hidden treasure of dialog in video question answering
Deniz Engin1,2

François Schnitzler2
Ngoc Q. K. Duong2
Yannis Avrithis1
1
2
Inria, Univ Rennes, CNRS, IRISA
InterDigital

Abstract
High-level understanding of stories in video such as
movies and TV shows from raw data is extremely challenging. Modern video question answering (VideoQA) systems often use additional human-made sources like plot
synopses, scripts, video descriptions or knowledge bases.
In this work, we present a new approach to understand
the whole story without such external sources. The secret
lies in the dialog: unlike any prior work, we treat dialog as a noisy source to be converted into text description
via dialog summarization, much like recent methods treat
video. The input of each modality is encoded by transformers independently, and a simple fusion method combines
all modalities, using soft temporal attention for localization
over long inputs. Our model outperforms the state of the
art on the KnowIT VQA dataset by a large margin, without using question-specific human annotation or humanmade plot summaries. It even outperforms human evaluators who have never watched any whole episode before.
Code is available at https://engindeniz.github.
io/dialogsummary-videoqa

Scene A

Scene B

Dialog

Dialog

Raj: ...but he does it with real sensitivity.
No one: (LISPING)
Kripke (arriving): Hey, Hofstadter. Word around
the plasma lab is you built a robot?
Leonard: - Yes, we did, Kripke.
Sheldon: - His name is Monte.
Kripke: Well, if you have any delusions about
entering him against the Kripke Crippler... ...in the
Southern California Robot Fighting League Round
Robin Invitational... ...AKA the SCRFLRRI... ...his
name is gonna be Scrap Metal.

Kripke: ...his name is gonna be Scrap Metal.
Leonard: Come on. Is that really necessary?
Sheldon: Leonard, I believe it is. This is trash
talk. Trash talk is a traditional component in all
sporting events.
...
Sheldon: Kripke... ...your robot is inferior and
it will be defeated by ours... ...because ours
exceeds yours in both design and execution.

Scene Dialog Summary

Scene Dialog Summary

Leonard and Raj have built a robot called Monte.
Kripke is going to enter him in the Southern
California Robot Fighting League Round Robin
Invitational.

Kripke is going to name his robot Scrap Metal.
Sheldon and Leonard are going to defeat
Kripke's robot because theirs is better in design and
execution.

Episode Dialog Summary
... Leonard and Raj have built a robot
called Monte. Kripke is going to enter him in
the Southern California Robot Fighting
League Round Robin Invitational. ...

QA (Scene B)
What did the guys name their robot?

1. Introduction
Deep learning has accelerated progress in vision and language tasks. Visual-semantic embeddings [18, 9] have allowed zero-shot learning, cross-modal retrieval and generating new descriptions from embeddings. Image captioning [33] and visual question answering (VQA) [2] have
demonstrated generation of realistic natural language description of images and a great extent of multimodal semantic understanding. The extension to video captioning [19,
32] and video question answering (VideoQA) [29, 20] has
enabled further progress because video requires a higher
level of reasoning to understand complex events [37].
VideoQA systems typically have similar architecture focusing on multimodal embeddings/description, temporal attention and localization, multimodal fusion and reasoning.
While it is often hard to isolate progress in individual components, there are some clear trends. For instance, custom
self-attention and memory mechanisms for fusion and rea-

A) Killer Robot
B) Terminator
C) Monte
D) Crippler

Predicted Answer

VideoQA

Monte

Dialog Scene Description
(Scene B)
(Scene B)

Figure 1: In VideoQA, a question is associated with Scene
B, but it can only be answered by information from Scene
A. We generate episode dialog summaries from subtitles
and give them as input to our VideoQA system, dispensing
with the need for external knowledge.

soning [24, 17, 7] are gradually being streamlined by using
transformer architectures [30, 16, 36]; while visual embeddings [29] are being replaced by semantic embeddings [20]
and text descriptions by captioning [14, 3].
Datasets are essential for progress in the field, but often introduce bias. For instance, questions from text summaries are less relevant to visual information [29]; super-

2064

