Deep survival analysis with longitudinal X-rays for COVID-19
Michelle Shu1

Richard Strong Bowen1 Charles Herrmann1 Gengmo Qi1
Michele Santacatterina3 Ramin Zabih1,2
1 Cornell Tech
2 Google Research
3 George Washington University

{michelleshu, rsb, cih, rdz}@cs.cornell.edu, gq35@cornell.edu, msanta@email.gwu.edu

Abstract
Time-to-event analysis is an important statistical tool for
allocating clinical resources such as ICU beds. However,
classical techniques like the Cox model cannot directly incorporate images due to their high dimensionality. We propose
a deep learning approach that naturally incorporates multiple, time-dependent imaging studies as well as non-imaging
data into time-to-event analysis. Our techniques are benchmarked on a clinical dataset of 1,894 COVID-19 patients,
and show that image sequences significantly improve predictions. For example, classical time-to-event methods produce
a concordance error of around 30-40% for predicting hospital admission, while our error is 25% without images and
20% with multiple X-rays included. Ablation studies suggest
that our models are not learning spurious features such as
scanner artifacts and that models which use multiple images
tend to perform better than those which only use one. While
our focus and evaluation is on COVID-19, the methods we
develop are broadly applicable.

1. Introduction
COVID-19 is the most significant global health emergency in recent memory, with hundreds of thousands dead
and widespread economic disruption. There is growing evidence that imaging is useful for the diagnosis and management of COVID-19 [1, 2]. Clinicians use radiology imaging
to assess structural information which cannot be assessed
with laboratory tests or physical examination. In COVID-19,
chest imaging adds a high-dimensional assessment of the
degree of pulmonary involvement of the disease. It allows
clinicians to rule out other conditions which might contribute
to the patient’s presentation such as lobular pneumonia and
pneumothorax and to assess the patient for comorbidities
such as heart failure, emphysema, and coronary artery disease. Some researchers have already found that imaging
features predict mortality in COVID-19 [3].
In this paper we address the challenge of predicting the
time course of COVID-19 patient outcomes; for example,

the probability that a specific patient will need an ICU bed
in the next few days following hospital admission. Classical
statistical techniques for time-to-event analysis (sometimes
referred to as survival analysis) are widely used, but struggle
with incorporating images due to their high dimensionality.
We begin with an overview of time-to-event analysis and
a discussion of the challenges that images and COVID-19
present. Our deep learning approach is presented in section 3,
followed by a review of related work in section 4. We describe our clinical dataset and some implementation details,
including the baseline, in section 5. Experimental results are
given in section 6, with additional data and analysis in the
supplemental material.

2. Time-to-event analysis
Time-to-event analysis techniques [4] predict the probability of an outcome event occurring before a specific time,
while accounting for right-censored (incompletely observed)
data. Right-censoring happens when the event under study
may not be observed within the relevant time period. In the
clinical setting, these methods can predict a patient’s probability of undergoing an event in a particular time interval
as a function of their features. In our dataset for instance,
when predicting if a hospitalized COVID-19 patient will be
admitted to the ICU, right-censoring happens when, as of
today, the patient has not been admitted.
Time-to-event analysis focuses on three interrelated quantities: (1) the hazard function, the rate of an event at time
t given that the event did not occur before time t, which
is not affected by right-censoring [5]; (2) the cumulative
hazard function, the integral of the hazard function between
0 and time t; and (3) the survival function, a decreasing
function that provides the probability that a patient will not
experience the event of interest beyond any specified time
t and is expressed as the exponential of the negative of the
cumulative hazard function.
While the hazard function is not a probability, h(t) can be
viewed as the probability of the event occurring in a small
interval around t given that the event did not occur before
t. For clinical purposes, once we have estimated the hazard

4046

