Self-supervised Geometric Features Discovery via Interpretable Attention
for Vehicle Re-Identification and Beyond
Ming Li*

Xinming Huang
Ziming Zhang
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
100 Institute Rd, Worcester, MA, USA

ming.li@u.nus.edu, {xhuang, zzhang15}@wpi.edu

Abstract
Front

To learn distinguishable patterns, most of recent works
in vehicle re-identification (ReID) struggled to redevelop official benchmarks to provide various supervisions, which
requires prohibitive human labors. In this paper, we seek
to achieve the similar goal but do not involve more human efforts. To this end, we introduce a novel framework,
which successfully encodes both geometric local features
and global representations to distinguish vehicle instances,
optimized only by the supervision from official ID labels.
Specifically, given our insight that objects in ReID share
similar geometric characteristics, we propose to borrow
self-supervised representation learning to facilitate geometric features discovery. To condense these features, we introduce an interpretable attention module, with the core of
local maxima aggregation instead of fully automatic learning, whose mechanism is completely understandable and
whose response map is physically reasonable. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first that perform self-supervised
learning to discover geometric features. We conduct comprehensive experiments on three most popular datasets for
vehicle ReID, i.e., VeRi-776, CityFlow-ReID, and VehicleID. We report our state-of-the-art (SOTA) performances
and promising visualization results. We also show the excellent scalability of our approach on other ReID related tasks,
i.e., person ReID and multi-target multi-camera (MTMC)
vehicle tracking.

1. Introduction
Vehicle ReID is a fundamental but challenging problem
in video surveillance due to subtle discrepancy among vehicles from identical make and large variation across viewpoints of the same instance. The success of recent works
suggests that the key to solving this problem is to incor* This work was done when the author visited VISLab at WPI https:
//zhang-vislab.github.io

Back

Left

Right

(a) Prelabeled landmarks (b) Our learned landmarks with self-supervision

Figure 1: (Top) In the literature, a labor-intensive finegrained labels annotation is often required to capture local
discriminative features, such as (a) labelling landmarks in
[55] to learn orientation invariant features. In contrast, we
manage to discover such geometric features (denoted as red
in (b)) in a self-supervised way. (Bottom) As for its generalization ability, our approach can also consistently locate
critical parts of a deformable human body, e.g., head, upper arms, and knees, with no using corresponding ground
truths. Best viewed in color.
porate explicit mechanisms to discover and concentrate on
informative vehicle parts (e.g., wheels, manufacturer logos)
for discriminative feature extraction in addition to capturing robust features from a holistic image. They all sought,
however, to edit original data to provide supplementary su-

194

