AGKD-BML: Defense Against Adversarial Attack by Attention Guided
Knowledge Distillation and Bi-directional Metric Learning
Hong Wang1 *, Yuefan Deng1 , Shinjae Yoo2 , Haibin Ling1 , Yuewei Lin2†
1
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
2
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA
{hong.wang.2,yuefan.deng,haibin.ling}@stonybrook.edu, {sjyoo,ywlin}@bnl.gov

Abstract
While deep neural networks have shown impressive performance in many tasks, they are fragile to carefully designed adversarial attacks. We propose a novel adversarial
training-based model by Attention Guided Knowledge Distillation and Bi-directional Metric Learning (AGKD-BML).
The attention knowledge is obtained from a weight-fixed
model trained on a clean dataset, referred to as a teacher
model, and transferred to a model that is under training on
adversarial examples (AEs), referred to as a student model.
In this way, the student model is able to focus on the correct region, as well as correcting the intermediate features
corrupted by AEs to eventually improve the model accuracy. Moreover, to efficiently regularize the representation
in feature space, we propose a bidirectional metric learning. Specifically, given a clean image, it is first attacked
to its most confusing class to get the forward AE. A clean
image in the most confusing class is then randomly picked
and attacked back to the original class to get the backward
AE. A triplet loss is then used to shorten the representation
distance between original image and its AE, while enlarge
that between the forward and backward AEs. We conduct
extensive adversarial robustness experiments on two widely
used datasets with different attacks. Our proposed AGKDBML model consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art
approaches. The code of AGKD-BML will be available at:
https://github.com/hongw579/AGKD-BML.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great breakthrough on a variety of fields, such as computer vision [22],
speech recognition [17], and natural language processing [8]. However, their vulnerability against the so-called
* This work was done during the research assistantship at BNL.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. A clean image (“German shepherd”) and its adversarial
example (incorrectly classified as “Planetarium”) are in the first
column. The class relevant attention maps (Grad-CAM) of correct
and incorrect labels, and the class irrelevant attention maps are
shown in the second, third and fourth columns, respectively. It
shows that the adversarial perturbations corrupt the attention maps.

adversarial examples (AEs), which are the data with carefully designed but imperceptible perturbations added, has
drawn significant attention [38]. The existing of AEs is a
potential threat for the safety and security of DNNs in realworld applications. Thus, many efforts have been made to
defend against adversarial attacks as well as improve the
adversarial robustness of the machine learning model. In
particular, adversarial training [16, 27]-based models are
among the most effective and popular defending methods.
Adversarial training solves a min-max optimization problem, in which the inner problem is to find the strongest AE
within an −ball by maximizing the loss function, while
the outer problem is to minimize the classification loss
of the AE. Madry et al. [27] provided a multi-step projected gradient descent (PGD) model, which has become
the standard model of the adversarial training. Following PGD, a number of recent works have been proposed
to improve adversarial training from different aspects, e.g.,
[6, 11, 28, 32, 35, 42, 49, 51].
However, the adversarial training-based models still suffer from relatively poor generalization on both clean and
adversarial examples. Most of the existing adversarial train-

7658

