Ranking Models in Unlabeled New Environments
Xiaoxiao Sun, Yunzhong Hou, Weijian Deng, Hongdong Li, Liang Zheng
Australian National University
{first name.last name}@anu.edu.au

A:

Abstract

In real-world applications, it is not uncommon to see
models trained on the source domain (hereafter called
source models) directly applied to unlabeled new target environments (hereafter called target domains) at the price of
employing some unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
techniques [15, 32, 19]. Assume that one has access to
a pool of source models and can choose appropriate ones.
Under this context, it is desirable to obtain the relative performance of different models on the target domain without
having to annotate data in the target environment.
To find the appropriate models, we usually evaluate each
individual model on a labeled partition (e.g., a validation

B:

best
worst

How to find a labeled proxy
that well reflects real ranking?
best

use instead

…

1. Introduction

target (unlabeled)

…

source
models

rank

…

Consider a scenario where we are supplied with a number of ready-to-use models trained on a certain source domain and hope to directly apply the most appropriate ones
to different target domains based on the models’ relative
performance. Ideally we should annotate a validation set
for model performance assessment on each new target environment, but such annotations are often very expensive.
Under this circumstance, we introduce the problem of ranking models in unlabeled new environments. For this problem, we propose to adopt a proxy dataset that 1) is fully
labeled and 2) well reflects the true model rankings in a
given target environment, and use the performance rankings on the proxy sets as surrogates. We first select labeled
datasets as the proxy. Specifically, datasets that are more
similar to the unlabeled target domain are found to better
preserve the relative performance rankings. Motivated by
this, we further propose to search the proxy set by sampling
images from various datasets that have similar distributions
as the target. We analyze the problem and its solutions on
the person re-identification (re-ID) task, for which sufficient
datasets are publicly available, and show that a carefully
constructed proxy set effectively captures relative performance ranking in new environments. Code is avalible at
https://github.com/sxzrt/Proxy-Set.

evaluate on

proxy (labeled)

worst

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed problem and a general solution. Given various models (blue circles) trained
on source data (hereon denoted as source models) and an
unlabeled target domain, we aim to rank them and find the
best one for direct deployment to the target. A: Without access to image labels, this objective is unlikely to be achieved
using only the target data. B: We find a proxy to rank the
model performance and use this (red) ranking as a surrogate. Specifically, this proxy should 1) be fully labeled and
2) well reflect the (green) true ranking on the target.
set) of the target environment and rank them to find the best
one (see Fig. 1 A). However, annotation is often expensive
to obtain, and it becomes prohibitive if we consider data
labeling for every new application scenario. As such, an
interesting question arises: can we estimate model rankings
in new environments in the absence of ground truth labels?
In this work, we aim to find a proxy (or surrogate) to
rank the models in answer to the aforementioned question.
Specifically, we focus on the person re-identification (re-ID)
task, which aims to retrieve persons of the same identity
across multiple cameras. For this problem, it is desirable
that the proxy can provide similar model rankings, since a
target validation set is difficult to acquire in practice. To this
end, the proxy should satisfy: 1) have labels for evaluation
and 2) well reflect the true model rankings (see Fig. 1 B).
For the first requirement (labels), we can either use the
target dataset with pseudo labels, or other labeled datasets.
However, due to the nature of pseudo labels, some of them
might not be accurate. Existing works find that the inaccu-

11761

