Dense Interaction Learning for Video-based Person Re-identification
Tianyu He1 , Xin Jin2 , Xu Shen1 , Jianqiang Huang1 , Zhibo Chen2 , and Xian-Sheng Hua1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
University of Science and Technology of China
timhe.hty@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Video-based person re-identification (re-ID) aims at
matching the same person across video clips. Efficiently
exploiting multi-scale fine-grained features while building
the structural interaction among them is pivotal for its success. In this paper, we propose a hybrid framework, Dense
Interaction Learning (DenseIL), that takes the principal advantages of both CNN-based and Attention-based architectures to tackle video-based person re-ID difficulties. DenseIL contains a CNN encoder and a Dense Interaction (DI)
decoder. The CNN encoder is responsible for efficiently extracting discriminative spatial features while the DI decoder
is designed to densely model spatial-temporal inherent interaction across frames. Different from previous works, we
additionally let the DI decoder densely attends to intermediate fine-grained CNN features and that naturally yields
multi-grained spatial-temporal representation for each video
clip. Moreover, we introduce Spatio-TEmporal Positional
Embedding (STEP-Emb) into the DI decoder to investigate
the positional relation among the spatial-temporal inputs.
Our experiments consistently and significantly outperform
all the state-of-the-art methods on multiple standard videobased person re-ID datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) tells whether a personof-interest has been noticed in a different location by another camera. It is essential to many important surveillance
applications such as tracking [70] and retrieval [89]. In
recent years, significant progresses have been achieved in
image-based person re-ID [42, 59, 63, 22], as well as the
video-based one [87, 41, 80], due to the rapid development
of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [36].
The goal of image-based person re-ID is to match person images captured in different times and locations. To
achieve this goal, recent methods are proposed to better dig appearance features while concurrently to maintain the robustness with respect to body part misalign-

(a) Left: different identities with similar appearance. Right: the
same identity with misalignment or occlusion.
Dense Attention

𝜔!

𝜔"

𝜔$

CNN
Block

CNN
Block

SelfAttn.

𝜔#

(b) Our proposed Dense Interaction Learning (DenseIL).

Figure 1: (a): Two key challenges existed in video-based
person re-ID. (b): To tackle these two challenges, we introduce a DenseIL framework to densely capture multi-grained
spatial-temporal interaction with the guidance of global relationship, where the preferences (ω) are automatically learned
by our proposed Dense Attention.
ment [43, 54, 7, 91, 73, 63, 67, 33, 32, 22]. Nevertheless, it
is still insufficient to model the discrete relationships among
various misaligned body parts from a single image. This motivates the exploration on video-based re-ID, which further
takes adjacent frames of the captured person into consideration, and therefore the occluded or missed parts can be
inferred. In this sense, the key point to video-based re-ID
lies in designing an architecture that is suitable for temporal
dynamics, such as leveraging optical flow [9], RNN [92] and
3D CNN [40].
However, the aforementioned methods neglect the importance of spatial-temporal interaction between body parts
within intra- and inter-frame, which limits their effectivity.
As a result, the state-of-the-arts [80, 79] suggest that graph
convolutional network [34] has the merit of modeling spatialtemporal dependencies and shows promising performance
on video-based re-ID task. However, their models are built
upon the coarse-grained representation while leaving the

1490

