PASS: Protected Attribute Suppression System for Mitigating Bias in Face
Recognition
Prithviraj Dhar*1 , Joshua Gleason*2 , Aniket Roy1 , Carlos D. Castillo1 , Rama Chellappa1
1
Johns Hopkins University, 2 University of Maryland, College Park
{pdhar1,aroy28,carlosdc,rchella4}@jhu.edu, gleason@umd.edu

Identities for which descriptors are extracted (using pre-trained network P)
and stored in a private database D

Abstract
Face recognition networks encode information about sensitive attributes while being trained for identity classification.
Such encoding has two major issues: (a) it makes the face
representations susceptible to privacy leakage (b) it appears
to contribute to bias in face recognition. However, existing bias mitigation approaches generally require end-to-end
training and are unable to achieve high verification accuracy. Therefore, we present a descriptor-based adversarial
de-biasing approach called ‘Protected Attribute Suppression
System (PASS)’. PASS can be trained on top of descriptors obtained from any previously trained high-performing network
to classify identities and simultaneously reduce encoding
of sensitive attributes. This eliminates the need for end-toend training. As a component of PASS, we present a novel
discriminator training strategy that discourages a network
from encoding protected attribute information. We show the
efficacy of PASS to reduce gender and skintone information
in descriptors from SOTA face recognition networks like Arcface. As a result, PASS descriptors outperform existing
baselines in reducing gender and skintone bias on the IJB-C
dataset, while maintaining a high verification accuracy.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, the accuracy of face recognition
networks has significantly improved [40, 41, 36, 15, 10, 17].
These improvements have led to the deployment of face
recognition systems in a large number of applications. However, recent studies [16, 25, 43] have also shown that face
recognition networks encode information about protected
attributes such as race, gender, and age, while being trained
for identity classification. Encoding of sensitive attributes
raises concerns regarding privacy and bias.
Privacy concerns: Many large-scale face verification and
identification systems employ a database that stores face
descriptors of identities, as opposed to face images. Face
descriptors refer to the features extracted from the penultimate layer of a previously trained face recognition network.
*These authors have contributed equally to this work.

Identity 1

Identity 2

Identity 3

Identity 4

Step 1
Face descriptors are extracted
for dataset DX, using P

Step 2

Dataset DX
(with gender labels)

Privacy
Leakage
Scenario

Pre-trained
Malicious Gender classifier CX is
Face Recognition Network (P) trained on descriptors of Dataset DX
Identity 1
Identity 2
Identity 3
Identity 4

Private database D
of face descriptors

Identity 1 Male
Identity 2 Male
Identity 3 Female
Identity 4 Male

Step 3
Trained classifier CX predicts Gender
for descriptors in private database D

Figure 1. Suppose a malicious agent X has gained access to a
private database D (blue) which consists of a pre-trained network
P and face descriptors of four identities. The agent can use P to
extract descriptors (red) for a gender-labeled dataset DX (Step 1).
Using these descriptors, the agent can train a gender classifier CX
(Step 2). Using the trained CX , the agent can predict the gender of
the descriptors in D (Step 3) and thus cause privacy breach.

Storing descriptors, rather than images, allows for very fast
gallery lookup and verification against known subjects. This
also acts as an additional layer of security by not storing
potentially sensitive information present in the original face
images. However, since some sensitive information is still
encoded in these descriptors (e.g. race, gender, age), a malicious agent with access to these descriptors can potentially
extract this information and use it for nefarious purposes.
An example scenario is presented in Figure 1.
Bias concerns: Encoding of protected attributes such as
gender or race in face descriptors results in bias w.r.t. these
attributes when used for face recognition. A recent study
from NIST [22] found evidence that characteristics such as
gender and ethnicity impact verification and matching performance of face descriptors. Similarly, it has been shown
that most face-based gender classifiers perform significantly
better on male faces with light skintone than female faces
with dark skintone [12].
One method of addressing privacy and bias issues is by
producing face descriptors that are independent of the pro-

15087

