Time-Multiplexed Coded Aperture Imaging: Learned Coded Aperture and Pixel
Exposures for Compressive Imaging Systems
Edwin Vargas1,∗ , Julien N.P. Martel2,∗ , Gordon Wetzstein2 , Henry Arguello1
1
Universidad Industrial de Santander, Colombia 2 Stanford University, USA
edwin.vargas4@correo.uis.edu.co, [jnmartel,gordonwz]@stanford.edu, henarfu@uis.edu.co

Simulated encoder
training

Abstract
Compressive imaging using coded apertures (CA) is a
powerful technique that can be used to recover depth, light
fields, hyperspectral images and other quantities from a single snapshot. The performance of compressive imaging systems based on CAs mostly depends on two factors: the properties of the mask’s attenuation pattern, that we refer to as
“codification”, and the computational techniques used to
recover the quantity of interest from the coded snapshot. In
this work, we introduce the idea of using time-varying CAs
synchronized with spatially varying pixel shutters. We divide the exposure of a sensor into sub-exposures at the beginning of which the CA mask changes and at which the sensor’s pixels are simultaneously and individually switched
“on” or “off”. This is a practically appealing codification
as it does not introduce additional optical components other
than the already present CA but uses a change in the pixel
shutter that can be easily realized electronically. We show
that our proposed time-multiplexed coded aperture (TMCA)
can be optimized end to end and induces better coded snapshots enabling superior reconstructions in two different applications: compressive light field imaging and hyperspectral imaging. We demonstrate both in simulation and with
real captures (taken with prototypes we built) that this codification outperforms the state-of-the-art compressive imaging systems by a large margin in those applications.

1. Introduction
Computational imaging techniques combining the codesign of hardware and algorithms have successfully enabled the development of novel cameras for several applications such as spectral imaging [2], depth imaging [11],
light-field imaging [35], or computed tomography [25].
Among those, in particular compressive imaging [13] approaches that aim at multiplexing visual information in a
single snapshot have been popularized to reconstruct high
dynamic range images, videos, spectral or depth informa∗ denotes equal contributions.

Digital decoder
training and inference

backprop

or

Optical
elements

Real scene
inference

Reconstructions
hyperspectral images,
light fields, etc.

Real prototype
inference

Time Multiplexed Coded Aperture = Coded + Coded
aperture shutter
(TMCA)
Hyperspectral

Light field

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed Time Multiplexed Coded
Aperture (TMCA) codification in the proposed end-to-end differentiable pipeline. We also show coded snapshot and reconstruction
examples for our compressive light field and hyperspectral imaging applications.

tion [36, 58, 12]. They use optical and electronic coding strategies to encode light and use physics-based forward models along with optimization techniques to reconstruct the aforementioned visual quantities. Besides their
ability to recover visual information not easily accessible
with traditional cameras, another advantage of compressive
imaging systems is they can realize sparse measurements,
for instance capturing a single coded snapshot to recover a
whole light field. This typically yields ill-posed reconstruction problems that can nevertheless be solved by leveraging
knowledge about the signal’s sparsity and using other priors about the visual quantity to reconstruct. For optimal re-

2692

