Clustering by Maximizing Mutual Information Across Views
Kien Do, Truyen Tran, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2I2), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{k.do, truyen.tran, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for image clustering that
incorporates joint representation learning and clustering.
Our method consists of two heads that share the same backbone network - a “representation learning” head and a
“clustering” head. The “representation learning” head
captures fine-grained patterns of objects at the instance
level which serve as clues for the “clustering” head to extract coarse-grain information that separates objects into
clusters. The whole model is trained in an end-to-end
manner by minimizing the weighted sum of two sampleoriented contrastive losses applied to the outputs of the
two heads. To ensure that the contrastive loss corresponding to the “clustering” head is optimal, we introduce a
novel critic function called “log-of-dot-product”. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art single-stage clustering methods across a variety of image datasets, improving
over the best baseline by about 5-7% in accuracy on CIFAR10/20, STL10, and ImageNet-Dogs. Further, the “twostage” variant of our method also achieves better results
than baselines on three challenging ImageNet subsets.

1. Introduction
The explosion of unlabeled data, especially visual content in recent years has led to the growing demand for
effective organization of these data into semantically distinct groups in an unsupervised manner. Such data clustering facilitates downstream machine learning and reasoning tasks. Since labels are unavailable, clustering algorithms are mainly based on the similarity between samples to predict the cluster assignment. However, common
similarity metrics such as cosine similarity or (negative)
Euclidean distance are ineffective when applied to highdimensional data like images. Modern image clustering
methods [7, 17, 18, 37, 40, 41], therefore, leverage deep
neural networks (e.g., CNNs, RNNs) to transform highdimensional data into low-dimensional representation vectors in the latent space and perform clustering in that space.

Ideally, a good clustering model assigns data to clusters
to keep inter-group similarity low while maintaining high
intra-group similarity. Most existing deep clustering methods do not satisfy both of these properties. For example,
autoencoder-based clustering methods [19, 40, 42] often
learn representations that capture too much information including distracting information like background or texture.
This prevents them from computing proper similarity scores
between samples at the cluster-level. Autoencoder-based
methods have only been tested on simple image datasets
like MNIST. Another class of methods [7, 17, 18] directly
use cluster-assignment probabilities rather than representation vectors to compute the similarity between samples.
These methods can only differentiate objects belonging to
different clusters but not in the same cluster, hence, may incorrectly group distinct objects into the same cluster. This
leads to low intra-group similarity.
To address the limitations of existing methods, we propose a novel framework for image clustering called Contrastive Representation Learning and Clustering (CRLC).
CRLC consists of two heads sharing the same backbone network: a “representation learning” head (RL-head) that outputs a continuous feature vector, and a “clustering” head (Chead) that outputs a cluster-assignment probability vector.
The RL-head computes the similarity between objects at the
instance level while the C-head separates objects into different clusters. The backbone network serves as a medium
for information transfer between the two heads, allowing
the C-head to leverage disciminative fine-grained patterns
captured by the RL-head to extract correct coarse-grained
cluster-level patterns. Via the two heads, CRLC can effectively modulate the inter-cluster and intra-cluster similarities between samples. CRLC is trained in an end-toend manner by minimizing a weighted sum of two sampleoriented contrastive losses w.r.t. the two heads. To ensure
that the contrastive loss corresponding to the C-head leads
to the tightest InfoNCE lower bound [30], we propose a
novel critic called “log-of-dot-product” to be used in place
of the conventional “dot-product” critic.
In our experiments, we show that CRLC significantly outperforms a wide range of state-of-the-art single-

9928

