Robust Automatic Monocular Vehicle Speed Estimation for Traffic Surveillance
Jerome Revaud
Martin Humenberger
NAVER LABS Europe
firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Even though CCTV cameras are widely deployed for
traffic surveillance and have therefore the potential of becoming cheap automated sensors for traffic speed analysis,
their large-scale usage toward this goal has not been reported yet. A key difficulty lies in fact in the camera calibration phase. Existing state-of-the-art methods perform the
calibration using image processing or keypoint detection
techniques that require high-quality video streams, yet typical CCTV footage is low-resolution and noisy. As a result,
these methods largely fail in real-world conditions. In contrast, we propose two novel calibration techniques whose
only inputs come from an off-the-shelf object detector. Both
methods consider multiple detections jointly, leveraging the
fact that cars have similar and well-known 3D shapes with
normalized dimensions. The first one is based on minimizing an energy function corresponding to a 3D reprojection
error, the second one instead learns from synthetic training
data to predict the scene geometry directly. Noticing the
lack of speed estimation benchmarks faithfully reflecting the
actual quality of surveillance cameras, we introduce a novel
dataset collected from public CCTV streams. Experimental results conducted on three diverse benchmarks demonstrate excellent speed estimation accuracy that could enable
the wide use of CCTV cameras for traffic analysis, even in
challenging conditions where state-of-the-art methods completely fail. Additional information can be found on our
project web page: https://rebrand.ly/nle-cctv

1. Introduction
Being able to accurately measure the traffic speed on
road networks is important for many applications like live
intelligent transportation system and itinerary planning,
traffic analysis [24, 40], and anomaly detection [18, 10].
This is normally achieved through dedicated hardware sensors like roadside radar sensors on highways, inductive loop
detectors at intersections, GPS data collected from probe
fleet, etc. [32, 23]. Nevertheless, such equipment is expensive and can hardly be deployed quickly and at a large scale.

Figure 1. Cars in the BrnoCompSpeed [44] benchmark (left) and
our CCTV dataset (right) displayed at their actual apparent size.
Calibration methods [16, 43, 9, 5, 4] are based on image processing techniques (estimating angles of lines on moving cars,
green lines) or keypoint localization (colored crosses) that are both
highly impacted by image quality and resolution. Applying the
same techniques on actual CCTV footage, where the resolution is
low and quality often mediocre, turns out to be nearly impossible.

Traffic surveillance cameras, often (improperly) dubbed
CCTVs, are already widely deployed for manual traffic
monitoring. Since they are directly filming roads and vehicles, they provide a rich flow of video data that implicitly contains nearly all relevant traffic information. It
has therefore been noted that CCTV cameras have the
potential to be turned into traffic speed sensors at little
cost [2, 32, 30, 18, 28, 23]. In this paper, we precisely focus on this particular problem, i.e. the estimation of vehicle speed from monocular videos captured via surveillance
cameras. This is in fact a challenging problem. As a matter of fact, there is to the best of our knowledge no largescale usage of CCTV cameras for automated traffic speed
surveillance, despite the public availability of CCTV realtime video streams [23, 2, 30, 18].
One of the explanation lies in the fact that state-ofthe-art approaches often assume that cameras are already
calibrated [42, 35], which is rarely the case for CCTVs.
Still, recent methods were developed to automatically calibrate cameras by looking for specific clues on moving vehicles [17, 43, 9, 6, 6, 5]. For instance, one solution is
to look for straight edges perpendicular to the car motion
and parallel to the ground (green lines in Fig. 1), as the
14551

