Data-free Universal Adversarial Perturbation and Black-box Attack
Chaoning Zhang*

Philipp Benz∗

Adil Karjauv∗

chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com

pbenz@kaist.ac.kr

mikolez@gmail.com

In So Kweon
iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Abstract
Universal adversarial perturbation (UAP), i.e. a single
perturbation to fool the network for most images, is widely
recognized as a more practical attack because the UAP can
be generated beforehand and applied directly during the attack stage. One intriguing phenomenon regarding untargeted
UAP is that most images are misclassified to a dominant label. This phenomenon has been reported in previous works
while lacking a justified explanation, for which our work
attempts to provide an alternative explanation. For a more
practical universal attack, our investigation of untargeted
UAP focuses on alleviating the dependence on the original
training samples, from removing the need for sample labels
to limiting the sample size. Towards strictly data-free untargeted UAP, our work proposes to exploit artificial Jigsaw
images as the training samples, demonstrating competitive
performance. We further investigate the possibility of exploiting the UAP for a data-free black-box attack which is
arguably the most practical yet challenging threat model.
We demonstrate that there exists optimization-free repetitive
patterns which can successfully attack deep models. Code is
available at https://bit.ly/3y0ZTIC.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks [28] are widely known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [52]. This intriguing phenomenon of human imperceptible perturbation fooling the
DNN has inspired active research for studying the model
robustness against adversarial attack techniques [18, 36, 3].
More surprisingly, [38] shows that a single perturbation can
be generated to attack the model for most images. Due to its
image-agnostic nature, it is often termed universal adversarial perturbation (UAP). The existence of UAP is especially

worrisome because, unlike image-dependent adversarial perturbations, after being generated beforehand the UAP can be
applied directly for performing a real-time attack [38].
Our work revisits UAP by providing an alternative explanation on the phenomenon of dominant label, i.e. an untargeted UAP causing the model to misclassify a large fraction
of images to a dominant label, which has been reported
in [38, 43] but still lacks a justifiable explanation. Note that
this phenomenon is counter-intuitive because unlike targeted
UAP [25, 60], the untargeted UAP is not optimized towards
any predefined target label. In the targeted setting, [25, 60]
have shown that the UAP alone leads the model to output
the target class. We observe a similar phenomenon for the
untargeted UAP by perceiving the dominant label, which
is the result of the optimization algorithm instead of being
predefined, as the pseudo-target class. When added to the
images, the UAP causes the average logit values over all
adversarial examples to be somewhat proportional to the
logit values with the UAP alone as the input. This result is
further collaborated by the layer-wise and step-wise model
response analysis, suggesting untargeted UAP has a dominant contribution to the model response and there exists
a positive correlation between this dominant influence and
fooling ratio as the training evolves. This observation motivates to further investigate simple yet effective techniques
towards more practical universal attacks under the data-free
constraint, in both white-box and black-box settings.
Overall our contributions are shown as follows:
• We revisit the mechanism behind the dominant label
phenomenon caused by an untargeted UAP. Specifically,
we show that the existing explanation [38] hypothesizing a dominant label occupying a large image space can
not justify some observed phenomena based on some
reasonable assumptions. We provide an alternative explanation with the observation that untargeted UAP has
a dominant contribution to the model response of adver-

* Equal contribution

7868

