Deep Metric Learning for Open World Semantic Segmentation
Jun Cen Peng Yun Junhao Cai Michael Yu Wang Ming Liu
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{jcenaa, pyun, jcaiaq}@connect.ust.hk, {mywang, eelium}@ust.hk

Abstract
DMLNet

Inputs

Classical close-set semantic segmentation networks
have limited ability to detect out-of-distribution (OOD) objects, which is important for safety-critical applications
such as autonomous driving. Incrementally learning these
OOD objects with few annotations is an ideal way to enlarge the knowledge base of the deep learning models. In
this paper, we propose an open world semantic segmentation system that includes two modules: (1) an open-set semantic segmentation module to detect both in-distribution
and OOD objects. (2) an incremental few-shot learning
module to gradually incorporate those OOD objects into
its existing knowledge base. This open world semantic
segmentation system behaves like a human being, which
is able to identify OOD objects and gradually learn them
with corresponding supervision. We adopt the Deep Metric Learning Network (DMLNet) with contrastive clustering to implement open-set semantic segmentation. Compared to other open-set semantic segmentation methods,
our DMLNet achieves state-of-the-art performance on three
challenging open-set semantic segmentation datasets without using additional data or generative models. On this
basis, two incremental few-shot learning methods are further proposed to progressively improve the DMLNet with
the annotations of OOD objects.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional networks have achieved tremendous
success in semantic segmentation tasks [1, 2], benefiting
from high-quality datasets [3, 4, 5]. These semantic segmentation networks are used as the perception system in
many applications, like autonomous driving [6], medical diagnose [7], etc. However, most of these perception systems
are close-set and static. Close-set semantic segmentation
is subject to the assumption that all classes in testing are
already involved during training, which is not true in the
open world. A close-set system could cause disastrous consequences in security-critical applications, like autonomous
driving, if it wrongly assigns an in-distribution label to an
OOD object [8]. Meanwhile, a static perception system cannot update its knowledge base according to what it has seen,

1

Known objects

2

Label of new class

Unknown objects

Labelling
4

Incremental few-shot learning
3

DMLNet

Enlarged domain

Figure 1. Open world semantic segmentation system. Step 1:
Identify both known and unknown objects (blue arrow). Step 2:
Annotate for unknown objects (red arrow). Step 3: Apply incremental few-shot learning to increase the classification range of the
network (green arrow). Step 4: After incremental few-shot learning, DMLNet can output the result in a larger domain (purple arrow).

and therefore, it is limited to particular scenarios and needs
to be retrained after a certain amout of time. To solve these
problems, we propose an open-set and dynamic perception
system called the open world semantic segmentation system. It contains two modules: (1) an open-set semantic
segmentation module to detect OOD objects and assign
correct labels to in-distribution objects. (2) an incremental
few-shot learning module to incorporate those unknown
objects progressively into its existing knowledge base. The
whole pipeline of our proposed open world semantic segmentation system is shown in Fig. 1.
Both open-set semantic segmentation and incremental
few-shot learning are not well solved. For open-set semantic segmentation, the essential part is to identify OOD pixels
among all pixels in one image which is called anomaly segmentation. The typical approach of anomaly segmentation
is to adapt methods of image-level open-set classification
for pixel-level open-set classification. These methods include uncertainty estimation-based methods [9, 10, 11, 12]
and autoencoder-based methods [13, 14]. However, both of
these methods have been proved ineffective in driving sce-

15333

