Tokens-to-Token ViT: Training Vision Transformers from Scratch on ImageNet
Li Yuan1 ,* Yunpeng Chen2 , Tao Wang1,3∗ , Weihao Yu1 , Yujun Shi1 ,
Zihang Jiang1 , Francis E.H. Tay1 , Jiashi Feng1 , Shuicheng Yan1
1

National University of Singapore

2

YITU Technology

3

Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore

yuanli@u.nus.edu, yunpeng.chen@yitu-inc.com, shuicheng.yan@gmail.com

Abstract
Transformers, which are popular for language modeling,
have been explored for solving vision tasks recently, e.g.,
the Vision Transformer (ViT) for image classification. The
ViT model splits each image into a sequence of tokens with
fixed length and then applies multiple Transformer layers
to model their global relation for classification. However,
ViT achieves inferior performance to CNNs when trained
from scratch on a midsize dataset like ImageNet. We find
it is because: 1) the simple tokenization of input images
fails to model the important local structure such as edges
and lines among neighboring pixels, leading to low training sample efficiency; 2) the redundant attention backbone
design of ViT leads to limited feature richness for fixed computation budgets and limited training samples. To overcome
such limitations, we propose a new Tokens-To-Token Vision Transformer (T2T-ViT), which incorporates 1) a layerwise Tokens-to-Token (T2T) transformation to progressively
structurize the image to tokens by recursively aggregating
neighboring Tokens into one Token (Tokens-to-Token), such
that local structure represented by surrounding tokens can
be modeled and tokens length can be reduced; 2) an efficient backbone with a deep-narrow structure for vision
transformer motivated by CNN architecture design after
empirical study. Notably, T2T-ViT reduces the parameter
count and MACs of vanilla ViT by half, while achieving
more than 3.0% improvement when trained from scratch on
ImageNet. It also outperforms ResNets and achieves comparable performance with MobileNets by directly training
on ImageNet. For example, T2T-ViT with comparable size
to ResNet50 (21.5M parameters) can achieve 83.3% top1
accuracy in image resolution 384×384 on ImageNet. 1

1. Introduction
Self-attention models for language modeling like Transformers [37] have been recently applied to vision tasks,
including image classification [5, 12, 43], object detec* Work done during an internship at Yitu Tech.
1 Code: https://github.com/yitu-opensource/T2T-ViT

Figure 1. Comparison between T2T-ViT with ViT, ResNets and
MobileNets when trained from scratch on ImageNet. Left: performance curve of MACs vs. top-1 accuracy. Right: performance
curve of model size vs. top-1 accuracy.

tion [3, 61] and image processing like denoising, superresolution and deraining [4]. Among them, the Vision
Transformer (ViT) [12] is the first full-transformer model
that can be directly applied for image classification. In particular, ViT splits each image into 14×14 or 16×16 patches
(a.k.a., tokens) with fixed length; then following practice of
the transformer for language modeling, ViT applies transformer layers to model the global relation among these tokens for classification.
Though ViT proves the full-transformer architecture is
promising for vision tasks, its performance is still inferior
to that of similar-sized CNN counterparts (e.g. ResNets)
when trained from scratch on a midsize dataset (e.g., ImageNet). We hypothesize that such performance gap roots
in two main limitations of ViT: 1) the straightforward tokenization of input images by hard split makes ViT unable
to model the image local structure like edges and lines,
and thus it requires significantly more training samples (like
JFT-300M for pretraining) than CNNs for achieving similar
performance; 2) the attention backbone of ViT is not welldesigned as CNNs for vision tasks, which contains redundancy and leads to limited feature richness and difficulties
in model training.
To verify our hypotheses, we conduct a pilot study to
investigate the difference in the learned features of ViTL/16 [12] and ResNet50 [15] through visualization in Fig. 2.
We observe the features of ResNet capture the desired local

558

