The Power of Points for Modeling Humans in Clothing
Qianli Ma1,2 Jinlong Yang1 Siyu Tang2 Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zürich
{qma,jyang,black}@tuebingen.mpg.de, {qianli.ma, siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch

Unseen scan

Fitted POP (point cloud)

Animations with pose-dependent clothing deformation

Figure 1: The Power of Points (POP) model for clothed humans. Based on a novel articulated dense point cloud representation, our cross-outfit model, named POP, produces pose-dependent shapes of clothed humans with coherent global shape
and expressive local garment details. The trained model can be fitted to a single scan of an unseen subject wearing an unseen
outfit, and can animate it with realistic pose-dependent clothing deformations. The results are color-coded with predicted
point normals and rendered with a simple surfel-based renderer.

Abstract
Currently it requires an artist to create 3D human
avatars with realistic clothing that can move naturally. Despite progress on 3D scanning and modeling of human bodies, there is still no technology that can easily turn a static
scan into an animatable avatar. Automating the creation of
such avatars would enable many applications in games, social networking, animation, and AR/VR to name a few. The
key problem is one of representation. Standard 3D meshes
are widely used in modeling the minimally-clothed body
but do not readily capture the complex topology of clothing. Recent interest has shifted to implicit surface models for this task but they are computationally heavy and
lack compatibility with existing 3D tools. What is needed
is a 3D representation that can capture varied topology at
high resolution and that can be learned from data. We argue that this representation has been with us all along —
the point cloud. Point clouds have properties of both implicit and explicit representations that we exploit to model
3D garment geometry on a human body. We train a neural network with a novel local clothing geometric feature
to represent the shape of different outfits. The network is
trained from 3D point clouds of many types of clothing,

on many bodies, in many poses, and learns to model posedependent clothing deformations. The geometry feature can
be optimized to fit a previously unseen scan of a person
in clothing, enabling the scan to be reposed realistically.
Our model demonstrates superior quantitative and qualitative results in both multi-outfit modeling and unseen outfit
animation. The code is available for research purposes at
https://qianlim.github.io/POP .

1. Introduction
Animatable clothed human avatars are required in many
applications for 3D content generation. To create avatars
with naturally-deforming clothing, existing solutions either
involve heavy artist work or require 4D scans for training machine-learning models [55]. These solutions are expensive and often impractical. Instead, can we turn a single static 3D scan — which can be acquired at low cost
today even with hand-held devices — into an animatable
avatar? Currently, no existing technology is able to do this
and produce realistic clothing deformations. Given a static
scan, traditional automatic rigging-and-skinning methods
[3, 18, 33] can be used to animate it, but are unable to
produce pose-dependent clothing deformations. Physics-

10974

