StyleCLIP: Text-Driven Manipulation of StyleGAN Imagery
Zongze Wu‡∗
Eli Shechtman§
Daniel Cohen-Or†
Dani Lischinski‡
Or Patashnik† *
‡
†
§
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Tel-Aviv University
Adobe Research

“Emma Stone”

“Mohawk hairstyle”

“Without makeup”

“Cute cat”

“Lion”

“Gothic church”

Figure 1. Examples of text-driven manipulations using StyleCLIP. Top row: input images; Bottom row: our manipulated results. The text
prompt used to drive each manipulation appears under each column.

Abstract
Inspired by the ability of StyleGAN to generate highly realistic images in a variety of domains, much recent work has
focused on understanding how to use the latent spaces of
StyleGAN to manipulate generated and real images. However, discovering semantically meaningful latent manipulations typically involves painstaking human examination of
the many degrees of freedom, or an annotated collection
of images for each desired manipulation. In this work, we
explore leveraging the power of recently introduced Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) models in order to develop a text-based interface for StyleGAN image
manipulation that does not require such manual effort. We
first introduce an optimization scheme that utilizes a CLIPbased loss to modify an input latent vector in response to a
user-provided text prompt. Next, we describe a latent mapper that infers a text-guided latent manipulation step for
a given input image, allowing faster and more stable textbased manipulation. Finally, we present a method for mapping text prompts to input-agnostic directions in StyleGAN’s
style space, enabling interactive text-driven image manipulation. Extensive results and comparisons demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approaches.
∗ Equal contribution, ordered alphabetically. Code and video are available

on https://github.com/orpatashnik/StyleCLIP

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [18] have revolutionized image synthesis, with recent style-based generative models [24, 25, 22] boasting some of the most realistic
synthetic imagery to date. Furthermore, the learnt intermediate latent spaces of StyleGAN have been shown to possess
disentanglement properties [9, 48, 19, 53, 58], which enable
utilizing pretrained models to perform a wide variety of image manipulations on synthetic, as well as real, images.
Harnessing StyleGAN’s expressive power requires developing simple and intuitive interfaces for users to easily carry out their intent. Existing methods for semantic control discovery either involve manual examination
(e.g., [19, 48, 58]), a large amount of annotated data, or pretrained classifiers [49, 1]. Furthermore, subsequent manipulations are typically carried out by moving along a direction
in one of the latent spaces, using a parametric model, such
as a 3DMM in StyleRig [53], or a trained normalized flow
in StyleFlow [1]. Specific edits, such as virtual try-on [27]
and aging [2] have also been explored.
Thus, existing controls enable image manipulations only
along preset semantic directions, severely limiting the
user’s creativity and imagination. Whenever an additional,
unmapped, direction is desired, further manual effort and/or
large quantities of annotated data are necessary.

2085

