Relaxed Transformer Decoders for Direct Action Proposal Generation
Jing Tan*
Jiaqi Tang*
Limin WangB
Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{jtan,jqtang}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {lmwang, gswu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal action proposal generation is an important
and challenging task in video understanding, which aims
at detecting all temporal segments containing action instances of interest. The existing proposal generation approaches are generally based on pre-defined anchor windows or heuristic bottom-up boundary matching strategies.
This paper presents a simple and efficient framework (RTDNet) for direct action proposal generation, by re-purposing
a Transformer-alike architecture. To tackle the essential
visual difference between time and space, we make three
important improvements over the original transformer detection framework (DETR). First, to deal with slowness
prior in videos, we replace the original Transformer encoder with a boundary attentive module to better capture
long-range temporal information. Second, due to the ambiguous temporal boundary and relatively sparse annotations, we present a relaxed matching scheme to relieve the
strict criteria of single assignment to each groundtruth. Finally, we devise a three-branch head to further improve
the proposal confidence estimation by explicitly predicting
its completeness. Extensive experiments on THUMOS14
and ActivityNet-1.3 benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of RTD-Net, on both tasks of temporal action proposal generation and temporal action detection. Moreover,
due to its simplicity in design, our framework is more efficient than previous proposal generation methods, without
non-maximum suppression post-processing. The code and
models are made available at https://github.com/
MCG-NJU/RTD-Action.

1. Introduction
As large numbers of videos are captured and uploaded
online (e.g., YouTube, Instagram, and TikTok), video understanding is becoming an important problem in computer
vision. Action recognition [33, 39, 5, 36, 47, 37] has received much research attention from both academia and in*: Equal contribution. B: Corresponding author.

none type

Relaxed Matcher

action targets

Transformer Decoder
MLP Encoder
Boundary Probability Predictor
Feature Extractor
Raw Video

Figure 1. Overview of RTD-Net. Given an untrimmed video,
RTD-Net directly generates action proposals based on boundaryattentive features without hand-crafted design, such as dense anchor placement, heuristic matching strategy, and non-maximum
suppression.

dustry, with a focus on classifying trimmed video clip into
action labels. However, these action recognition methods
cannot be directly applied for realistic video analysis due
to the fact that these web videos are untrimmed in nature.
Therefore, temporal action detection [26, 24, 42, 41] is a
demanding technique, which aims to localize each action
instance in long untrimmed videos with the action category
and as well its temporal duration. In general, temporal action detection task is composed of two subtasks: temporal
action proposal generation and action classification.
As for temporal proposal generation task, there are
two mainstream approaches. The first type is an anchorbased [3, 19, 11, 15] method, which generates action proposals based on dense and multi-scale box placement. As
the duration of action instances varies from seconds to minutes, it is almost impossible for these anchor-based methods to cover all these ground-truth instances under a reasonable computation consumption. The second type is a
boundary-based [46, 26, 24] method, which first predicts
the boundary confidence at all frames, and then employs
a bottom-up grouping strategy to match pairs of start and

13526

