Large Scale Multi-Illuminant (LSMI) Dataset for
Developing White Balance Algorithm under Mixed Illumination
Dongyoung Kim1 , Jinwoo Kim1 , Seonghyeon Nam2 , Dongwoo Lee1 , Yeonkyung Lee3 ,
Nahyup Kang3 , Hyong-Euk Lee3 , ByungIn Yoo3 , Jae-Joon Han3 , Seon Joo Kim1
1

Yonsei University, 2 York University, 3 Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology

Abstract
We introduce a Large Scale Multi-Illuminant (LSMI)
Dataset that contains 7,486 images, captured with three different cameras on more than 2,700 scenes with two or three
illuminants. For each image in the dataset, the new dataset
provides not only the pixel-wise ground truth illumination
but also the chromaticity of each illuminant in the scene
and the mixture ratio of illuminants per pixel. Images in our
dataset are mostly captured with illuminants existing in the
scene, and the ground truth illumination is computed by taking the difference between the images with different illumination combination. Therefore, our dataset captures natural composition in the real-world setting with wide field-ofview, providing more extensive dataset compared to existing
datasets for multi-illumination white balance. As conventional single illuminant white balance algorithms cannot be
directly applied, we also apply per-pixel DNN-based white
balance algorithm and show its effectiveness against using
patch-wise white balancing. We validate the benefits of our
dataset through extensive analysis including a user-study,
and expect the dataset to make meaningful contribution for
future work in white balancing.

1. Introduction
White balance (WB) is a key feature in cameras that estimates the color of the illumination in the scene, in order
to remove the color cast by the illumination. WB imitates
the color constancy in human visual system, and it is one of
the core components of the in-camera imaging pipeline for
developing visually pleasing photographs.
White balancing, or computational color constancy, is a
long-standing problem in computer vision and most prior
works have focused on scenes with single illumination [28,
9, 34]. As with other areas in computer vision, recent
WB algorithms have been developed in a data-driven man-

Figure 1. Two and three-illuminant scene samples from LSMI
dataset (left) and illuminant coefficient maps that show the ratio
of how illuminants are mixed per pixel (right). Raw images are
converted to the sRGB space with an auto white balance for visualization purposes.

ner [33, 5, 3] that requires large WB datasets. There are
many good datasets for developing learning based WB algorithms for single illumination scenes [12, 31, 17, 11, 22].
However, many real-world scenes contain multiple illuminants. A typical example is taking a photograph of an indoor scene with windows. There are lights originating from
indoor light sources as well as the sunlight coming in from
windows. Compared to the single illumination problem,
only a few studies [21, 4, 6, 32] have addressed the multi-

2410

