Sample Efficient Detection and Classification of Adversarial Attacks
via Self-Supervised Embeddings
Mazda Moayeri
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland

Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland

mmoayeri@umd.edu

sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Adversarial robustness of deep models is pivotal in ensuring safe deployment in real world settings, but most modern defenses have narrow scope and expensive costs. In this
paper, we propose a self-supervised method to detect adversarial attacks and classify them to their respective threat
models, based on a linear model operating on the embeddings from a pre-trained self-supervised encoder. We use
a SimCLR encoder in our experiments, since we show the
SimCLR embedding distance is a good proxy for human perceptibility, enabling it to encapsulate many threat models at
once. We call our method SimCat since it uses SimCLR encoder to catch and categorize various types of adversarial
attacks, including ℓp and non-ℓp evasion attacks, as well
as data poisonings. The simple nature of a linear classifier makes our method efficient in both time and sample
complexity. For example, on SVHN, using only five pairs of
clean and adversarial examples computed with a PGD-ℓ∞
attack, SimCat’s detection accuracy is over 85%. Moreover, on ImageNet, using only 25 examples from each threat
model, SimCat can classify eight different attack types such
as PGD-ℓ2 , PGD-ℓ∞ , CW-ℓ2 , PPGD, LPA, StAdv, ReColor,
and JPEG-ℓ∞ , with over 40% accuracy. On STL10 data, we
apply SimCat as a defense against poisoning attacks, such
as BP, CP, FC, CLBD, HTBD, halving the success rate while
using only twenty total poisons for training. We find that the
detectors generalize well to unseen threat models. Lastly,
we investigate the performance of our detection method under adaptive attacks and further boost its robustness against
such attacks via adversarial training.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been applied to many applications
with great success, though a major roadblock to safe deployment of deep models in real world settings is their susceptibility to adversarial attacks. Targeting a model at the

time of inference is known as an evasion attack [33], where
imperceptible perturbations are made to an input to craft
an adversarial example that is misclassified by the model.
Models can also be attacked during training via poisoning
[11], where a small number of adversarial examples are inserted to a training set, so that after training, targeted test
samples are misclassified.
To mitigate these vulnerabilities, many defenses have
been introduced [22, 34, 9, 19]. However, a number of practical challenges remain. First, most defenses only harden a
model against a specific narrow threat model [16]. Thus,
an attacker can easily evade the defense by using a different
attack. Second, novel attacks are introduced frequently, in
a brisk game of cat and mouse, in which the attacker generally has the upper hand [2]. When we combine the rapid
development of attacks with the high computational cost of
retraining a model to be robust against even a single threat,
maintaining the robustness of a model to all threats using
typical defenses becomes intractable.
Certain detection based defenses [3] do not require fundamentally changing how the model is trained, which allows for easy application of the detector without disrupting
the existing machine learning pipeline. However, many detection based systems require large amounts of data. This
is problematic in practice, as an adversary may employ an
attack that the defender has never seen before, making it difficult for the defender to have trained the detector to work
against it. Even if the defender obtains some examples of
the novel attack, the training size may not be sufficient to
expand the detector’s ability to include the novel attack.
The advantage of a detector that is both broad in scope
and inexpensive in training requirements is clear. In this
paper, we propose a highly sample efficient detector that
also generalizes well to unforeseen attacks. Further, we extend our model to classify adversarial attacks to their respective threat models, similar to [23]. The classification allows for additional defenses to be employed, specific to the
attack encountered. Our model is based on pretrained selfsupervised encoders, which are capable of efficiently ex-

7677

