MLVSNet: Multi-level Voting Siamese Network for 3D Visual Tracking
Zhoutao Wang *1 , Qian Xie *1 , Yu-Kun Lai2 , Jing Wu2 , Kun Long1 and Jun Wang †1
1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
Cardiff University
Search Area

Abstract
Benefiting from the excellent performance of Siamesebased trackers, huge progress on 2D visual tracking has
been achieved. However, 3D visual tracking is still underexplored. Inspired by the idea of Hough voting in 3D object
detection, in this paper, we propose a Multi-level Voting
Siamese Network (MLVSNet) for 3D visual tracking from
outdoor point cloud sequences. To deal with sparsity in outdoor 3D point clouds, we propose to perform Hough voting
on multi-level features to get more vote centers and retain
more useful information, instead of voting only on the final level feature as in previous methods. We also design
an efficient and lightweight Target-Guided Attention (TGA)
module to transfer the target information and highlight the
target points in the search area. Moreover, we propose a
Vote-cluster Feature Enhancement (VFE) module to exploit
the relationships between different vote clusters. Extensive
experiments on the 3D tracking benchmark of KITTI dataset
demonstrate that our MLVSNet outperforms state-of-the-art
methods with significant margins. Code will be available
at https://github.com/CodeWZT/MLVSNet.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking aims to track a given target in every
frame of a sequence. As shown in Fig. 1, a tracking algorithm takes as input a target and a search area, and outputs
the location of the detected target in the search area, which
also serves as the target for the next frame. Visual tracking is an indispensable part in robot vision and autopilot
systems [43, 46, 8], and has long been a popular research
topic in computer vision [23, 35]. Great progress has been
made in 2D visual tracking community, benefiting from the
excellent performance of Siamese based trackers [47, 11].
However, direct application of these trackers to 3D tracking
is infeasible due to the different data structure. Compared
to 2D visual tracking, 3D tracking uses point cloud data. It
has the advantages of being more robust to illumination and
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: wjun@nuaa.edu.cn.

Target

Frame t

MLVSNet

Frame t+1

MLVSNet

Figure 1. Illustration on how MLVSNet tracks a target on 3D point
clouds. MLVSNet tracks the target object in the search area at each
frame over a sequence of point clouds.

appearance changes, but is also more challenging. Different
from RGB images/videos, 3D point cloud data is irregular,
noisy, and more sparse especially in outdoor environment.
These impose challenges different from 2D visual tracking
and require specific considerations in the algorithm design.
In this paper, we propose a novel Multi-level Voting
Siamese Network (MLVSNet), an end-to-end 3D visual
tracking method from point clouds in outdoor scenes. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, at each frame, tracking is grounded on
target detection. The recently proposed VoteNet [29] has
demonstrated its effectiveness in detecting 3D objects from
point clouds [42, 5, 33]. VoteNet is based on Hough voting,
where the chosen points collect the geometric information
from their surrounding points and then vote for the object
centers. Inspired by the success of VoteNet, the proposed
MLVSNet also employs the idea of Hough voting to locate
targets in the search area. In addition to voting-based detection, the design of MLVSNet also takes into consideration

3101

