Let’s See Clearly: Contaminant Artifact Removal for Moving Cameras
Xiaoyu Li1

Bo Zhang2

Jing Liao3

Pedro V. Sander1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Microsoft Research Asia
City University of Hong Kong
1

2

Figure 1: Contaminant removal for video frames captured by dirty lens camera. Contaminants on the lens, e.g., dust, dirt
and moisture, cause spatially variant photography artifacts (first row). Our method restores these contaminant artifacts by
leveraging the spatio-temporal consistency from multiple frames (second row). Please refer to our supplementary material
for video results.

Abstract
Contaminants such as dust, dirt and moisture adhering
to the camera lens can greatly affect the quality and clarity of the resulting image or video. In this paper, we propose a video restoration method to automatically remove
these contaminants and produce a clean video. Our approach first seeks to detect attention maps that indicate the
regions that need to be restored. In order to leverage the
corresponding clean pixels from adjacent frames, we propose a flow completion module to hallucinate the flow of
the background scene to the attention regions degraded by
the contaminants. Guided by the attention maps and completed flows, we propose a recurrent technique to restore the
input frame by fetching clean pixels from adjacent frames.
Finally, a multi-frame processing stage is used to further
process the entire video sequence in order to enforce temporal consistency. The entire network is trained on a synthetic
dataset that approximates the physical lighting properties
of contaminant artifacts. This new dataset and our novel
framework lead to our method that is able to address different contaminants and outperforms competitive restoration
approaches both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
As imaging devices have become ubiquitous, the ability to take photographs and videos everywhere and anytime

has increased significantly. Mobile cameras, action cameras, surveillance cameras, and the sensors of autonomous
driving cars are often exposed to the harsh environment in
which contaminants will cause deterioration of image quality. Figure 1 shows some examples of dirty lens artifacts,
where the visibility of the scene radiance is partially affected by the absorption and reflection of the contaminants
along the light path [17]. These undesired artifacts are not
only aesthetically disturbing, but also bring difficulty for
subsequent computer vision tasks. Although one can physically clean the lens sporadically, doing this frequently is
by no means a handy solution and sometimes infeasible for
real-time situations.
Since the contaminants adhere to the lens surface and
thereby lie out of focus, their imaging effect can be modeled by a low-frequency light modulation [17], i.e., the dirty
lens artifacts appear diffuse and semi-transparent with the
high-frequency textures of the background scene partially
preserved. This makes image or video inpainting methods [6, 55, 19, 46, 54] inadequate for our task as they completely ignore the underlying structures and the hallucinated
content. Albeit visually plausible, they may deviate significantly from the real scene. Furthermore, these works assume the completion regions are prescribed by a user-given
mask, whereas our task automatically identifies the degradation region, which is inferred from camera motion.
This work is more closely related to single image artifact

2011

