H3D-Net: Few-Shot High-Fidelity 3D Head Reconstruction
Eduard Ramon1,2
1

Crisalix SA

2

Gil Triginer1
Janna Escur1
Albert Pumarola3
Xavier Giro-i-Nieto2,3
Francesc Moreno-Noguer3
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

3

Jaime Garcia1

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC

Figure 1. We introduce H3D-Net, a method for high-fidelity 3D head reconstruction in the wild. Our method estimates a signed distance
function (SDF) of the head by optimizing a coordinate-based neural network on a small set of input images. This optimization process is
constrained by a pre-trained probabilistic model of 3D head SDFs to obtain plausible shapes in few-shot setups. The figure shows the 3D
head reconstruction of three scenes obtained with the proposed method from only three images with associated masks and camera poses.

Abstract
Recent learning approaches that implicitly represent surface geometry using coordinate-based neural representations have shown impressive results in the problem of multiview 3D reconstruction. The effectiveness of these techniques is, however, subject to the availability of a large
number (several tens) of input views of the scene, and computationally demanding optimizations. In this paper, we
tackle these limitations for the specific problem of few-shot
full 3D head reconstruction, by endowing coordinate-based
representations with a probabilistic shape prior that enables faster convergence and better generalization when
using few input images (down to three). First, we learn
a shape model of 3D heads from thousands of incomplete
raw scans using implicit representations. At test time, we
jointly overfit two coordinate-based neural networks to the
scene, one modelling the geometry and another estimating the surface radiance, using implicit differentiable rendering. We devise a two-stage optimization strategy in
which the learned prior is used to initialize and constrain
the geometry during an initial optimization phase. Then,
the prior is unfrozen and fine-tuned to the scene. By doing this, we achieve high-fidelity head reconstructions, including hair and shoulders, and with a high level of detail
that consistently outperforms both state-of-the-art 3D Morphable Models methods in the few-shot scenario, and nonparametric methods when large sets of views are available.

1. Introduction
Recent learning based methods have shown impressive
results in reconstructing 3D shapes from 2D images. These
approaches can be roughly split into two main categories:
model-based [3, 11, 25, 35, 36, 37, 44, 45, 49, 52] and
model-free [9, 10, 16, 18, 21, 31, 33, 34, 39, 50, 51, 53]. The
former incorporate prior knowledge using 3D Morphable
Models (3DMMs) to limit the space of feasible solutions,
making these approaches well suited for few-shot and oneshot shape estimation. However, most model-based methods produce shapes that usually lack geometric detail and
cannot handle arbitrary topology changes.
On the other hand, model-free approaches based on discrete representations like voxels, meshes or point-clouds,
have the flexibility to represent a wider spectrum of shapes,
although at the cost of being computationally tractable only
for small resolutions or being restricted to fixed topologies. These limitations have been overcome by neural implicit representations [8, 23, 24, 27, 32, 38, 41, 56], which
can represent both geometry and appearance as a continuum, encoded in the weights of a neural network. [26, 54]
have shown the success of such representations in learning
detail-rich 3D geometry directly from images, with no 3D
ground truth supervision. Unfortunately, the performance
of these methods is currently conditioned to the availabil-

5620

