3D Human Pose Estimation with Spatial and Temporal Transformers
Ce Zheng1 , Sijie Zhu1 , Matias Mendieta1 , Taojiannan Yang1 , Chen Chen1 , Zhengming Ding2
1
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, USA
{cezheng,sizhu,mendieta,taoyang1122}@knights.ucf.edu;
chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu;zding1@tulane.edu

Abstract
Transformer architectures have become the model of
choice in natural language processing and are now being
introduced into computer vision tasks such as image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. However, in the field of human pose estimation, convolutional architectures still remain dominant. In this work, we present
PoseFormer, a purely transformer-based approach for 3D
human pose estimation in videos without convolutional architectures involved. Inspired by recent developments in
vision transformers, we design a spatial-temporal transformer structure to comprehensively model the human joint
relations within each frame as well as the temporal correlations across frames, then output an accurate 3D human
pose of the center frame. We quantitatively and qualitatively
evaluate our method on two popular and standard benchmark datasets: Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP. Extensive experiments show that PoseFormer achieves state-ofthe-art performance on both datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/zczcwh/PoseFormer

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation (HPE) aims to localize joints and
build a body representation (e.g. skeleton position) from input data such as images and videos. HPE provides geometric and motion information of the human body and can
be applied to a wide range of applications (e.g. humancomputer interaction, motion analysis, healthcare). Current works generally can be divided into two classes: (1)
direct estimation approaches, and (2) 2D-to-3D lifting approaches. Direct estimation methods [31, 29] infer a 3D
human pose from 2D images or video frames without intermediately estimating the 2D pose representation. 2D-to-3D
lifting approaches [25, 5, 43, 38] infer 3D human pose from
an intermediately estimated 2D pose. Benefiting from the
excellent performance of state-of-the-art 2D pose detectors,
2D-to-3D lifting approaches generally outperform direct es-

timation methods. However, the mapping of these 2D poses
to 3D is non-trivial; various potential 3D poses could be
generated from the same 2D pose due to depth ambiguity
and occlusion. To alleviate some of these issues and preserve natural coherence, many recent works have integrated
temporal information from videos into their approaches.
For example, [25, 5] utilize temporal convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) to capture global dependencies from adjacent frames, and [33] uses recurrent architectures to similar
effect. However, the temporal correlation window is limited for both of these architectures. CNN-based approaches
typically rely on dilation techniques, which inherently have
limited temporal connectivity, and recurrent networks are
mainly constrained to simply sequential correlation.
Recently, the transformer [37] has become the de facto
model for natural language processing (NLP) due to its efficiency, scalability and strong modeling capabilities. Thanks
to the self-attention mechanism of the transformer, global
correlations across long input sequences can be distinctly
captured. This makes it a particularly fitting architecture
for sequence data problems, and therefore naturally extendable to 3D HPE. With its comprehensive connectivity and expression, the transformer provides an opportunity
to learn stronger temporal representations across frames.
However, recent works [12, 36] show that transformers require specific designs to achieve comparable performance
with CNN counterparts for vision tasks. Specifically, they
often require either extremely large scale training datasets
[12], or enhanced data augmentation and regularization [36]
if applied to smaller datasets. Moreover, existing vision
transformers have been limited primarily to image classification [12, 36], object detection [4, 50], and segmentation [41, 47], but how to harness the power of transformers
for 3D HPE remains unclear.
To begin answering this question, we first directly apply the transformer on 2D-to-3D lifting HPE. In this case,
we view the entire 2D pose for each frame in a given sequence as a token (Fig. 1(a)). While this baseline approach
is functional to an extent, it ignores the natural distinction of

11656

