Learning Self-Similarity in Space and Time
as Generalized Motion for Video Action Recognition
Heeseung Kwon*

Manjin Kim*

Suha Kwak

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/SELFY/

Abstract
Spatio-temporal convolution often fails to learn motion
dynamics in videos and thus an effective motion representation is required for video understanding in the wild. In
this paper, we propose a rich and robust motion representation based on spatio-temporal self-similarity (STSS). Given
a sequence of frames, STSS represents each local region as
similarities to its neighbors in space and time. By converting appearance features into relational values, it enables
the learner to better recognize structural patterns in space
and time. We leverage the whole volume of STSS and let
our model learn to extract an effective motion representation from it. The proposed neural block, dubbed SELFY,
can be easily inserted into neural architectures and trained
end-to-end without additional supervision. With a sufficient volume of the neighborhood in space and time, it effectively captures long-term interaction and fast motion in
the video, leading to robust action recognition. Our experimental analysis demonstrates its superiority over previous
methods for motion modeling as well as its complementarity to spatio-temporal features from direct convolution. On
the standard action recognition benchmarks, SomethingSomething-V1 & V2, Diving-48, and FineGym, the proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Learning spatio-temporal dynamics is the key to video
understanding. While extending standard convolution in
space and time has been actively investigated for the purpose in recent years [1, 44, 46], the empirical results so far
indicate that spatio-temporal convolution alone is not sufficient for grasping the whole picture; it often learns irrelevant context bias rather than motion information [32, 33]
and thus the additional use of optical flow turns out to boost
the performance in most cases [1,29]. Motivated by this, re* Equal contribution.

Figure 1: Spatio-temporal self-similarity (STSS) representation learning. STSS describes each position (query)
by its similarities (STSS tensor) with its neighbors in space
and time (neighborhood). It allows to take a generalized,
far-sighted view on motion, i.e., both short-term and longterm, both forward and backward, as well as spatial selfmotion. Our method learns to extract a rich motion representation from STSS without additional supervision.
cent action recognition methods learn to extract explicit motion, i.e., flow or correspondence, between feature maps of
adjacent frames to improve the performance [22, 27]. But,
is it essential to extract such an explicit form of flows or correspondences? How can we learn a richer and more robust
form of motion information for videos in the wild?
In this paper, we propose to learn spatio-temporal selfsimilarity (STSS) representation for video understanding.
Self-similarity is a relational descriptor for an image that effectively captures intra-structures by representing each local
region as similarities to its spatial neighbors [37]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, given a sequence of frames, i.e., a video, it

13065

