ADNet: Leveraging Error-Bias Towards Normal Direction in Face Alignment
Yangyu Huang, Hao Yang*, Chong Li, Jongyoo Kim, Fangyun Wei
Microsoft Research Asia
{yanghuan,haya,chol,jongk,fawe}@microsoft.com

The recent progress of CNN has dramatically improved
face alignment performance. However, few works have paid
attention to the error-bias with respect to error distribution of facial landmarks. In this paper, we investigate the
error-bias issue in face alignment, where the distributions
of landmark errors tend to spread along the tangent line
to landmark curves. This error-bias is not trivial since it
is closely connected to the ambiguous landmark labeling
task. Inspired by this observation, we seek a way to leverage the error-bias property for better convergence of CNN
model. To this end, we propose anisotropic direction loss
(ADL) and anisotropic attention module (AAM) for coordinate and heatmap regression, respectively. ADL imposes
strong binding force in normal direction for each landmark
point on facial boundaries. On the other hand, AAM is an
attention module which can get anisotropic attention mask
focusing on the region of point and its local edge connected
by adjacent points, it has a stronger response in tangent
than in normal, which means relaxed constraints in the tangent. These two methods work in a complementary manner to learn both facial structures and texture details. Finally, we integrate them into an optimized end-to-end training pipeline named ADNet. Our ADNet achieves state-ofthe-art results on 300W, WFLW and COFW datasets, which
demonstrates the effectiveness and robustness.

1. Introduction
Face alignment, applied to facial landmark detection, has
experienced tremendous improvement by means of Convolutional Neural Networks, and provides a continuous impetus for improvements in many computer vision techniques
for face such as face recognition [29], face synthesis [1, 17]
and face 3D reconstruction [23].
Error-bias can be treated as a special kind of AI-bias that
could be resulted from the prejudiced assumptions made in
the process of algorithm development or prejudices in the
* Corresponding author

Normalized Standard Deviation or NMEinterpupil/2

Abstract

(a) Human Labeling Variance

(a) Human

(b) Error Distribution by Baseline

(b) Baseline

(c) Error Distribution by ADNet

(c) ADNet

Figure 1. Manual annotations variance v.s. Prediction error distribution on 300W dataset. (a) The variance of the manual annotations for each landmarks cited from 300W [36], the ellipses is
colored by standard deviation normalized by face size. (b) The
prediction error distribution of baseline model, each point represent the relevant position between predicted landmark and its corresponding ground truth, colored by the average NMEinterpupil /
2 of that landmark, in general face size is twice of the inter pupil.
(c) The prediction error distribution of ADNet model.

training data thus is an anomaly in the output of machine
learning algorithms. Common AI-bias, such as race-bias
and gender-bias, always causes negative ethical effects, especially in the case of gender shades [5]. Different from
them, the error-bias considered in this paper is more like a
location uncertainty, as mentioned by [26].
In our research, error-bias is regarded as the nature of
error direction and proves to be highly conducive for model
understanding, thus deserving a thorough investigation to
fill in the research gap.
Figure 1.(a) demonstrates the labeling-bias of landmarks
location on 300W dataset, deduced by the anisotropic standard deviation of each point, especially the points located
on the boundary. By the observation, we trained a common
face alignment model with 300W dataset, whose setting is
the same as the baseline model described at the end of Section 4.2, and rendered the error distribution on the whole
test dataset in Figure 1.(b), in which the error means the
relative offset from predicted position to ground truth. It
is found that the error-bias exists on common face alignment model and reaches 33% relative rate, which is highly
consistent with labeling-bias in Figure 1.(a). Based on the
finding, we speculate that model easier converges the error

3080

