Adaptive Adversarial Network for Source-free Domain Adaptation
Haifeng Xia† , Handong Zhao‡ , and Zhengming Ding†
†
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, USA
‡
Adobe Research, San Jose, USA
hxia@tulane.edu, hazhao@adobe.com, zding1@tulane.edu

Source-similar set

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation solves knowledge
transfer along with the coexistence of well-annotated source
domain and unlabeled target instances. However, the
source domain in many practical applications is not always accessible due to data privacy or the insufficient memory storage for small devices. This scenario defined as
Source-free Domain Adaptation only allows accessing the
well-trained source model for target learning. To address
the challenge of source data unavailability, we develop an
Adaptive Adversarial Network (A2 Net) including three
components. Specifically, the first one named Adaptive Adversarial Inference seeks a target-specific classifier to advance the recognition of samples which the provided sourcespecific classifier difficultly identifies. Then, the Contrastive
Category-wise Matching module exploits the positive relation of every two target images to enforce the compactness
of subspace for each category. Thirdly, Self-Supervised Rotation facilitates the model to learn additional semantics
from target images by themselves. Extensive experiments
on the popular cross-domain benchmarks verify the effectiveness of our proposed model on solving adaptation task
without any source data.

1. Introduction
Recent years witness great promising achievements from
the exploration of deep neural network (DNN) in the practical scenarios, i.e., image classification, segmentation and
detection [20, 47, 24, 48]. However, DNN model easily suffers from severe performance degradation when evaluated
on test data (target domain) lying in different distribution
from the training instances (source domain). Such discrepancy termed as domain shift [9, 36] results from the varying environments or devices [28] and various image styles
[49]. To tackle the challenge, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) attracts increasing attention and achieves encouraging results by using deep learning architecture.
Conventional UDA assumes the cross-domain data is

Source-dissimilar set

Frozen
classifier !!(#)
Learnable
classifier !"(#)

Source subspace

Target subspace

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of high-level source (black) and target (red) feature distributions from the trained source model. The
target samples can be divided into two subsets: source-similar and
source-dissimilar sets. Square and circle represent two different
categories. A2 Net adaptively learns a new classifier (dashed)
based on the frozen classifier (solid) trained in source domain.

available during model training, so that it effectively measures and eliminates the domain discrepancy [7, 39, 42].
Based on this assumption, the mainstream solutions of UDA
are roughly divided into two paradigms. One branch attempts to transform source and target data into the highlevel feature space with the consistent statistical moments
to achieve the alignment of their feature distributions [14,
26, 41, 3, 16]. As for the representative work maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD), the learned cross-domain features are enforced to share the identical first-order moment.
The other branch devotes more efforts to the deployment
of adversarial framework [27, 33, 2]. The core strategy is
exploiting feature generator to deceive the domain discriminator so that it fails to recognize which domain the feature comes from. Despite the successes of these methods,
it is not hard to observe that they heavily depend on the
co-existence of source and target data. However, abundant
application scenarios cannot always meet the basic assumption of UDA due to data privacy and memory constraint of
small devices. For instance, the training benchmark of ImageNet [6] contains 14 million images occupying hundreds
gigabytes storage, which is a huge burden for small-storage
equipment. Moreover, many industries such as hospitals are

9010

