Conditional Diffusion for Interactive Segmentation
Xi Chen, Zhiyan Zhao, Feiwu Yu, Yilei Zhang, Manni Duan*
Alibaba Group
{xizhi.cx, zhiyan.zzy, feiwu.yfw, yilei.z}@alibaba-inc.com, manyi@taobao.com

Abstract
In click-based interactive segmentation, the mask extraction process is dictated by positive/negative user clicks;
however, most existing methods do not fully exploit the
user cues, requiring excessive numbers of clicks for satisfactory results. We propose Conditional Diffusion Network (CDNet), which propagates labeled representations
from clicks to conditioned destinations with two levels of
affinities: Feature Diffusion Module (FDM) spreads features from clicks to potential target regions with global similarity; Pixel Diffusion Module (PDM) diffuses the predicted
logits of clicks within locally connected regions. Thus, the
information inferred by user clicks could be generalized to
proper destinations. In addition, we put forward Diversified
Training (DT), which reduces the optimization ambiguity
caused by click simulation. With FDM,PDM and DT, CDNet could better understand user’s intentions and make better predictions with limited interactions. CDNet achieves
state-of-the-art performance on several benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Interactive segmentation has been a topic of research for
a long while; various forms of interactions have been explored. Human could provide bounding boxes [26, 30, 15],
scribbles [16, 6, 1], or clicks [27, 20, 32, 11] to express
the segmentation intentions, which guide the algorithm for
the mask extraction process. The segmentation target could
be anything that users want, which requires interactive segmentation to be a flexible tool and makes it a challenging
vision task. In this work, we address click-based interactive
segmentation, and we aim to improve upon existing works
by better understanding user’s intentions.
For click-based interactive segmentation, users places
positive/negative clicks (red/ green points in Fig. 1) to indicate foreground/ background regions. In general, a user’s
click contains two layers of information: the first layer is
spatial – the location of the foreground/background could
* Corresponding Author

(a) Baseline

(b) CDNet

(c) Baseline

(d) CDNet

Figure 1. Comparison of baseline method and CDNet. Positive /negative clicks are marked in red and green. Diffusion flows
are visualized in colored arrows. As the red arrow denotes, CDNet
propagates information from clicks to target destinations, while
suppressing the invalid flow denoted by the white arrow.

be indicated by the distribution of clicks; the second layer
is visual – the label of regions around the clicks could be
inferred by visual similarity. In a standard pipeline, the first
step is encoding clicks into distance maps [32, 27, 11, 31],
Gaussian maps [20, 23, 21, 14], or super-pixels [22]; next,
encoded maps is concatenated with the original image and
fed into a segmentation network to make predictions. This
kind of method exploits good use of spatial information but
ignores the visual hint. Consequently, we see two problems:
1) like the example in Fig. 1 (a), the label of a click often
fails to be generalized to target regions further away from
clicks, even if parts of the target region has almost the same
appearance as the click. 2) the labels could spill over to the
wrong regions, even if the target has clear boundaries, as
demonstrated in Fig. 1 (c).
To address the aforementioned issues, we explored to
model the affinity between different locations and diffuse
the representations from clicks to unlabeled regions. A
straightforward solution is modeling the affinity simply
based on feature similarity. However, it would lead to overgeneralization: in Fig. 1 (b), the information should not
propagate from A to C (under the assumption that the target
is the bottom flamingo), even though they are visually simi17345

