Leveraging Auxiliary Tasks with Affinity Learning for Weakly Supervised
Semantic Segmentation
Lian Xu1 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Mohammed Bennamoun1 , Farid Boussaid1 , Ferdous Sohel3 , and Dan Xu4
1

3

The University of Western Australia 2 The University of Sydney
Murdoch University 4 Hong Kong University of Sciences and Technology

{lian.xu,mohammed.bennamoun,farid.boussaid}@uwa.edu.au, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au,
F.Sohel@murdoch.edu.au, danxu@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is a challenging task in the absence of densely labelled data. Only relying on class activation maps (CAM) with image-level labels provides deficient
segmentation supervision. Prior works thus consider pretrained models to produce coarse saliency maps to guide
the generation of pseudo segmentation labels. However, the
commonly used off-line heuristic generation process cannot
fully exploit the benefits of these coarse saliency maps. Motivated by the significant inter-task correlation, we propose
a novel weakly supervised multi-task framework termed as
AuxSegNet, to leverage saliency detection and multi-label
image classification as auxiliary tasks to improve the primary task of semantic segmentation using only image-level
ground-truth labels. Inspired by their similar structured semantics, we also propose to learn a cross-task global pixellevel affinity map from the saliency and segmentation representations. The learned cross-task affinity can be used
to refine saliency predictions and propagate CAM maps to
provide improved pseudo labels for both tasks. The mutual
boost between pseudo label updating and cross-task affinity learning enables iterative improvements on segmentation performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed auxiliary learning network
structure and the cross-task affinity learning method. The
proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art weakly supervised segmentation performance on the challenging PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO benchmarks. 1

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation plays a vital role in many applications such as scene understanding and autonomous driv1 https://github.com/xulianuwa/AuxSegNet

A

a
de ec

a e c
a

U da ed a e c PGT
C

-Ta

Aff
Lea

A
ca

a
f ca

a e
a

Ref ed CAM

a

P
e

a
e a c
e a
a

U da ed e a

c PGT

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed approach for weakly supervised semantic segmentation. Our approach jointly learns two
auxiliary tasks (i.e., multi-label image classification and saliency
detection) and a primary task (i.e., semantic segmentation) only
using image-level ground-truth labels, and performs affinity learning across two dense prediction tasks (i.e., saliency detection and
semantic segmentation). The learned affinity is then used to generate updated pseudo ground-truth (PGT) providing supervision to
learn saliency detection and semantic segmentation.

ing. It describes the process of assigning a semantic label
to each pixel of an image. Prior works have achieved great
success in the case of fully supervised semantic segmentation using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). However, this has come at a high pixel-wise annotation cost.
There has been an emerging research trend in semantic segmentation using less expensive annotations, such as bounding boxes [14, 31], scribbles [22, 33], points and imagelevel labels [28, 18, 42]. Among them, image-level labels
only indicate the presence or absence of objects in an image,
resulting in an inferior segmentation performance compared
to their fully supervised counterparts.
Most existing weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) approaches follow a two-step pipeline, i.e., generating pseudo segmentation labels and training segmenta-

6984

