Pano-AVQA: Grounded Audio-Visual Question Answering on 360◦ Videos
Heeseung Yun1 , Youngjae Yu2 , Wonsuk Yang3 , Kangil Lee4 , Gunhee Kim1
1
Seoul National University, 2 Allen Institute for AI, 3 University of Oxford ,4 Hyundai Motor Company
{heeseung.yun, yj.yu}@vision.snu.ac.kr, {wonsuk1001, smddls77}@gmail.com, gunhee@snu.ac.kr
https://github.com/hs-yn/PanoAVQA

Q. What are the people on the opposite side Q. What color are the shorts of the bald man Q. Where is the cause of rustling noise in
of the talking man doing?
relation to a woman in pink clothes?
speaking in a grave voice?
A. Walking.
A. Right.
A. White.
Figure 1. Pano-AVQA is a panoramic video question answering dataset for evaluating spherical spatial reasoning and audio-visual
reasoning that goes beyond a normal field-of-view with limited context. Pano-AVQA introduces diverse new sets of questions from
real-life surroundings, considering spherical spatial relations and audio-visual matching.

Abstract
360◦ videos convey holistic views for the surroundings
of a scene. It provides audio-visual cues beyond predetermined normal field of views and displays distinctive
spatial relations on a sphere. However, previous benchmark tasks for panoramic videos are still limited to evaluate the semantic understanding of audio-visual relationships or spherical spatial property in surroundings. We
propose a novel benchmark named Pano-AVQA as a largescale grounded audio-visual question answering dataset
on panoramic videos. Using 5.4K 360◦ video clips harvested online, we collect two types of novel question-answer
pairs with bounding-box grounding: spherical spatial relation QAs and audio-visual relation QAs. We train several transformer-based models from Pano-AVQA, where the
results suggest that our proposed spherical spatial embeddings and multimodal training objectives fairly contribute
to a better semantic understanding of the panoramic surroundings on the dataset.

1. Introduction
Due to their capacity to capture entire surroundings without a restriction in the field of view, 360◦ videos have been

gaining increasing popularity as a novel medium to record
real-life scenery. As illustrated in Fig. 1, unlike conventional normal field-of-view (NFoV) videos, 360◦ videos
allow users to attend to any regions of interest from the
original real-life surroundings. As publicly available 360◦
videos surge from video-sharing platforms (e.g., YouTube)
and their applications of omnidirectional perception quickly
spread from autonomous vehicles [1, 2], robotics [3, 4] to
virtual & augmented reality [5, 6], visual understanding in
360◦ videos has warranted serious attentions in computer
vision research.
The wide field of view of 360◦ videos brings forth
new challenges in visual understanding that are underemphasized in the NFoV video understanding, including spherical spatial reasoning and audio-visual reasoning.
Since 360◦ videos are encoded in a spherical ambient space,
spatial reasoning in 360◦ video, namely spherical spatial
reasoning, requires a novel approach to recognizing various
relations between the objects all around. Moreover, 360◦
videos contain more diverse visual sources of sounds than
conventional videos, which allows richer contextual audiovisual correspondences. Given that spatial attention for visual and auditory stimuli is inherent and even aligned in
human [7], capturing the link among visual and auditory
signals from panoramic videos can be highly beneficial to
real-life scene understanding.

2031

