MEDIRL: Predicting the Visual Attention of Drivers via
Maximum Entropy Deep Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Sonia Baee1 , Erfan Pakdamanian1 , Inki Kim2 , Lu Feng1 , Vicente Ordonez3 , Laura Barnes1
1
University of Virginia, 2 University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 3 Rice University
sb5ce@virginia.edu, ep2ca@virginia.edu, inkikim@illinois.edu
Lu.feng@virginia.edu, vicenteor@rice.edu, lb3dp@virginia.edu

Abstract
Inspired by human visual attention, we propose a novel
inverse reinforcement learning formulation using Maximum
Entropy Deep Inverse Reinforcement Learning (MEDIRL)
for predicting the visual attention of drivers in accidentprone situations. MEDIRL predicts fixation locations that
lead to maximal rewards by learning a task-sensitive reward function from eye fixation patterns recorded from attentive drivers. Additionally, we introduce EyeCar, a new
driver attention dataset in accident-prone situations. We
conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate our proposed model on three common benchmarks: (DR(eye)VE,
BDD-A, DADA-2000), and our EyeCar dataset. Results indicate that MEDIRL outperforms existing models for predicting attention and achieves state-of-the-art performance.
We present extensive ablation studies to provide more insights into different features of our proposed model.1

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles have witnessed significant advances in recent years. These vehicles promise better safety
and freedom from the prolonged and monotonous task of
driving. However, one of the remaining safety challenges
of vision-based models integrated into these vehicles is
how to quickly identify important visual cues and understand risks involved in traffic environments at a time of
urgency [51]. Humans have an incredible visual attention
ability to quickly detect the most relevant stimuli, to direct
attention to potential hazards in complex situations [43],
and to select only a relevant fraction of perceived information for more in-depth processing [53]. Humans are able to
guide their attention by a combination of bottom-up (stimuli
driven, e.g., color and intensity) and top-down (task driven,
e.g., current goals or intention) mechanisms [13, 27].
1 The code and dataset are provided for reproducibility in https://
github.com/soniabaee/MEDIRL-EyeCar.

Figure 1: Given a driving video and corresponding eye fixations as inputs, MEDIRL learns to model the fixation selection as a sequence of states and actions (St , At ). MEDIRL
then predicts a maximally-rewarding fixation location by
perceptually parsing a scene to extract rich visual information (environment) and accumulating a sequence of visual
cues through fixations (state).
During task-specific activities, the goal-directed behavior of humans along with their underlying target-based selective attention, enables drivers to ignore objects and unnecessary details in their field of view that are irrelevant
to their decisions [7, 8]. For example, at one moment, a
driver’s goal might be to initiate an overtaking maneuver,
thus a nearby vehicle becomes the target object. Later,
the driver may need to stop abruptly to avoid an accident,
thereby the brake light of the car in front becomes the target
object. Despite recent progress in computer vision models
for autonomous systems [28, 63], they are still behind the
foveal vision ability of humans [42, 61, 69].
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) algorithms are capable to address this problem by learning to imitate the efficient attention allocation produced by an expert, i.e. an
attentive driver [41]. It is important that autonomous vehicles leverage human visual attention mechanisms to improve their performance, especially for better safety in critical situations where rare events can be encountered. In this
paper, we introduce Maximum Entropy Deep Inverse Reinforcement Learning (MEDIRL) to learn task-specific visual

13178

