P2-Net: Joint Description and Detection of Local Features for
Pixel and Point Matching
Bing Wang1 , Changhao Chen2 , Zhaopeng Cui3 , Jie Qin4 , Chris Xiaoxuan Lu5 ,
Zhengdi Yu6 , Peijun Zhao1 , Zhen Dong7 , Fan Zhu8 , Niki Trigoni1 , Andrew Markham1
1

2

University of Oxford 3 Zhejiang University 5 University of Edinburgh 7 Wuhan University
National University of Defense Technology 4 Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 6 Durham

8

IIAI

1. Introduction
Establishing accurate pixel- and point- level matches
across images and point clouds, respectively, is a fundamental computer vision task that is crucial for a multitude
of applications, such as Simultaneous Localization And
Mapping [34], Structure-from-Motion [44], pose estimation
[35], 3D reconstruction [25], and visual localization [42].
A typical pipeline of most methods is to first recover the
3D structure given an image sequence [24, 41], and subsequently perform matching between pixels and points based
on 2D to 3D reprojected features. Such features will be homogeneous as points in the reconstructed 3D model inherit

Stairs

Accurately describing and detecting 2D and 3D keypoints is crucial to establishing correspondences across images and point clouds. Despite a plethora of learningbased 2D or 3D local feature descriptors and detectors
having been proposed, the derivation of a shared descriptor and joint keypoint detector that directly matches pixels and points remains under-explored by the community.
This work takes the initiative to establish fine-grained correspondences between 2D images and 3D point clouds.
In order to directly match pixels and points, a dual fullyconvolutional framework is presented that maps 2D and 3D
inputs into a shared latent representation space to simultaneously describe and detect keypoints. Furthermore, an
ultra-wide reception mechanism and a novel loss function
are designed to mitigate the intrinsic information variations
between pixel and point local regions. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our framework shows competitive performance in fine-grained matching between images
and point clouds and achieves state-of-the-art results for the
task of indoor visual localization. Our source code is available at https://github.com/BingCS/P2-Net.

Chess

Abstract

Figure 1: Examples of 2D-3D matches obtained by the
P2-Net. The proposed method can directly establish correspondences across images and point clouds by the jointly
learned feature description and detection.
the descriptors from corresponding pixels of the image sequence. However, this two-step procedure requires accurate 3D reconstruction, which is not always feasible to be
achieved, e.g., under challenging illumination or large viewpoint changes. More critically, this approach treats RGB
images as first-class citizens, and discounts the equivalence
of sensors capable of directly capturing 3D point clouds,
e.g., LIDAR, imaging RADAR and depth cameras. These
factors motivate us to consider a unified approach to pixel
and point matching, where an open question can be posed:
how to directly establish correspondences between pixels in
2D images and points in 3D point clouds, and vice-versa?
This is inherently challenging as 2D images capture scene
appearance, whereas 3D point clouds encode structure.
To this end, we formulate a new task of direct 2D pixel
and 3D point matching (cf. Fig. 1) without any auxiliary
steps (e.g., reconstruction). This task is undoubtedly challenging for existing conventional and learning-based approaches, which fail to bridge the gap between 2D and 3D
representations as separately extracted 2D and 3D local features are distinct and do not share a common embedding.

16004

