Geometric Deep Neural Network using Rigid and Non-Rigid Transformations
for Human Action Recognition
Rasha Friji1,2 Hassen Drira3 Faten Chaieb1,4 Hamza Kchok 5,3 Sebastian Kurtek 6
1

CRISTAL Lab - National University of Computer Science ENSI, Manouba University Campus, Manouba, Tunisia
Talan Innovation Factory, Talan Tunisia, 10 Rue de l’énergie solaire Impasse N°1 Charguia 1, Tunis 2035, Tunisia
3
IMT Lille Douai, CRIStAL UMR 9189, University Lille, F-59000 Lille, France
4
AllianSTIC Lab - EFREI Paris, Villejuif, France
5
INSAT, Tunisia
6
Department of Statistics, the Ohio State University Columbus, OH, USA
racha.friji@talan.com hassen.drira@imt-lille-douai.fr faten.chakchouk@efrei.fr
hamza.kchok@insat.u-carthage.tn kurtek.1@stat.osu.edu
2

Abstract
Deep Learning architectures, albeit successful in most
computer vision tasks, were designed for data with an underlying Euclidean structure, which is not usually fulfilled
since pre-processed data may lie on a non-linear space.
In this paper, we propose a geometry aware deep learning approach using rigid and non rigid transformation optimization for skeleton-based action recognition. Skeleton sequences are first modeled as trajectories on Kendall’s shape
space and then mapped to the linear tangent space. The resulting structured data are then fed to a deep learning architecture, which includes a layer that optimizes over rigid and
non rigid transformations of the 3D skeletons, followed by
a CNN-LSTM network. The assessment on two large scale
skeleton datasets, namely NTU-RGB+D and NTU-RGB+D
120, has proven that the proposed approach outperforms
existing geometric deep learning methods and exceeds recently published approaches with respect to the majority of
configurations.

1. Introduction
Human behavior analysis via diverse data types has
emerged as an active research issue in computer vision due
to 1) the wide spectrum of not yet fully explored application domains, e.g., human-computer interaction, intelligent
surveillance security, virtual reality, etc., and 2) the development of advanced sensors such as Intel RealSense, Asus
Xtion and the Microsoft Kinect [49], which yield various
data modalities, e.g., RGB and depth image sequences, and
videos. Conventionally, these modalities have been utilized,
solely [23, 37], or merged (e.g., RGB + optical flow), for

action recognition tasks [35, 9] using multiple classification techniques, and resulted in excellent results. With the
development of human pose estimation algorithms [8, 6],
the problem of human joint (i.e., key-points) localization
was solved and reliable acquisition of accurate 3D skeleton
data became possible. In comparison with former modalities, skeleton data, a topological representation of the human body using joints and bones, appears to be less computationally expensive, and more robust in front of intricate
backgrounds and with respect to variable conditions including viewpoints, scales and motion speeds. An efficient way
to analyze 3D skeleton motions is to consider their shapes
independently of undesirable transformations; the resulting
representation space of skeleton data is then non linear.
Accordingly, we represent 3D skeleton landmarks in the
Kendall shape space [16] that defines shape as the geometric information that remains when location, scaling and rotational effects are filtered out. A sequence of skeletons is
then modeled as a trajectory on this space. Thus, to analyze and classify such data, it is more suitable to consider the geometry of the underlying space. This remains
a challenging problem since most commonly used techniques were designed for linear data. Deep learning architectures, despite their efficiency in many computer vision
applications, usually ignore the geometry of the underlying
data space. Therefore, geometric deep learning architectures have been introduced to remedy this issue. To the best
of our knowledge, the main previous geometric deep learning approaches were designed on feature spaces (e.g., SPD
matrices, Grassmann manifold, Lie groups [14, 13]) or on
the 3D human body manifold [2, 28]. The literature that
considers this problem on shape spaces is scarce. Actually,
an extension of a conventional deep architecture on a pre-

12611

