Relational Embedding for Few-Shot Classification
Dahyun Kang

Heeseung Kwon

Juhong Min

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/RENet

1. Introduction
Few-shot image classification [11, 27, 53, 72] aims to
learn new visual concepts from a small number of examples. The task is defined to classify a given query image
into target classes, each of which is unseen during training and represented by only a few support images. Recent
methods [1,5,19,34,48,50,63,72,80,84] tackle the problem
by meta-learning a deep embedding function such that the
distance between images on the embedding space conforms
to their semantic distance. The learned embedding function, however, often overfits to irrelevant features [4, 9, 13]
and thus fails to transfer to new classes not yet observed in
training. While deep neural features provide rich semantic
information, it remains challenging to learn a generalizable
embedding without being distracted by spurious features.
The central tenet of our approach is that relational patterns, i.e., meta-patterns, may generalize better than individual patterns; an item obtains a meaning in comparison with
other items in a system, and thus relevant information can

support

input

(a)

cross-correlation

We propose to address the problem of few-shot classification by meta-learning “what to observe” and “where
to attend” in a relational perspective. Our method leverages relational patterns within and between images via selfcorrelational representation (SCR) and cross-correlational
attention (CCA). Within each image, the SCR module transforms a base feature map into a self-correlation tensor
and learns to extract structural patterns from the tensor.
Between the images, the CCA module computes crosscorrelation between two image representations and learns
to produce co-attention between them. Our Relational Embedding Network (RENet) combines the two relational modules to learn relational embedding in an end-to-end manner. In experimental evaluation, it achieves consistent improvements over state-of-the-art methods on four widely
used few-shot classification benchmarks of miniImageNet,
tieredImageNet, CUB-200-2011, and CIFAR-FS.

query

self-correiation self-correiation

Abstract

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Relational embedding process and its attentional effects. The base image features are transformed via self-correlation
to capture structural patterns within each image and then coattended via cross-correlation to focus on semantically relevant
contents between the images. (a), (b), and (c) visualize the activation maps of base features, self-correlational representation, and
cross-correlational attention, respectively. See Sec. 5.6 for details.

be extracted from the relational structure of items. On this
basis, we propose to learn “what to observe” and “where
to attend” in a relational perspective and combine them to
produce relational embeddings for few-shot learning.
We achieve this goal by leveraging relational patterns
within and between images via (1) self-correlational representation (SCR) and (2) cross-correlational attention
(CCA). The SCR module transforms a base representation
into its self-correlation tensor and learns to extract structural
patterns from it. Self-correlation of a deep feature map encodes rich semantic structures by correlating each activation
of the feature map to its neighborhood. We perform representation learning on top of it to make relevant structural
patterns of the image stand out (Fig. 1 (a)→(b)). On the
other hand, the CCA module computes cross-correlation between two image representations and learns to produce coattention from it. Cross-correlation encodes semantic correspondence relations between the two images. We learn
high-dimensional convolutions on the cross-correlation tensor to refine it via convolutional matching and produce
adaptive co-attention based on semantic relations between
the query and the support (Fig. 1 (b)→(c)).
The proposed method combines the two modules to learn
relational embeddings in an end-to-end manner; it extracts

8822

