Motion Deblurring with Real Events
Fang Xu1 , Lei Yu1 ,* Bishan Wang1 , Wen Yang1 ,* Gui-Song Xia2 , Xu Jia3 ,* Zhendong Qiao4 , Jianzhuang Liu4
1
School of Electronic Information, Wuhan University
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
4
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
{xufang, ly.wd, bswang, yangwen, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, xjia@dlut.edu.cn, {qiaozhendong, liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end learning framework for event-based motion deblurring in a self-supervised
manner, where real-world events are exploited to alleviate
the performance degradation caused by data inconsistency.
To achieve this end, optical flows are predicted from events,
with which the blurry consistency and photometric consistency are exploited to enable self-supervision on the deblurring network with real-world data. Furthermore, a piecewise linear motion model is proposed to take into account
motion non-linearities and thus leads to an accurate model
for the physical formation of motion blurs in the real-world
scenario. Extensive evaluation on both synthetic and real
motion blur datasets demonstrates that the proposed algorithm bridges the gap between simulated and real-world
motion blurs and shows remarkable performance for eventbased motion deblurring in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Due to motion ambiguities as well as the erasure of intensity textures [12], the task of motion deblurring is severely
ill-posed [11, 25]. With the help of an event camera which
can “continuously” emit events asynchronously with extremely low latency (in the order of µs) [15, 6], inherently
embedding motions and textures [2], the task of motion deblurring [24, 22, 28] can be essentially alleviated. Many
event-based motion deblurring methods have been proposed
by learning from synthesized dataset composed of simulated events and blurry images as well as sequences of sharp
clear ground-truth images [10, 31]. However, the inconsistency between synthetic and real data degrades the performance of inference on real-world event cameras [29].
The physical intrinsic noise of event cameras raises the
* Corresponding author

The research was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China, No. 61871297 and the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central University of China, WHU No. 2042020kf0019 and DUT
No. 82232026. And the numerical calculations have been done on the supercomputing system in the Supercomputing Center of Wuhan University.

Figure 1. Illustrative example of inconsistency between synthesized and real-world motion blurs with respect to the event timesurface [14]: (a) a real-world motion blurred image; (b) the timesurface of real-world events corresponding to (a); (c) the timesurface of events collected with the same trajectory as (a) but at
a slow motion speed; (d) deblurred results respectively by eSLNet [31] (top row), LEDVDI [16] (middle row) and our proposed
RED-Net (bottom row) that trained with real-world events and
real-world motion blurs, sequence predictions of the blue area are
shown on the right. Our proposed RED-Net generates less halo
artifacts and achieves the best visualization performance.

difficulty of simulating labeled events that highly match the
real event data [26]. Even though the event simulator to
some extent reduces the gap by considering the pixel-topixel variation in the event threshold [26], additional noise
effects such as background activity noise and false negatives [1] still exist, leading to tremendous discrepancy between the virtual events synthesized from event simulators

2583

