Robust Object Detection via Instance-Level Temporal Cycle Confusion
Xin Wang1 Thomas E. Huang2 * Benlin Liu3∗
Fisher Yu2 Xiaolong Wang4 Joseph E. Gonzalez5 Trevor Darrell5
1

Microsoft Research

2

ETH Zürich

3

University of Washington

4

UC San Diego

5

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Building reliable object detectors that are robust to domain shifts, such as various changes in context, viewpoint,
and object appearances, is critical for real-world applications. In this work, we study the effectiveness of auxiliary
self-supervised tasks to improve the out-of-distribution generalization of object detectors. Inspired by the principle of
maximum entropy, we introduce a novel self-supervised task,
instance-level temporal cycle confusion (CycConf), which
operates on the region features of the object detectors. For
each object, the task is to find the most different object proposals in the adjacent frame in a video and then cycle back to
itself for self-supervision. CycConf encourages the object detector to explore invariant structures across instances under
various motions, which leads to improved model robustness
in unseen domains at test time. We observe consistent outof-domain performance improvements when training object
detectors in tandem with self-supervised tasks on various domain adaptation benchmarks with static images (Cityscapes,
Foggy Cityscapes, Sim10K) and large-scale video datasets
(BDD100K and Waymo open data)1 .

1. Introduction
Object detection has achieved remarkable performance on
in-domain data [2, 32]. However, contemporary visual perception models still suffer significant performance degradation under domain shifts, raising concerns for safety critical
applications such as autonomous driving [5, 23].
Prior works [1, 3, 17, 21, 33, 51] have designed domain
adaptive object detectors, which align the unlabeled target
domain data and labeled source domain data in the feature
space to tackle the distribution shift problem. These approaches perform well when they have access to excessive
unlabeled data in the target domain. More recently, another line of work improves model robustness to domain
shift [22, 48], image corruption and distortion [13] through
* Equal contribution. The authors are listed in alphabetical order.
1 The models are released at https://xinw.ai/cyc-conf

Match
back
to self

𝑡!

Find
most
different
objects

Separate instance features

𝑡"
Instance Confusion

Cycle Confusion Task

+

Evaluation

Object Detector

Improved Robustness
Novel Domain

Figure 1: We introduce a self-supervised task, instance-level temporal cycle confusion (CycConf), which mixes up instance features
to encourage learning invariant structures across instances. The
object detector trained in tandem with the auxiliary self-supervised
task is more robust to domain shifts.

pre-training [14], self-supervision [15], and data augmentation [16]. These studies are largely conducted on image
classification, and the effectiveness is unknown for structural
prediction tasks like object detection.
In this work, we revisit the idea of auxiliary selfsupervised tasks to improve out-of-domain generalization
of object detectors. Through empirical studies, we find the
widely used self-supervised tasks such as image rotation [10]
and Jigsaw [26], used in tandem with the fully supervised
object detector in the source domain, can consistently improve the object detector’s out-of-domain performance (e.g.,
evaluating on different datasets or different scenes) without
using target data. Surprisingly, we also find that jointly training the object detector and the rotation task outperforms the
complicated feature alignment approaches by a large margin on a range of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
benchmarks, where the test domain is known during training.
These findings indicate the usage of auxiliary self-supervised
tasks can be a general solution to improve model robustness
under various assumptions about the amount of unlabeled
target data available.
19143

