Task Switching Network for Multi-task Learning
Guolei Sun1 , Thomas Probst1 , Danda Pani Paudel1 , Nikola Popovic1 , Menelaos Kanakis1 ,
Jagruti Patel1 , Dengxin Dai1,2 , Luc Van Gool1
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
MPI for Informatics, Germany
guolei.sun@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
We introduce Task Switching Networks (TSNs), a
task-conditioned architecture with a single unified encoder/decoder for efficient multi-task learning. Multiple
tasks are performed by switching between them, performing one task at a time. TSNs have a constant number of parameters irrespective of the number of tasks. This scalable
yet conceptually simple approach circumvents the overhead
and intricacy of task-specific network components in existing works. In fact, we demonstrate for the first time
that multi-tasking can be performed with a single taskconditioned decoder. We achieve this by learning taskspecific conditioning parameters through a jointly trained
task embedding network, encouraging constructive interaction between tasks. Experiments validate the effectiveness
of our approach, achieving state-of-the-art results on two
challenging multi-task benchmarks, PASCAL-Context and
NYUD. Our analysis of the learned task embeddings further indicates a connection to task relationships studied in
the recent literature.

1. Introduction
The very concept of computer vision is to automatically
perform the tasks that a human visual system can do. Even
artificial neural networks (ANNs) were also designed as an
inspiration from the biological nervous system, such as the
human brain. As opposed to the most successful ANNs,
the brain and its visual cortex can perform multiple tasks
– such as object, parts, and boundary detection or depth
and orientation prediction – without any difficulty. Being able to perform multitude of such tasks has allowed
humans to efficiently conduct complex activities. In the
very spirit, real-world applications like autonomous driving,
healthcare, agriculture, manufacturing, cannot be addressed
by merely seeking for the perfection on solving individual
tasks. It goes without saying that a system capable of performing multiple tasks not only has potential of being ef-

(a) Single-task

(b) Multi-task

(c) TC Multi-task

(d) Our TSNs

Figure 1: Solutions for multi-task learning. (a) Every
task is solved by training an individual network, i.e., using an independent encoder-decoder pair for each task. (b)
General multi-task solutions are built on sharing the encoder and maintaining separate decoders for each task. (c)
Task-conditional (TC) multi-task solutions [15, 24] are built
on sharing partial parameters of the encoder (task-specific
modules also exist), and using separate decoders for each
task. (d) In the proposed Task Switching Networks (TSNs),
all parameters of a single encoder-decoder pair are shared,
and a small task embedding network C facilitates switching
between different tasks. Best viewed in color.
ficient in memory usage, computation, and learning speed,
but it may also benefit from complementary tasks.
To tackle multi-task learning (MTL), different solutions
have been proposed. Encoder-based methods [18, 27, 23]
focus on the encoder, by enhancing the representation
capability of architectures so that both shared and taskspecific information can be encoded, while decoder-based
approaches [47, 44] explore techniques mainly on the decoder part, to better refine the encoder features for specific
tasks. Optimization-based methods [6, 17, 37] explicitly
target on task interference or negative transfer issue from
optimization perspective, by re-weighting the loss or reordering the task learning. In general, these methods follow the structure as Fig. 1 (b). Recently, another direction for MTL emerged, termed task-conditional (TC) multitasking [24, 15], shown in Fig. 1 (c). They perform separate pass within the MTL model and activate a set of taskspecific modules for each task. The task-specific modules

8291

