Vision Transformers for Dense Prediction
René Ranftl

Alexey Bochkovskiy

Vladlen Koltun

Intel Labs
rene.ranftl@intel.com

Abstract
We introduce dense prediction transformers, an architecture that leverages vision transformers in place of convolutional networks as a backbone for dense prediction
tasks. We assemble tokens from various stages of the vision transformer into image-like representations at various resolutions and progressively combine them into fullresolution predictions using a convolutional decoder. The
transformer backbone processes representations at a constant and relatively high resolution and has a global receptive field at every stage. These properties allow the
dense prediction transformer to provide finer-grained and
more globally coherent predictions when compared to fullyconvolutional networks. Our experiments show that this
architecture yields substantial improvements on dense prediction tasks, especially when a large amount of training data is available. For monocular depth estimation,
we observe an improvement of up to 28% in relative
performance when compared to a state-of-the-art fullyconvolutional network. When applied to semantic segmentation, dense prediction transformers set a new state of
the art on ADE20K with 49.02% mIoU. We further show
that the architecture can be fine-tuned on smaller datasets
such as NYUv2, KITTI, and Pascal Context where it also
sets the new state of the art. Our models are available at
https://github.com/intel-isl/DPT.

1. Introduction
Virtually all existing architectures for dense prediction
are based on convolutional networks [6, 33, 36, 44, 51,
52, 55]. The design of dense prediction architectures commonly follows a pattern that logically separates the network
into an encoder and a decoder. The encoder is frequently
based on an image classification network, also called the
backbone, that is pretrained on a large corpus such as ImageNet [9]. The decoder aggregates features from the encoder and converts them to the final dense predictions. Architectural research on dense prediction frequently focuses

on the decoder and its aggregation strategy [6, 7, 52, 55].
However, it is widely recognized that the choice of backbone architecture has a large influence on the capabilities
of the overall model, as any information that is lost in the
encoder is impossible to recover in the decoder.
Convolutional backbones progressively downsample the
input image to extract features at multiple scales. Downsampling enables a progressive increase of the receptive
field, the grouping of low-level features into abstract highlevel features, and simultaneously ensures that memory
and computational requirements of the network remain
tractable. However, downsampling has distinct drawbacks
that are particularly salient in dense prediction tasks: feature resolution and granularity are lost in the deeper stages
of the model and can thus be hard to recover in the decoder.
While feature resolution and granularity may not matter for
some tasks, such as image classification, they are critical
for dense prediction, where the architecture should ideally
be able to resolve features at or close to the resolution of the
input image.
Various techniques to mitigate the loss of feature granularity have been proposed. These include training at
higher input resolution (if the computational budget permits), dilated convolutions [51] to rapidly increase the receptive field without downsampling, appropriately-placed
skip connections from multiple stages of the encoder to
the decoder [33], or, more recently, by connecting multiresolution representations in parallel throughout the network [44]. While these techniques can significantly improve prediction quality, the networks are still bottlenecked
by their fundamental building block: the convolution. Convolutions together with non-linearities form the fundamental computational unit of image analysis networks. Convolutions, by definition, are linear operators that have a limited receptive field. The limited receptive field and the limited expressivity of an individual convolution necessitate sequential stacking into very deep architectures to acquire sufficiently broad context and sufficiently high representational
power. This, however, requires the production of many intermediate representations that require a large amount of
memory. Downsampling the intermediate representations

12179

