Learned Spatial Representations for Few-shot Talking-Head Synthesis
Moustafa Meshry

Saksham Suri

Larry S. Davis

Abhinav Shrivastava

University of Maryland, College Park
Input landmarks

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for few-shot talking-head
synthesis. While recent works in neural talking heads have
produced promising results, they can still produce images
that do not preserve the identity of the subject in source
images. We posit this is a result of the entangled representation of each subject in a single latent code that models
3D shape information, identity cues, colors, lighting and
even background details. In contrast, we propose to factorize the representation of a subject into its spatial and style
components. Our method generates a target frame in two
steps. First, it predicts a discrete and dense spatial layout
for the target image. Second, an image generator utilizes the
predicted layout for spatial denormalization and synthesizes
the target frame. We experimentally show that this disentangled representation leads to a significant improvement over
previous methods, both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
We study the task of learning personalized head avatars
in a low-shot setting, also known as “neural talking heads”.
Given a single-shot or few-shot images of a source subject,
and a driving sequence of facial landmarks, possibly derived
from a different subject, the goal is to synthesize a photorealistic video of the source subject, under the poses and
expressions of the driving sequence. This task has a wide
range of applications, including those in AR/VR, video conferencing, gaming, animated movie production and video
compression in tele-communication.
Traditional graphics-based approaches to this task rely on
a 3D face geometry and produce very high quality synthesis. However, they tend to focus on modeling the face area
without the hair, and they learn a subject-specific model and
cannot generalize to new subjects. In contrast, recent 2Dbased approaches [1, 2, 3, 4] learn a subject-agnostic model
that can animate unseen subjects given as few as a single image. Furthermore, since these works learn an implicit model
and do not require an explicit geometric representation, they
can synthesize the full head, including the hair, mouth inte-

Learned spatial layout

Output

Ground truth

Figure 1: Our framework factorizes the image synthesis process
into its spatial and style components. It predicts a discrete latent
spatial layout for the target image, which is used to produce perpixel style modulation parameters for the final synthesis.

rior, and even wearable accessories like glasses and earrings.
This remarkable generalization ability however comes at
the cost of low quality and poor identity preservation when
compared to their 3D-based subject-specific counterparts.
Bridging the quality gap between 2D-based subject-agnostic
and 3D-based subject-specific approaches remains an open
problem.
Recent efforts in 2D-based approaches can be divided
into two classes; warping-based and direct synthesis. As the
name suggests, warping-based methods (e.g., [2]) learn to
warp the input image or a recovered canonical pose based
on the motion of the driving sequence. While these methods
achieve high realism, especially for static and rigid parts of
the image, they tend to work well only for a limited range
of motion, head rotation and dis-occlusion. On the other
hand, direct synthesis approaches (e.g., [1, 3, 4]) encode the
source subject into a compressed latent code, and a generator
decodes the latent code to synthesize the target pose. These
approaches learn a prior over the compressed latent space,
and can generate realistic results for a wider range of poses
and head motion. However, they exhibit a noticeable identity
gap between their output and the source subject.
We posit that the identity gap is caused by the entangled
representation of the source subject in a single latent code.
This compressed 1D latent encodes multi-view shape information, identity cues, as well as color information, lighting
and background details. In order to synthesize a target view
from a latent code, the generator needs to devise a complex
function to decode the uni-dimensional latent into its corresponding 2D spatial information. We argue this not only
consumes a large portion of the network capacity, but also

13829

