CR-Fill: Generative Image Inpainting with Auxiliary Contextual Reconstruction
Yu Zeng1

Zhe Lin2

Huchuan Lu3,4

Vishal M. Patel1

zengxianyu18@qq.com, zlin@adobe.com, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, vpatel36@jhu.edu
1

2

Johns Hopkins University
3
Dalian University of Technology

(a)

(b)

(c)

Adobe Research
4
Peng Cheng Lab

(d)

(e)

Figure 1: (a) Input images with holes. (b) Sample patch correspondences between missing region and known region established by
contextual attention layer, overlaid with the image composed by copying image patches from the known region to the corresponding
position in missing region. (c) Inpainting results of DeepFillv2 [29] with CA layer. (d) Patch correspondences generated by the learned
CR loss. (e) Inpainting results of our attention-free generator trained with CR loss.

Abstract
Recent deep generative inpainting methods use attention
layers to allow the generator to explicitly borrow feature
patches from the known region to complete a missing region. Due to the lack of supervision signals for the correspondence between missing regions and known regions, it
may fail to find proper reference features, which often leads
to artifacts in the results. Also, it computes pair-wise similarity across the entire feature map during inference bringing a significant computational overhead. To address this
issue, we propose to teach such patch-borrowing behavior
to an attention-free generator by joint training of an auxiliary contextual reconstruction task, which encourages the
generated output to be plausible even when reconstructed
by surrounding regions. The auxiliary branch can be seen
as a learnable loss function, i.e. named as contextual reconstruction (CR) loss, where query-reference feature similarity and reference-based reconstructor are jointly optimized
with the inpainting generator. The auxiliary branch ( i.e. CR

loss) is required only during training, and only the inpainting generator is required during the inference. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed inpainting model
compares favourably against the state-of-the-art in terms of
quantitative and visual performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/zengxianyu/crfill.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting is a task of predicting missing regions
in images. It is an important problem in computer vision
and can be used in many applications, e.g. image restoration, compositing, manipulation, re-targeting, and imagebased rendering [2, 10, 19]. Traditional methods such
as [4, 9, 2] borrow example patches from known regions
or external dataset and paste them into the missing regions.
They cannot hallucinate novel image contents for challenging cases involving complex, non-repetitive structures. Recent research efforts have shifted the attention to data-driven
deep CNN-based approaches [20, 6, 28, 14, 29].

14164

