Hyperspectral Image Denoising with Realistic Data
Tao Zhang1 Ying Fu1∗ Cheng Li2
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
The hyperspectral image (HSI) denoising has been
widely utilized to improve HSI qualities. Recently, learningbased HSI denoising methods have shown their effectiveness, but most of them are based on synthetic dataset and
lack the generalization capability on real testing HSI. Moreover, there is still no public paired real HSI denoising
dataset to learn HSI denoising network and quantitatively
evaluate HSI methods. In this paper, we mainly focus on
how to produce realistic dataset for learning and evaluating HSI denoising network. On the one hand, we collect a
paired real HSI denoising dataset, which consists of shortexposure noisy HSIs and the corresponding long-exposure
clean HSIs. On the other hand, we propose an accurate
HSI noise model which matches the distribution of real data
well and can be employed to synthesize realistic dataset.
On the basis of the noise model, we present an approach
to calibrate the noise parameters of the given hyperspectral camera. The extensive experimental results show that a
network learned with only synthetic data generated by our
noise model performs as well as it is learned with paired
real data. Our code and data are available at: https:
//github.com/ColinTaoZhang/HSIDwRD.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral image (HSI) can provide much more spectral information than RGB image, and is beneficial to numerous applications, including remote sensing [6,35], computer vision [7], medical diagnosis [5, 32] and more. Hyperspectral imaging is to capture spectral information of
each spatial position in a scene with massive wavebands,
and the commercial hyperspectral cameras often utilize the
scanning design [4, 39]. These make its photon counts for
each band are much less than that in RGB image, and various noises are easily introduced into the acquisition process.
This kind of degradation negatively influences not only the
visual appearance of the HSI but also the performance of
all downstream HSI applications [14]. Thus, HSI denoising is an essential step in the pipeline of HSI analysis and
∗ Corresponding author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

(a) Input (PSNR)

(b) Complex [16] (30.59)

(c) Ours Real (33.60)
(d) Ours Synthetic (34.22)
Figure 1. A scene from our collected HSI dataset, and we show the
spectral band in 550 nm. (a) The input noisy image; (b) The output of CNN trained with synthetic dataset generated by complex
noise model [16]; (c) The output of CNN trained with our collected
paired real dataset; (d) The output of CNN trained with synthetic
dataset generated by our noise model, which is comparable with
(c) the result trained with paired real dataset and obviously outperforms synthetics dataset generated by complex noise model.

processing.
To remove the imaging noise, the well-known modelbased HSI denoising methods often iteratively solve an optimization problem with various hand-crafted priors, such
as smoothness [50], self-similarity [20, 21] and so on.
Nevertheless, the iterative optimization procedure is timeconsuming and the hand-crafted priors cannot sufficiently
represent the variety of data in the real world. Instead of
costly optimization and hand-crafted priors, learning-based
methods [9, 19, 29, 45, 51] automatically learn the mapping
from noisy HSI to clean HSI with convolutional neural network (CNN). However, existing learning-based methods
generally rely on training dataset synthesized with simple
Gaussian noise model or complex noise models [16, 45].
Promising results on synthetic data notwithstanding, these
methods still cannot well work and evaluate on the real data,
due to lacking realistic HSI data.

2248

