High-Resolution Optical Flow from 1D Attention and Correlation
Haofei Xu1 * Jiaolong Yang2
1

Jianfei Cai3

Juyong Zhang1

Xin Tong2

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University

{xhf@mail., juyong@}ustc.edu.cn

{jiaoyan, xtong}@microsoft.com

jianfei.cai@monash.edu

Abstract
Optical flow is inherently a 2D search problem, and thus
the computational complexity grows quadratically with respect to the search window, making large displacements
matching infeasible for high-resolution images. In this paper, we take inspiration from Transformers and propose a
new method for high-resolution optical flow estimation with
significantly less computation. Specifically, a 1D attention
operation is first applied in the vertical direction of the target image, and then a simple 1D correlation in the horizontal direction of the attended image is able to achieve 2D
correspondence modeling effect. The directions of attention and correlation can also be exchanged, resulting in two
3D cost volumes that are concatenated for optical flow estimation. The novel 1D formulation empowers our method
to scale to very high-resolution input images while maintaining competitive performance. Extensive experiments on
Sintel, KITTI and real-world 4K (2160 × 3840) resolution
images demonstrated the effectiveness and superiority of
our proposed method. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/haofeixu/flow1d.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation, a classic topic in computer vision, is a fundamental building block of various real-world
applications such as 3D reconstruction [22], video processing [20] and action recognition [31]. The recent advancement of deep learning enables directly optical flow learning
with a neural network [18]. By further improving the architectures and training strategies, deep learning based methods [18, 34, 35, 43, 37] have demonstrated stronger performance and faster inference speed compared with traditional
optimization based approaches [13, 46, 33, 29, 44, 3].
An essential component in deep learning based optical
flow frameworks is cost volume [14], which is usually computed by the dot product operation (also known as correlation [10]) between two feature vectors. It stores the match* Work primarily done while interning at MSRA mentored by JY

Figure 1: Optical flow factorization. We factorize the 2D
optical flow with 1D attention and correlation in orthogonal
directions to achieve large displacements search on highresolution images. Specifically, for the correspondence (red
point) of the blue point, we first perform a 1D vertical attention to propagate the information of the red point to the
green point, which lies on the same row of the blue point.
Then a simple 1D correlation in the horizontal direction can
be applied to build a horizontal cost volume. The vertical
cost volume can be derived likewise with switched attention
and correlation directions.
ing costs between each pixel in the source image and its potential correspondence candidates in the target image. By
explicitly constructing a cost volume layer that encodes the
search space, the network learns to better reason about the
relative pixel displacements, as demonstrated by the superior performance of FlowNetC than FlowNetS that without
such a layer [10, 18].
The original cost volume in FlowNetC [10] is constructed in a single scale and it has difficulty in modeling
large displacements due to the quadratic complexities with
respect to the search window. PWC-Net [34] migrates this
problem by constructing multiple partial cost volumes in
a coarse-to-fine warping framework. However, coarse-tofine methods tend to miss small objects since they might
not be visible in the highly-downsampled coarse scales, and
thus have little chance to be correctly estimated [29, 32, 3].
Moreover, warping might introduce artifacts in occlusion
regions [24], which may potentially hinder the network to
learn correct correspondences.

10498

