Field-Guide-Inspired Zero-Shot Learning
Utkarsh Mall, Bharath Hariharan, Kavita Bala
Cornell University
{utkarshm, bharathh, kb}@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Modern recognition systems require large amounts of supervision to achieve accuracy. Adapting to new domains
requires significant data from experts, which is onerous and
can become too expensive. Zero-shot learning requires an
annotated set of attributes for a novel category. Annotating
the full set of attributes for a novel category proves to be a
tedious and expensive task in deployment. This is especially
the case when the recognition domain is an expert domain.
We introduce a new field-guide-inspired approach to zeroshot annotation where the learner model interactively asks
for the most useful attributes that define a class. We evaluate our method on classification benchmarks with attribute
annotations like CUB, SUN, and AWA2 and show that our
model achieves the performance of a model with full annotations at the cost of significantly fewer number of annotations.
Since the time of experts is precious, decreasing annotation
cost can be very valuable for real-world deployment.

1. Introduction
Modern recognition systems require vast amounts of labeled data. This is infeasible to acquire in many domains,
especially when the classes in question involve subtle distinctions that require an expert: experts have limited time
and availability and cannot annotate thousands of images.
This has motivated research into zero-shot learning (ZSL)
where the goal is to build effective recognition models from
class descriptions alone. The name “zero-shot” suggests that
the labeling effort for the annotator is zero. However, this is
not true: in current ZSL systems, the annotator must specify
for each class hundreds of attributes for thousands of classes
(Figure 1 (left)). For example, in one of our preliminary experiments, it took an ornithologist more than 15 minutes to
fully describe the 312 different attributes in CUB; annotating
all 200 classes would have taken the expert more than 50
hours! For ZSL to truly decrease the annotator’s burden, the
cost of attribute description has to be significantly cheaper.
Past work on addressing this concern has looked at using
freely available text from the internet, e.g., Wikipedia[7,

back-color back-pattern belly-color
belly-pattern bill-color bill-length
bill-shape breast-color
breast-pattern crown-color
eye-color forehead-color
head-pattern leg-color nape-color
primary-color shape size
tail-pattern tail-shape throat-color
under-tail-color underparts-color
upper-tail-color upperparts-color
wing-color wing-pattern

Figure 1. Left: For each new class in the CUB dataset, an annotator
must label 28 attributes (and 312 different quantities). The attributes
are multidimensional and continuous-valued, Right: A field guide
example of a bird class. There is no full attribute description;
instead the bird is described by a few key attributes that distinguish
it from close cousins.

16, 2, 23, 43], or relying on word embeddings of class
names[3, 8, 24, 1]. While such “unsupervised” ZSL is intriguing, neither class names nor Wikipedia descriptions are
intended to be used for identifying classes. Class names
are terse and may often be based on location rather than
appearance (e.g.,“Northern Royal Albatross”). Wikipedia
articles might likewise include irrelevant information (e.g.,
about etymology) and miss vital visual details. As such, we
find that these approaches result in a substantial reduction
in accuracy of almost 20 points(see Figure 4 (middle row)).
This suggests that expert-provided visual characteristics or
attributes are indeed crucial for performance.
How can we record expert knowledge of class distinctions
as completely as possible while still reducing their burden?
One could simply reduce the vocabulary of attributes that
the expert has to specify. But doing so might preclude important class distinctions, resulting in a dramatic reduction in
accuracy. A better approach is provided by field guides that
experts write to train human novices. In these guides, for
each class, the expert first identifies a very similar previously
defined class, and then specifies only the most important
attributes that distinguish the two classes (Figure 1 (right)).
This allows for concise descriptions that are both easy to
write for the expert and also complete enough for the novice.
What if one used these kinds of descriptions for ZSL?
While intuitive, in our experiments we find that this field
guide-based approach is even worse than simply choosing
a random smaller, fixed vocabulary of attributes to begin
19546

