Video-based Person Re-identification with Spatial and Temporal Memory
Networks
Chanho Eom

Geon Lee

Junghyup Lee

Bumsub Ham∗

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
https://cvlab-yonsei.github.io/projects/STMN
Abstract
Video-based person re-identification (reID) aims to retrieve person videos with the same identity as a query person across multiple cameras. Spatial and temporal distractors in person videos, such as background clutter and
partial occlusions over frames, respectively, make this task
much more challenging than image-based person reID. We
observe that spatial distractors appear consistently in a
particular location, and temporal distractors show several patterns, e.g., partial occlusions occur in the first few
frames, where such patterns provide informative cues for
predicting which frames to focus on (i.e., temporal attentions). Based on this, we introduce a novel Spatial and
Temporal Memory Networks (STMN). The spatial memory stores features for spatial distractors that frequently
emerge across video frames, while the temporal memory
saves attentions which are optimized for typical temporal
patterns in person videos. We leverage the spatial and
temporal memories to refine frame-level person representations and to aggregate the refined frame-level features
into a sequence-level person representation, respectively,
effectively handling spatial and temporal distractors in person videos. We also introduce a memory spread loss preventing our model from addressing particular items only
in the memories. Experimental results on standard benchmarks, including MARS, DukeMTMC-VideoReID, and LSVID, demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction

Person re-Identification (reID) aims at retrieving a person of interest from a set of pedestrian images/videos taken
from non-overlapping cameras. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have made remarkable advances in imagebased person reID [44, 29, 21, 19, 4, 46] over the last
decade. Video-based person reID has recently attracted
increasing attention in accordance with the prevalence of
video capturing systems. Video frames provide rich information to specify a particular person, but they often con∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Examples of (a) spatial distractors that appear frequently
in surveillance videos and (b) prototypes of temporal patterns that
provide important clues to predict temporal attentions.

tain spatial distractors, e.g., trees, bicycles, and concrete
pavers. In particular, person videos, typically cropped by
off-the-shelf object detectors from a whole sequence, also
have temporal distractors, e.g., misaligned persons across
video frames or partial occlusions within a sequence.
Recent video reID methods [18, 5] attempt to tackle
these issues by exploiting spatial and temporal attention
modules, which are useful for extracting person representations robust to noisy regions (e.g., background clutter) and
temporal variations (e.g., partial occlusions). They, however, do not consider a global view in a sequence [43, 11],
suggesting that these approaches may focus on less discriminative parts or video frames. Several works [17, 16,
20, 30, 40, 41] instead propose to use non-local [36] or
graph convolutional networks [13] to capture co-attention

12036

