Mesh Graphormer
Kevin Lin

Lijuan Wang
Microsoft

Zicheng Liu

{keli, lijuanw, zliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present a graph-convolution-reinforced transformer,
named Mesh Graphormer, for 3D human pose and mesh
reconstruction from a single image. Recently both transformers and graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) have shown promising progress in human mesh reconstruction. Transformer-based approaches are effective
in modeling non-local interactions among 3D mesh vertices and body joints, whereas GCNNs are good at exploiting neighborhood vertex interactions based on a prespecified mesh topology. In this paper, we study how to
combine graph convolutions and self-attentions in a transformer to model both local and global interactions. Experimental results show that our proposed method, Mesh
Graphormer, significantly outperforms the previous stateof-the-art methods on multiple benchmarks, including Human3.6M, 3DPW, and FreiHAND datasets. Code and
pre-trained models are available at https://github.
com/microsoft/MeshGraphormer.

1. Introduction
3D human pose and mesh reconstruction from a single
image is a popular research topic as it offers a wide range
of applications for human-computer interactions. However,
due to the complex body articulation, it is a challenging
task.
Recently, Transformers and Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNNs) have shown promising advances
in human mesh reconstruction. For example, recent studies [20, 5] have suggested using GCNNs to directly regress
3D positions of mesh vertices by taking into account local
interactions among neighbor vertices. In a recent study [22],
a transformer encoder was used with self-attention to capture global interactions among body joints and mesh vertices, which lead to further improvement.
However, as discussed in the literature [41, 40, 8, 41, 3],
Transformers and Convolution Neural Networks (CNN)
each have their own limitations. Transformers are good at
modeling long-range dependencies on the input tokens, but

Figure 1: Summary. We study how to combine selfattentions and graph convolutions in a transformer for human mesh reconstruction. The proposed Graphormer outperforms existing graph convolution networks [5, 20] and
transformer-based method [22] by a clear margin. The numbers are the reconstruction error (PA-MPJPE) in the unit of
millimeter. The lower the better.
they are less efficient at capturing fine-grained local information. Convolution layers, on the other hand, are useful
for extracting local features, but many layers are required
to capture global context. In natural language processing
and speech recognition, Conformer [8] is a recently proposed technique that leverages the complementarity of selfattention and convolutions to learn representations. This
motivates us to combine self-attention and graph convolution for the 3D reconstruction of human mesh (Figure 1).
We present a graph-convolution-reinforced transformer
called Mesh Graphformer for reconstructing human pose
and mesh from a single image. We inject graph convolutions into transformer blocks to improve the local interactions among neighboring vertices and joints. In order to
leverage the power of graph convolutions, Graphormer is
free to attend to all image grid features that contain more
detailed local information and are helpful in refining the 3D
coordinate prediction. Consequently, Graphormer and image grid features are mutually reinforced to achieve better
performance in human pose and mesh reconstruction.
Extensive experiments show that the proposed Mesh
Graphormer models both local and global interactions effectively and clearly outperforms previous state-of-the-art

12939

