Normalized Human Pose Features for Human Action Video Alignment
Jingyuan Liu1 Mingyi Shi2 Qifeng Chen1 Hongbo Fu3 Chiew-Lan Tai1
1
2
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

The University of Hong Kong

{jliucb,cqf,taicl}@cse.ust.hk

2

3

The City University of Hong Kong

myshi@cs.hku.hk

3

hongbofu@cityu.edu.hk

Figure 1. We propose to normalize human poses in video frames for computing pose similarity. People with different anthropometry (b)
lead to differences in joint positions when performing the same pose (a), but their joint rotations are similar. The same pose performed by
different subjects in (a) and (b) can be represented by the same normalized pose (c) to retain only pose information.

Abstract
We present a novel approach for extracting human pose
features from human action videos. The goal is to let the
pose features capture only the poses of the action while
being invariant to other factors, including video backgrounds, the video subjects’ anthropometric characteristics
and viewpoints. Such human pose features facilitate the
comparison of pose similarity and can be used for downstream tasks, such as human action video alignment and
pose retrieval. The key to our approach is to first normalize the poses in the video frames by mapping the poses onto
a pre-defined 3D skeleton to not only disentangle subject
physical features, such as bone lengths and ratios, but also
to unify global orientations of the poses. Then the normalized poses are mapped to a pose embedding space of highlevel features, learned via unsupervised metric learning. We
evaluate the effectiveness of our normalized features both
qualitatively by visualizations, and quantitatively by a video
alignment task on the Human3.6M dataset and an action
recognition task on the Penn Action dataset.

1. Introduction
Video alignment aims to find dense temporal correspondences between a pair of videos. Finding alignments between two natural human action videos is especially chal-

lenging because the two videos to be aligned can have large
variations in many factors, such as scales and orientations
of the video subjects, camera viewpoints, action speeds and
orientations, etc. A feature that is robust to these variations
is desirable in finding the alignments.
A common approach to the problem of human action video alignment is to first estimate 2D or 3D human poses from two input videos, and then find the alignments by matching with features extracted from joint positions [48, 11], so as to reduce certain interference in video
backgrounds and subjects’ clothing. However, human poses
still contain large variations in scale, bone length ratios,
orientations, etc. Since existing 3D pose estimation methods [28, 37] recover 3D poses in camera coordinate systems, the joint positions relative to a root joint are dependent on viewpoints (as illustrated by a toy example in the
supplementary material). Global orientation normalization
by Procrustes alignment is hard to be applied to in-the-wild
videos when the ground-truth 3D poses are not available.
Besides viewpoint, the joint positions computed by existing 3D pose estimation methods are also dependent on the
video subjects’ anthropometric characteristics, such as bone
lengths and ratios. Such anthropometric variation would
cause a difference in distance measurements (e.g., L2 distance after Procrustes alignment) even when the subjects in
the videos perform exactly the same poses, as illustrated in
Figure 1.

11521

