Co-Scale Conv-Attentional Image Transformers
Weijian Xu* Yifan Xu* Tyler Chang Zhuowen Tu
University of California San Diego
{wex041, yix081, tachang, ztu}@ucsd.edu

84

Abstract

1. Introduction
A notable recent development in artificial intelligence is
the creation of attention mechanisms [38] and Transformers [31], which have made a profound impact in a range of
fields including natural language processing [7, 20], document analysis [39], speech recognition [8], and computer
vision [9, 3]. In the past, state-of-the-art image classifiers
have been built primarily on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [15, 14, 27, 26, 11, 36] that operate on layers of
filtering processes. Recent developments [30, 9] however
begin to show encouraging results for Transformer-based
image classifiers.
In essence, both the convolution [15] and attention [38]
operations address the fundamental representation problem
for structured data (e.g. images and text) by modeling the
local contents, as well as the contexts. The receptive fields
* indicates equal contribution.

Code at https://github.com/mlpc-ucsd/CoaT.

ImageNet Top-1 Accuracy (%)

82

In this paper, we present Co-scale conv-attentional image
Transformers (CoaT), a Transformer-based image classifier
equipped with co-scale and conv-attentional mechanisms.
First, the co-scale mechanism maintains the integrity of
Transformers’ encoder branches at individual scales, while
allowing representations learned at different scales to effectively communicate with each other; we design a series
of serial and parallel blocks to realize the co-scale mechanism. Second, we devise a conv-attentional mechanism by
realizing a relative position embedding formulation in the
factorized attention module with an efficient convolution-like
implementation. CoaT empowers image Transformers with
enriched multi-scale and contextual modeling capabilities.
On ImageNet, relatively small CoaT models attain superior
classification results compared with similar-sized convolutional neural networks and image/vision Transformers. The
effectiveness of CoaT’s backbone is also illustrated on object detection and instance segmentation, demonstrating its
applicability to downstream computer vision tasks.

CoaT-Li
(M)

CoaT
(S)
CoaT
(Mi)

80

CoaT
(T)

78

CoaT-Li T2T-ViT-14
(S)
CoaT-Li DeiT-S
(Mi)
PVT-S
R50

T2T-ViT-19
PVT-M

PVT-L

DeiT-B

R101
ViT-B

CoaT-Li
(T)
76 T2T-ViT-12
PVT-T

CoaT-Lite (ours)
CoaT (ours)
DeiT (baseline)
T2T
PVT
ResNet
ViT

74
DeiT-T
T2T-ViT-7

72
70

R18

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Number of Parameters (Millions)

70

80

90

Figure 1. Model Size vs. ImageNet Accuracy. Our CoaT model
significantly outperforms other image Transformers. Details are in
Table 2.

in CNNs are gradually expanded through a series of convolution operations. The attention mechanism [38, 31] is,
however, different from the convolution operations: (1) the
receptive field at each location or token in self-attention
[31] readily covers the entire input space since each token
is “matched” with all tokens including itself; (2) the selfattention operation for each pair of tokens computes a dot
product between the “query” (the token in consideration)
and the “key” (the token being matched with) to weight the
“value” (of the token being matched with).
Moreover, although the convolution and the self-attention
operations both perform a weighted sum, their weights are
computed differently: in CNNs, the weights are learned during training but fixed during testing; in the self-attention
mechanism, the weights are dynamically computed based
on the similarity or affinity between every pair of tokens.
As a consequence, the self-similarity operation in the selfattention mechanism provides modeling means that are potentially more adaptive and general than convolution operations. In addition, the introduction of position encodings
and embeddings [31] provides Transformers with additional
flexibility to model spatial configurations beyond fixed input
structures.
Of course, the advantages of the attention mechanism are

9981

