A Multi-Mode Modulator for Multi-Domain Few-Shot Classification
Yanbin Liu1,2 , Juho Lee3,4 , Linchao Zhu2 , Ling Chen2 , Humphrey Shi5 , Yi Yang2 *
1
Baidu Research, 2 AAII, University of Technology Sydney, 3 KAIST, 4 AITRICS
5
University of Oregon & Picsart AI Research (PAIR)
{csyanbin, shihonghui3}@gmail.com, juholee@kaist.ac.kr
{linchao.zhu, ling.chen, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Training

Abstract

Testing

miniImageNet

Most existing few-shot classification methods only consider generalization on one dataset (i.e., single-domain),
failing to transfer across various seen and unseen domains.
In this paper, we consider the more realistic multi-domain
few-shot classification problem to investigate the crossdomain generalization. Two challenges exist in this new
setting: (1) how to efficiently generate multi-domain feature representation, and (2) how to explore domain correlations for better cross-domain generalization. We propose a
parameter-efficient multi-mode modulator to address both
challenges. First, the modulator is designed to maintain
multiple modulation parameters (one for each domain) in a
single network, thus achieving single-network multi-domain
representation. Given a particular domain, domain-aware
features can be efficiently generated with the well-devised
separative selection module and cooperative query module.
Second, we further divide the modulation parameters into
the domain-specific set and the domain-cooperative set to
explore the intra-domain information and inter-domain correlations, respectively. The intra-domain information describes each domain independently to prevent negative interference. The inter-domain correlations guide information sharing among relevant domains to enrich their own
representation. Moreover, unseen domains can utilize the
correlations to obtain an adaptive combination of seen domains for extrapolation. We demonstrate that the proposed
multi-mode modulator achieves state-of-the-art results on
the challenging META-DATASET benchmark, especially for
unseen test domains.

1. Introduction
Few-shot classification aims to train a model that can
generalize on unseen novel classes with only few labeled
* Part of this work was done when Yanbin Liu was an intern at Baidu
Research. Yi Yang is the corresponding author.

unseen classes

Single-Domain Few-shot Classification
ImageNet

Omniglot

QuickDraw
unseen classes
support label

TrafficSigns

query

unseen domains

Multi-Domain Few-shot Classification

Figure 1. Multi-domain few-shot classification differs from singledomain few-shot classification in two aspects: (1) it contains multiple diverse datasets for training and extra unseen domains for
test; (2) there exists potential correlations across multiple domains,
e.g., both Omniglot and QuickDraw contain simple shapes.

examples in each novel class. Recent progress has been
made by the meta-learning paradigm: instead of learning
about any training class in particular, few-shot algorithms
exploit the training classes to learn to recognize new classes
with few examples. Excellent results are achieved on common benchmarks (e.g., Omniglot [21], miniImageNet [33])
by a series of methods [28, 50, 53, 51, 52, 4, 43, 7, 18]. Despite their success, most of them train and evaluate on only
one dataset (i.e., single-domain), failing to learn generalized
model across different visual domains (i.e., multi-domain).
In fact, the need for cross-domain generalization is prevalent in practical applications [44, 13, 24, 23, 14, 11, 26]. For
example, we would expect a model trained on ImageNet [6]
to be applied on TrafficSigns [17] without collecting extra
target training examples (Figure 1).
To break the limitations of existing few-shot classification methods and benchmarks, [44] have proposed a new

8453

