Geometric Granularity Aware Pixel-to-Mesh
Yue Shi

Bingbing Ni†
Jinxian Liu
Dingyi Rong
Ye Qian
Wenjun Zhang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmission
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

{shiyue001, nibingbing, liujinxian, r892546826, qianye001, zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pixel-to-mesh has wide applications, especially in virtual
or augmented reality, animation and game industry. However, existing mesh reconstruction models perform unsatisfactorily in local geometry details due to ignoring mesh
topology information during learning. Besides, most methods are constrained by the initial template, which cannot reconstruct meshes of various genus. In this work,
we propose a geometric granularity-aware pixel-to-mesh
framework with a ﬁdelity-selection-and-guarantee strategy,
which explicitly addresses both challenges. First, a geometry structure extractor is proposed for detecting local high
structured parts and capturing local spatial feature. Second, we apply it to facilitate pixel-to-mesh mapping and resolve coarse details problem caused by the neglect of structural information in previous practices. Finally, a mesh edit
module is proposed to encourage non-zero genus topology
to emergence by ﬁne-grained topology modiﬁcation and a
patching algorithm is introduced to repair the non-closed
boundaries. Extensive experimental results, both quantitatively and visually have demonstrated the high reconstruction ﬁdelity achieved by the proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Mesh is a widely used 3D representation, especially in
virtual/augmented reality, animation and game industry, for
its capability of modeling geometric details. As an alternative or auxiliary of traditional manual mesh, 3D reconstruction from pixel level attracts a growing attention and
has achieved promising results. According to the format
of the generated 3D model, existing reconstructed methods
can be divided into image to voxel, image to point-cloud,
image to mesh, etc [22]. More recently, implicit representation [41, 8, 58] has been used for 3D reconstruction
and some new reconstructing forms also come up, such as
NeRF [37]. Among these methods, 3D mesh reconstruction attracts much attention because it is the most popular
shape representation in game and movie industries. Recent
progress in single-view mesh reconstruction proposes to reconstruct a 3D mesh by deforming a template model based
† Corresponding author

(a) Ground truth

(b) Deep Mesh

(c) Ours

(d) Input image

(e) Pixel2Mesh

(f) GEOMetrics

Figure 1: Monocular reconstruction results of the state of
the art deformation-based learning approaches. (a) Ground
truth; (b) Deep Mesh [40], the green lines and triangles mark
the non-closed boundaries correspondingly; (c) Ours; (d) Input image; (e) Pixel2Mesh [51]; (f) GEOMetrics [46]. Relatively, our method can better deal with the topology in details and reconstruct holes of the object without non-closed
boundaries.

on the perceptual features extracted from the input image
[51]. Though promising results have been achieved, the reconstructed results are unsatisfactory on local details and
non-zero genus objects.
The ﬁrst challenge in reconstruction is to generate precise
and rich details. Existing methods mainly utilize the chamfer distance between two point clouds, which are sampled
from predicted mesh and the ground truth respectively, to
restrict the reconstruction. Although some other constraints
are added, such as normal loss [27] which enforces the consistency of surface normal and edge length regularization to
prevent outliers [45]. All of them only focus on the point
clouds, without considering the topology of mesh. Replacing mesh with point cloud smooths out local structure details and corresponding local structure information, leading
to coarse reconstruction details. Besides, it is not reasonable
to treat all parts of a mesh equally for the uneven information distribution on it, which means high-ﬁdelity parts need
extra attention. Treating the mesh as point cloud and in-

13097

