C2N: Practical Generative Noise Modeling for Real-World Denoising
Geonwoon Jang*
Wooseok Lee*
Sanghyun Son
Kyoungmu Lee
ASRI, Department of ECE, Seoul National University
{onwoono, adntjr4}@gmail.com, {thstkdgus35, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning-based image denoising methods have been
bounded to situations where well-aligned noisy and clean
images are given, or samples are synthesized from predetermined noise models, e.g., Gaussian. While recent generative noise modeling methods aim to simulate the unknown
distribution of real-world noise, several limitations still exist. In a practical scenario, a noise generator should learn
to simulate the general and complex noise distribution without using paired noisy and clean images. However, since
existing methods are constructed on the unrealistic assumption of real-world noise, they tend to generate implausible patterns and cannot express complicated noise maps.
Therefore, we introduce a Clean-to-Noisy image generation framework, namely C2N, to imitate complex real-world
noise without using any paired examples. We construct the
noise generator in C2N accordingly with each component
of real-world noise characteristics to express a wide range
of noise accurately. Combined with our C2N, conventional
denoising CNNs can be trained to outperform existing unsupervised methods on challenging real-world benchmarks
by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Image denoising aims to remove unintended signals
from a given noisy observation. The task has been considered as one of the fundamental vision problems and handled
by numerous studies [9, 14, 17]. While recent deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved promising
performance [50, 51, 19, 11, 36], several challenges prevent them from being used for practical applications. A
primary limitation of the learning-based approaches is that
they are usually data-driven, where training on a specific
dataset does not guarantee generalization to a real-world
scenarios [53, 19].
The noise from a typical camera pipeline is different to
the conventional assumption for ideal noise in several as* Authors contributed equally.

(a) Clean

(b) GT

(c) C2N

(d) DIDN [48]

Figure 1: Examples of generated and denoised image
from our proposed method. (a) Clean image, (b) Ground
truth noisy image, (c) Generated noisy image from the proposed C2N, (d) Denoising results of DIDN [48] trained on
the images generated by our C2N. Our C2N can accurately
imitate the real noise without using paired examples.
pects. For instance, a widely-used Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) formulation assumes that the term is
signal-independent [10, 28], while real-world noises are
not. Therefore, it is difficult to generalize a denoising algorithm toward real-world images when the model is trained
on synthetic examples. As an alternative, few studies have
collected well-aligned noisy and clean image pairs in the
wild [2, 40] so that the following denoising methods can be
trained in a supervised manner. While such an approach is
an effective way to deal with real-world noise, it remains
challenging to acquire large-scale pairs due to several practical issues. Recent self-supervised approaches [28, 6] deal
with the limitations by using noisy samples as the target
output, whose supervision would lead a model to estimate
the actual value on average. However, they usually leverage
some statistical properties of the noise, which are insufficient to represent the real-world cases [2, 40].

2350

