SPEC: Seeing People in the Wild with an Estimated Camera
Muhammed Kocabas1,2

Chun-Hao P. Huang1
Joachim Tesch1
Otmar Hilliges2
Michael J. Black1

Lea Müller1

1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zurich
{mkocabas,chuang2,jtesch,lea.mueller,black}@tue.mpg.de otmar.hilliges@inf.ethz.ch

Focal length = 755 px
Camera pitch = 33.4o
Camera roll = -0.6o

(a) Input image

(b) SOTA method

(c) Our results

Figure 1: State-of-the-art methods for 3D human pose and shape estimation from images (such as HMR trained with EFT [26]
data) struggle with imagery containing perspective effects. (b) In part, this is due to the use of the standard weak perspective
camera. (c) SPEC learns to estimate perspective camera parameters and uses these to regress more accurate 3D poses.

Abstract
Due to the lack of camera parameter information for inthe-wild images, existing 3D human pose and shape (HPS)
estimation methods make several simplifying assumptions:
weak-perspective projection, large constant focal length,
and zero camera rotation. These assumptions often do not
hold and we show, quantitatively and qualitatively, that they
cause errors in the reconstructed 3D shape and pose. To
address this, we introduce SPEC, the first in-the-wild 3D
HPS method that estimates the perspective camera from
a single image and employs this to reconstruct 3D human
bodies more accurately. First, we train a neural network
to estimate the field of view, camera pitch, and roll given
an input image. We employ novel losses that improve the
calibration accuracy over previous work. We then train
a novel network that concatenates the camera calibration
to the image features and uses these together to regress
3D body shape and pose. SPEC is more accurate than
the prior art on the standard benchmark (3DPW) as well
as two new datasets with more challenging camera views
and varying focal lengths. Specifically, we create a new
photorealistic synthetic dataset (SPEC-SYN) with ground
truth 3D bodies and a novel in-the-wild dataset (SPECMTP) with calibration and high-quality reference bodies.
Code and datasets are available for research purposes at
https://spec.is.tue.mpg.de/.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose and shape (HPS) from a single RGB image is a core challenge in computer vision and
has many applications in robotics, computer graphics, and
AR/VR. Reconstructing a high dimensional 3D structure
from 2D observations is ill-posed by nature. To overcome
this, much attention has been given to structured prediction
[16, 20, 62] and incorporating shape and pose priors [47, 69]
to guide estimation. Weakly-supervised training of HPS regressors leverages 2D-pose datasets [1, 25, 39] and requires
various forms of regularization [28, 35, 71]. Data for full 3D
supervision often relies on controlled lab settings [21, 58],
synthetic images [61], or, more recently, in-the-wild capture
of reference data [43, 63].
Despite rapid progress, we observe that most state-ofthe-art (SOTA) methods [5, 7, 15, 24, 26, 28, 29, 32, 35,
36, 47, 52, 59, 73, 74] make several simplifying assumptions about the image formation process itself. First, they
all apply a weak perspective or orthographic projection assumption; resulting in a simplified camera model with only
three parameters which capture the camera translation relative to the body. Moreover, some [32, 35, 47] set the focal
length to a predefined large constant for every input image.
Finally, they all assume zero camera rotation, which entangles body rotation and camera rotation, making it extremely
hard to correctly estimate the body orientation in 3D. These
11035

