Env-QA: A Video Question Answering Benchmark for Comprehensive
Understanding of Dynamic Environments

1

Difei Gao1,2 , Ruiping Wang1,2,3 , Ziyi Bai1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, 100084, China
{difei.gao, ziyi.bai}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

Exploring and Interacting in an Environment
: agent

Visual understanding goes well beyond the study of images or videos on the web. To achieve complex tasks in
volatile situations, the human can deeply understand the environment, quickly perceive events happening around, and
continuously track objects’ state changes, which are still
challenging for current AI systems. To equip AI system
with the ability to understand dynamic ENVironments, we
build a video Question Answering dataset named Env-QA.
Env-QA contains 23K egocentric videos, where each video
is composed of a series of events about exploring and interacting in the environment. It also provides 85K questions to evaluate the ability of understanding the composition, layout, and state changes of the environment presented
by the events in videos. Moreover, we propose a video QA
model, Temporal Segmentation and Event Attention network
(TSEA), which introduces event-level video representation
and corresponding attention mechanisms to better extract
environment information and answer questions. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework and show the formidable challenges of Env-QA
in terms of long-term state tracking, multi-event temporal
reasoning and event counting, etc.

1. Introduction
In the last decades, tremendous works [9, 30, 45, 17, 58,
10, 49] have brought revolutionary advancements to computer vision systems for understanding web data, e.g., photos, videos, and movies, while for deploying machines in
the human living environment (i.e., building embodied artificial intelligence), we will encounter brand new challenges
on visual ability. 1) From “broader” to “deeper” visual understanding. The studies of internet AI focus on making the
system recognize from dozens of object categories [29, 34]
to thousands of categories [9, 43, 19] (broader). How-

Egocentric Video

move pot to table

: trajectory
𝒕=𝟖

𝒕 = 𝟏𝟖

Move pot to sink

pick up pot

Turn on faucet

turn on faucet
pick up pot
𝒕 = 𝟐𝟎

pot moved to

Pick up pot

𝒕 = 𝟑𝟓
Move pot to table

Question & Answer
Query Environment Attribute
Q1: What color is the cabinet?
A1: Brown

Query Object State
Q2: Where is pot, at the end of the video?
A2: On the table

Query Event
Q3: What happened, after moving the pot to
the sink?
A3: Turning on the faucet

Query Temporal Relations
Q4: Which happened first, moving the pot to
the table or turning on the faucet?
A4: Turning on the faucet

Figure 1. Env-QA dataset contains egocentric videos about exploring and interacting with environments, and diverse questions to
evaluate the models of understanding dynamic environments from
various perspectives.

ever, internet AI mainly pays attention to the salient objects
shown in the images. For completing tasks in real world
environment, such as cooking a meal, a system needs an
in-depth understanding of every detail of the environment
(deeper), e.g., knowing the positions of all utensils and ingredients in a kitchen. 2) From static to dynamic visual understanding. One of the essential characteristics of the real
world environment lies in its dynamic nature. The interactions between a human and the environment will trigger the
environment’s state changes. A system must learn to sense
and remember state changes to accomplish some long-term
tasks, e.g., a housekeeping robot may need to continuously
track the state of objects at home to plan the cleaning task.
However, few works purely study these visual abilities under embodied AI setting. Some of the video QA
datasets, such as TVQA [32] and MovieQA [49], evaluate
the model’s understanding of movies, TV series or YouTube

1675

