Adversarial Example Detection Using Latent Neighborhood Graph
Ahmed Abusnaina† , Yuhang Wu‡ , Sunpreet Arora‡ , Yizhen Wang‡ ,
Fei Wang‡ , Hao Yang‡ , and David Mohaisen†¶
† University of Central Florida, ‡ Visa Research
 ahmed.abusnaina@knights.ucf.edu, ¶ mohaisen@ucf.edu,

‡{yuhawu, sunarora, yizhewan, feiwang, haoyang}@visa.com

Embedding Extraction

Neighborhood Embeddings

Pre-trained
Classifier

Graph Construction

Embedding Space

Input Image

Figure 1: Generation of Latent Neighborhood Graph (LNG) for adversarial example detection. After computing the input
example embedding, a LNG that describes the local manifold around the input example is constructed using both adversarial
and benign example embeddings from a reference database. The LNG is then classified using a graph discriminator to
determine whether the graph is generated from an adversarial or benign example.

Abstract
Detection of adversarial examples with high accuracy is
critical for the security of deployed deep neural networkbased models. We present the first graph-based adversarial detection method that constructs a Latent Neighborhood
Graph (LNG) around an input example to determine if the
input example is adversarial. Given an input example, selected reference adversarial and benign examples (represented as LNG nodes in Figure 1) are used to capture the
local manifold in the vicinity of the input example. The LNG
node connectivity parameters are optimized jointly with the
parameters of a graph attention network in an end-to-end
manner to determine the optimal graph topology for adversarial example detection. The graph attention network
is used to determine if the LNG is derived from an adversarial or benign input example. Experimental evaluations
on CIFAR-10, STL-10, and ImageNet datasets, using six
adversarial attack methods, demonstrate that the proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art adversarial detection
methods in white-box and gray-box settings. The proposed
method is able to successfully detect adversarial examples
crafted with small perturbations using unseen attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques are being widely used in various domains including computer vision [6, 13, 10, 24],
natural language processing [12, 43], and speech recognition [16, 37]. However, an extensive line of research has
shown that an attacker can manipulate the prediction of a
deep learning-based classification system by adding a small
perturbation to deep learning model inputs, intermediate
embeddings [19, 11, 8], or by inducing distribution shifts
[26, 41]. These results highlight a major security issue for
deep neural network-based prediction systems, especially
the ones deployed in critical applications such as access
control and user authentication [49].
To address this security concern, a variety of defense
mechanisms have been proposed. These defense mechanisms can be broadly categorized into two categories. The
proactive approaches, e.g. adversarial training [7, 14] and
robustness-driven regularization [42], explicitly considers
the presence of known adversarial attack methods to train
a model, which increases model robustness to adversarial
perturbation. However, in order to use this approach, existing models need to be re-trained, which can be costly.
In contrast, the reactive approach requires no re-training of

7687

