Dynamical Pose Estimation
Heng Yang
MIT

Chris Doran
University of Cambridge
Scene Cloud

Model

Jean-Jacques Slotine
MIT

Category Model

Virtual Springs

Virtual Springs

Keypoints

Virtual
Springs

Scene

Category
Model

3D Model
Virtual Springs
2D Keypoints
Bearing Vectors

Primitive Model

(a) Point Cloud Registration

(b) Primitive Registration

2D Keypoints

Bearing Vectors

Keypoints

Virtual Springs

Instance Keypoints

Camera Frame

(c) Category Registration

Camera Frame

(e) Category APE

(d) Absolute Pose Estimation

Figure 1: We propose DynAMical Pose estimation (DAMP), the first general and practical framework to perform pose estimation from 2D and 3D visual correspondences by simulating rigid body dynamics arising from virtual springs and damping
(top row, magenta lines). DAMP almost always returns the globally optimal rigid transformation across five pose estimation
problems (bottom row). (a) Point cloud registration using the Bunny dataset [16]; (b) Primitive registration using a robot model
of spheres, planes, cylinders and cones; (c) Category registration using the chair category from the PASCAL3D+ dataset [51];
(d) Absolute pose estimation (APE) using the SPEED satellite dataset [45]; (e) Category APE using the FG3DCar dataset [34].

Abstract
We study the problem of aligning two sets of 3D geometric primitives given known correspondences. Our first
contribution is to show that this primitive alignment framework unifies five perception problems including point cloud
registration, primitive (mesh) registration, category-level
3D registration, absolution pose estimation (APE), and
category-level APE. Our second contribution is to propose
DynAMical Pose estimation (DAMP), the first general and
practical algorithm to solve primitive alignment problem by
simulating rigid body dynamics arising from virtual springs
and damping, where the springs span the shortest distances
between corresponding primitives. We evaluate DAMP in
simulated and real datasets across all five problems, and
demonstrate (i) DAMP always converges to the globally optimal solution in the first three problems with 3D-3D correspondences; (ii) although DAMP sometimes converges to
suboptimal solutions in the last two problems with 2D-3D
correspondences, using a scheme for escaping local minima, DAMP always succeeds. Our third contribution is to demystify the surprising empirical performance of DAMP and
formally prove a global convergence result in the case of
point cloud registration by charactering local stability of
the equilibrium points of the underlying dynamical system.1
1 Code: https://github.com/hankyang94/DAMP

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of finding the best rigid transformation (pose) to align two sets of corresponding 3D geoN
N
metric primitives X = {Xi }i=1 and Y = {Yi }i=1 :
min

T 2SE(3)

N
X
i=1

2

dist (T ⌦ Xi , Yi ) ,

(1)

where SE(3) , (R, t) : R 2 SO(3), t 2 R3 2 is the set
of 3D rigid transformations (rotations and translations),
T ⌦ X denotes the action of a rigid transformation T on
the primitive X, and dist (X, Y ) is the shortest distance between two primitives X and Y . In particular, we focus on
the following primitives:
1. Point: P (x) , {x}, where x 2 R3 is a 3D point;
2. Line: L(x, v) , {x + ↵v : ↵ 2 R}, where x 2 R3 is
a point on the line, and v 2 S2 is the unit direction;3
3. Plane: H(x, n) ,
y 2 R3 : nT (y x) = 0 ,
3
where x 2 R is a point on the plane, and n 2 S2
is the unit normal that is perpendicular to the plane;
2 SO(3) ,
R 2 R3⇥3 : RRT = RT R = I3 , det (R) = +1
the set of proper 3D rotations.
3 Sn 1 , {v 2 Rn : kvk = 1} is the set of n-D unit vectors.

5926

is

