Multi-Source Domain Adaptation for Object Detection
Xingxu Yao1, 3 , Sicheng Zhao2 , Pengfei Xu3 , Jufeng Yang1
1
Nankai University, China 2 Columbia University, USA 3 Didi Chuxing, China
yxx hbgd@163.com, schzhao@gmail.com, xupengfeipf@didiglobal.com, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
To reduce annotation labor associated with object detection, an increasing number of studies focus on transferring the learned knowledge from a labeled source domain to
another unlabeled target domain. However, existing methods assume that the labeled data are sampled from a single
source domain, which ignores a more generalized scenario,
where labeled data are from multiple source domains. For
the more challenging task, we propose a unified Faster RCNN based framework, termed Divide-and-Merge Spindle
Network (DMSN), which can simultaneously enhance domain invariance and preserve discriminative power. Specifically, the framework contains multiple source subnets and
a pseudo target subnet. First, we propose a hierarchical feature alignment strategy to conduct strong and weak
alignments for low- and high-level features, respectively,
considering their different effects for object detection. Second, we develop a novel pseudo subnet learning algorithm
to approximate optimal parameters of pseudo target subset
by weighted combination of parameters in different source
subnets. Finally, a consistency regularization for region
proposal network is proposed to facilitate each subnet to
learn more abstract invariances. Extensive experiments on
different adaptation scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed model.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, object detection has drawn much attention in the past decade [34,
32, 25]. With the development of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), some modern CNN-based detectors like
Faster R-CNN [35] have emerged and been successfully applied to many tasks, such as autonomous driving [10, 38],
face and pedestrian detection [17, 27], etc. However, the
high-quality performance of detectors is based on largescale training images with annotated bounding boxes. In
the real world, variances exist between training and test images in many aspects, including object appearance, background, even taken time. Due to these domain discrepan-

Labeled source domain Sj

Unlabeled target domain T Labeled source domain Sk

Figure 1. An example of domain shift in the multi-source scenario
for object detection. The above images are sampled from different
subsets of BDD100k [50]. Source domain Sj and Sk are taken
in daytime and night, respectively, while the images in target domain T are taken in dawn/dusk. As shown in the above results,
directly combining images from multiple sources and conducting
single-source domain adaptation (DA) will cause performance decay compared with only using the best single source domain. Note
that mAP denotes mean average precision.

cies, the performance on the test images may decrease dramatically. Although annotating more training data of the
new domain is able to alleviate the phenomenon, it is not an
optimal strategy due to large time and labor costs.
To mitigate the domain gap, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been widely used for object detection [6,
20, 22, 19]. Domain adaptive Faster R-CNN [6] is a milestone study developed for tackling the domain shift problem in object detection. In the work, image-level features
and instance-level features are respectively aligned through
an adversarial manner. Following [6], a series of Faster RCNN based adaptation models [57, 56] have emerged recently. Considering that image-level alignment transfers
massive unnecessary information background for object detection, Zhu et al. [56] and Saito et al. [37] pay more attention to align informative local regions. To minimize the

3273

