TransForensics: Image Forgery Localization with Dense Self-Attention
Jing Hao∗

Zhixin Zhang∗
Shicai Yang
Di Xie
Hikvision Research Institute

Shiliang Pu†

{haojing, zhangzhixin5, yangshicai, xiedi, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Nowadays advanced image editing tools and technical
skills produce tampered images more realistically, which
can easily evade image forensic systems and make authenticity verification of images more difficult. To tackle this
challenging problem, we introduce TransForensics, a novel
image forgery localization method inspired by Transformers. The two major components in our framework are dense
self-attention encoders and dense correction modules. The
former is to model global context and all pairwise interactions between local patches at different scales, while the
latter is used for improving the transparency of the hidden
layers and correcting the outputs from different branches.
Compared to previous traditional and deep learning methods, TransForensics not only can capture discriminative
representations and obtain high-quality mask predictions
but is also not limited by tampering types and patch sequence orders. By conducting experiments on main benchmarks, we show that TransForensics outperforms the stateof-the-art methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Image is an important medium for information transmission. Recently, tampered images generated by image editing techniques are commonly confused to be real ones, and
are increasingly used in fake news creation, academic fraud,
and criminal offenses. When tampering occurs in a digital
image, we usually expect that the tampered regions can be
found through image forensic analyses. However, capturing discriminative features of tampered regions with multiple forgery types (e.g. splicing, copy-move, removal) is still
a challenge and often requires exploiting the characteristics
of different tampering artifacts.
Unlike semantic object segmentation methods [33, 43]
that do predictions of all meaningful object regions, image
forensics makes predictions of tampering locations only.
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Examples from three common image forgery datasets.
Four authentic images (top) with their corresponding tampered images (medium) and ground-truth masks (bottom).

The former focuses on analyzing the content of different regions to understand visual concepts, while the latter needs
to generalize some other artifacts (e.g. inconsistent local
noise variances) created by different manipulation techniques. As shown in Fig.1, the well-manipulated images
are usually realistic, where the content of fake and genuine
regions is likely to be similar. If we directly use semantic segmentation network for image forensics, the network
would localize both original and manipulated regions, while
the original ones are the wrong predictions for image forensics. The work of Bappy et al. [3] also have demonstrated
that semantic segmentation approaches do not perform well
for image manipulations.
The key to image forensics is characterizing different
tempering artifacts that are often hidden in tiny details of
the images. Previous methods mainly employ traditional
hand-crafted features, such as error level analysis (ELA)
[20], discrete cosine transform (DCT) [5], and steganalysis
rich model (SRM) [15], to learn local inconsistencies from
invisible traces, but they usually apply only to a specific
manipulation type. In fact, the boundary formation of tampered (smoother) and authentic regions (sharper) within an
image is different [3, 4]. With the success of deep learning
approaches, recent works focus on checking feature consistency or learning boundary discrepancy via convolutional

15055

