Learning to Better Segment Objects from Unseen Classes
with Unlabeled Videos
Yuming Du
Yang Xiao
Vincent Lepetit
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-vallée, France
{yuming.du, yang.xiao, vincent.lepetit}@enpc.fr

https://dulucas.github.io/gbopt/

Abstract
The ability to localize and segment objects from unseen
classes would open the door to new applications, such as
autonomous object learning in active vision. Nonetheless,
improving the performance on unseen classes requires additional training data, while manually annotating the objects
of the unseen classes can be labor-extensive and expensive.
In this paper, we explore the use of unlabeled video sequences to automatically generate training data for objects
of unseen classes. It is in principle possible to apply existing
video segmentation methods to unlabeled videos and automatically obtain object masks, which can then be used as
a training set even for classes with no manual labels available. However, our experiments show that these methods
do not perform well enough for this purpose. We therefore
introduce a Bayesian method that is specifically designed to
automatically create such a training set: Our method starts
from a set of object proposals and relies on (non-realistic)
analysis-by-synthesis to select the correct ones by performing an efficient optimization over all the frames simultaneously. Through extensive experiments, we show that our
method can generate a high-quality training set which significantly boosts the performance of segmenting objects of
unseen classes. We thus believe that our method could open
the door for open-world instance segmentation by exploiting abundant Internet videos.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation models are now able to predict the
masks of objects of known classes in query images [19, 50,
55], providing rich information for many downstream applications such as scene understanding [17, 47] and robot
grasping [53, 59, 62]. Unfortunately, existing instance segmentation methods perform poorly on new classes [12].
This is an obstacle to the development of autonomous systems evolving in open worlds where there will always be
objects that do not belong to known classes. Being able to

Figure 1. Starting from an instance segmentation model trained
on some classes, we want to learn to localize and segment objects
from new classes without any human label. We do this by using
unlabeled videos, which are an abundant source of data. Our approach can automatically detect and select the object masks in the
videos. We then use the selected masks to retrain the initial model
that can then localize and segment objects from the new classes in
still frames without losing performance on the old ones.

detect and segment these objects would be the starting point
of learning to grasp and manipulate them, for example.
As Figure 1 illustrates, our goal is therefore to automatically improve the performance of instance segmentation models on static images containing objects from new
classes without human intervention. This is in contrast
with previous works that aiming at limiting the manual
labeling burden for object segmentation by using bounding boxes only [21, 28, 65] or developing few-shot techniques [15, 60], but still require human intervention for new
classes.
More specifically, we do not aim at predicting the categories of these new objects, but focus on robustly localizing and accurately segmenting them. In this sense, our
work is therefore more related to recent object discovery
methods, which attempt to segment objects without manual
segmentation labels by grouping pixels according to some
criterion [3, 18, 33, 45, 57]. However, these approaches are
still very fragile as they can be easily affected by low-level
perturbations in color, lighting, or texture.
Our strategy is therefore to rely on unlabeled video sequences, as unlabeled videos can be acquired without effort
while providing rich information. The general idea of using

3375

