Low Curvature Activations Reduce Overfitting in Adversarial Training
Vasu Singla

Sahil Singla
Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland

David Jacobs

{vsingla, ssingla, sfeizi, djacobs}@cs.umd.edu

Adversarial training is one of the most effective defenses
against adversarial attacks. Previous works suggest that
overfitting is a dominant phenomenon in adversarial training leading to a large generalization gap between test and
train accuracy in neural networks. In this work, we show
that the observed generalization gap is closely related to
the choice of the activation function. In particular, we show
that using activation functions with low (exact or approximate) curvature values has a regularization effect that significantly reduces both the standard and robust generalization gaps in adversarial training. We observe this effect
for both differentiable/smooth activations such as SiLU as
well as non-differentiable/non-smooth activations such as
LeakyReLU. In the latter case, the “approximate” curvature of the activation is low. Finally, we show that for activation functions with low curvature, the double descent
phenomenon for adversarially trained models does not occur.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks can be readily fooled by adversarial examples, which are computed by imposing small
perturbations on clean inputs [65]. Adversarial attacks have
been well studied in the machine learning community in recent years [10, 43, 23, 54, 21, 36, 37]. There have been
several defenses proposed against adversarial attacks in the
literature [53, 64, 7]. In our work we focus on adversarial training [43, 23, 35], one of the most effective empirical
defenses.
Adversarial training involves training the network on adversarially perturbed data instead of clean data to produce
a classifier with better robustness on the test set. However, it has been shown that networks produced through
vanilla adversarial training do not robustly generalize well
[59, 56, 18]. The gap between robust train and test accuracy for adversarially trained neural networks i.e. the robust
generalization gap can be far greater than the generalization gap achieved during standard empirical risk minimiza-

Robust Loss

Abstract

2.25
2.00
1.75
1.50
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50

ReLU Train
ReLU Test
SiLU Train
SiLU Test
0

25

50

75 100 125 150 175 200
Epochs

Figure 1: Learning curves for a robustly trained ResNet-18
model on CIFAR-10. Using an activation function with low
curvature such as SiLU prevents robust overfitting, achieving and maintaining low test robust loss, even compared to
the best early-stop checkpoint of a network with ReLU activation function. The learning rate is decreased by a factor
of 10 at the 100th and 150th epoch.
tion. In this work, we show that the robust generalization
gap is significantly impacted by the curvature of the activation function, and activations with low curvature can act
as efficient regularizers for adversarial training, effectively
mitigating this phenomenon.
Rice et al. [56] showed for adversarially trained ReLU
networks, the best robust test accuracy is not achieved by
allowing models to train until convergence. Adversarial
training has the characteristic that, after a certain point, further training will continue to decrease the robust training
loss, while the robust test loss starts increasing. This phenomenon is referred to as robust overfitting and ultimately
leads to poor robust accuracy on the test set. Rice et al. also
showed that while traditional approaches against overfitting
such as l1 , l2 regularization can mitigate robust overfitting,
no approach works better than simple early stopping. Since
standard accuracy continues to improve even after the network overfits to adversarial examples, early stopping leads
to trade-off between selecting a model with high robust accuracy versus a model with high standard accuracy [11].

16423

