Radial Distortion Invariant Factorization for Structure from Motion

1

José Pedro Iglesias1
Department of Electrical Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology

2

Carl Olsson1,2
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University

Abstract

jection model. To allow scale changes [25] generalizes the
approach to weak perspective cameras.

Factorization methods are frequently used for structure
from motion problems (SfM). In the presence of noise they
are able to jointly estimate camera matrices and scene
points in overdetermined settings, without the need for accurate initial solutions. While the early formulations were
restricted to affine models, recent approaches have been
show to work with pinhole cameras by minimizing object
space errors.
In this paper we propose a factorization approach using the so called radial camera, which is invariant to radial distortion and changes in focal length. Assuming a
known principal point our approach can reconstruct the 3D
scene in settings with unknown and varying radial distortion and focal length. We show on both real and synthetic
data that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art factorization methods under these conditions. 1

Since then a number of variations of the SfM problem
has been tackled with factorization approaches. Strum and
Triggs [28] used a measurement matrix consisting of homogeneous coordinates, scaled with (known) point depths,
to extract 3 × 4 cameras matrices. Iterative approaches alternating estimation of the depths Λ with factorization was
proposed in [10, 31]. To avoid solutions where many of the
elements of Λ are zero, [22] derives linear constraints that
permits a projectively correct reconstruction. Margerand et
al. [21] eliminate the projective depths and show that the
linear constraints can be transferred to the remaining parameters. A very recent method [16], factorizes a block matrix consisting of estimated pairwise fundamental matrices
to solve SfM.

1. Introduction
Factorization methods have been employed for SfM
problems since the seminal work [30]. Suppose that M is a
measurement matrix where each pair of rows correspond to
the x- and y- coordinates of the observed 2D points in one
image. The approach relies on the fact that the observed
projections should form a rank 3 matrix. To remove noise
they therefore solve
min kM − P Xk2F ,
P,X

(1)

with matrices P having 3 columns and X having 3 rows,
using the singular value decomposition (SVD). The interpretation of the result is that a pair of rows Pi in P correspond to an (affine) camera matrix projecting the 3D
points in X into image i. The solution is ambiguous since
P X = P HH −1 X for any invertible H. In [30] a metric upgrade is found by selecting H so that P H consists
of pairwise orthonormal rows giving an orthographic pro1 This work has been supported by the Swedish Research Council (grant

2018-05375), the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (Semantic
Mapping and Visual Navigation for Smart Robots), the Wallenberg AI,
Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP)

One reason for the popularity of the original (affine) factorization approaches was the availability of a closed form
solution using the SVD. This is however only possible if all
scene point are visible in all images. If this is not the case
we are limited to iterative methods. For this purpose splitting methods have become popular because of their simplicity [3, 5, 18]. These allow regularization of the singular
values when a proximal operator can be computed. On the
other hand recent results [15, 23] have shown that they can
give relatively inaccurate results due to slow convergence
near the optimum. Convex formulations with the nuclear
norm have also been considered [5, 4] but are in general too
weak for SfM problems with noise [23, 15]. We note that a
number of papers that give conditions which ensure that direct bilinear optimization has no local minimum (other than
the global one) [1, 24, 8, 7]. The assumptions these papers make are however too restrictive for the SfM problem,
where local minima are known to exist e.g. [2].
A recent series of papers by Hong et al. [11, 14, 13, 12]
show that when the rank is known direct bilinear estimation
of P and X can be made remarkably robust to local minima,
when using the VarPro method. In [12] the pOSE formulation is introduced. This method uses a pinhole model and
optimizes a trade-off between an object space error (OSE)
and an affine term (which fixes the scale). It is shown to
converge to the global minimum from random starting solution in the vast majority of cases.

5906

