PIAP-DF: Pixel-Interested and Anti Person-Specific Facial Action Unit Detection
Net with Discrete Feedback Learning

1

Yang Tang1
Wangding Zeng1
Dafei Zhao2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
1

2

{ty, zengwd, zhhg}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Facial Action Units (AUs) are of great significance in
communication. Automatic AU detection can improve the
understanding of psychological conditions and emotional
status. Recently, several deep learning methods have been
proposed to detect AUs automatically. However, several
challenges, such as poor extraction of fine-grained and robust local AUs information, model overfitting on personspecific features, as well as the limitation of datasets with
wrong labels, remain to be addressed. In this paper, we propose a joint strategy called PIAP-DF to solve these problems, which involves 1) a multi-stage Pixel-Interested learning method with pixel-level attention for each AU; 2) an
Anti Person-Specific method aiming to eliminate features
associated with any individual as much as possible; 3) a
semi-supervised learning method with Discrete Feedback,
designed to effectively utilize unlabeled data and mitigate
the negative impacts of wrong labels. Experimental results
on the two popular AU detection datasets BP4D and DISFA
prove that PIAP-DF can be the new state-of-the-art method.
Compared with the current best method, PIAP-DF improves
the average F1 score by 3.2% on BP4D and by 0.5% on
DISFA. All modules of PIAP-DF can be easily removed after training to obtain a lightweight model for practical application.

2

Honggang Zhang1
University of Ottawa

dafei.zhao@uottawa.ca

diagnosis of depressed patients [9] and conversations of
criminals. Moreover, microexpression detection also has
a potential value in many other emotion recognition tasks
[15, 32, 35, 43]. In previous studies, the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [13] method is often used to encode microexpressions. In FACS, each expression is considered as
a combination of multiple action units (AU). By detecting
the AU, FACS can effectively eliminate the ambiguity problem in microexpression annotation. Therefore, a reliable
AU detection system is of great importance for the analysis
of facial microexpressions.
In FACS, different AUs are associated with specific facial muscles, which in turn correspond to the features of
different regions of the face. Sometimes one AU may
also correspond to more than one region. Therefore, local information is essential for AU detection. Traditional
[3, 7, 10, 19, 26, 42] approaches use manual methods to represent different local regions . In recent years, deep learning
methods for facial expression detection are gaining popularity and some results have been achieved. Early work used
simple CNN for learning. Later, deeper neural networks
were employed to improve performance. Due to the im-

1. Introduction
Facial expression, a natural way of human communication in people’s daily lives, is also an intuitive reflection of human emotions, mental states, and consciousness when analyzing emotion recognition tasks. There are
some popular facial expression topics categorized as microexpressions. Microexpressions are reflected by rapid
and unconscious spontaneous facial movements, and studies have shown that microexpressions cannot be concealed
[8]. These characteristics make the detection of microexpressions necessary in some specific situations, such as the

Figure 1. a) Comparison of patch and PI method on AU6, marked
as the red border and the blue border, respectively. b) PI Maps on
AU2 and AU6. The predefined PI Maps are generated with landmark information. After the second stage of PI, we have refined
PI Maps, shown as binary and the heatmap views.

12899

