Exploring Simple 3D Multi-Object Tracking for Autonomous Driving
Chenxu Luo1,2
1
QCraft

Xiaodong Yang1 * Alan Yuille2
2
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
3D multi-object tracking in LiDAR point clouds is a key
ingredient for self-driving vehicles. Existing methods are
predominantly based on the tracking-by-detection pipeline
and inevitably require a heuristic matching step for the detection association. In this paper, we present SimTrack to
simplify the hand-crafted tracking paradigm by proposing
an end-to-end trainable model for joint detection and tracking from raw point clouds. Our key design is to predict the
first-appear location of each object in a given snippet to get
the tracking identity and then update the location based on
motion estimation. In the inference, the heuristic matching
step can be completely waived by a simple read-off operation. SimTrack integrates the tracked object association,
newborn object detection, and dead track killing in a single unified model. We conduct extensive evaluations on two
large-scale datasets: nuScenes and Waymo Open Dataset.
Experimental results reveal that our simple approach compares favorably with the state-of-the-art methods while ruling out the heuristic matching rules.

1. Introduction
3D multi-object tracking is a crucial component in an autonomous driving system as it provides pivotal information
to facilitate various onboard modules ranging from perception, prediction to planning. LiDAR is the most commonly
used sensor that a self-driving vehicle relies on to perceive
its surroundings. Thus, tracking in LiDAR point clouds has
been attracting increasing interests with the rapid development of self-driving vehicles in recent years.
Multi-object tracking is a long-standing task in computer
vision and has been extensively studied in image sequence
domain. Arguably, the tracking-by-detection is the most
popular tracking paradigm, which first detects objects for
each frame and then associates them across frames. These
methods have shown promising results and benefited from
huge progress in image object detection. They usually formulate the association step as a bipartite matching problem.
Most existing works therefore focus on better defining the
* Correspondence to xiaodong@qcraft.ai

Figure 1: An overview of the tracking-by-detection pipeline
and our approach. (a) performs 3D object detection in each
point cloud and then match detected objects through an association step, which involves complex heuristic rules. (b)
reads-off tracking identities and updates object locations using estimated motion, and at the same time manages newborn and dead tracks. Our model handles the three cases in
a single forward pass without requiring heuristic matching.
affinity matrix between tracked objects and new detections.
In the matching criteria design, the motion [2] and appearance [32] are widely adopted as the association cues.
For 3D multi-object tracking with LiDAR, the trackingby-detection pipeline also plays the dominant role [6, 27].
Accordingly, in order to obtain the final tracking result, current methods inevitably require a heuristic matching step to
link detected objects over time in a separate stage. There
exists numerous hand-crafted rules when performing such
a step. As compared in the supplementary material, different matching criteria and corresponding threshold for each
specific object class substantially impact the final tracking
performance. This also happens in the track life management, which is used to handle new-born objects and dead
tracks. It is a common practice for these methods to initialize a track only when an object continuously presents for
a certain number of frames in order to filter out false detections, and keep disappeared objects for several frames to

10488

