Re-distributing Biased Pseudo Labels for Semi-supervised Semantic
Segmentation: A Baseline Investigation

1

Ruifei He1,2 *, Jihan Yang1∗ , Xiaojuan Qi1†
The University of Hong Kong 2 Zhejiang University
rfhe@zju.edu.cn, {jhyang, xjqi}@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
While self-training has advanced semi-supervised semantic segmentation, it severely suffers from the longtailed class distribution on real-world semantic segmentation datasets that make the pseudo-labeled data bias toward majority classes. In this paper, we present a simple and yet effective Distribution Alignment and Random
Sampling (DARS) method to produce unbiased pseudo labels that match the true class distribution estimated from
the labeled data. Besides, we also contribute a progressive data augmentation and labeling strategy to facilitate
model training with pseudo-labeled data. Experiments on
both Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC 2012 datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Albeit simple,
our method performs favorably in comparison with stateof-the-art approaches. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/CVMI-Lab/DARS.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great success of deep
convolutional neural network (DCNNs) in semantic segmentation [46, 37, 8, 36, 57]. The success, however, heavily
relies on a large number of training data with accurate pixellevel human annotations, which are prohibitively expensive
and time-consuming to collect.
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) provides a promising
path [51, 49, 29, 52, 47] to ease human annotation burden by
using a small amount of labeled data in conjunction with a
large amount of unlabeled data to obtain an accurate model.
In this regard, self-training, alternating between generating pseudo labels for unlabeled data using model predictions and training the model with pseudo-labeled data, is a
classic and effective approach for semi-supervised learning
and has obtained state-of-the-art results [17, 5, 60] in semisupervised semantic segmentation with DCNNs.
Motivations. Despite the encouraging results, most of the
previous self-training approaches [60, 59, 31, 56, 47] as* equal contribution
† corresponding author

Labeled
ST
Labeled ⋂ ST

Distribution Mismatch

Figure 1. Class distribution mismatch on the Cityscapes
dataset [10]. ’Labeled’ and ’ST’ denote the class distribution of
true labels in the labeled set and pseudo labels produced by ST.
We line up percentages of each class for better visualization.

sume a class-balanced data distribution and hence adopt a
single confidence thresholding (ST) scheme to produce the
pseudo labels (i.e. pixels with prediction confidence score
exceeding a pre-defined threshold are pseudo-labeled) to
guarantee pseudo label qualities. However, most real-world
semantic segmentation datasets [35, 10, 15, 58] have long
tail class distributions with few categories occupying the
majority of pixels as illustrated in Fig. 1. And, it is well
known that DCNNs trained with such long-tailed data distribution will produce predictions biased toward the dominant categories [12]. This can be even more problematic
for self-training, since pseudo labels are generated based on
these biased model predictions. There exists a severe distribution mismatch between true and pseudo labels, especially
for tail categories (see Fig. 1), which will harm self-training.
Recently, only very few works [61, 17] attempt to address the class distribution issue in pseudo labels via sampling the same percentage of pixels for each category based
on the predicted results instead of using a single confidence
threshold. However, as the class distribution for the predictions has already deviated from the true distribution, the

6930

