Channel-wise Topology Refinement Graph Convolution for Skeleton-Based
Action Recognition
Yuxin Chen1,2 , Ziqi Zhang1,2 , Chunfeng Yuan1 *, Bing Li1 , Ying Deng4 , Weiming Hu1,3
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4
School of Aeronautical Manufacturing Engineering, Nanchang Hangkong University
chenyuxin2019@ia.ac.cn, {ziqi.zhang,cfyuan,bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have been widely
used and achieved remarkable results in skeleton-based
action recognition. In GCNs, graph topology dominates
feature aggregation and therefore is the key to extracting representative features. In this work, we propose a
novel Channel-wise Topology Refinement Graph Convolution (CTR-GC) to dynamically learn different topologies
and effectively aggregate joint features in different channels for skeleton-based action recognition. The proposed
CTR-GC models channel-wise topologies through learning
a shared topology as a generic prior for all channels and refining it with channel-specific correlations for each channel.
Our refinement method introduces few extra parameters and
significantly reduces the difficulty of modeling channel-wise
topologies. Furthermore, via reformulating graph convolutions into a unified form, we find that CTR-GC relaxes
strict constraints of graph convolutions, leading to stronger
representation capability. Combining CTR-GC with temporal modeling modules, we develop a powerful graph convolutional network named CTR-GCN which notably outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the NTU RGB+D, NTU
RGB+D 120, and NW-UCLA datasets.1

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is an important task with various applications ranging from human-robot interaction to
video surveillance. In recent years, skeleton-based human
action recognition has attracted much attention due to the
development of depth sensors and its robustness against
complicated backgrounds.
* Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/Uason-Chen/CTR-GCN.

Figure 1. Channel-wise topology refinement. Lines of different
colors correspond to topologies in different channels and the thickness of lines indicates the correlation strength between joints.

Early deep-learning-based methods treat human joints as
a set of independent features and organize them into a feature sequence or a pseudo-image, which is fed into RNNs
or CNNs to predict action labels. However, these methods overlook inherent correlations between joints, which
reveals human body topology and is important information
of human skeleton. Yan et al. [32] firstly modeled correlations between human joints with graphs and apply GCNs
along with temporal convolutions to extract motion features. While the manually defined topology they employ is
difficult to achieve relationship modeling between unnaturally connected joints and limits representation capability of
GCNs. In order to boost power of GCNs, recent approaches
[24, 35, 34] adaptively learn the topology of human skeleton
through attention or other mechanisms. They use a topology
for all channels, which forces GCNs to aggregate features
with the same topology in different channels and thus limits
the flexibility of feature extraction. Since different channels
represent different types of motion features and correlations
between joints under different motion features are not always the same, it’s not optimal to use one shared topology.
Cheng et al. [3] set individual parameterized topologies for
channel groups. However, the topologies of different groups

13359

