SGMNet: Learning Rotation-Invariant Point Cloud Representations
via Sorted Gram Matrix
Jianyun Xu,

Xin Tang, Yushi Zhu, Jie Sun,
Hikvision Research Institute

Shiliang Pu*

{xujianyun, tangxin10, zhuyushi, sunjie, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Recently, various works that attempted to introduce rotation invariance to point cloud analysis have devised pointpair features, such as angles and distances. In these methods, however, the point-pair is only comprised of the center
point and its adjacent points in a vicinity, which may bring
information loss to the local feature representation. In this
paper, we instead connect each point densely with all other
points in a local neighborhood to compose the point-pairs.
Specifically, we present a simple but effective local feature
representation, called sorted Gram matrix(SGM), which is
not only invariant to arbitrary rotations, but also models
the pair-wise relationship of all the points in a neighborhood. In more detail, we utilize vector inner product to
model distance- and angle-information between two points,
and in a local patch it naturally forms a Gram matrix. In
order to guarantee permutation invariance, we sort the correlation value in Gram matrix for each point, therefore this
geometric feature names sorted Gram matrix. Furthermore,
we mathematically prove that the Gram matrix is rotationinvariant and sufficient to model the inherent structure of a
point cloud patch. We then use SGM as features in convolution, which can be readily integrated as a drop-in module
into any point-based networks. Finally, we evaluated the
proposed method on two widely used datasets, and it outperforms previous state-of-the-arts on both shape classification and part segmentation tasks by a large margin.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, the development of 3D computer
vision has flourished due to its wide applications, such as
robotics, AR/VR and self-driving. Point cloud, the most
common format of 3D data, has attracted more and more attention, and plenty of works [19, 20, 1, 25, 13, 26, 24] have
been proposed to extract 3D features directly on points.
* Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (Grant No.2020AAA010400X).

local patch

local patch
circle :

pc

xj

pc

D p
j
m
O ref. point

xj
pj

G

X T X (X

[ x1 , x2 , x3 ])

(a)

(b)

Simplified PPFs

Dense-connected PPFs

Figure 1. Illustration of simplified PPFs and our improved denseconnected version. In figure(a), the PPFs are constructed between
center point pc and neighbor point pj by distance ||xj ||(xj =
pj − pc ) and angle ∠(m, xj )(m = Opc , O is a reference point,
such as mass center), which cannot fully constraint pj , letting it
freely positioned in the circle Ω, thus leads to information loss.
In figure(b), we densely connect every point-pair exhaustively and
compute each pair’s distance and angle information by an inner
product which, forms a Gram matrix, leading to a fixed local structure.

Compared to dense images, point clouds are irregular and
unstructured, thus it is necessary to design permutation
invariant feature extractors, which is handled by PointNet [19] using symmetric functions. Besides that, spatial
transformation, including translation and rotation, is generally common in 3D world. Therefore, the learned representation of the point cloud should also be invariant to translation and rotation [19]. While translation-invariance can be
accomplished perfectly by using weight sharing as 2D convolution does in an image, rotation-invariance in 3D point
cloud has not been well resolved due to its spacial complexity.
In essence, rotation-invariance is crucial in some specific tasks, such as classification, part segmentation, matching and shape retrieval, as in these tasks, the objects or
the whole scene can be arbitrarily rotated. Hence, it is
necessary to ensure that the learned point cloud feature is
rotation-invariant, and in particular, the local patch descrip-

10468

