End-to-End Dense Video Captioning with Parallel Decoding
Teng Wang1,2 , Ruimao Zhang3,4 , Zhichao Lu2 , Feng Zheng2∗ , Ran Cheng2 , Ping Luo1
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Southern University of Science and Technology
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen) 4 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
f.zheng@ieee.org

ruimao.zhang@ieee.org

luzhichaocn@gmail.com

ranchengcn@gmail.com

pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Dense video captioning aims to generate multiple associated captions with their temporal locations from the
video. Previous methods follow a sophisticated “localizethen-describe” scheme, which heavily relies on numerous
hand-crafted components. In this paper, we proposed a simple yet effective framework for end-to-end dense video captioning with parallel decoding (PDVC), by formulating the
dense caption generation as a set prediction task. In practice, through stacking a newly proposed event counter on the
top of a transformer decoder, the PDVC precisely segments
the video into a number of event pieces under the holistic understanding of the video content, which effectively increases the coherence and readability of predicted captions.
Compared with prior arts, the PDVC has several appealing
advantages: (1) Without relying on heuristic non-maximum
suppression or a recurrent event sequence selection network
to remove redundancy, PDVC directly produces an event
set with an appropriate size; (2) In contrast to adopting
the two-stage scheme, we feed the enhanced representations of event queries into the localization head and caption head in parallel, making these two sub-tasks deeply
interrelated and mutually promoted through the optimization; (3) Without bells and whistles, extensive experiments
on ActivityNet Captions and YouCook2 show that PDVC is
capable of producing high-quality captioning results, surpassing the state-of-the-art two-stage methods when its localization accuracy is on par with them. Code is available
at https://github.com/ttengwang/PDVC.

1. Introduction
As an emerging branch of video understanding, video
captioning has received an increasing attention in the recent past [2, 12, 13, 21, 32, 10, 15, 19, 20], aiming to
generate a natural sentence to describe one main event of
* Corresponding author

Selected
Proposals

Captions

Segments

Captions

Caption
Generator

Localization
head

Captioning
head

Proposal Selection
(e.g. ESGN, NMS)

Proposal
Generator
Feature
Encoder
Video
Features

Transformer

tengwang@connect.hku.hk

Decoder
Event queries

Encoder

Video
Features

Two-stage Methods

PDVC

Figure 1: The defacto two-stage pipeline vs. the proposed PDVC.
The two-stage “localize-then-describe” pipeline requires a denseto-sparse proposal generation and selection process before captioning, which contains hand-crafted components and can not effectively exploit the potential mutual benefits between localization
and captioning. PDVC adopts the vision transformer to learn attentive interaction of different frames, where the learnable event
queries are embedded to capture the relevance between the frames
and the events. Two prediction heads run in parallel over query
features, leveraging the mutual benefits between two tasks and improving their performance together.

a short video. However, since realistic videos are usually
long, untrimmed, and composed of a variety of events with
irrelevant background contents, the above single-sentence
captioning methods tend to generate sentences of blandness
with less information. To circumvent the above dilemma,
dense video captioning (DVC) [5, 7, 25, 29, 37] is developed for automatically localizing and captioning multiple
events in the video, which could reveal detailed visual contents and generate the coherent and complete descriptions.
Intuitively, dense video captioning can be divided into
two subtasks, termed event localization and event captioning. As shown in Fig. 1, the previous methods usually
solve this problem by a two-stage “localize-then-describe”
pipeline. It firstly predicts a set of event proposals with accurate boundaries. By extracting fine-grained semantic cues

6847

