Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation with Self-Supervised Depth Estimation
Qin Wang1 Dengxin Dai1,2* Lukas Hoyer1 Luc Van Gool1,3 Olga Fink1
1
ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 MPI for Informatics, Germany 3 KU Lueven, Belgium
{qwang,lhoyer,ofink}@ethz.ch {dai,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Domain adaptation for semantic segmentation aims to
improve the model performance in the presence of a distribution shift between source and target domain. Leveraging the supervision from auxiliary tasks (such as depth estimation) has the potential to heal this shift because many
visual tasks are closely related to each other. However,
such a supervision is not always available. In this work,
we leverage the guidance from self-supervised depth estimation, which is available on both domains, to bridge the
domain gap. On the one hand, we propose to explicitly
learn the task feature correlation to strengthen the target
semantic predictions with the help of target depth estimation. On the other hand, we use the depth prediction discrepancy from source and target depth decoders to approximate the pixel-wise adaptation difficulty. The adaptation
difficulty, inferred from depth, is then used to refine the
target semantic segmentation pseudo-labels. The proposed
method can be easily implemented into existing segmentation frameworks. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach on the benchmark tasks SYNTHIA-to-Cityscapes
and GTA-to-Cityscapes, on which we achieve the new stateof-the-art performance of 55.0% and 56.6%, respectively.
Our code is available at https://qin.ee/corda.

1. Introduction
The task of semantic segmentation requires models to
assign pixel-level category labels to given scenes. While
deep learning models have achieved good performance on
benchmark datasets with the help of a large amount of high
quality annotated training data [1, 48], they still face the
real-world challenge of the domain shift between training
and test data because of the variance in illumination, appearance, viewpoints, backgrounds, etc. Unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) can potentially heal this domain gap by
aligning the domain distributions [40], or recursively refining the target pseudo-labels [55].
* The corresponding author

Figure 1. We propose to use self-supervised depth estimation (green) to improve semantic segmentation performance under
the unsupervised domain adaptation setup. We explicitly learn the
task feature correlation (orange) between semantics and depth and
use it to improve the target semantics. We use the adaptation difficulty (blue) approximated by depth prediction discrepancy of the
target image from two domain-specific depth decoders to refine
our target semantic pseudo-label. The proposed correlation-aware
domain adaptation method can largely improve the segmentation
performance in the target domain.

In recent years, motivated by the success of multi-task
learning [49, 44], auxiliary tasks (such as depth estimation) have been increasingly used to help the adaptation. As
auxiliary tasks are often coupled with the semantics, they
have been proved to be beneficial for the main segmentation
task [19]. Existing works [41, 3] typically utilize the easyto-access depth information from a synthetic source domain
to train an auxiliary depth network but do not take target
depth into account because of its inaccessibility. Inspired by
recent progress on self-supervised depth estimation, where
depth can be trained from stereo pairs [7, 8] or video sequences [54], we propose to make use of self-supervised
depth estimates for the domains (the source domain and/or
target domain) on which ground-truth depth is not available.
The additional self-supervised depth estimation can facilitate us to explicitly learn the correlation between tasks to
18515

