BARF

: Bundle-Adjusting Neural Radiance Fields

Chen-Hsuan Lin1 Wei-Chiu Ma2 Antonio Torralba2 Simon Lucey1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 The University of Adelaide
https://chenhsuanlin.bitbucket.io/bundle-adjusting-NeRF

NeRF

BARF (ours)

Images + accurate camera poses

Images + imperfect camera poses

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [31] have recently gained
a surge of interest within the computer vision community for
its power to synthesize photorealistic novel views of realworld scenes. One limitation of NeRF, however, is its requirement of accurate camera poses to learn the scene representations. In this paper, we propose Bundle-Adjusting
Neural Radiance Fields (BARF) for training NeRF from imperfect (or even unknown) camera poses — the joint problem
of learning neural 3D representations and registering camera frames. We establish a theoretical connection to classical
image alignment and show that coarse-to-fine registration is
also applicable to NeRF. Furthermore, we show that naïvely
applying positional encoding in NeRF has a negative impact
on registration with a synthesis-based objective. Experiments on synthetic and real-world data show that BARF can
effectively optimize the neural scene representations and resolve large camera pose misalignment at the same time. This
enables view synthesis and localization of video sequences
from unknown camera poses, opening up new avenues for
visual localization systems (e.g. SLAM) and potential applications for dense 3D mapping and reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Humans have strong capabilities of reasoning about 3D
geometry through our vision from the slightest ego-motion.
When watching movies, we can immediately infer the 3D
spatial structures of objects and scenes inside the videos.
This is because we have an inherent ability of associating
spatial correspondences of the same scene across continuous
observations, without having to make sense of the relative
camera or ego-motion. Through pure visual perception, not
only can we recover a mental 3D representation of what we
are looking at, but meanwhile we can also recognize where
we are looking at the scene from.
Simultaneously solving for the 3D scene representation
from RGB images (i.e. reconstruction) and localizing the
given camera frames (i.e. registration) is a long-standing
chicken-and-egg problem in computer vision — recovering

˝

˝

3D scene representation

˝

3D scene representation
+ registered camera poses

Figure 1: Training NeRF requires accurate camera poses for
all images. We present BARF for learning 3D scene representations from imperfect (or even unknown) camera poses
by jointly optimizing for registration and reconstruction.

the 3D structure requires observations with known camera
poses, while localizing the cameras requires reliable correspondences from the reconstruction. Classical methods such
as structure from motion (Sf M) [17, 44] or SLAM [13, 32]
approach this problem through local registration followed
by global geometric bundle adjustment (BA) on both the
structure and cameras. Sf M and SLAM systems, however,
are sensitive to the quality of local registration and easily
fall into suboptimal solutions. In addition, the sparse nature
of output 3D point clouds (often noisy) limits downstream
vision tasks that requires dense geometric reasoning.
Closely related to 3D reconstruction from imagery is the
problem of view synthesis. Though not primarily purposed
for recovering explicit 3D structures, recent advances on
photorealistic view synthesis have opted to recover an intermediate dense 3D-aware representation (e.g. depth [15, 61],
multi-plane images [71, 51, 55], or volume density [27, 31]),
followed by neural rendering techniques [14, 29, 47, 54] to
15741

