Labels4Free: Unsupervised Segmentation using StyleGAN
Rameen Abdal1
1

Peihao Zhu1

KAUST

2

Niloy J. Mitra2

Peter Wonka1

UCL and Adobe Research

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised segmentation framework
for StyleGAN generated objects. We build on two main observations. First, the features generated by StyleGAN hold
valuable information that can be utilized towards training
segmentation networks. Second, the foreground and background can often be treated to be largely independent and
be swapped across images to produce plausible composited
images. For our solution, we propose to augment the StyleGAN2 generator architecture with a segmentation branch
and to split the generator into a foreground and background
network. This enables us to generate soft segmentation
masks for the foreground object in an unsupervised fashion.
On multiple object classes, we report comparable results
against state-of-the-art supervised segmentation networks,
while against the best unsupervised segmentation approach
we demonstrate a clear improvement, both in qualitative
and quantitative metrics.
Project Page : https:/rameenabdal.github.io/Labels4Free

1. Introduction
Given the high quality and photo-realistic results of
current generative adversarial networks (GANs), we are
witnessing their widespread adaptation for many applications. Examples include various image and video editing
tasks, image inpainting [13, 47, 46, 41], local image editing [42, 2], low bit-rate video conferencing [40], image super resolution [28, 12], image colorization [4, 27], and extracting 3D models [30].
While originally conjectured that GANs are merely great
at memorizing the training data, recent work in GAN-based
image editing [18, 3, 36, 42] demonstrates that GANs learn
non-trivial semantic information about a class of objects,
e.g., faces or cars. For example, GANs are able to learn
the concept of pose and they can show the same, or at least
a very similar looking, object with different orientations.
Even though the background changes in subtle ways during this editing operations, in this paper we explore to what
extent the underlying generator network actually learns the
distinction between foreground and background, and then

Figure 1: We propose an unsupervised segmentation framework that enables foreground/background separation for
raw input images. At the core of our framework is an unsupervised network, which segments class-specific StyleGAN images, and is used to generate segmentation masks
for training supervised segmentation networks.

to encourage it to disentangle foreground and background,
without explicit mask-level supervision. As an important
byproduct, we can extract information from an unsupervised GAN that is useful for general object segmentation.
For example, we are able to create a large synthetic dataset
for training a state-of-the-art segmentation network and
then segment arbitrary face (or horse, car, cat) images into
foreground and background without requiring any manually
assigned labels (see Fig. 1).
Our implementation is based on StyleGAN [24, 23], generally considered the state-of-the-art for GANs trained on
individual object classes. Our solution is built on two ideas.
First, based on our analysis of GAN-based image editing,
the features generated by StyleGAN hold a lot of information useful for segmentation, and can be used towards corresponding mask synthesis. Second, the foreground and background should be largely independent and be composited in
different ways. The exact coupling between foreground and
background is highly non-trivial however and there are multiple ways of decoupling foreground and background that
we analyze in our work.
For our solution, we propose to augment the StyleGAN
generator architecture with a segmentation branch and to

13970

