EventHPE: Event-based 3D Human Pose and Shape Estimation
Shihao Zou∗
Chuan Guo∗
Xinxin Zuo∗,§
Sen Wang∗,§
Pengyu Wang‡
Xiaoqin Hu†
Shoushun Chen†,♮
Minglun Gong§
Li Cheng∗
∗
‡
†
University of Alberta
Shandong University
Celepixel Technology
§
♮
University of Guelph
Nanyang Technological University
{szou2, cguo2, xzuo, sen9, lcheng5}@ualberta.ca, pengyuwang@mail.sdu.edu.cn,
{xiaoqin.hu, shoushun.chen}@ovt.com, minglun@uoguelph.ca

Abstract
Event camera is an emerging imaging sensor for capturing dynamics of moving objects as events, which motivates
our work in estimating 3D human pose and shape from the
event signals. Events, on the other hand, have their unique
challenges: rather than capturing static body postures, the
event signals are best at capturing local motions. This leads
us to propose a two-stage deep learning approach, called
EventHPE. The first-stage, FlowNet, is trained by unsupervised learning to infer optical flow from events. Both
events and optical flow are closely related to human body
dynamics, which are fed as input to the ShapeNet in the
second stage, to estimate 3D human shapes. To mitigate
the discrepancy between image-based flow (optical flow)
and shape-based flow (vertices movement of human body
shape), a novel flow coherence loss is introduced by exploiting the fact that both flows are originated from the identical
human motion. An in-house event-based 3D human dataset
is curated that comes with 3D pose and shape annotations,
which is by far the largest one to our knowledge. Empirical evaluations on DHP19 dataset and our in-house dataset
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Visual human pose and shape estimation have played a
critical role in computer vision, with numerous research activities over the years [18, 25]. Existing research efforts are
predominantly based on images from the conventional RGB
or RGB-D cameras [13, 15, 14, 29, 34]. Meanwhile, the
recent development in event cameras [7] offers new opportunities. Its working mechanism is a paradigm shift from
theses conventional frame-based cameras. Inspired by biological vision process, event cameras [7] asynchronously
measure per-pixel brightness changes, which enables them
to best detect and capture object local motions. This new

events stream
optical flow
first frame of
gray-scale image

estimated shapes
through time

Figure 1. An illustration of our approach, which takes as input
a stream of events and only the first frame of gray-scale image
from an event camera. Our goal is to estimate 3D human poses
and shapes through time from the events stream as the sole data
source given the beginning body posture in the first frame of grayscale image, where optical flows are inferred from events as an
intermediate step.

imaging paradigm has already stimulated a range of computer vision research activities, such as camera pose estimation [8], gesture recognition [1] and 3D reconstruction [24],
as well as commercial interests spanning a range of use scenarios including robotics, augmented and virtual reality, and
auto-driving applications [7]. However, its potential in estimating 3D human shape is rarely explored.
DHP19 [3] is an early work that estimates only 2-D poses
by treating a packet of events as a static image. The recent effort of EventCap [28] is the first in estimating 3D human shapes from an event camera. However, in addition to
the input events, EventCap relies on an additional stream of
gray-scale image sequence as input, to establish the initial
shape estimation at each time step. This motivates us to consider the problem of inferring 3D human shape from events
as the major source of input: events are the sole source of
input data to estimate 3D human shapes over time, given
that the beginning shape is known or extracted from the first
frame of gray-scale image. Fig. 1 provides an overview of

10996

