Few-Shot and Continual Learning with Attentive Independent Mechanisms
Eugene Lee Cheng-Han Huang Chen-Yi Lee
Institute of Electronics, National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan
{eugenelet.ee06g, huang50213.ee04}@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to perform
well when deployed to test distributions that shares high
similarity with the training distribution. Feeding DNNs with
new data sequentially that were unseen in the training distribution has two major challenges — fast adaptation to new
tasks and catastrophic forgetting of old tasks. Such difficulties paved way for the on-going research on few-shot learning and continual learning. To tackle these problems, we
introduce Attentive Independent Mechanisms (AIM). We incorporate the idea of learning using fast and slow weights
in conjunction with the decoupling of the feature extraction
and higher-order conceptual learning of a DNN. AIM is designed for higher-order conceptual learning, modeled by a
mixture of experts that compete to learn independent concepts to solve a new task. AIM is a modular component that
can be inserted into existing deep learning frameworks. We
demonstrate its capability for few-shot learning by adding it
to SIB and trained on MiniImageNet and CIFAR-FS, showing significant improvement. AIM is also applied to ANML
and OML trained on Omniglot, CIFAR-100 and MiniImageNet to demonstrate its capability in continual learning.
Code made publicly available at https://github.
com/huang50213/AIM-Fewshot-Continual.

1. Introduction
Humans have the ability to learn new concepts continually while retaining previously learned concepts [11]. While
learning new concepts, prior concepts that were learned are
leveraged to form new connections in the brain [4, 52].
The plasticity of the human brain plays an important role
on the forming of novel neuronal connections for learning new concepts. Current deep learning methods are inefficient in remembering old concepts after being fed with
new concepts, also widely know as catastrophic forgetting
[34, 23]. Deep neural networks (DNNs) trained in an endto-end fashion also has difficulty in learning new tasks in
a sample efficient manner [12]. It is conjectured that the

cylee@si2lab.org

cause of catastrophic forgetting and inefficiency in learning new tasks is from the stability-plasticity dilemma [2].
Stability is required so that previously learned information can be retained through the limitation of abrupt weight
changes. Plasticity on the other hand encourages large
weight changes, resulting in the fast acquisition of new concepts with the trade-off of forgetting old concepts.
It is believed that by scaling up the currently available
architecture, DNNs are able to generalize better [7, 41, 10].
Tremendous effort is placed into neural architecture search
(NAS) [28, 54, 49, 39, 32] with the hypothesis that improvements on a structural level introduce inductive bias that improves the generalizability of a neural network. As most of
the prior arts are evaluated on benchmark datasets that are
distributed similarly to the training set that it is trained on,
the evaluation results are not a good measure of the generalization. We argue that the ability to adapt, acquire new
knowledge and recall previously learned information plays
an important role in reaching true generalization. The importance of learning to learn, i.e. meta-learning, has shone
the spotlight on two major research direction that we will
focus on — few-shot learning and continual learning. In
few-shot learning [12, 37, 45, 14], the goal is to learn novel
concepts with as few samples as possible, i.e. evaluating the
capability of adapting to new tasks. Whereas in continual
learning, the ability to learn an increasing amount of concepts while not forgetting old ones is evaluated.
Following OML [22], we separate the feature extraction
part and the decision making part of the network, defined in
OML as representation learning network (RLN) and prediction learning network (PLN) respectively. The fast and slow
learning in OML is performed on an architecture level, i.e.
RLN is updated in the outer loop (slow weights) and PLN is
updated in the inner loop (fast weights). Such approach has
proven to be helpful in learning sparse representation that
are beneficial for fast adaptation and prevention of catastrophic forgetting. We take one step further by introducing
sparsity on an architectural level, accomplished through the
introduction of Attentive Independent Mechanisms (AIM).
AIM is composed of a set of mechanisms that competitively

9455

