Neural Image Compression via Attentional Multi-scale Back Projection and
Frequency Decomposition

1

Ge Gao1 , Pei You1 , Rong Pan1 , Shunyuan Han1 , Yuanyuan Zhang1 , Yuchao Dai2 , Hojae Lee1
Samsung R&D Institute China Xi’an, China 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
1

{ge1.gao, pei.you, rong.pan, shuny.han, yuan2.zhang, hojae72.lee}@samsung.com
2

daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, neural image compression emerges as
a rapidly developing topic in computer vision, where the
state-of-the-art approaches now exhibit superior compression performance than their conventional counterparts.
Despite the great progress, current methods still have
limitations in preserving fine spatial details for optimal
reconstruction, especially at low compression rates. We
make three contributions in tackling this issue. First, we
develop a novel back projection method with attentional
and multi-scale feature fusion for augmented representation
power. Our back projection method recalibrates the current
estimation by establishing feedback connections between
high-level and low-level attributes in an attentional and discriminative manner. Second, we propose to decompose the
input image and separately process the distinct frequency
components, whose derived latents are recombined using a
novel dual attention module, so that details inside regions of
interest could be explicitly manipulated. Third, we propose
a novel training scheme for reducing the latent rounding
residual. Experimental results show that, when measured
in PSNR, our model reduces BD-rate by 9.88% and 10.32%
over the state-of-the-art method, and 4.12% and 4.32%
over the latest coding standard Versatile Video Coding
(VVC) on the Kodak and CLIC2020 Professional Validation
dataset, respectively. Our approach also produces more
visually pleasant images when optimized for MS-SSIM. The
significant improvement upon existing methods shows the
effectiveness of our method in preserving and remedying
spatial information for enhanced compression quality.

1. Introduction
Lately, the demand for image compression has increased
dramatically to cope with the enormous amount of highresolution images produced by modern devices. Based on
deep neural networks (DNNs), neural image compression
has reinvigorated this domain with its superb capacity to

Ground Truth

VTM 12.0 (0.326bpp, 27.39)

Cheng (0.381bpp, 27.97) Ours [MSE] (0.354bpp, 28.45)

Figure 1. Comparison of kodim05.png reconstructed by different
methods. The image is cropped for convenient visualization.
Notice that the tilted, shadowy artifacts in the yellow tube region
have been largely suppressed by our method.

learn in a data- and metric-driven manner, as opposed to
their conventional, handcrafted counterparts [17].
Neural image compression typically employs autoencoders to model the compression and reconstruction process
as a unified task and optimize the rate-distortion tradeoff jointly. Such methods map the input image into
a more compact latent intermediate via an encoder and
inversely transform the quantized latent back to generate the
reconstructed image on the decoder side. Many researches
concentrate on optimizing the network architecture, e.g.,
GDN [6], residual blocks [34, 23], RNNs [35, 22, 36], to
reduce bit-rates with alleviated quality degradation. Meanwhile, some other works focus on reducing the entropy
of the latent representations to attain fewer encoding bits.
Earlier works [8, 34] in this respect incorporate elementwise
entropy models to encode each element independently.
Later advancements introduce hierarchical hyperprior networks [7] and autoregressive components [20, 25] into
the VAE framework to explicitly estimate the entropy of
the latent representation by utilizing prior information.
Currently, the rate-distortion performance of the state-ofthe-art methods has surpassed that of reigning compression

14677

