Explainable Video Entailment with Grounded Visual Evidence
Junwen Chen and Yu Kong
Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY, USA
{jc1088, yu.kong}@rit.edu

Prediction

Abstract
Video

Video entailment aims at determining if a hypothesis
textual statement is entailed or contradicted by a premise
video. The main challenge of video entailment is that it
requires fine-grained reasoning to understand the complex
and long story-based videos. To this end, we propose to
incorporate visual grounding to the entailment by explicitly linking the entities described in the statement to the
evidence in the video. If the entities are grounded in the
video, we enhance the entailment judgment by focusing on
the frames where the entities occur. Besides, in the entailment dataset, the entailed/contradictory (also named as
real/fake) statements are formed in pairs with subtle discrepancy, which allows an add-on explanation module to
predict which words or phrases make the statement contradictory to the video and regularize the training of the entailment judgment. Experimental results demonstrate that our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Bridging the gap between computer vision and natural
language processing is a rapid growing research area in various tasks including visual captioning [40, 34], VQA [20,
1, 33], and visual-textual retrieval [22, 23]. Liu et al. [25]
introduced a new video entailment problem to infer the semantic entailment between a premise video and a textual
hypothesis. As shown in Fig. 1, video entailment [25] task
aims at determining whether a textual statement is entailed
or contradicted by a video. In Fig. 1, the label for the first
statement with the premise is entailment because the statement can be concluded from the dialog of the first clip in
which “the woman wearing jeans” appears. On the contrary, the second statement is labeled as contradiction, because the premise does not have evidence to conclude the
statement. In this paper, we aim to address the video entailment with a faithful explanation.
The main challenge of video entailment is that it re-

Dialog

Statement

[00:01.709, 00:04.579]
"got pony lessons in
an hour I'm hearing"

[00:12.920, 00:16.430] [00:12.920, 00:16.430
“hi yeah I'm cool hey
“please give me a
you do me a favor”
glass of water”

[00:30.390, 00:32.479
“the season's over no
no no no no Pamela”

Ground to clip 1&4
Focus on clip 1&4
(a) The woman wearing jeans has kids that have pony lessons in hour.
(b) The woman wearing jeans has kids that have school tomorrow.

Entailment
Contradiction

Figure 1. Video entailment aims at judging if a statement is entailed or contradicted by a video and its aligned textual dialog. A
pair of real and fake statements have the similar structure and sutble difference (marked by the red dot line). We incorporate visual
grounding into the entailment judgment. The entity grounding,
e.g., “A woman wearing jeans” guides the entailment judgment
module to focus on the entity-relevant frames and the corresponding sentences in the dialog (marked by blue in the temporal axis)
to make a correct judgment. Best viewed in color.

quires fine-grained reasoning to understand the complex
story-based videos and then make a correct judgment. The
story-based videos are also accompanied by the textual dialog (subtitles) (see Fig. 1). In the existing method for video
entailment [25], video frames are less exploited than dialog, because it lacks of a fine-grained understanding of the
video and the model does not know which frames in the
long video are related to the statement. However, the entities in the textual statement are usually people with their attributes, e.g., “A woman wearing jeans” (see Fig. 1), which
should be implied in the video frames instead of the dialog.
To this end, we propose to enhance the entailment judgment by introducing a visual grounding model that links the
entity described in a statement to the evidence in the video.
This is motivated by the fact that the statement is usually
only related to a small subset of the long and untrimmed
video. Based on this, a visual grounding module for the entities described in the statement is developed to localize the
clips where the entity appears and guide the judgment to focus on the entity’s occurring clips as well as the aligned sentences in the dialog. For example, the statements in Fig. 1
are linked to the first and fourth clips and sentences, consid-

2021

