Language-Guided Global Image Editing via Cross-Modal Cyclic Mechanism
Wentao Jiang 1 Ning Xu 2 Jiayun Wang 1 Chen Gao 1 Jing Shi 3 Zhe Lin 2 Si Liu 1∗
1
Beihang University 2 Adobe Research 3 University of Rochester
{jiangwentao,wangjiayun12,gaochen,liusi}@buaa.edu.cn, {xnu,zlin}@adobe.com, j.shi@rochester.edu

Abstract
Editing an image automatically via a linguistic request can significantly save laborious manual work and is
friendly to photography novice. In this paper, we focus on
the task of language-guided global image editing. Existing
works suffer from imbalanced and insufficient data distribution of real-world datasets and thus fail to understand
language requests well. To handle this issue, we propose
to create a cycle with our image generator by creating a
novel model called Editing Description Network (EDNet)
which predicts an editing embedding given a pair of images. Given the cycle, we propose several free augmentation strategies to help our model understand various editing requests given the imbalanced dataset. In addition, two
other novel ideas are proposed: an Image-Request Attention (IRA) module which allows our method to edit an image
spatial-adaptively when the image requires different editing
degree at different regions, as well as a new evaluation metric for this task which is more semantic and reasonable than
conventional pixel losses (e.g. L1). Extensive experiments
on two benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method over existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Image editing has a wide range of applications in many
scenarios. With the growth of social media such as Instagram and Facebook, more and more users like to edit their
photos before they post them. People would like to use specific photo editing software like Photoshop, but using this
kind of professional software is not easy. It may cost novice
users a lot of time to learn, the process of editing is also
time-consuming. Moreover, as smartphones have become
the main user terminal, a way that can automatically edit
the images using the voice of users (like Siri or Cortana)
will be more user-friendly.
In this paper, we focus on the task of global image editing via linguistic requests: given an input image and a lin∗ Corresponding author

Text-Guided Image Manipulation

Virtual
Dataset

“Remove bottomright large red cube”

Salient
Object
&
Detailed
Caption

“This bird has wings
that are black, and
has a red belly and a
red head”

Language-Guided Global Image Editing
“Increase both
brightness and
contrast a lot”

Real-World
Scenes

Input

Text Information

Target

Figure 1. The example of language-guided global image editing,
compared to existing tasks. Our task work on real-world scenarios
with editing requests.

guistic editing request, the model is required to produce a
target image that matches the request, as shown in the last
row of Figure 1. Global image editing is to retouch the input image by adjusting the brightness, hue, saturation, contrast, tint, etc. Among the vision and language area, textguided image manipulation [11, 16, 5] may seem similar to
our task, but they are actually different. First, current textguided image manipulation methods [11, 16] are designed
for domain-specific datasets, which are either constrained to
images of a single salient object (e.g., bird) or virtual dataset
with simple objects, as shown in the first two rows of Figure
1. While in our task, we edit the images from the real-world
environment that contains various objects and scenes. Second, text-guided image manipulation methods are designed
for template text inputs, which summarize the attributes of
the target image (e.g., “A bird with black eye rings and a
black bill”) instead of describing the editing request. The
linguistic requests on virtual datasets are also generated au-

2115

