Joint Topology-preserving and Feature-refinement Network for Curvilinear
Structure Segmentation

1

Xuhong Guo2
Yajing Xu1
Jun Guo1
Mingfei Cheng1 * Kaili Zhao1∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications.
2
DOCOMO Beijing Communications Laboratories Co., Ltd.
Input

Abstract
Curvilinear structure segmentation (CSS) is under semantic segmentation, whose applications include crack detection, aerial road extraction, and biomedical image segmentation. In general, geometric topology and pixel-wise
features are two critical aspects of CSS. However, most semantic segmentation methods only focus on enhancing feature representations while existing CSS techniques emphasize preserving topology alone. In this paper, we present
a Joint Topology-preserving and Feature-refinement Network (JTFN) that jointly models global topology and refined
features based on an iterative feedback learning strategy.
Specifically, we explore the structure of objects to help preserve corresponding topologies of predicted masks, thus design a reciprocative two-stream module for CSS and boundary detection. In addition, we introduce such topologyaware predictions as feedback guidance that refines attentive features by supplementing and enhancing saliencies. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that jointly
addresses topology preserving and feature refinement for
CSS. We evaluate JTFN on four datasets of diverse applications: Crack500, CrackTree200, Roads, and DRIVE. Results show that JTFN performs best in comparison with alternative methods. Code is available.1

1. Introduction
Curvilinear Structure Segmentation (CSS) [19, 37] is to
segment binary masks of curvilinear objects such as concrete cracks, aerial roadmaps, blood vessel, and neuron
boundary, etc. An accurate CSS in computer vision can help
automatically detect concrete cracks captured by unmanned
aerial vehicle [53], extract road networks from aerial images [4,38], assist doctors to recognize lesions from medical
images [48]. While significant progress has been made in
CSS and semantic segmentation communities, at least two
critical problems remain: topology preserving and feature
refinement. Like human’s labeling process, topology pre* These authors contributed equally.
1 https://github.com/zkl20061823

Topology-preserve.

Feature-refine.

+

=

+

=

+

=

JTFN pred.

GT

Figure 1. Effects of Joint Topology-preserving and Featurerefinement Network (JTFN) on road network extraction, blood
vessels segmentation, and crack detection. JTFN can preserve
global connectivity and render details simultaneously. Red and
blue rectangles mark effect regions of topology-preserving and
feature refinement separately.

serving seeks to preserve overall geometric connectivity;
feature-refinement aims to render details.
Typically, general CSS methods [14, 26, 39] tend to emphasize topology preserving. For instance, [14] explicitly
defines connected components and holes as local topology,
but only optimizes limited pixels for topology, thus leads
to the method is sensitive to complex backgrounds. Another work [26] implicitly assumes features produced by
pre-trained VGG have natural topology, but such strong
assumptions cause limited improvements. Hence, a robust, loose assumption, and global topology-preserving
CSS method is demanding.
In contrast, general semantic segmentation works mostly
focus on feature representations, which integrate additional
contextual or spatial information [7, 8, 15, 42, 44, 59]. For
context-aware methods, dilated convolutions or pyramid
designs are applied to enhance receptive fields [7, 8, 44],
and non-local modules are used to raise self-attentions
[15, 42, 59]. For spatial-aware methods, multi-scale or skipconnected architectures are introduced to aggregate different features to diversify representations [20, 21]. Though
these methods improve representations relatively, refining
features for details is still problematic for CSS. Correspond-

7147

