Exploring Visual Engagement Signals for Representation Learning
Menglin Jia*1,2

Zuxuan Wu*2,3 Austin Reiter2 Claire Cardie1 Serge Belongie1
1
2
3
Cornell University
Facebook AI
Fudan University
Abstract

Visual engagement in social media platforms comprises interactions with photo posts including comments,
shares, and likes. In this paper, we leverage such Visual
Engagement clues as supervisory signals for representation learning. However, learning from engagement signals
is non-trivial as it is not clear how to bridge the gap between low-level visual information and high-level social interactions. We present VisE, a weakly supervised learning
approach, which maps social images to pseudo labels derived by clustered engagement signals. We then study how
models trained in this way benefit subjective downstream
computer vision tasks such as emotion recognition or political bias detection. Through extensive studies, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of VisE across a diverse
set of classification tasks beyond the scope of conventional
recognition 1 .

1. Introduction
People post photos on social media to invite engagement
and seek connections. A photo of a cute dog can resonate
with other dog lovers and trigger reactions such as the “like”
or “love” button or comments including “what an adorable
dog” and “look at those blue eyes!” The widely available interactions with the photos posted on social media, which we
call visual engagement, contain rich semantic descriptions
(“dog”, “blue eyes”) and are far less expensive to obtain
than manual annotations in standard computer vision tasks,
including coarse and fine-grained class labels [11, 80, 95],
bounding boxes [51, 23], and image captions [8].
More importantly, visual engagement, including comments, replies, likes, and shares, provides emotional and
cultural context that goes beyond the image content therein.
For example, the image in Fig. 1 could be described in a
standard captioning task as “a dog sits next to a stuffed animal.” The social media audience of this post may react to
the cuteness of the dog, comment on the torn stuffed animal with whimsical responses, or initiate a conversation.
* Equal contribution.
1 Project page: https://github.com/KMnP/vise

Object Classification:

Dog

Scene:

Indoor

Fine-grained Classification:

Eskie Mix

Ser-Nam Lim2

Objects Detection:

dog

stuffed animal

Image Captioning:
A dog sits next to a stuffed animal.

Visual Engagement:
•
•
•
•

Does he know how cute he looks?
He looks so innocent
Who me?
!!!!❤❤

•
•
•

Haha. They call them canine
teeth for a reason.
Not destroyed, just well loved.
LOL!

Figure 1. Visual engagement vs. other common supervisory signals. Given the same image, visual engagement provide semantically and contextually richer information than conventional recognition and captioning tasks.

The resulting textual descriptions depart from the exactly
what it says on the tin approach of standard image captioning tasks and express private states [65, 82]: opinions, emotions, and speculations, for example. We argue that visual
engagement can also serve as supervisory signals for representation learning and transfer well to subjective downstream computer vision tasks like emotion recognition or
political bias classification.
Motivated by this observation, we propose to learn image representations from semantically and contextually rich
Visual Engagement signals (VisE). We hypothesize that
such learned representations, as a byproduct of mapping
image content to human reactions, are able to infer private
states expressed by images. This is beneficial and could
serve as a nice addition to current computer vision research
which in general focuses on the objectively present factual
information from images (e.g., “this is a dog” vs. “what a
cute dog!”).
Open-world visual engagement contains dense subjectivity clues, but is inherently noisy in nature. How to properly leverage such signals for representation learning is a
challenging, open question. Inspired by recent studies on
feature learning from proxy tasks [19, 3, 84], we cluster
each type of visual engagement and obtain cluster assignment indices for all the responses associated with a training
image. These cluster assignments are used as supervisory

4206

