Adaptive Unfolding Total Variation Network for Low-Light Image Enhancement
Chuanjun Zheng Daming Shi* Wentian Shi
Shenzhen University
{zhengchuanjun2019,shiwentian2018}@email.szu.edu.cn, dshi@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world low-light images suffer from two main degradations, namely, inevitable noise and poor visibility. Since
the noise exhibits different levels, its estimation has been
implemented in recent works when enhancing low-light images from raw Bayer space. When it comes to sRGB color
space, the noise estimation becomes more complicated due
to the effect of the image processing pipeline. Nevertheless,
most existing enhancing algorithms in sRGB space only
focus on the low visibility problem or suppress the noise
under a hypothetical noise level, leading them impractical due to the lack of robustness. To address this issue,
we propose an adaptive unfolding total variation network
(UTVNet), which approximates the noise level from the real
sRGB low-light image by learning the balancing parameter in the model-based denoising method with total variation regularization. Meanwhile, we learn the noise level
map by unrolling the corresponding minimization process
for providing the inferences of smoothness and fidelity constraints. Guided by the noise level map, our UTVNet can
recover finer details and is more capable to suppress noise
in real captured low-light scenes. Extensive experiments on
real-world low-light images clearly demonstrate the superior performance of UTVNet over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The insufficient light provided by low-light scenarios is
the main limitation of capturing high-quality photographs.
Besides enlarging the aperture and prolonging the exposure
time to gather more light when taking images, another flexible solution is to increase the ISO setting of camera to adjust the analog gain or both analog and digital gains as the
compensation for the brightness. However, a higher ISO
setting will decrease the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The
SNR should be carefully managed to control the noise for
providing higher possibilities of post-processing [7]. Unfortunately, such a manipulation is difficult for non-expert
* Corresponding author

(a) Input

(b) LIME [1]

(c) LIME+NBNet [2]

(d) NBNet+LIME

(e) AGLLNet [3]

(f) D&E [4]

(g) MIRNet [5]

(h) UTVNet (Ours)

(i) Ground Truth

Figure 1. Performance in real captured low-light scene. (a) a sRGB
image captured by a NikonD850 camera from ELD dataset [6]. (bd) results of the luminance correction and denoising approaches.
(f) and (g) are outputs of two recent methods without noise estimation. (e) the result of [3] trained on the synthetic low-light dataset
to predict noise maps. (h) the result of proposed UTVNet. All
images were cropped to make their details more visible.

users who lack the appropriate photography skills.
Restoration of real-world low-light images is a challenging process in computer vision, which focuses on recovering underlying clean images from observed noisy ones
and correcting the luminance without amplifying the noise.
Most existing methods [1, 8, 9] focus on enhancing noisefree underexposed images. Such methods may solve the
low visibility problem, but the noise will amplified when
adjusting the exposure as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Meanwhile,
existing denoising approaches [10, 11, 2] may fail to suppress noise for low-light images, since most of them focus
on images taken under normal luminance, the small magnitude between pixels in extremely low-light images hinder
the detection of noise from details as shown in Fig. 1 (c, d).

4439

