Lifelong Infinite Mixture Model Based on Knowledge-Driven Dirichlet Process
Fei Ye and Adrian G. Bors
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
fy689@york.ac.uk, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent research efforts in lifelong learning propose to
grow a mixture of models to adapt to an increasing number of tasks. The proposed methodology shows promising
results in overcoming catastrophic forgetting. However, the
theory behind these successful models is still not well understood. In this paper, we perform the theoretical analysis for lifelong learning models by deriving the risk bounds
based on the discrepancy distance between the probabilistic representation of data generated by the model and that
corresponding to the target dataset. Inspired by the theoretical analysis, we introduce a new lifelong learning approach, namely the Lifelong Infinite Mixture (LIMix) model,
which can automatically expand its network architectures
or choose an appropriate component to adapt its parameters for learning a new task, while preserving its previously learnt information. We propose to incorporate the
knowledge by means of Dirichlet processes by using a gating mechanism which computes the dependence between
the knowledge learnt previously and stored in each component, and a new set of data. Besides, we train a compact
Student model which can accumulate cross-domain representations over time and make quick inferences. The code
is available at https://github.com/dtuzi123/
Lifelong-infinite-mixture-model.

1. Introduction
Lifelong learning (LLL) aims to learn successively a
series of tasks from their corresponding probabilistic representations of specific databases. The objective of the
lifelong learning model is to implement all learnt tasks at
any given time. Modern deep learning approaches have
been successful in a variety of applications including image
translation [24], image synthesis [29] and object detection
[37], but all these models face a major challenge in the performance, when applied on prior tasks, while learning multiple tasks, one after the other. This challenge is caused by
catastrophic forgetting which happens when a model adapts
its parameters in order to learn a new task [31].

Source risk plus Accumulated errors
Target risk

Risks

Accumulated errors

Source risk
Tasks: Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Figure 1. The process of forgetting the information from a certain
dataset after learning two additional tasks. The source distribution
generated by the Generative Replay Mechanims (GRM) is degenerated when learning a new task.

The Generative Replay Mechanism (GRM) [41] is a popular lifelong learning approach showing promising results
overcoming catastrophic forgetting [1, 33, 39, 48, 56]. A
generative replay model Gθ : Z → X , aims to transform a
low dimensional random variable Z into a high dimensional
variable X . Gθ can be an implicit generative model such
as a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [11] or an explicit latent model such as a Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
[16]. Once a task is learnt, Gθ generates data which then
can be combined with data sampled from a given database,
corresponding to a new task, to form a joint dataset used
for training. Some methods [1, 41] reduce the memory
size by only generating a batch of samples for each training step, by using only a copy Gθ′ of the GRM. However,
a major challenge for GRM based methods is that of gradually losing knowledge across tasks since a GRM model
is trained on its own generations repeatedly. Another drawback, when GANs are used as GRMs, is that of facing mode
collapse [44]. Two solutions have been proposed to address
this problem. Rao et al. [34] enable GRMs with a network
expansion mechanism in which the model’s capacity is increased when shifting data distributions. The other solution is to use the expansion mechanism [20] or an ensemble

10695

