Personalized and Invertible Face De-identiﬁcation by Disentangled Identity
Information Manipulation
Jingyi Cao1 , Bo Liu2 , Yunqian Wen1 , Rong Xie1 , and Li Song1
1

The Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Computer Science, University of Technology Sydney
{cjycaojingyi,wenyunqian,xierong,song li}@sjtu.edu.cn, bo.liu@uts.edu.au

Abstract
The popularization of intelligent devices including
smartphones and surveillance cameras results in more serious privacy issues. De-identiﬁcation is regarded as an
effective tool for visual privacy protection with the process
of concealing or replacing identity information. Most of
the existing de-identiﬁcation methods suffer from some limitations since they mainly focus on the protection process
and are usually non-reversible. In this paper, we propose a
personalized and invertible de-identiﬁcation method based
on the deep generative model, where the main idea is introducing a user-speciﬁc password and an adjustable parameter to control the direction and degree of identity variation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
and generalization of our proposed framework for both face
de-identiﬁcation and recovery.

1. Introduction
The widespread use of handheld devices such as smartphones and digital cameras is conducive to image production, and the development of social media promotes wide
dissemination and easy access to images along with the increasingly common applications of computer vision technology and deep learning. The above factors lead to serious
threats to image privacy and security.
Most importantly, face images are generally considered
to contain abundant private information. The earliest techniques obfuscated privacy-sensitive information by pixellevel processing which have been proved vulnerable and
poor effects on utility [23]. Recent GAN-based methods like [10, 16] improve the quality and utility of deidentiﬁcation results remarkably. What’s more, the research on disentangled representations [5, 18] contributes
to transforming the identity information without changing

the other facial attributes, which makes it possible that the
de-identiﬁed results keep visual similarity with the original.
Most de-identiﬁcation methods only focus on the protection phase, which can help to protect identity in surveillance
for normal situations or uploading images on social media.
Considering that when looking for the identity in criminal
investigations or sharing pictures with close friends, it is
hoped to use the original image instead of the de-identiﬁed.
Therefore, how to restore the original image is also a critical
task. Moreover, notice that the tradeoff between privacy and
utility poses a major challenge for all privacy-preserving
methods, and different levels of privacy are required in different scenarios. We believe that an ideal comprehensive
de-identiﬁcation method should: a) avoid deteriorating nonsensitive information like facial expression, behavior and so
on, b) control the degree of privacy protection according to
application, c) be able to restore the original image under
security conditions.
To achieve the above targets, this paper proposes a personalized and invertible face de-identiﬁcation method. The
main framework can be summarized in the following three
stages: (1) extract disentangled identity and attributes and
ensure the attributes unchanged during the de-identiﬁcation
process, (2) calculate the protected or restored identity with
the identity modiﬁcation module based on the password p
and privacy level parameter d, (3) implement image reconstruction. As shown in Fig. 1, compared with existing deidentiﬁcation methods, our approach can retain more similarities with the original. Different from the generative
adversarial network conditioned on passwords proposed by
Gu et al. [8], which needs to retrain the network for different passwords, our encryption process is relatively independent of the deep generative network, so that the password
form can be deﬁned more ﬂexibly, the complexity will be
reduced greatly and the scope of identity changes can be inﬁnitely expanded. Different from k-Same family algorithms
[6, 7, 17] which can provide privacy guarantees and control

3334

