Glimpse-Attend-and-Explore: Self-Attention for Active Visual Exploration
Soroush Seifi*

Abhishek Jha* Tinne Tuytelaars
PSI, ESAT, KU Leuven
Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, 3001 Leuven
firstname.lastname@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Active visual exploration aims to assist an agent with a
limited field of view to understand its environment based
on partial observations made by choosing the best viewing
directions in the scene. Recent methods have tried to address this problem either by using reinforcement learning,
which is difficult to train, or by uncertainty maps, which are
task-specific and can only be implemented for dense prediction tasks. In this paper, we propose the Glimpse-Attendand-Explore model which: (a) employs self-attention to
guide the visual exploration instead of task-specific uncertainty maps; (b) can be used for both dense and sparse
prediction tasks; and (c) uses a contrastive stream to further improve the representations learned. Unlike previous
works, we show the application of our model on multiple tasks like reconstruction, segmentation and classification. Our model provides encouraging results while being less dependent on dataset bias in driving the exploration. We further perform an ablation study to investigate the features and attention learned by our model. Finally, we show that our self-attention module learns to attend different regions of the scene by minimizing the loss on
the downstream task. Code: https://github.com/
soroushseifi/glimpse-attend-explore.

1. Introduction
Most computer vision methods rely on datasets captured
by human photographers [27, 34]. Such data is biased towards the salient information showing up in predictable areas of the image (e.g. image center). Besides, most computer vision methods assume full observability of the input
image [26, 18]. However, in a dynamic environment, an
agent with a limited field of view/resource cannot fully observe its immediate 360°scene. This might cause the agent’s
camera to capture parts of the environment that are divergent to those seen in standard computer vision dataset, thus
degrading agent’s performance on different tasks.
In this paper, we propose an active vision [1] method to

autonomously explore and reason about a scene by sequentially gathering partial observations from it. Our method
can be deployed in scenarios where an agent cannot view
and process the whole scene due to limitations such as the
agent’s small field of view or limited transfer bandwidth
between the camera and the processing unit. We simulate
this by restricting our method to see small crops (called
glimpses) from the images in common computer vision
datasets. Besides, we restrict the total number of glimpses
the agent can see from a single image. At each time step,
the agent has the freedom to change its viewing direction
and take a new glimpse of the scene. Therefore, it is important that the agent selects the areas of the environment
with the highest information gain for a given task. Given a
set of training examples and an initial random glimpse for
each example, our model learns a policy to select the next
glimpses, hallucinates the unseen areas, and solves a task
given the structural cues coming from the visited areas.
While previous methods rely on reinforcement learning
[32, 25], reconstruction loss [35] and uncertainty measures
[36], we employ the heatmaps generated by self-attention
layers to guide the exploration. Contrary to previous works,
we propose a unified two-stream architecture for different
tasks such as image reconstruction, classification, and semantic segmentation and evaluate our method using several
baselines. In addition, we show that the agent can build
a richer representation of the environment by using contrastive learning. In this case, only during training, we use
a pretrained encoder to produce the features for the full environment. Next, taking inspiration from [12], we train one
of our network’s streams to predict the full environment’s
features given only the visited glimpses. Finally, we perform an ablation study on the number of glimpses and our
network architecture. Our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce a new self-supervised attention mechanism for active visual exploration.
• We propose a unified architecture for both sparse and
dense prediction tasks.
• We show that our proposed attention mechanism

* Equal contribution.

16137

