PICCOLO: Point Cloud-Centric Omnidirectional Localization
Junho Kim, Changwoon Choi, Hojun Jang, and Young Min Kim
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Korea
82magnolia@snu.ac.kr, changwoon.choi00@gmail.com, {j12040208, youngmin.kim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present PICCOLO, a simple and efficient algorithm
for omnidirectional localization. Given a colored point
cloud and a 360˝ panorama image of a scene, our objective
is to recover the camera pose at which the panorama image is taken. Our pipeline works in an off-the-shelf manner
with a single image given as a query and does not require
any training of neural networks or collecting ground-truth
poses of images. Instead, we match each point cloud color
to the holistic view of the panorama image with gradientdescent optimization to find the camera pose. Our loss
function, called sampling loss, is point cloud-centric, evaluated at the projected location of every point in the point
cloud. In contrast, conventional photometric loss is imagecentric, comparing colors at each pixel location. With a
simple change in the compared entities, sampling loss effectively overcomes the severe visual distortion of omnidirectional images, and enjoys the global context of the 360˝
view to handle challenging scenarios for visual localization. PICCOLO outperforms existing omnidirectional localization algorithms in both accuracy and stability when
evaluated in various environments.

Figure 1: Overview of our approach. PICCOLO minimizes
a novel, point cloud-centric loss function called sampling
loss. After the initialization phase trims off local minima,
PICCOLO minimizes the sampling loss with gradient descent.

1. Introduction
With the recent advancements in 3D sensing technology,
3D maps of the environment are often available for download [1] or can be easily captured with commodity sensors [9]. The 3D map and the accurate location of the user
within the map provide crucial information for AR/VR applications or other location-based services. Visual localization is a cheap localization method as it only uses an image
input and utilizes the 3D map without additional sensors
such as WIFI, GPS, or gyroscopes. However, visual localization is fragile to changes in illumination or local geometric variations resulting from object displacements [37, 43].
Further, with the limited field of view, perspective cameras
often fail to regress the camera pose when the observed image lacks visual features (e.g., a plain wall) or the scene
exhibits symmetric or repetitive structure [42, 40].

Omnidirectional cameras, equipped with a 360˝ field of
view, provide a holistic view of the surrounding environment. Hence these cameras are immune to small scene
changes and ambiguous local features [47], which gives
them the potential to dramatically improve the performance
of visual localization algorithms. However, the large field of
view comes with a cost: significant visual distortion caused
by the spherical projection equation. This makes it difficult
to directly apply conventional visual localization algorithms
on omnidirectional cameras [21, 12, 45, 15, 7], as many visual localization algorithms [46, 40, 42, 39] do not account
for distortion. Furthermore, learning-based approaches are
bound to the settings they are trained on, and cannot generalize to arbitrary scenes.
In this paper, we introduce PICCOLO, a simple yet ef-

3313

