Recurrent Mask Refinement for Few-Shot Medical Image Segmentation
Hao Tang

Xingwei Liu
Shanlin Sun
Xiangyi Yan
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine, California, 92697

Xiaohui Xie

{htang6, xingweil, shanlins, xiangyy4, xhx}@uci.edu

Abstract
Although having achieved great success in medical image segmentation, deep convolutional neural networks usually require a large dataset with manual annotations for
training and are difficult to generalize to unseen classes.
Few-shot learning has the potential to address these challenges by learning new classes from only a few labeled examples. In this work, we propose a new framework for
few-shot medical image segmentation based on prototypical
networks. Our innovation lies in the design of two key modules: 1) a context relation encoder (CRE) that uses correlation to capture local relation features between foreground
and background regions; and 2) a recurrent mask refinement module that repeatedly uses the CRE and a prototypical network to recapture the change of context relationship
and refine the segmentation mask iteratively. Experiments
on two abdomen CT datasets and an abdomen MRI dataset
show the proposed method obtains substantial improvement
over the state-of-the-art methods by an average of 16.32%,
8.45% and 6.24% in terms of DSC, respectively. Code is
publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation is a fundamental task in
medical image analysis. It is used in many clinical applications, including disease diagnosis, treatment planning
and treatment delivery. Segmentation of anatomical structures or lesions is usually done manually by experienced
doctors, which is often tedious and labor-intensive. With
the recent use of deep convolutional neural networks, automated segmentation tools using computer programs can
achieve near human accuracy on multiple tasks with very
short processing time. However, in order to achieve good
performance, these systems are usually trained in a fully
supervised fashion with large amounts of annotated data.
Acquiring a dataset with abundant manual labels is often
1 https://github.com/uci-cbcl/RP-Net

very expensive and time-consuming as it requires experts
with many years’ clinical experience. Moreover, the differences in image acquisition protocols among different medical equipment and institutes pose great challenges to the
generalization ability of the learning based systems.
Few-shot learning has been proposed as one of the potential solutions to addressing these challenges in the low
data regime [43, 46, 56, 8, 22]. The main few-shot image
segmentation approach forms the problem as meta learning [9, 10, 16] and uses supervised learning to train fewshot learning models. A few-shot learning model is trained
to extract class-specific features from the set of support
images with annotations, and then perform segmentation
on the query images by using distilled knowledge from
the support images. During test time, by extracting features from a set of new support images (unseen classes),
the model is able to segment novel classes. Many fewshot learning methods have been proposed and achieved
great performance on natural image segmentation tasks
[33, 39, 6, 41, 59, 67, 66, 62, 17]. However, applying fewshot learning models for medical image segmentation is still
in early stages [31, 36].
Few-shot segmentation in medical images is different
than that in natural images. Many approaches are based
on prototypical networks [43], and often apply masked average pooling [6, 59, 67] to extract class prototypes from
feature maps within the foreground mask. This step usually assumes the masked region contains sufficient features
to distinguish different classes, especially foreground and
background. However, this may not always be true in medical images. Distinct local appearances and context information are more critical in determining the boundary for
foreground and background. A clear boundary to separate
regions of interest from the background is of critical importance in medical image segmentation. Moreover, the background is usually large and spatially inhomogeneous while
the foreground is small and homogeneous [30], and there
exists the abundance of tissues that share very similar appearance to each other, all of which add ambiguity to define
the foreground and background regions. To address this is-

3918

