Universal Cross-Domain Retrieval: Generalizing Across Classes and Domains
Soumava Paul1 *, Titir Dutta2 *, Soma Biswas2
1
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 2 Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
soumava2016@gmail.com, {titird,somabiswas}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
In this work, for the first time, we address the problem of universal cross-domain retrieval, where the test data
can belong to classes or domains which are unseen during
training. Due to dynamically increasing number of categories and practical constraint of training on every possible domain, which requires large amounts of data, generalizing to both unseen classes and domains is important.
Towards that goal, we propose SnMpNet (Semantic Neighbourhood and Mixture Prediction Network), which incorporates two novel losses to account for the unseen classes
and domains encountered during testing. Specifically, we
introduce a novel Semantic Neighborhood loss to bridge the
knowledge gap between seen and unseen classes and ensure that the latent space embedding of the unseen classes
is semantically meaningful with respect to its neighboring
classes. We also introduce a mix-up based supervision at
image-level as well as semantic-level of the data for training
with the Mixture Prediction loss, which helps in efficient retrieval when the query belongs to an unseen domain. These
losses are incorporated on the SE-ResNet50 backbone to
obtain SnMpNet. Extensive experiments on two large-scale
datasets, Sketchy Extended and DomainNet, and thorough
comparisons with state-of-the-art justify the effectiveness of
the proposed model.

1. Introduction
Due to the availability of large amount of data in
different domains of multi-media, cross-domain retrieval
has gained significant attention. It addresses the challenging problem of retrieving relevant data from a domain (say, image), when the query belongs to a different domain (e.g. sketch, painting etc.). As motivation for our work, we focus on the specific application
of sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) [14][34], which
has wide range of applications in e-commerce, forensic
data matching, etc. Considering the dynamic real-world,
* Equal contribution.

where the search dataset is always being augmented with
new categories of data, recently, the focus has shifted to
zero-shot SBIR (ZS-SBIR) or generalized ZS-SBIR (GZSSBIR) [26][32][4][15][5][7], in which, the query and search
set samples belong to classes not seen during training.
The generic architecture for ZS-SBIR (or other crossdomain retrieval applications) consists of two parallel
branches, each consisting of a feature extractor and a classifier, to learn the latent-space representations of the data
from individual domains (here, sketches and images). The
domain gap in this latent space is bridged by the semantic
descriptions [19][22] of the seen classes. During testing,
the query sketch and search set images are projected to this
space and compared directly for retrieval. But if the query
belongs to a different domain, say painting, then this network needs to be re-trained, with painting and images as
the two domains. This not only requires the training to be
performed for every domain-pair with sufficient amount of
data, but also, the query domain needs to be known a-priori.
Here, we attempt a more realistic and significantly
more challenging cross-domain retrieval scenario, where
the query data can belong not only to unseen classes, but
also to unseen domains - which we term as universal crossdomain retrieval (UCDR). It is a combination of two wellstudied, but separate problems in literature, namely, ZSSBIR, which accounts for test data from unseen classes
and domain generalization (DG) [28][10], which accounts
for test data from unseen domains in the classification. To
this end, we propose SnMpNet (Semantic Neighbourhood
and Mixture Prediction Network), which is a single-branch
network consisting of a feature extractor and classifier, for
learning a domain-independent embedding of input data,
that also generalizes to unseen category test data. For generalizing to unseen classes, we propose Semantic Neighbourhood Loss, to represent the unseen classes in terms of their
relative positions with the seen classes. In addition, we
exploit the mix-up technique [33] to populate our training
set with samples created through both inter-class and interdomain mixing to prepare for unseen domains of query samples during testing. To better generalize across domains, we
propose a novel Mixture Prediction Loss. The contributions

12056

