Unifying Nonlocal Blocks for Neural Networks
Lei Zhu1,3,4 Qi She∗,2 Duo Li7 Yanye Lu1,3 Xuejing Kang5 Jie Hu6 Changhu Wang2
zhulei@stu.pku.edu.cn, sheqi1991@gmail.com
1

Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University Health Science Center, Peking University
2
3
Bytedance AI Lab
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University
4
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
5
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
6
SKLCS & University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
7
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
The nonlocal-based blocks are designed for capturing
long-range spatial-temporal dependencies in computer vision tasks. Although having shown excellent performance,
they still lack the mechanism to encode the rich, structured information among elements in an image or video.
In this paper, to theoretically analyze the property of these
nonlocal-based blocks, we provide a new perspective to interpret them, where we view them as a set of graph filters
generated on a fully-connected graph. Specifically, when
choosing the Chebyshev graph filter, a unified formulation
can be derived for explaining and analyzing the existing
nonlocal-based blocks (e.g., nonlocal block, nonlocal stage,
double attention block). Furthermore, by concerning the
property of spectral, we propose an efficient and robust spectral nonlocal block, which can be more robust and flexible
to catch long-range dependencies when inserted into deep
neural networks than the existing nonlocal blocks. Experimental results demonstrate the clear-cut improvements and
practical applicabilities of our method on image classification, action recognition, semantic segmentation, and person re-identification tasks. Code are available at https:
//github.com/zh460045050/SNL_ICCV2021.

1. Introduction
Capturing the long-range spatial-temporal dependencies
between spatial pixels or temporal frames plays a crucial
role in computer vision tasks. Convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) are inherently limited by their convolution operators,
which are devoted to concern local relations (e.g., a 7 × 7
region), and they are inefficient in modeling long-range dependencies. Deep CNNs model these dependencies, which
commonly refers to enlarge receptive fields, via stacking mul-

tiple convolution operators. However, two unfavorable issues
are raised in practice. Firstly, repeating convolutional operations comes with higher computational and memory costs
as well as the risk of over-fitting [10]. Secondly, stacking
more layers cannot always increase the effective receptive
fields [23], which indicates the convolutional layers may still
lack the mechanism to model these dependencies efficiently.
A common practice to tackle these challenges is to aggregate the feature in a non-local way with fewer learning
weights. Thus the aggregation can act on not only the k-hop
neighbors but also the long-range positions [1, 30, 4, 36, 35].
Typically, inspired by the self-attention strategy, the Nonlocal (NL) block [30] firstly creates a dense affinity matrix
that contains the relation among every pairwise position, and
then uses this matrix as an attention map to aggregate the
features by weighted mean. Nonetheless, because the dense
attention map concerns humongous amounts of feature pairs
(e.g. the relations between background and background), the
aggregation feature map contains too much noise.
To solve this problem, recent state-of-the-art methods focus on creating a more reasonable attention map for the NL
block [2, 28, 34, 17, 28]. Chen et al. [2] propose the Double
Attention (A2 ) block that firstly gathers the features in the
entire space and then distributes them back to each location.
Yue et al. [34] propose the Compact Generalized Nonlocal
(CGNL) block to catch cross-channel clues, which also increases the noise of the attention map inevitably. Huang et
al. [17] propose a lightweight nonlocal block called CrissCross Attention block (CC), which decomposes the positionwise attention of NL into conterminously column-wise and
row-wise attention. To enhance the stability of the NL block,
Tao et al. [28] propose the Nonlocal Stage (NS) module that
can follow the diffusion nature by using the Laplacian of the
affinity matrix as the attention map.
In general, though the above works can generate a better

12292

