(Just) A Spoonful of Refinements Helps the Registration Error Go Down
Sérgio Agostinho1 Aljoša Ošep2 Alessio Del Bue3 Laura Leal-Taixé2
1
Instituto Superior Técnico, Portugal 2 Technical University of Munich, Germany
3
Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy
1

sergio.agostinho@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
3

2

{aljosa.osep, leal.taixe}@tum.de

alessio.delbue@iit.it

Abstract
We tackle data-driven 3D point cloud registration. Given
point correspondences, the standard Kabsch algorithm provides an optimal rotation estimate. This allows to train
registration models in an end-to-end manner by differentiating the SVD operation. However, given the initial rotation estimate supplied by Kabsch, we show we can improve
point correspondence learning during model training by extending the original optimization problem. In particular,
we linearize the governing constraints of the rotation matrix and solve the resulting linear system of equations. We
then iteratively produce new solutions by updating the initial estimate. Our experiments show that, by plugging our
differentiable layer to existing learning-based registration
methods, we improve the correspondence matching quality. This yields up to a 7% decrease in rotation error for
correspondence-based data-driven registration methods.

1. Introduction
Finding a geometrical transformation that aligns two
point sets is at the core of several down-stream tasks
such as range data fusion [20], ego- or object pose tracking [15, 17, 46], 3D shape completion [16] and camera
re-localization [1]. This challenging problem has a longstanding research history [14, 36, 2, 35, 26], as the correspondence between point clouds is usually not known, or it
may not even explicitly exist. Other challenges include the
fact that 3D sensors often observe object or scene surfaces
only partially, that the density of scans varies with respect
to the distance from the sensor, and that point clouds are
usually corrupted by severe noise and outliers.
Existing optimization-based methods typically solve
point cloud registration by finding a transformation that
minimizes the distance between two point sets, according
to some criterion, e.g., Chamfer distance [12]. Their performance critically depends on the quality of the 3D point
correspondences between the point sets [21, 33, 32, 22, 45,

Matching
network

Matches

Kabsch

Our method

R|t

Gradients

Figure 1. We propose a novel, differentiable rotation estimator.
Given a trainable, correspondence-based registration method and
initial rotation estimate (by, e.g., Kabsch algorithm), our iterative
rotation estimator performs a series of pose refinements to produce gradients that guide the matching network towards improving
point correspondences.

43, 9]. To cope with the limitations of prior heuristic approaches, recent methods [45, 43, 9, 8, 7, 15, 18] leverage
the representational power of deep neural networks to learn
an estimate of the transformation that aligns point clouds in
an end-to-end manner.
To ensure that the estimated matrix is a valid rigid
transformation matrix, state-of-the-art learning-based methods [38, 44, 5] employ the Kabsch algorithm [14] and thus
need to differentiate through the SVD operation [28]. Kabsch produces globally optimal estimates for a given set of
correspondences. However, if the point matches are not
perfect, we can design other pose oriented geometric incentives to guide the correspondence network to learn better
matches.
To this end, we formulate a local approximation of the
correspondence distance minimization problem and show
that this helps the network to produce better correspondences. Our method takes the estimate produced by Kabsch
as input and it performs a number of recurrent iterative steps
that over time push the matching network to improve correspondence matching quality (see Figure 1). As rotation matrices are governed by non-linear constraints, we propose a
linearization of these constraints around the computed initial estimate and solve the optimization problem using the
method of Lagrange multipliers. The result is a linear system of equations, where the new rotation estimate can be ex-

6108

