I2UV-HandNet: Image-to-UV Prediction Network for Accurate and High-fidelity
3D Hand Mesh Modeling
Ping Chen1

Yujin Chen2,3 Dong Yang1 Fangyin Wu1 Qin Li1 Qingpei Xia1
1
IQIYI Inc. 2 Wuhan University 3 Technical University of Munich

{redcping, terencecyj}@gmail.com

Yong Tan1

{yangdong01, wufangying, liqin01, xiaqingpei, tanyong}@qiyi.com

Figure 1: We propose a novel Image-to-UV prediction network (I2UV-HandNet) that estimates accurate and high-fidelity hand mesh from
a single RGB image. Here, we present example results on the HO-3D dataset (left) and the FreiHAND dataset (right). From left to right:
input, estimated coarse mesh, estimated high-fidelity mesh (in two viewpoints).

Abstract
Reconstructing a high-precision and high-fidelity 3D human hand from a color image plays a central role in replicating a realistic virtual hand in human-computer interaction and virtual reality applications. The results of current
methods are lacking in accuracy and fidelity due to various
hand poses and severe occlusions. In this study, we propose
an I2UV-HandNet model for accurate hand pose and shape
estimation as well as 3D hand super-resolution reconstruction. Specifically, we present the first UV-based 3D hand
shape representation. To recover a 3D hand mesh from an
RGB image, we design an AffineNet to predict a UV position map from the input in an image-to-image translation
fashion. To obtain a higher fidelity shape, we exploit an
additional SRNet to transform the low-resolution UV map
outputted by AffineNet into a high-resolution one. For the
first time, we demonstrate the characterization capability
of the UV-based hand shape representation. Our experi-

ments show that the proposed method achieves state-of-theart performance on several challenging benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Observing and understanding the human hand has been
an important task in computer vision and human-computer
interaction, with applications from gesture recognition to
augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR). Recently,
we have witnessed significant progress in 3D hand pose
and shape estimation [5, 7, 8, 10, 14, 36, 52, 49], driven
by efforts in large-scale data collection and annotation
[46, 52, 53], coupled with the development of 3D representations and learning methods [6, 33]. This has led to remarkable advances in 3D hand understanding from a singleview color image.
Due to the lack of hand surface data, most of the earlier works study 3D pose estimation by estimating 3D joint
location from a single image [3, 7, 20, 37, 52]. However,
the sparse joints representation cannot meet the needs of

12929

