Neural-GIF: Neural Generalized Implicit Functions
for Animating People in Clothing
Garvita Tiwari 1,2
1

Nikolaos Sarafianos 3
2

University of Tübingen, Germany,
3

Tony Tung 3

Gerard Pons-Moll1,2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany

Facebook Reality Labs, Sausalito, USA

gtiwari@mpi-inf.mpg.de, {nsarafianos, tony.tung}@fb.com, gerard.pons-moll@uni-tuebingen.de

Input pose

Output

Input pose

Output

Input pose

Output

Input pose

Output

Figure 1. We present Neural Generalized Implicit Functions (Neural-GIF), to animate people in clothing as a function
of body pose. Neural-GIF learns directly from scans, models complex clothing and produces pose-dependent details for
realistic animation. We show for four different characters the query input pose on the left (illustrated with a skeleton) and
our output animation on the right.

Abstract
We present Neural Generalized Implicit Functions
(Neural-GIF), to animate people in clothing as a function
of the body pose. Given a sequence of scans of a subject
in various poses, we learn to animate the character for new
poses. Existing methods have relied on template-based representations of the human body (or clothing). However such
models usually have fixed and limited resolutions, require
difficult data pre-processing steps and cannot be used with
complex clothing. We draw inspiration from template-based
methods, which factorize motion into articulation and nonrigid deformation, but generalize this concept for implicit
shape learning to obtain a more flexible model. We learn to
map every point in the space to a canonical space, where
a learned deformation field is applied to model non-rigid
effects, before evaluating the signed distance field. Our formulation allows the learning of complex and non-rigid deformations of clothing and soft tissue, without computing
a template registration as it is common with current approaches. Neural-GIF can be trained on raw 3D scans and
reconstructs detailed complex surface geometry and deformations. Moreover, the model can generalize to new poses.

We evaluate our method on a variety of characters from different public datasets in diverse clothing styles and show
significant improvements over baseline methods, quantitatively and qualitatively. We also extend our model to multiple shape setting. To stimulate further research, we will
make the model, code and data publicly available at [1].

1. Introduction
Human avatars enable numerous applications related to
augmented and virtual reality, such as telepresence for enhanced communication and entertainment, and have been
instrumental to reconstruct and perceive people in images [2, 3, 11, 22, 62, 61]. Human shape deforms according
to articulation, soft-tissue and non-rigid clothing dynamics,
which make realistic animations extremely challenging.
State-of-the-art body models [29, 43, 61] typically learn
to deform a fixed topology template, usually using linear
blend skinning to model articulation, and blendshapes to
model non-rigid effects [29], even including soft-tissue [45]
and clothing [31, 42, 52]. The use of a fixed template limits the type of clothing and dynamics that can be modeled.
For example, it would be difficult to model the subjects in

11708

