Topologically Consistent Multi-View Face Inference Using Volumetric Sampling
Tianye Li1,2 , Shichen Liu1,2 , Timo Bolkart3 , Jiayi Liu1,2 , Hao Li1,2 , and Yajie Zhao1
1

USC Institute for Creative Technologies, 2 USC, 3 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

(a) Input images (9 of 15 views)

(b) Mesh in correspondence

(c) Skin details and appearances

(d) Animation with fully rigged face model

Figure 1: Given (a) multi-view images, our face modeling framework ToFu uses volumetric sampling to predict (b) accurate
base meshes in consistent topology as well as (c) high-resolution details and appearances. Our efficient pipeline enables (d)
rapid creation of production-quality avatars for animation.

Abstract
High-fidelity face digitization solutions often combine
multi-view stereo (MVS) techniques for 3D reconstruction
and a non-rigid registration step to establish dense correspondence across identities and expressions. A common
problem is the need for manual clean-up after the MVS step,
as 3D scans are typically affected by noise and outliers
and contain hairy surface regions that need to be cleaned
up by artists. Furthermore, mesh registration tends to fail
for extreme facial expressions. Most learning-based methods use an underlying 3D morphable model (3DMM) to
ensure robustness, but this limits the output accuracy for
extreme facial expressions. In addition, the global bottleneck of regression architectures cannot produce meshes
that tightly fit the ground truth surfaces. We propose ToFu,
Topological consistent Face from multi-view, a geometry
inference framework that can produce topologically consistent meshes across facial identities and expressions using a volumetric representation instead of an explicit underlying 3DMM. Our novel progressive mesh generation
network embeds the topological structure of the face in a
feature volume, sampled from geometry-aware local features. A coarse-to-fine architecture facilitates dense and
accurate facial mesh predictions in a consistent mesh topology. ToFu further captures displacement maps for pore-

level geometric details and facilitates high-quality rendering in the form of albedo and specular reflectance maps.
These high-quality assets are readily usable by production
studios for avatar creation, animation and physically-based
skin rendering. We demonstrate state-of-the-art geometric
and correspondence accuracy , while only taking 0.385 seconds to compute a mesh with 10K vertices, which is three
orders of magnitude faster than traditional techniques. The
code and the model are available for research purposes at
https://tianyeli.github.io/tofu.

1. Introduction
Creating high-fidelity digital humans is not only highly
sought after in the film and gaming industry, but is also gaining interest in consumer applications, ranging from telepresence in AR/VR to virtual fashion models and virtual assistants. While fully automated single-view avatar digitization solutions exist [28, 29, 42, 56, 63], professional studios
still opt for high resolution multi-view images as input, to
ensure the highest possible fidelity and surface coverage in
a controlled setting [8, 23, 25, 40, 41, 46, 50] instead of unconstrained input data. Typically, high-resolution geometric
details (< 1mm error) are desired along with high resolution physically-based material properties (at least 4K). Furthermore, to build a fully rigged face model for animation, a

3824

