Channel Augmented Joint Learning for Visible-Infrared Recognition
Mang Ye1 , Weijian Ruan2 , Bo Du1 ,* Mike Zheng Shou3
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
https://github.com/mangye16/Cross-Modal-Re-ID-baseline

Abstract

IR Cam
Raw Img

This paper introduces a powerful channel augmented
joint learning strategy for the visible-infrared recognition
problem. For data augmentation, most existing methods directly adopt the standard operations designed for singlemodality visible images, and thus do not fully consider the
imagery properties in visible to infrared matching. Our basic idea is to homogenously generate color-irrelevant images by randomly exchanging the color channels. It can
be seamlessly integrated into existing augmentation operations without modifying the network, consistently improving the robustness against color variations. Incorporated
with a random erasing strategy, it further greatly enriches
the diversity by simulating random occlusions. For crossmodality metric learning, we design an enhanced channelmixed learning strategy to simultaneously handle the intraand cross-modality variations with squared difference for
stronger discriminability. Besides, a channel-augmented
joint learning strategy is further developed to explicitly optimize the outputs of augmented images. Extensive experiments with insightful analysis on two visible-infrared recognition tasks show that the proposed strategies consistently
improve the accuracy. Without auxiliary information, it improves the state-of-the-art Rank-1/mAP by 14.59%/13.00%
on the large-scale SYSU-MM01 dataset.

1. Introduction
Identity recognition (person re-identification [22], face
recognition [11, 19]) systems have achieved significant success recently. However, most research efforts have been
paid on the single-modality visible domain. In many nighttime surveillance and low-light environments, near(far)infrared cameras are applied to capture target appearance
* Corresponding Author: Bo Du

IR Img

RGB Img

RGB Cam

Large Gap

Small Gap
Recover

R
G
B
Channel Component

R
G
B
Channel Augmentation

Figure 1. Motivation of channel augmentation. Directly recovering the three-channel RGB image from a single-channel infrared
images is ill-posed. Instead, we propose to directly optimize the
relation between the infrared images and the R, G and B channels
of the visible images.

[4, 37]. This raises important cross-modality visibleinfrared recognition problems, e.g., visible-infrared person
re-identification (VI-ReID) [41] and NIR-VIS face recognition [53]. The cross-modality matching is usually formulated by learning modality shared or invariant features.
Matching the infrared imagery to visible-spectrum images is a significant challenge due to the large modality gap
and unknown environmental factors [32, 54] (e.g., different viewpoints, occlusions, background clutter, etc.), leading to large intra- and cross-modality variations. To eliminate the color discrepancy, cross-modality image generation
with Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) is a popular
approach [36, 56] bridging the gap at the image level. However, the image generation process usually needs additional
computational cost and suffers from unavoidable noise [21].
Another approach is to directly employ grayscale images
to perform the cross-modality matching [9, 42], where the
color information is assumed to be irrelevant. While this
approach does eliminate the color discrepancy, it also loses
discriminative information in color channels.
This paper presents a channel exchangeable augmenta-

13567

