Transparent Object Tracking Benchmark
Heng Fan1

Halady Akhilesha Miththanthaya2∗ Harshit2∗ Siranjiv Ramana Rajan2∗
Xiaoqiong Liu2 Zhilin Zou2 Yuewei Lin3 Haibin Ling2†
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, USA
3
Computational Science Initiative, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, USA
heng.fan@unt.edu

hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Visual tracking has achieved considerable progress in recent years. However, current research in the field mainly focuses on tracking of opaque objects, while little attention is
paid to transparent object tracking. In this paper, we make
the first attempt in exploring this problem by proposing a
Transparent Object Tracking Benchmark (TOTB). Specifically, TOTB consists of 225 videos (86K frames) from 15 diverse transparent object categories. Each sequence is manually labeled with axis-aligned bounding boxes. To the best
of our knowledge, TOTB is the first benchmark dedicated to
transparent object tracking. In order to understand how existing trackers perform and to provide comparison for future
research on TOTB, we extensively evaluate 25 state-of-theart tracking algorithms. The evaluation results exhibit that
more efforts are needed to improve transparent object tracking. Besides, we observe some nontrivial findings from the
evaluation that are discrepant with some common beliefs in
opaque object tracking. For example, we find that deeper
features are not always good for improvements. Moreover,
to encourage future research, we introduce a novel tracker,
named TransATOM, which leverages transparency features
for tracking and surpasses all 25 evaluated approaches by a
large margin. By releasing TOTB, we expect to facilitate future research and application of transparent object tracking
in both the academia and industry. The TOTB and evaluation results as well as TransATOM are available at https:
//hengfan2010.github.io/projects/TOTB/.

1. Introduction
Object tracking is one of the most fundamental problems
in computer vision and serves as an important component in
numerous applications [37, 50, 60, 36] including robotics,
∗ The three authors make equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

062ÿ456789ÿ ÿ86ÿ1ÿ6

012ÿ456789ÿ ÿ686ÿ1ÿ6
Figure 1. Opaque object tracking (a) and transparent object tracking (b). Compared with opaque object tracking in which target
object appearance is more distinguishable from background and
consistent over time, tracking of transparent target is more challenging as transparent object appearance is heavily dependent on
background. All figures in this paper are best viewed in color and
by zooming in.

human-machine interaction, video analysis and understanding, etc. In recent decades, the tracking community has witnessed remarkable progress. Numerous tracking algorithms
have been proposed and significantly pushed the state-ofthe-arts. Nevertheless, existing research in the field mainly
focuses on opaque object tracking, while very little attention
is paid to tracking of transparent objects.
Transparent objects (e.g., bottle, cup, bulb, jar and many
others made by glass and plastics) are common to see in the
real world. Many of them are closely related to human daily
life, and tracking of them are crucial for robotic vision and
human-machine interaction. For example, a robot may need
to know the trajectory of a transparent object in human hand
for better action understanding.
Compared with tracking of opaque objects, transparent
object tracking is more challenging. Because of the par-

10734

