Local Temperature Scaling for Probability Calibration
Zhipeng Ding Xu Han Peirong Liu Marc Niethammer
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA
{zp-ding, xhs400, peirong, mn}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
For semantic segmentation, label probabilities are often
uncalibrated as they are typically only the by-product of a
segmentation task. Intersection over Union (IoU) and Dice
score are often used as criteria for segmentation success,
while metrics related to label probabilities are not often explored. However, probability calibration approaches have
been studied, which match probability outputs with experimentally observed errors. These approaches mainly focus on classification tasks, but not on semantic segmentation. Thus, we propose a learning-based calibration method
that focuses on multi-label semantic segmentation. Specifically, we adopt a convolutional neural network to predict
local temperature values for probability calibration. One
advantage of our approach is that it does not change prediction accuracy, hence allowing for calibration as a postprocessing step. Experiments on the COCO, CamVid, and
LPBA40 datasets demonstrate improved calibration performance for a range of different metrics. We also demonstrate
the good performance of our method for multi-atlas brain
segmentation from magnetic resonance images.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the accuracy of semantic segmentation has
improved dramatically [9, 43]. However, ideally semantic segmentation networks should not only be accurate, but
should also indicate when they are likely incorrect. For
example, an autonomous driving system might use deep
convolutional neural networks to analyze a real-time scene
from a camera [5], the associated semantic segmentation of
street scenes should provide accurate detections of pedestrians and other vehicles, and the system should recognize
when such predictions are unreliable. Another example is
the segmentation of brain tumors with a CNN [22]. If the
segmentation network can not confidently segment critical
regions of the brain, then a medical expert should decide or
be alerted to such doubtful regions. Thus, it is important for
semantic segmentation networks to generate both accurate

label predictions and accurate confidence measures.
However, due to overfitting, CNNs for semantic segmentation tend to be overconfident about predicted labels [17, 20, 29, 41]. Approaches for joint prediction and
calibration exist [36, 44, 48, 52]. However, they require
changing the learning task and typically strive for calibration, but do not guarantee it. An alternative approach is
to calibrate the resulting probabilities of a model via postprocessing so that they better reflect the true probabilities
of being correct. This is the kind of approach we consider
here as it easily applies to pre-trained networks and can even
benfit joint prediction/calibration approaches. Probability
calibration, first studied for classification [58], generally addresses this problem via a hold-out validation dataset.
Existing calibration approaches still have several limitations: (1) Most of the probability calibration approaches
are designed for classification, thus are not guaranteed to
work well for semantic segmentation (where it is also more
challenging to annotate on a pixel/voxel level); (2) While
there is limited work discussing probability calibration for
semantic segmentation, this work either only applies to specific types of models (e.g., Bayesian neural networks [29])
or only implicitly improves calibration performance (e.g.,
via model ensembling [47] or multi-task learning [31]); (3)
Most methods are designed to work for binary classifications and approach multi-class problems by a decomposition into k one-vs-rest binary calibrations (where k denotes
the number of classes). However, such a decomposition
does not guarantee overall calibration (only for the individual subproblems before normalization) and the classification accuracy of the trained model may change after calibration as the probability order of labels may change.
Our goal is to develop a post-processing calibration
method for multi-label semantic segmentation, which retains label probability order and, therefore, a model’s segmentation accuracy. Our work is inspired by temperature
scaling (TS) [20] for classification probability calibration.
As TS determines only one global scaling constant, it cannot capture spatial miscalibration changes in images. We
therefore (1) extend TS to multi-label semantic segmentation and (2) make it adaptive to local image changes.

6889

