FFT-OT: A Fast Algorithm for Optimal Transportation
Na Lei* 1 and Xianfeng Gu2
1

Dalian University of Technology
2
Stony Brook University

Abstract
An optimal transportation map finds the most economical way to transport one probability measure to the other. It
has been applied in a broad range of applications in vision,
deep learning and medical images. By Brenier theory, computing the optimal transport map is equivalent to solving
a Monge-Ampère equation. Due to the highly non-linear
nature, the computation of optimal transportation maps in
large scale is very challenging.
This work proposes a simple but powerful method, the
FFT-OT algorithm, to tackle this difficulty based on three
key ideas. First, solving Monge-Ampère equation is converted to a fixed point problem; Second, the obliqueness
property of optimal transportation maps are reformulated
as Neumann boundary conditions on rectangular domains;
Third, FFT is applied in each iteration to solve a Poisson
equation in order to improve the efficiency.
Experiments on surfaces captured from 3D scanning and
reconstructed from medical imaging are conducted, and
compared with other existing methods. Our experimental
results show that the proposed FFT-OT algorithm is simple,
general and scalable with high efficiency and accuracy.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of
optimal transportation and its broad applications in vision
[32, 31, 41, 38], deep learning [1, 16, 28] and medical imaging [18, 17, 39, 29]. An optimal transportation map (OT
map) finds the most economical way to transport one probability measure to the other, the total transportation cost is
treated as the Wasserstein distance between the two random
distributions. Therefore, OT maps have been used for measuring the differences among probability distributions, and
for registering images or 3D shapes.
Motivation Due to the highly non-linear nature, improving the computational efficiency of OT maps becomes one
of the central challenges. Researchers have developed
* Corresponding author

many methods to tackle this difficult problem with different emphasises. For examples, the Sinkhorn algorithm
[35, 7, 25, 12] greatly improves the optimization speed of
the Kantorovich potential by adding an entropy regularizer
terms, but sacrificing the accuracy; the convex geometric
variational algorithms [39, 24, 27] find the precise solution, but with complex dynamic geometric data structure
and adaptive arithmetic precision. The fluid dynamic algorithms [2, 19, 18] find the optimal flow in space-time, therefore increases the dimension and reduces the computational
efficiency.Therefore, existing methods can hardly find the
accurate solutions for large scale OT problems efficiently.
In order to handle the challenge, this work proposes a novel
algorithm: FFT-OT, which computes large scale optimal
transportation maps with high efficiency and accuracy using
the fundamental and powerful tool: Fast Fourier Transformation.
Key Ideas The proposed algorithm is based on three simple
ideas. The goal is to find the OT map between two probability measures T : (Ω, f dx) → (Ω∗ , gdy), based on Brenier’s
theorem 3.1, this is reduced to finding the Brenier potential
u : Ω → R by solving the Monge-Ampere equation (1).
1. Fixed point By improving the formulation in [10, 4], an
operator in the Sobolev space is constructed P : H 2 (Ω) →
H 2 (Ω), such that the solution u∗ of the Monge-Ampere
equation is the fixed point of P, P[u∗ ] = u∗ . The fixed
point can be achieved by iterations, u(n+1) ← P[u(n) ],
when n → ∞, u(n) converges to u∗ , u(n) → u∗ . The
convergence of the iteration process and the convexity of
the solution has theoretic guarantees.
2. Obliqueness Boundary Condition The boundary condition Du(Ω) = Ω∗ is difficult to directly formulated. Our
formulation is based on the obliqueness boundary condition
in Eqn. (5). Suppose the domain Ω is a planar rectangle, the
Brenier potential is rewritten as
  u(x,y) = (x^2+y^2)/2 + \varphi , 
where −φ is the well-known Kantorovich potential. The
obliqueness condition is equivalent to the Neumann bound-

6280

