Interaction Compass: Multi-Label Zero-Shot Learning of
Human-Object Interactions via Spatial Relations
Dat Huynh
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

huynh.dat@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of multi-label zero-shot recognition in which labels are in the form of human-object interactions (combinations of actions on objects), each image may
contain multiple interactions and some interactions do not
have training images. We propose a novel compositional
learning framework that decouples interaction labels into
separate action and object scores that incorporate the spatial compatibility between the two components. We combine
these scores to efficiently recognize seen and unseen interactions. However, learning action-object spatial relations,
in principle, requires bounding-box annotations, which are
costly to gather. Moreover, it is not clear how to generalize
spatial relations to unseen interactions. We address these
challenges by developing a cross-attention mechanism that
localizes objects from action locations and vice versa by
predicting displacements between them, referred to as relational directions. During training, we estimate the relational directions as ones maximizing the scores of groundtruth interactions that guide predictions toward compatible
action-object regions. By extensive experiments, we show
the effectiveness of our framework, where we improve the
state of the art by 2.6% mAP score and 5.8% recall score
on HICO and Visual Genome datasets, respectively.1

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning is the important yet challenging task
of recognizing all labels in an image with applications in
human-computer interaction, robotics, assistive technologies and surveillance systems. Due to the high cost of collecting training samples for all possible labels, multi-label
zero-shot learning aims to recognize unseen labels that do
not have training images [1, 2, 3]. However, the majority of
existing works have focused on the case where each label is
a simple concept (e.g., an object) and have tired to capture
inter-label dependencies (e.g., co-occurrences of objects)
1 Code is available at https://github.com/hbdat/iccv21_
relational_direction.

Figure 1: Conventional multi-label zero-shot recognition (top) assumes
independence between action and object components in interaction labels,
hence, cannot distinguish between objects in background (red) and in interactions (yellow). Our method (bottom) leverages relational directions to
guide predictions toward compatible objects and actions.

for more effective recognition. On the other hand, richer
representation and description of images require more complex labels. Human-object interactions are one such important form of labels, where each label describes an action performed on an object (e.g., ‘holding cup’ or ‘removing wheel’) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. However, existing multi-label
learning works ignore intra-label dependency, which is the
spatial relation between the action and the object within an
interaction label. This leads to a lack of ability to distinguish between objects in backgrounds and in interactions,
see Figure 1 and poses challenges to generalization to unseen interactions. The work in [9] made the first attempt in
generalizing multi-label learning to human-object interaction (HOI) recognition in the zero-shot setting, where some
interactions do not have training images. Our paper makes
advances on this task by capturing spatial relations among
actions and objects (intra-label dependencies) to enhance
seen and unseen interaction recognition without requiring
bounding-box of locations of actions and objects in images.
Prior Works and Challenges. Most multi-label learning
works take advantage of label correlations to regularize predictions [10, 11, 12, 13]. To further enhance the performance, [14, 15, 16] use attention mechanisms to extract
discriminative visual features of labels. While [17, 18, 19]
predict attention regions recurrently, [20, 21, 22, 7] propose

8472

