Visual Graph Memory with Unsupervised Representation for Visual Navigation
Obin Kwon

Nuri Kim†

Yunho Choi†

Hwiyeon Yoo†

Jeongho Park†

Songhwai Oh

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, ASRI, Seoul National University *
{firstname.lastname}@rllab.snu.ac.kr,
songhwai@snu.ac.kr
Abstract
We present a novel graph-structured memory for visual
navigation, called visual graph memory (VGM), which consists of unsupervised image representations obtained from
navigation history. The proposed VGM is constructed incrementally based on the similarities among the unsupervised representations of observed images, and these representations are learned from an unlabeled image dataset.
We also propose a navigation framework that can utilize
the proposed VGM to tackle visual navigation problems. By
incorporating a graph convolutional network and the attention mechanism, the proposed agent refers to the VGM
to navigate the environment while simultaneously building
the VGM. Using the VGM, the agent can embed its navigation history and other useful task-related information. We
validate our approach on the visual navigation tasks using the Habitat simulator with the Gibson dataset, which
provides a photo-realistic simulation environment. The extensive experimental results show that the proposed navigation agent with VGM surpasses the state-of-the-art approaches on image-goal navigation tasks. Project Page:
https://sites.google.com/view/iccv2021vgm

1. Introduction
Visual navigation has been one of the fundamental building blocks in developing intelligent autonomous agents. To
effectively navigate through a large-scale environment, an
agent is required to build an internal representation of the
environment from raw sensory inputs and its own actions.
Using this internal representation, the agent can store useful
information such as its navigation history and successfully
perform tasks with additional guidance.
Numerous studies in psychology and cognitive science
have shown that animals build a landmark-based topological representation about the environment during navigation
[14, 16, 18, 31, 33]. Inspired by this observation, several
navigation methods based on a topological map have been
proposed [2, 3, 5, 15, 25, 29]. These methods use a graph,
in which a vertex represents a landmark in the environment
* This work was supported by Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea
government (MSIT) (No. 2019-0-01190, [SW Star Lab] Robot Learning:
Efficient, Safe, and Socially-Acceptable Machine Learning). † These authors contributed equally to this work.

and an edge represents the relationship between two vertices, such as reachability and proximity.
Recent works in computer vision and deep learning show
remarkable improvements in visual navigation tasks using
topological representation [4, 8, 9, 23, 24, 27]. The existing
methods autonomously build a topological map about the
environment using a pretrained classifier network, which
can determine whether two image observations are close
or not. However, there are limitations to currently available
methods. (1) To train the classifier network, elaborately designed annotation rules based on accurate geometric information are required for preparing training datasets. (2) Their
navigation performance depends on the quality of geometric
information (e.g., odometry) for calculating distances between nodes or providing local point-goals to the navigation policy. (3) The majority of methods [4, 9, 23, 24, 27]
assumes that the environment is previously observed before. These methods use a pre-built graph and the size of
the graph is fixed during the navigation, demanding a preexploration time to build the entire topological map before
an actual navigation task can begin.
In order to address the aforementioned limitations,
we propose the visual graph memory (VGM), a graphstructured memory for visual navigation. VGM is constructed using an RGBD image encoder, which is trained
in an unsupervised manner. This encoder can be trained using only an unlabeled image dataset, and this can release the
burden of annotating the training dataset. We also present a
navigation framework which is designed to utilize the VGM
to tackle visual navigation tasks. The proposed navigation
framework consists of two components: a memory update
module and a navigation module, as shown in Figure 1a.
The memory update module selectively stores image representations from the navigation history and constructs a
VGM using their spatio-temporal relationships. The navigation module uses the VGM to select an ideal action for
a given navigation task. Specifically, this module encodes
the VGM using a graph convolutional network and extracts
the attention-guided context information from the encoded
VGM using the current and target images.
The proposed navigation framework does not require
robot pose information unlike previous methods, thus the
navigation performance is independent of the environmental errors. Furthermore, the proposed navigation framework
incrementally builds the VGM during navigation. Hence,
the proposed method is able to conduct a given navigation

15890

