FastNeRF: High-Fidelity Neural Rendering at 200FPS
Stephan J. Garbin*
Marek Kowalski*
Matthew Johnson
Jamie Shotton
Julien Valentin
Microsoft

NeRF at 0.06FPS

NeRF at 31FPS

FastNeRF at 200FPS

Figure 1. FastNeRF renders high-resolution photorealistic novel views of objects at hundreds of frames per second. Comparable existing
methods, such as NeRF, are orders of magnitude slower and can only render very low resolution images at interactive rates.

Abstract
Recent work on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) showed
how neural networks can be used to encode complex 3D
environments that can be rendered photorealistically from
novel viewpoints. Rendering these images is very computationally demanding and recent improvements are still a
long way from enabling interactive rates, even on high-end
hardware. Motivated by scenarios on mobile and mixed reality devices, we propose FastNeRF, the first NeRF-based
system capable of rendering high fidelity photorealistic images at 200Hz on a high-end consumer GPU. The core of
our method is a graphics-inspired factorization that allows
for (i) compactly caching a deep radiance map at each position in space, (ii) efficiently querying that map using ray
directions to estimate the pixel values in the rendered image. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method
is 3000 times faster than the original NeRF algorithm and
at least an order of magnitude faster than existing work on
accelerating NeRF, while maintaining visual quality and extensibility.

1. Introduction
Rendering scenes in real-time at photorealistic quality
has long been a goal of computer graphics. Traditional approaches such as rasterization and ray-tracing often require
* Denotes equal contribution

Project website: https://microsoft.github.io/FastNeRF

significant manual effort in designing or pre-processing the
scene in order to achieve both quality and speed. Recently,
neural rendering [10, 27, 17, 25, 19] has offered a disruptive alternative: involve a neural network in the rendering
pipeline to output either images directly [24, 18, 27] or
to model implicit functions that represent a scene appropriately [5, 23, 29, 25, 40]. Beyond rendering, some of
these approaches implicitly reconstruct a scene from static
or moving cameras [25, 36, 1], thereby greatly simplifying
the traditional reconstruction pipelines used in computer vision.
One of the most prominent recent advances in neural rendering is Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [25] which, given
a handful of images of a static scene, learns an implicit volumetric representation of the scene that can be rendered from
novel viewpoints. The rendered images are of high quality
and correctly retain thin structures, view-dependent effects,
and partially-transparent surfaces. NeRF has inspired significant follow-up work that has addressed some of its limitations, notably extensions to dynamic scenes [31, 7, 46],
relighting [2, 3, 37], and incorporation of uncertainty [22].
One common challenge to all of the NeRF-based approaches is their high computational requirements for rendering images. The core of this challenge resides in NeRF’s
volumetric scene representation. More than 100 neural
network calls are required to render a single image pixel,
which translates into several seconds being required to render low-resolution images on high-end GPUs. Recent explorations [35, 15, 28, 16] conducted with the aim of improving NeRF’s computational requirements reduced the

14346

