HiFT: Hierarchical Feature Transformer for Aerial Tracking
Ziang Cao† , Changhong Fu†,∗, Junjie Ye† , Bowen Li† , and Yiming Li‡
†
Tongji University ‡ New York University
caoang233@gmail.com, changhongfu@tongji.edu.cn, yimingli@nyu.edu

Abstract
Most existing Siamese-based tracking methods execute
the classiﬁcation and regression of the target object based
on the similarity maps. However, they either employ a single map from the last convolutional layer which degrades
the localization accuracy in complex scenarios or separately use multiple maps for decision making, introducing intractable computations for aerial mobile platforms.
Thus, in this work, we propose an efﬁcient and effective
hierarchical feature transformer (HiFT) for aerial tracking. Hierarchical similarity maps generated by multi-level
convolutional layers are fed into the feature transformer
to achieve the interactive fusion of spatial (shallow layers)
and semantics cues (deep layers). Consequently, not only
the global contextual information can be raised, facilitating the target search, but also our end-to-end architecture
with the transformer can efﬁciently learn the interdependencies among multi-level features, thereby discovering a
tracking-tailored feature space with strong discriminability. Comprehensive evaluations on four aerial benchmarks
have proven the effectiveness of HiFT. Real-world tests on
the aerial platform have strongly validated its practicability
with a real-time speed. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/vision4robotics/HiFT.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking1 , aiming to estimate the location
of object frame by frame given the initial state, has drawn
considerable attention due to its prosperous applications especially for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), e.g., aerial
cinematography [5], visual localization [48], and collision
warning [19]. Despite the impressive progress, efﬁcient and
effective aerial tracking remains a challenging task due to
limited computational resources and various difﬁculties like
fast motion, low-resolution, frequent occlusion, etc.
In the visual tracking community, deep learning (DL)based trackers [44, 35, 9, 2, 31, 53, 18, 17, 6] stand out on
∗ Corresponding Author
1 This work targets single object tracking (SOT).

#0247

#0262

#0291

#0015

#0167

#0182

#0270
HiFT (ours)

#0321
SiamBAN

#0338
SiamCAR

SiamRPN++_Res

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of the proposed HiFT with stateof-the-arts [23, 8, 31] on three challenging sequences (BMX4,
RaceCar1 from DTB70 [34], and Car16 from UAV20L [39]). Owing to the effective tracking-tailored feature space produced by
the hierarchical feature transformer, our HiFT tracker can achieve
robust performance under various challenges with a satisfactory
tracking speed while other trackers lose effectiveness.

account of using the convolutional neural network (CNN)
with robust representation capability. However, lightweight
CNNs like AlexNet [30] can hardly extract robust features
which are vital for tracking performance in complex aerial
scenarios. Using a larger kernel size or a deeper backbone [31] can alleviate the aforementioned shortcoming yet
the efﬁciency and practicability will be sacriﬁced. In literature, the dilated convolution [49] proposed to expand the
receptive ﬁeld and avoid the loss of resolution caused by
the pooling layer. Unfortunately, it still suffers from unstable performance while handling small objects.
Recently, the transformer has demonstrated huge potential in many domains with an encoder-decoder structure [1].
Inspired by the superior performance of the transformer in
modeling global relationships, we try to exploit its architecture in aerial tracking to effectively fuse multi-level2 features to achieve promising performance. Meanwhile, the
loss of efﬁciency caused by the computations of multiple
layers and the deﬁciency of the transformer in handling
2 We use the hierarchical feature to denote the feature maps from multiple convolutional layers.

15457

