Unsupervised 3D Pose Estimation for Hierarchical Dance Video Recognition*
Xiaodan Hu, Narendra Ahuja
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{xiaodan8,n-ahuja}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Dance experts often view dance as a hierarchy of information, spanning low-level (raw images, image sequences),
mid-levels (human poses and bodypart movements), and
high-level (dance genre). We propose a Hierarchical Dance
Video Recognition framework (HDVR). HDVR estimates 2D
pose sequences, tracks dancers, and then simultaneously estimates corresponding 3D poses and 3D-to-2D imaging parameters, without requiring ground truth for 3D poses. Unlike most methods that work on a single person, our tracking
works on multiple dancers, under occlusions. From the estimated 3D pose sequence, HDVR extracts body part movements, and therefrom dance genre. The resulting hierarchical dance representation is explainable to experts. To overcome noise and interframe correspondence ambiguities, we
enforce spatial and temporal motion smoothness and photometric continuity over time. We use an LSTM network
to extract 3D movement subsequences from which we recognize dance genre. For experiments, we have identified
154 movement types, of 16 body parts, and assembled a
new University of Illinois Dance (UID) Dataset, containing
1143 video clips of 9 genres covering 30 hours, annotated
with movement and genre labels. Our experimental results
demonstrate that our algorithms outperform the state-ofthe-art 3D pose estimation methods, which also enhances
our dance recognition performance.

1. Introduction
Dance represents a special genre of human activity. Our
goal in this paper is development of algorithms to understand dance videos. We combine estimation of body movements with their feasibility as a part of dance. This enables
interpretation of dance videos using not only constraints
posed by the data but also those by the domain knowledge.
A variety of proposed methods have also focused on
* The support of the Office of Naval Research under grant N00014-201-2444 and USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture under grant
2020-67021-32799/1024178 are gratefully acknowledged.

dance videos [1–6]. Most of these rely on kinect sensors to
obtain depth information [1, 2]. [3] classifies Indian dances
by extracting patches centered at body’s joint locations and
using an LSTM network for classification. [4] proposes to
perform Laban Movement Analysis (in terms of dance domain constructs of Body, Effort, Shape and Space) to then
describe human motion from a pose sequence. [5] compares
the effects of using three different representations - raw images, optical flow and multi-person pose data - on their proposed dance dataset proving that visual information is not
sufficient to classify motion-heavy categories. There are
several approaches to action recognition that first estimate
poses [7–9]. [7] creates a coaching system for personalized
athletic training based on pose correctness. [8] improves
action recognition performance by improving pose estimation accuracy using additional spatial and temporal constraints. However, [7, 8] both estimate only the 2D poses,
leading to difficulties ambiguity when the movements are
along the viewing direction . [9] estimates both 2D and 3D
Poses as well as image features to predict actions from all
three. [7–9] limit their representation for action recognition to pose sequences without including any higher level
semantics that may define action. Moreover, these methods also require pose annotations in training videos. [6]
embeds RGB and optical-flow values into a single two-inone stream network for more efficient dance genre classification. In addition to the features such as pose and optical
flow used in these works, in this paper we use dance domain
representations to tune feature analysis to dance instead of
being generic.
When people dance, they follow a carefully choreographed sequence of 3D movements, where each movement is hierarchically composed of simpler movements,
ending in basic movements. Each basic movement is composed of a sequence of poses representing a specific dance
pattern. For brevity, in what follows, we will refer to basic
movements by simply movements, We identify movements
of 16 main body parts e ∈ E illustrated in Figure 3. following Labanotation [10], a well-known notation system used
to record and archive human motion. Then in Table 1 we
11015

