Boosting the Generalization Capability in Cross-Domain Few-shot Learning via
Noise-enhanced Supervised Autoencoder
Hanwen Liang∗1 Qiong Zhang∗†2 Peng Dai1 Juwei Lu1
hanwen.liang@huawei.com, qiong.zhang@stat.ubc.ca, {peng.dai, juwei.lu}@huawei.com
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Canada. 2 Department of Statistics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

1. Introduction
After years of development, deep learning methods have
achieved remarkable success on visual classiﬁcation tasks
[17, 37, 21, 30]. The outstanding performance, however,
heavily relies on large-scale labeled datasets [5]. Meanwhile, although some large-scale public datasets, e.g. ImageNet [9], have made it possible to achieve better than human performance on common objects recognition, practical
applications of visual classiﬁcation systems usually target
at categories whose samples are very difﬁcult to collect, e.g.
∗ Equal contribution with alphabetical order. † Work done as an intern
in Noah’s Ark Lab.

feature
extractor

(a)

feature
extractor

(b)

(1) training on source domain
feature
extractor

CUB

State of the art (SOTA) few-shot learning (FSL) methods
suffer signiﬁcant performance drop in the presence of domain differences between source and target datasets. The
strong discrimination ability on the source dataset does not
necessarily translate to high classiﬁcation accuracy on the
target dataset. In this work, we address this cross-domain
few-shot learning (CDFSL) problem by boosting the generalization capability of the model. Speciﬁcally, we teach
the model to capture broader variations of the feature distributions with a novel noise-enhanced supervised autoencoder (NSAE). NSAE trains the model by jointly reconstructing inputs and predicting the labels of inputs as well
as their reconstructed pairs. Theoretical analysis based
on intra-class correlation (ICC) shows that the feature embeddings learned from NSAE have stronger discrimination
and generalization abilities in the target domain. We also
take advantage of NSAE structure and propose a two-step
ﬁne-tuning procedure that achieves better adaption and improves classiﬁcation performance in the target domain. Extensive experiments and ablation studies are conducted to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Experimental results show that our proposed method consistently outperforms SOTA methods under various conditions.

mini-ImageNet

Abstract

feature
extractor

?

(c)

(d)

(2) testing on target domain
Figure 1: Motivation illustration. Visualization of feature
embeddings by a less-generalized feature extractor fa and a
well-generalized feature extractor fb cross source and target
domains.
medical images. The scarcity of data limits the generalization of current vision systems. Therefore, it is essential to
learn to generalize to novel classes with a limited number of
labeled samples available in each class. Cross-domain fewshot learning (CDFSL) is proposed to recognize instances
of novel categories in the target domain with few labeled
samples. Different from general few-shot learning(FSL)
where large-scale source dataset and few-shot novel dataset
are from the same domain, target dataset and source dataset
under CDFSL setting come from different domains, i.e. the
marginal distributions of features of images in two domains
are quite different [49].
Much work has been done to solve FSL problem and obtained promising results [41, 14, 35, 36, 11, 33, 43]. However, [6, 16] show that the state-of-the-art (SOTA) metalearning based FSL methods fail to generalize well and perform poorly under CDFSL setting. It is therefore of great

9424

