Linguistically Routing Capsule Network for
Out-of-distribution Visual Question Answering
Qingxing Cao1 , Wentao Wan2 , Keze Wang2 , Xiaodan Liang1 , Liang Lin2 *
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Sun Yat-Sen University

1

caoqx8@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wentao.wan@qq.com,
kezewang@gmail.com, xdliang328@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Generalization on out-of-distribution (OOD) test data is
an essential but underexplored topic in visual question answering. Current state-of-the-art VQA models often exploit
the biased correlation between data and labels, which results in a large performance drop when the test and training data have different distributions. Inspired by the fact
that humans can recognize novel concepts by composing existed concepts and capsule network’s ability of representing
part-whole hierarchies, we propose to use capsules to represent parts and introduce “Linguistically Routing” to merge
parts with human-prior hierarchies. Specifically, we first
fuse visual features with a single question word as atomic
parts. Then we introduce the “Linguistically Routing” to
reweight the capsule connections between two layers such
that: 1) the lower layer capsules can transfer their outputs to the most compatible higher capsules, and 2) two
capsules can be merged if their corresponding words are
merged in the question parse tree. The routing process maximizes the above unary and binary potentials across multiple layers and finally carves a tree structure inside the capsule network. We evaluate our proposed routing method on
the CLEVR compositional generation test, the VQA-CP2
dataset and the VQAv2 dataset. The experimental results
show that our proposed method can improve current VQA
models on OOD split without losing performance on the indomain test data.

1. Introduction
The task of visual question answering (VQA) is to correctly answer a question about an image. It is regarded as
a core task towards the complete AI [5] as it requires a vast
* Corresponding author is Liang Lin. Qingxing Cao and Xiaodan Liang
are with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Shenzhen Campus
of Sun Yat-sen University, China. Wentao Wan, Keze Wang and Liang
Lin is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, China.

range of knowledge across multiple domains. However, the
complexity of this task also makes it impossible to annotate
enough training data that can cover all background knowledge and reasoning routes. Thus, a VQA model must capable of generalizing on out-of-distribution (OOD) test data
to handle the unconstrained VQA tasks for practical application.
Current state-of-the-art VQA models [47, 40, 41] focus
on increasing models’ capacity, but tend to catch the superficial correlation between questions and answers [17, 24].
As such correlation only holds on training distribution, their
performance drops on test data that have a different distribution. Other works [42, 49, 21, 26, 23] have explored structured models to represent atomic elements(e.g. object size,
color, or relationships) and then integrate elements to infer
the final results. These methods have better interpretability and generalization ability but perform worse than stateof-the-art neural networks on general and unconstrained indomain test data.
Humans can recognize novel concepts by incorporating
learned concepts [30]. This compositional generalization
ability allows people to solve a plethora of problems using
a limited set of basic skills and is one of the major differences between human intelligence and the current deep neural networks. Meanwhile, the capsule network [38, 20, 19]
has the potential to connect the end-to-end neural network
with part-based models [14] that represent a sample with
part-whole hierarchies. Each capsule can be used to represent a certain part and the routing process can be used to
model the hierarchical structure. Although the capsule network demonstrates interesting grouping properties in some
toy experiments, it still shows unsatisfactory results on the
large-scale image datasets since the diverse visual compositions cannot be captured by learning grouping weights in
a black-box manner without proper guidance.
Thus, we propose to inject the human-developed structure into the capsule network to improve neural networks’
compositional generalization ability while maintaining their
performance on in-domain settings, as shown in Figure 1.

1614

