PR-Net: Preference Reasoning for Personalized Video Highlight Detection
Runnan Chen * 1,2 , Penghao Zhou2 , Wenzhe Wang3 , Nenglun Chen1 , Pai Peng2 ,
Xing Sun†2 , Wenping Wang†1
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent
3
Zhejiang University

Abstract

1. Introduction
The short video has become an indispensable medium
for people to acquire knowledge and share experiences in
their daily lives. However, an unedited video cost minutes
or hours for a person to collect meaningful moments by going through the whole video. How to automatically identify
the most interesting moments for specific users has recently
* Work done during internship at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding author

Interest 3

Holistic
preference

Interest 1
user

?

Queries

Personalized video highlight detection aims to shorten
a long video to interesting moments according to a user’s
preference, which has recently raised the community’s attention. Current methods regard the user’s history as holistic information to predict the user’s preference but negating the inherent diversity of the user’s interests, resulting
in vague preference representation. In this paper, we propose a simple yet efficient preference reasoning framework
(PR-Net) to explicitly take the diverse interests into account
for frame-level highlight prediction. Specifically, distinct
user-specific preferences for each input query frame are
produced, presented as the similarity weighted sum of history highlights to the corresponding query frame. Next,
distinct comprehensive preferences are formed by the userspecific preferences and a learnable generic preference for
more overall highlight measurement. Lastly, the degree of
highlight and non-highlight for each query frame is calculated as semantic similarity to its comprehensive and nonhighlight preferences, respectively. Besides, to alleviate
the ambiguity due to the incomplete annotation, a new bidirectional contrastive loss is proposed to ensure a compact
and differentiable metric space. In this way, our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods with a relative improvement of 12% in mean accuracy precision.

Interest 2

travel

swimming

pets

Figure 1. Considering the diversity of the user’s interests is critical
for guiding personalized video highlight detection. For example,
if a user is interested in travel, swimming and pets, those query
frames that are semantically similar to one of the user’s interests
can be marked as the highlight frames. On the other hand, predicting a holistic user’s preference from history will lead to vague
preference representation and unsatisfied performance.

drawn attention from the research community.
Unlike generic highlight detection methods [41, 13, 40],
we focus on personalized video highlight detection, where
the user’s previously created historical highlight video segments are used as guidance to detect the interesting moments. To the best of our knowledge, only two methods
are proposed to solve this problem. Molino and Gygli [7]
directly concatenate the history feature into the input video
feature to perform segment level prediction by using a ranking model. Rochan et al. [28] introduce a temporal-adaptive
instance normalization layer that encodes history for framelevel highlight predictions. Although promising results they
achieved, there are still some limitations. Firstly, They re-

7980

