Evolving Search Space for Neural Architecture Search
Yuanzheng Ci1 , Chen Lin2 , Ming Sun3 , Boyu Chen1 , Hongwen Zhang4 , Wanli Ouyang1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 University of Oxford, 3 SenseTime Research, 4 CASIA
{yuanzheng.ci, boyu.chen, wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au, chen.lin@eng.ox.ac.uk,
sunming1@sensetime.com, hongwen.zhang@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Automation of neural architecture design has been a coveted alternative to human experts. Various search methods have been proposed aiming to find the optimal architecture in the search space. One would expect the search results to improve when the search space grows larger since
it would potentially contain more performant candidates.
Surprisingly, we observe that enlarging search space is
unbeneficial or even detrimental to existing NAS methods
such as DARTS, ProxylessNAS, and SPOS. This counterintuitive phenomenon suggests that enabling existing methods
to large search space regimes is non-trivial. However, this
problem is less discussed in the literature.
We present a Neural Search-space Evolution (NSE)
scheme, the first neural architecture search scheme designed especially for large space neural architecture search
problems. The necessity of a well-designed search space
with constrained size is a tacit consent in existing methods,
and our NSE aims at minimizing such necessity. Specifically, the NSE starts with a search space subset, then
evolves the search space by repeating two steps: 1) search
an optimized space from the search space subset, 2) refill this subset from a large pool of operations that are
not traversed. We further extend the flexibility of obtainable architectures by introducing a learnable multi-branch
setting. With the proposed method, we achieve 77.3%
top-1 retrain accuracy on ImageNet with 333M FLOPs,
which yielded a state-of-the-art performance among previous auto-generated architectures that do not involve
knowledge distillation or weight pruning. When the latency constraint is adopted, our result also performs better than the previous best-performing mobile models with
a 77.9% Top-1 retrain accuracy. Code is available at
https://github.com/orashi/NSE NAS.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are prevailing in myriad fields of
real-world applications. The emergence of Neural Archi-

Handcraft
Search Space

Search Space
Pool

Search

×

Start

(a) Traditional NAS

Initial Search
Space
Start

Result
Network
End

Search Space
Pool

Optimized
Space

Search
Optimized
Space

Suppl.
Space

Search

Optimized
Space

Suppl.
Space

Search

Search Space Evolving

(b) Search Space Evolving NAS

Figure 1. Comparison of search schemes. (a) Traditional pipeline.
(b) Our proposed search space evolving pipeline.

tecture Search (NAS) has brought up a possibility to automate the customization of deep neural network architectures for specific applications. Researchers have investigated Reinforcement Learning (RL) and Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) based methods [58, 29, 30, 55] to achieve the
automation of architecture design. Weight sharing based
methods [21, 7, 2, 9, 22, 56, 19, 8, 33] that can substantially
reduce the computational cost have been proposed and became one of the off-the-shelf approaches of NAS research.
These methods successfully yielded promising results that
have surpassed human-designed architectures [41].
In addition to the search method, another key component of NAS is the search space. When compared with
early NAS works [59, 29], the quality of the search space
has been improved along with the development of search
algorithms [27]. It has been observed that the improvement of search space design imposed a positive effect on
the performance of many existing works [27, 45]. In particular, the research community has devoted multiple efforts to
search space design, from selecting well-suited operations
based on the prior knowledge [39, 14] to utilizing channellevel fine-grained model search [40, 35, 14, 49, 6, 1] over

6659

