Virtual Multi-Modality Self-Supervised Foreground Matting for
Human-Object Interaction

1

Bo Xu1 , Han Huang1 , Cheng Lu2 , Ziwen Li1,3 and Yandong Guo1,*
OPPO Research Institute, 2 Xmotors, 3 University of California, San Diego

GT

yandong.guo@live.com

Abstract
Most existing human matting algorithms tried to separate pure human-only foreground from the background. In
this paper, we propose a Virtual Multi-modality Foreground
Matting (VMFM) method to learn human-object interactive
foreground (human and objects interacted with him or her)
from a raw RGB image. The VMFM method requires no
additional inputs, e.g. trimap or known background. We
reformulate foreground matting as a self-supervised multimodality problem: factor each input image into estimated
depth map, segmentation mask, and interaction heatmap using three auto-encoders. In order to fully utilize the characteristics of each modality, we first train a dual encoder-todecoder network to estimate the same alpha matte. Then
we introduce a self-supervised method: Complementary
Learning(CL) to predict deviation probability map and exchange reliable gradients across modalities without label.
We conducted extensive experiments to analyze the effectiveness of each modality and the significance of different
components in complementary learning. We demonstrate
that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Matting is known as a chroma keying process to separate
the foreground from a single image or video stream and then
composite it with a new background. It has long been applied in photography and special-effect film-making [33].
Due to the rapid development of deep neural network in
computer vision, automatic matting becomes increasingly
matured [7, 20, 23, 29, 33, 35]. However, most existing
deep learning matting methods extract pure human foreground under controlled settings.
We revisit the matting problem with the following three
beliefs. First, we argue that foreground matting algorithm
should be able to handle situations when humans are interacting with objects. Currently, most of human matting
algorithms [6, 7, 20, 22, 23, 29, 35] only focus on the body
region while ignoring the object interacting with the per-

Image

BGM

VMFM (Ours)

Figure 1: Given challenging human-interactive images, one
of the recent state-of-the-art foreground matting approach
Background Matting (BGM) [29], fails to produce accurate
alpha mattes. However our proposed multi-modality model
VMFM is able to separate accurate human-object interactive foreground mattes, outperforming SOTA works.
son of interest, as illustrated in Figure 1. Second, the ideal
matting model should be trained on a reliable and representative dataset, which requires the minimum amount of
supervision and labeling effort. That is because the definition of good human-object interactive matting is very subjective and such labeling is typically expensive and difficult, if not impossible. Third, we believe that this humanobject interactive foreground matting should be done under
unconstrained conditions. Until now, most accurate matting techniques still rely on “blue-screen” or “green-screen”
to remove background in a recording for traveling mattes.
Some other methods require trimap (trimap is a draft marking foreground, background, and unknown areas) as an even
strong prior [15, 23, 33, 35]. Learning without predefined
background [29] or prior knowledge is critical.
To address the above issues, we propose the solution
with following two components accordingly. First, we reformulate this problem as a multi-modality task to better
capture both human of interest and the interacted objects.
We believe feature extracted in the RGB space is not enough
to produce high quality mattes. In our case, we introduce
depth estimation as the extra virtual modality on top of
RGB image and estimated segmentation mask. We argue

438

