Talk-to-Edit: Fine-Grained Facial Editing via Dialog
Yuming Jiang1∗ Ziqi Huang1∗ Xingang Pan2 Chen Change Loy1 Ziwei Liu1B
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{yuming002, hu0007qi, ccloy, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
Hi, how does she look
like with a bigger smile?

px117@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Yes, and the bangs can be much
longer. Let’s cover the eyebrows.

editing and checking whether the
bangs have covered eyebrows

Is the smile just
right now?

Maybe you would like
to try editing the
glasses instead?

Figure 1: An example of Talk-to-Edit. The user provides a facial image and an editing request. Our system then edits
the image accordingly, and provides meaningful language feedback such as clarification or alternative editing suggestions.
During editing, the system is able to control the extent of attribute change on a fine-grained scale, and iteratively checks
whether the current editing step fulfills the user’s request.

Abstract
Facial editing is an important task in vision and graphics with numerous applications. However, existing works
are incapable to deliver a continuous and fine-grained editing mode (e.g., editing a slightly smiling face to a big
laughing one) with natural interactions with users. In this
work, we propose Talk-to-Edit, an interactive facial editing
framework that performs fine-grained attribute manipulation through dialog between the user and the system. Our
key insight is to model a continual “semantic field” in the
GAN latent space. 1) Unlike previous works that regard the
editing as traversing straight lines in the latent space, here
the fine-grained editing is formulated as finding a curving
trajectory that respects fine-grained attribute landscape on
the semantic field. 2) The curvature at each step is locationspecific and determined by the input image as well as the
users’ language requests. 3) To engage the users in a meaningful dialog, our system generates language feedback by
considering both the user request and the current state of
the semantic field.
We also contribute CelebA-Dialog, a visual-language facial editing dataset to facilitate large-scale study. Specifically, each image has manually annotated fine-grained attribute annotations as well as template-based textual descriptions in natural language. Extensive quantitative and
∗ Equal contribution.

qualitative experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
framework in terms of 1) the smoothness of fine-grained
editing, 2) the identity/attribute preservation, and 3) the
visual photorealism and dialog fluency. Notably, user
study validates that our overall system is consistently favored by around 80% of the participants. Our project
page is https://www.mmlab-ntu.com/project/
talkedit/.

1. Introduction
The goal of facial editing is to enable users to manipulate
facial images in their desired ways. Thanks to the advance
of deep generative models like GANs [10, 29, 3, 15, 16, 18],
facial editing has witnessed rapid growth in recent years,
especially in image fidelity. While there have been several attempts to improve facial editing quality, they often
lack interactions with users or require users to follow some
fixed control patterns. For instance, image-to-image translation models [53, 7, 12, 21, 26] only translate facial images
between several discrete and fixed states, and users cannot
give any subjective controls to the system. Other face editing methods offer users some controls, such as a semantic map indicating the image layout [22], a reference image
demonstrating the target style [14, 25, 24], and a sentence
describing a desired effect [5, 51, 30, 54, 46]. However,
users have to follow the fixed patterns, which are too demanding and inflexible for most users. Besides, the only

13799

