Synthesis of Compositional Animations from Textual Descriptions
Anindita Ghosh * 1,3 , Noshaba Cheema1,2,3 , Cennet Oguz1,3 , Christian Theobalt2,3 , and Philipp
Slusallek1,3
1

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
2
Max-Planck Institute for Informatics
3
Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
“How can we animate 3D-characters from a movie
script or move robots by simply telling them what we would
like them to do?” “How unstructured and complex can
we make a sentence and still generate plausible movements
from it?” These are questions that need to be answered
in the long-run, as the field is still in its infancy. Inspired
by these problems, we present a new technique for generating compositional actions, which handles complex input
sentences. Our output is a 3D pose sequence depicting the
actions in the input sentence. We propose a hierarchical
two-stream sequential model to explore a finer joint-level
mapping between natural language sentences and 3D pose
sequences corresponding to the given motion. We learn two
manifold representations of the motion, one each for the upper body and the lower body movements. Our model can
generate plausible pose sequences for short sentences describing single actions as well as long complex sentences
describing multiple sequential and compositional actions.
We evaluate our proposed model on the publicly available KIT Motion-Language Dataset containing 3D pose
data with human-annotated sentences. Experimental results
show that our model advances the state-of-the-art on textbased motion synthesis in objective evaluations by a margin
of 50%. Qualitative evaluations based on a user study indicate that our synthesized motions are perceived to be the
closest to the ground-truth motion captures for both short
and compositional sentences.

1. Introduction
Manually creating realistic animation of humans performing complex motions is always a challenge. Motion
synthesis based on textual descriptions substantially sim* Corresponding Author: anindita.ghosh@dfki.de.

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed method to generate motion from complex natural language sentences.1
plifies this task and has a wide range of applications, including language-based task planning for robotics and virtual assistants [3], designing instructional videos, creating
public safety demonstrations [40], and visualizing movie
scripts [27]. However, mapping natural language text descriptions to 3D pose sequences for human motions is nontrivial. The input texts may describe single actions with sequential information, e.g., “a person walks four steps forward”, or may not correspond to the discrete time steps
of the pose sequences to be generated, such as for compositional actions, e.g., “a person is spinning around while
walking”. This necessitates a machine-level understanding
of the syntax and the semantics of the text descriptions to
generate the desired motions [4]. While translating a sentence to a pose sequence, we need to identify the different
parts of speech in the given sentence and how they impact
the output motion. A verb in the sentence describes the type
of action, whereas an adverb may provide information on
the direction, place, frequency, and other circumstances of
the denoted action. These need to be mapped into the generated pose sequence in the correct order, laying out additional challenges for motion modeling systems.
Existing text-to-motion mapping methods either generate motions from sentences describing one action only [53]
or produce sub-par motions from descriptions of composi1 Code and additional resources available at
https://github.com/anindita127/Complextext2animation

1396

