Sparse-to-dense Feature Matching: Intra and Inter domain Cross-modal
Learning in Domain Adaptation for 3D Semantic Segmentation
Duo Peng1 Yinjie Lei1, * Wen Li2 Pingping Zhang3 Yulan Guo4
1
Sichuan University 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 National University of Defense Technology
duo peng@stu.scu.edu.cn, yinjie@scu.edu.cn, liwenbnu@gmail.com
zhpp@dlut.edu.cn, yulan.guo@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract
Domain adaptation is critical for success when confronting with the lack of annotations in a new domain. As
the huge time consumption of labeling process on 3D point
cloud, domain adaptation for 3D semantic segmentation is
of great expectation. With the rise of multi-modal datasets,
large amount of 2D images are accessible besides 3D point
clouds. In light of this, we propose to further leverage 2D
data for 3D domain adaptation by intra and inter domain
cross modal learning. As for intra-domain cross modal
learning, most existing works sample the dense 2D pixelwise features into the same size with sparse 3D point-wise
features, resulting in the abandon of numerous useful 2D
features. To address this problem, we propose Dynamic
sparse-to-dense Cross Modal Learning (DsCML) to increase the sufﬁciency of multi-modality information interaction for domain adaptation. For inter-domain cross modal
learning, we further advance Cross Modal Adversarial
Learning (CMAL) on 2D and 3D data which contains different semantic content aiming to promote high-level modal
complementarity. We evaluate our model under various
multi-modality domain adaptation settings including dayto-night, country-to-country and dataset-to-dataset, brings
large improvements over both uni-modal and multi-modal
domain adaptation methods on all settings. Code is available at https://github.com/leolyj/DsCML

1. Introduction
3D semantic segmentation is a challenging task with
plenty of real-world applications, such as particular
robotics, autonomous driving and virtual reality. Like other
tasks of scene perception, 3D semantic segmentation also
faces the challenge of domain shift. For instance, training
on one country and testing on another and in different times
* Corresponding Author: Yinjie Lei (yinjie@scu.edu.cn)

2D Image

3D Point Cloud

(H,W,3)

(N,3)

Projection

2D Network

3D Network

2D Prediction Map

3D Prediction Map

(H,W,C)

(1,N,C)
sampling

Learning
Loss

Figure 1. The common strategy of feature processing for 2D-3D
cross modal learning. The 2D dense feature map with dense pixelwise features are sampled to sparse features with the same size
of 3D point features. As a result, such sparse-to-sparse feature
matching only leverages quite limited 2D features and might cause
insufﬁcient 2D-3D information interaction. Speciﬁcally, H and W
are the height and width of 2D image respectively. N denotes the
number of points in point cloud. C is the number of categories for
semantic segmentation.

of the day may lead to signiﬁcantly dreadful performance.
Plenty of domain adaptation methods are proposed to address such domain shift on the task of 2D semantic segmentation [32, 18, 17, 34, 25, 45] but rarely on 3D [44].
In recent works for multi-modality datasets creation, researchers often incidentally capture 2D images as counterpart when executing the data collection of 3D point clouds.
In light of this, Jaritz et al. [22] proposes a cross modal
learning method to address domain adaptation for 3D semantic segmentation. Through the complementary advantages between 2D and 3D data, the multi-modality domain

7108

