From Contexts to Locality: Ultra-high Resolution Image Segmentation via
Locality-aware Contextual Correlation
Qi Li1 ,Weixiang Yang1 ,Wenxi Liu1∗ ,Yuanlong Yu1∗ ,Shengfeng He2
1
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou University*
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
Abstract
Ultra-high resolution image segmentation has raised increasing interests in recent years due to its realistic applications. In this paper, we innovate the widely used highresolution image segmentation pipeline, in which an ultrahigh resolution image is partitioned into regular patches for
local segmentation and then the local results are merged
into a high-resolution semantic mask. In particular, we introduce a novel locality-aware contextual correlation based
segmentation model to process local patches, where the
relevance between local patch and its various contexts
are jointly and complementarily utilized to handle the semantic regions with large variations. Additionally, we
present a contextual semantics refinement network that associates the local segmentation result with its contextual
semantics, and thus is endowed with the ability of reducing boundary artifacts and refining mask contours during the generation of final high-resolution mask. Furthermore, in comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate that
our model outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in
public benchmarks. Our released codes are available at
https://github.com/liqiokkk/FCtL.

1. Introduction
With the advance of photography and sensor technologies, the accessibility to ultra-high resolution images (i.e.,
2K, 4K, or even higher resolution images) has opened new
horizons to the computer vision community. It will benefits
a wide range of imaging applications, e.g., urban planning
and remote sensing based on high-resolution geospatial images and high-resolution medical image analysis, and thus
the demand for studying and analyzing such images has urgently increased in recent years.
In this paper, we aim at the specific task of semantic segmentation for ultra-high resolution geospatial images captured from aerial view. The recent development of deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has given rise to
remarkable progress of semantic segmentation techniques.
* Wenxi Liu and Yuanlong Yu are the corresponding authors.

Figure 1. For the task of ultra-high resolution image segmentation,
the most common approach is to segment cropped local patches
and then combine them into a high-resolution mask. To address the
core problem on local segmentation quality, we propose a localityaware contextual correlation based model that exploits rescaled
various contexts (×1, ×2, ×3 large as local patch in the original
image) to produce refined results.

Yet, most CNN-based segmentation models target on full
resolution images and perform pixel-level class prediction,
which requires more computation resources comparing to
image classification and object detection. This hurdle becomes significant when the image resolution grows to be
ultra high, leading to the pressing dilemma between memory efficiency (even feasibility) and segmentation quality.
Particularly, in order to segment an ultra-high resolution image, the prevailing practice is either to downsample it to a smaller spatial dimension before performing segmentation, or to separately segment the partitioned patches
and merge their results into a high-resolution one. These
trivial practices sacrifice the segmentation quality for the
model efficiency. Additionally, the recent attempts propose
to utilize the well-pretrained segmentation models to obtain the coarse segmentation masks and another model to
refine the contours of the masks [5, 37]. However, these
methods mainly focus on high-resolution natural images or
daily photos concerning with large objects, while the high-

7252

