SPG: Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for 3D Object Detection via
Semantic Point Generation
Qiangeng Xu1 †
Yin Zhou2
Weiyue Wang2
1
University of Southern California
{qiangenx}@usc.edu

Charles R. Qi2
Dragomir Anguelov2
2
Waymo, LLC

{yinzhou,weiyuewang,rqi,dragomir}@waymo.com

Figure 1: Our Semantic Point Generation (SPG) recovers the foreground regions by generating semantic points (red). Combined with the original cloud, these semantic points can be directly used by modern LiDAR-based detectors and help improve
the detection results (green boxes).

Abstract
In autonomous driving, a LiDAR-based object detector
should perform reliably at different geographic locations
and under various weather conditions. While recent 3D detection research focuses on improving performance within
a single domain, our study reveals that the performance of
modern detectors can drop drastically cross-domain. In
this paper, we investigate unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for LiDAR-based 3D object detection. On the
Waymo Domain Adaptation [49] dataset, we identify the deteriorating point cloud quality as the root cause of the performance drop. To address this issue, we present Semantic
Point Generation (SPG), a general approach to enhance the
reliability of LiDAR detectors against domain shifts. Specifically, SPG generates semantic points at the predicted foreground regions and faithfully recovers missing parts of the
foreground objects, which are caused by phenomena such
as occlusions, low reflectance, or weather interference. By
merging the semantic points with the original points, we obtain an augmented point cloud, which can be directly con† Work done during internship at Waymo LLC.

sumed by modern LiDAR-based detectors. To validate the
wide applicability of SPG, we experiment with two representative detectors, PointPillars [22] and PV-RCNN [45].
On the UDA task, SPG significantly improves both detectors
across all object categories of interest and at all difficulty
levels. SPG can also benefit object detection in the original
domain. On the Waymo Open Dataset [49] and KITTI [17],
SPG improves 3D detection results of these two methods
across all categories. Combined with PV-RCNN [45], SPG
achieves state-of-the-art 3D detection results on KITTI.

1. Introduction
A robust autonomous driving system requires its
LiDAR-based detector to reliably handle different environmental conditions, e.g., geographic locations and weather
conditions. While 3D detection has received increasing interest in recent years, most existing works [69, 6, 9, 10, 15,
21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 33, 37, 38, 45, 46, 47, 48, 57, 58, 59,
61, 62, 56, 68] have focused on the performance in a single
domain, where training and test data are captured in similar conditions. It is still an open question how to generalize
a 3D detector to different domains, where the environment

15446

