SaccadeCam: Adaptive Visual Attention for Monocular Depth Sensing
Brevin Tilmon

Sanjeev J. Koppal

University of Florida

Abstract
Most monocular depth sensing methods use conventionally captured images that are created without considering
scene content. In contrast, animal eyes have fast mechanical motions, called saccades, that control how the scene is
imaged by the fovea, where resolution is highest. In this paper, we present the SaccadeCam framework for adaptively
distributing resolution onto regions of interest in the scene.
Our algorithm for adaptive resolution is a self-supervised
network and we demonstrate results for end-to-end learning
for monocular depth estimation. We also show preliminary
results with a real SaccadeCam hardware prototype.

1. Introduction
Deep depth estimation from a single view has been effective at demonstrating the rich geometric cues available
in an image [51, 49, 36, 52, 10]. Additionally, these results are improved by using other cues, such as sparse LIDAR or stereo measurements [55, 66, 35, 6]. Our key idea
is to notice that most previous monocular approaches assume a nearly equal distribution of sensor pixels across the
camera’s field-of-view (FOV). In contrast, animal eyes distribute resolution unevenly using fast, mechanical motion,
or saccades, that change where the eye’s fovea views the
scene with high acuity. In this paper, we present SaccadeCam, a new algorithmic and hardware framework for visual attention control that automatically distributes resolution onto a scene to improve monocular depth estimation.

1.1. Why Leverage Attention for Depth Sensing?
Many methods seek to replicate the biological advantages of attention, such as computational efficiency. However, most efforts apply attention within network training
and testing, after images have been captured [48, 59, 34,
63, 29]. Our framework complements existing attentionbased learning, since SaccadeCam leverages visual attention to distribute resolution during image capture, and deep
attention mechanisms can still be applied after the capture
of a SaccadeCam image. Since SaccadeCam can leverage

Figure 1: Our method learns to distribute resolution onto regions that improve self-supervised monocular depth estimation while using the same number of pixels as conventional
equiangular cameras.
attention during image capture, it can extract novel efficiencies, particularly for bandwidth of image data. The potential
for bandwidth reduction is important — Marr observed that
to have foveal resolution everywhere “...would be wasteful,
unnecessary and in violation of our own experience as perceivers...” [39]. SaccadeCam extracts the biological bandwidth advantages of attention, which impacts platforms that
need perception within strict budgetary constraints, such as
small robots and long-range drones. We show SaccadeCam
results for distributing visual attention (using the proxy of
image resolution) to improve depth estimation. Our contributions are:
• We define a new problem of distributing image resolution under a fixed camera bandwidth around the scene
with the goal of succeeding at depth estimation (Sect.
2 and Table 2).
• We design an end-to-end network that controls resolution distribution, showing that SaccadeCam images
outperform conventional distribution of resolution and
can detect important objects for robot navigation, such
as poles, signs and distant vehicles (Sect. 3, Table 3
and Fig. 3, Sect. 5 Fig. 4).
• We validate our method on a real hardware prototype
that images multiple fovea per frame. We also present
a generalized selection algorithm to extract discrete
fovea from the attention mask. (Sect. 5).

6009

