ShapeConv: Shape-aware Convolutional Layer
for Indoor RGB-D Semantic Segmentation
Jinming Cao1 Hanchao Leng1 Dani Lischinski2 Danny Cohen-Or3 Changhe Tu1 * Yangyan Li4∗
1
2
Shandong University, China
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
3
4
Tel Aviv University, Israel
Alibaba Group, China
{jinming.ccao, hanchao.leng, danix3d, cohenor, changhe.tu, yangyan.lee}@gmail.com

Abstract
RGB-D semantic segmentation has attracted increasing
attention over the past few years. Existing methods mostly
employ homogeneous convolution operators to consume the
RGB and depth features, ignoring their intrinsic differences.
In fact, the RGB values capture the photometric appearance
properties in the projected image space, while the depth feature encodes both the shape of a local geometry as well as
the base (whereabout) of it in a larger context. Compared
with the base, the shape probably is more inherent and has
a stronger connection to the semantics, and thus is more
critical for segmentation accuracy. Inspired by this observation, we introduce a Shape-aware Convolutional layer
(ShapeConv) for processing the depth feature, where the
depth feature is firstly decomposed into a shape-component
and a base-component, next two learnable weights are introduced to cooperate with them independently, and finally
a convolution is applied on the re-weighted combination
of these two components. ShapeConv is model-agnostic
and can be easily integrated into most CNNs to replace
vanilla convolutional layers for semantic segmentation. Extensive experiments on three challenging indoor RGB-D semantic segmentation benchmarks, i.e., NYU-Dv2(-13,-40),
SUN RGB-D, and SID, demonstrate the effectiveness of our
ShapeConv when employing it over five popular architectures. Moreover, the performance of CNNs with ShapeConv
is boosted without introducing any computation and memory increase in the inference phase. The reason is that
the learnt weights for balancing the importance between
the shape and base components in ShapeConv become constants in the inference phase, and thus can be fused into the
following convolution, resulting in a network that is identical to one with vanilla convolutional layers.

1. Introduction
With the widespread use of depth sensors (such as Microsoft Kinect [31]), the availability of RGB-D data has
* Corresponding Author

ℙ!
ℙ#

ℙ!

ℙ"
ℙ$

ℙ#

ℙ"
ℙ$

!"#
$%&'ℎ
Figure 1. Visual demonstration of why the shape of an RGB-D image matters. Regarding the images on the top, lines with the same
color share a same shape, yet with different base. The corresponding patches are shown on the bottom.

boosted the advancement of RGB-D semantic segmentation, which contributes to an indispensable task in the computer vision community. Thanks to the flourishing of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), recent studies mostly
resort to CNNs for tackling this problem. Convolutional
layers, deemed as the core building blocks of CNNs, are
accordingly the key elements in RGB-D semantic segmentation models [6, 13, 15, 17, 21].
However, RGB and depth information are inherently different from each other. In particular, RGB values capture
the photometric appearance properties in the projected image space, while the depth feature encodes both the shape
of a local geometry as well as the base (whereabout) of it in
a larger context. As a result, the convolution operator that
is widely adopted for consuming RGB data might not be
the optimal for processing the depth data. Taking Figure 1
as an example, we would expect the corresponding patches
of the same chairs to have the same features, as they share

7088

