Robustness via Cross-Domain Ensembles
Teresa Yeo *
Oğuzhan Fatih Kar *
Amir Zamir
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)
http://crossdomain-ensembles.epfl.ch/

Abstract
We present a method for making neural network predictions robust to shifts from the training data distribution. The
proposed method is based on making predictions via a diverse set of cues (called ‘middle domains’) and ensembling
them into one strong prediction. The premise of the idea
is that predictions made via different cues respond differently to a distribution shift, hence one should be able to
merge them into one robust final prediction. We perform
the merging in a straightforward but principled manner
based on the uncertainty associated with each prediction.
The evaluations are performed using multiple tasks and
datasets (Taskonomy, Replica, ImageNet, CIFAR) under a
wide range of adversarial and non-adversarial distribution
shifts which demonstrate the proposed method is considerably more robust than its standard learning counterpart,
conventional deep ensembles, and several other baselines.

1. Introduction
Neural networks deployed in the real world will encounter data with naturally occurring distortions, e.g. motion blur, or adversarial ones. Such changes make up shifts
from the training data distribution. While neural networks
are able to learn complex functions in-distribution, their
predictions are profoundly unreliable under such shifts [9,
20, 50, 25]. This presents a core challenge that needs to be
solved for these models to be useful in the real world.
Suppose we want to learn a mapping from an input domain, e.g. RGB images, to a target domain, e.g. surface
normals (see Fig. 1). A common approach is to learn this
mapping with a direct path, i.e. RGB → surface normals.
Since this path directly operates on the input domain, it
is prone to being affected by any slight alterations in the
RGB image, e.g. brightness changes. An alternative can
be to go through a middle domain1 that is invariant to that
1 or equivalently “middle task”, as most vision tasks can be viewed as
mapping an input onto some other domain.
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1: An overview of the proposed method for creating a robust
and diverse ensemble of predictions. A set of K networks predict a target
domain (here surface normals) given an input image that has undergone
an unknown distribution shift (here JPEG compression degradation), via
K middle domains (e.g. 2D texture edges, low-pass filtering, greyscale
image, emboss filtering, etc). The predictions from the K paths are then
merged into one final strong prediction using weights that are based on
the uncertainty associated with each prediction. This method is shown to
be significantly robust against adversarial and non-adversarial distribution
shifts for several tasks. In the figure above, solid ( ) and dashed ( ) arrows
represent learned and analytical functions, respectively.

change. For example, the surface normals predicted via the
RGB → 2D edges → surface normals path will be resilient
to brightness distortions in the input as the 2D edges domain
abstracts that away. However, one does not know which
middle-domain to use ahead of time as the distortions that
a model may encounter are broad and apriori unknown, and
some middle domains can be too lossy for certain downstream predictions. These issues can be mitigated by employing an ensembling approach where predictions made
via a diverse set of middle domains are merged into one
strong prediction on-the-fly.
This paper presents a general approach for the aforementioned process. We first use a set of K middle domains from
which we learn to predict the final domain (Fig. 1). Each
of the K paths reacts differently to a particular distribution
shift due to its inherent biases, so its prediction may or may
not degrade severely. Thus, we further estimate the uncer-

12189

