Light Field Saliency Detection with Dual Local Graph Learning and
Reciprocative Guidance

1

Nian Liu1 * Wangbo Zhao2 * Dingwen Zhang2 Junwei Han2† Ling Shao1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University
{liunian228, wangbo.zhao96, zhangdingwen2006yyy, junweihan2010}@gmail.com,
ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
The application of light field data in salient object detection is becoming increasingly popular recently. The difficulty lies in how to effectively fuse the features within the focal stack and how to cooperate them with the feature of the
all-focus image. Previous methods usually fuse focal stack
features via convolution or ConvLSTM, which are both less
effective and ill-posed. In this paper, we model the information fusion within focal stack via graph networks. They
introduce powerful context propagation from neighbouring
nodes and also avoid ill-posed implementations. On the one
hand, we construct local graph connections thus avoiding
prohibitive computational costs of traditional graph networks. On the other hand, instead of processing the two
kinds of data separately, we build a novel dual graph model
to guide the focal stack fusion process using all-focus patterns. To handle the second difficulty, previous methods usually implement one-shot fusion for focal stack and all-focus
features, hence lacking a thorough exploration of their supplements. We introduce a reciprocative guidance scheme
and enable mutual guidance between these two kinds of information at multiple steps. As such, both kinds of features
can be enhanced iteratively, finally benefiting the saliency
prediction. Extensive experimental results show that the
proposed models are all beneficial and we achieve significantly better results than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) methods can be categorized into RGB based ones, RGB-D based ones, and the
recently proposed light field based ones. By only based on
static images, although RGB SOD methods [18, 26, 24, 54]
have achieved excellent performance on many benchmark
datasets, they still can not handle challenging and complex
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(b) Local Graph Connection

(a) Dense Graph Connection

Focal Stack

DLG

R

R

All Focus Image

(c) Framework of Our Proposed Model

Figure 1. (a) and (b) show the comparison of traditional dense
graph models and our proposed local graph model. (c) illustrates
the framework of our model. R means the reciprocative unit.

scenes. This is because the appearance saliency cues conveyed in RGB images are heavily constrained, especially
when the foreground and background appearance are complex or similar. To solve this problem, depth information is
introduced to provide supplementary cues in RGB-D SOD
methods [3, 52, 31, 27]. However, it is not easy to obtain
high-quality depth maps and many current RGB-D SOD
benchmark datasets only have noisy depth maps. On the
contrary, light field data Hence, the light field SOD problem has much potential to explore.
Besides the focal stack images, light field data also have
an all-focus image that provides the context information.
Thus, light field SOD has two key points, i.e., how to effectively fuse multiple focal stack features and how to cooperate the focal stack cues with the all-focus information.
A straightforward way to solve the first problem is to concatenate focal stack features and use a convolution layer for
fusion. Such a simple way can not sufficiently explore the
complex interaction within different focal slices, hence may
limit the model performance. It is also an ill-posed solution since convolution requires a fixed input number, hence
many methods have to randomly pad the input images when

4712

