GLiT: Neural Architecture Search for Global and Local Image Transformer
Boyu Chen1 ,* Peixia Li1 ,* Chuming Li1,2 , Baopu Li3†, Lei Bai1 , Chen Lin4 ,
Ming Sun2 , Junjie Yan2 , Wanli Ouyang1†
1
The University of Sydney, 2 SenseTime Group Limited,
3
BAIDU USA LLC, 4 University of Oxford

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) -based architecture (e.g., ResNet [14]) contributes to the great success of
deep learning in computer vision tasks [26, 6, 19] for past
several years. By stacking a set of CNN layers, CNN-based
models can achieve larger receptive filed and perceive more
contextual information on scarifies of the efficiency. Driven
by the great success of transformer [30] in Natural Language Processing(NLP) tasks, there are increasing interests
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

ImageNet top-1 accuracy (%)

We introduce the first Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
method to find a better transformer architecture for image
recognition. Recently, transformers without CNN-based
backbones are found to achieve impressive performance for
image recognition. However, the transformer is designed
for NLP tasks and thus could be sub-optimal when directly
used for image recognition. In order to improve the visual
representation ability for transformers, we propose a new
search space and searching algorithm. Specifically, we introduce a locality module that models the local correlations
in images explicitly with fewer computational cost. With the
locality module, our search space is defined to let the search
algorithm freely trade off between global and local information as well as optimizing the low-level design choice in
each module. To tackle the problem caused by huge search
space, a hierarchical neural architecture search method is
proposed to search the optimal vision transformer from two
levels separately with the evolutionary algorithm. Extensive experiments on the ImageNet dataset demonstrate that
our method can find more discriminative and efficient transformer variants than the ResNet family (e.g., ResNet101)
and the baseline ViT for image classification. The source
codes are available at https://github.com/bychen515/GLiT.

GLiT-Base

82

DeiT-Base

GLiT-Small

80

X101-64x4d

DeiT-Small

78

X50-32x4d

Vit-Base

Res50

76 GLiT-Tiny
74
DeiT-Tiny

72

DeiT
GLiT

70
68
0

Res18
1

2

3

4

5

10

15 16 17 18 19 20

FLOPs (G)

Figure 1. Top-1 accuracy (y-axis) and FLOPs (x-aixs) for different
backbones on ImageNet. GLiT is our method.

in the computer vision community to develop more efficient
architectures based on the transformer [11, 28, 4, 37] which
can manipulate the global correlations directly. Among
these works, vision transformer (ViT) is a representative
one [11] as it does not rely on the CNN-based backbone
to extract features and solely relies on self-attention modules in transformer to establish global correlations among
all input image patches. While ViT achieves impressive
performance, if extra training data is not used, ViT still has
lower accuracy than the well-designed CNN models such as
ResNet-101 [14]. To further exploit the potential of transformer in image recognition tasks, DeiT [28] uses teacherstudent strategy for distilling knowledge to the transformer
token. These two methods rely on the original transformer
architecture but neglect potential gap between NLP tasks
and image recognition tasks in architecture.
In this work, we argue that there are unignorable gaps
between different kinds of data modalities (e.g., image and
text), leading to the disparities between different tasks.
Thus, directly applying the vanilla transformer architecture
to other tasks may be sub-optimal. It is natural that there
exists better transformer architectures for image recognition. However, hand-designing such an architecture is
time consuming since there are too many influential factors to be considered. On one hand, Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) has achieved great progress in computer vi-

12

