Embed Me If You Can: A Geometric Perceptron
Pavlo Melnyk,

Michael Felsberg,

Mårten Wadenbäck

Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University
{pavlo.melnyk, michael.felsberg, marten.wadenback}@liu.se

Abstract
Solving geometric tasks involving point clouds by using machine learning is a challenging problem. Standard
feed-forward neural networks combine linear or, if the bias
parameter is included, affine layers and activation functions. Their geometric modeling is limited, which motivated
the prior work introducing the multilayer hypersphere perceptron (MLHP). Its constituent part, i.e., the hypersphere
neuron, is obtained by applying a conformal embedding
of Euclidean space. By virtue of Clifford algebra, it can
be implemented as the Cartesian dot product of inputs and
weights. If the embedding is applied in a manner consistent
with the dimensionality of the input space geometry, the decision surfaces of the model units become combinations of
hyperspheres and make the decision-making process geometrically interpretable for humans. Our extension of the MLHP
model, the multilayer geometric perceptron (MLGP), and its
respective layer units, i.e., geometric neurons, are consistent
with the 3D geometry and provide a geometric handle of the
learned coefficients. In particular, the geometric neuron activations are isometric in 3D, which is necessary for rotation
and translation equivariance. When classifying the 3D Tetris
shapes, we quantitatively show that our model requires no
activation function in the hidden layers other than the embedding to outperform the vanilla multilayer perceptron. In
the presence of noise in the data, our model is also superior
to the MLHP.

1. Introduction
Understanding the geometry of a neuron is a crucial prerequisite to successfully performing geometric deep learning [4]. Owing to their inherent connection to the notion of
distance, circles (or spheres) are fundamental atomic structures for defining geometric constraints. Note, e.g., how the
third corner of a triangle is constrained by specifying the
radii of two circles centered in each of the other two corners.
This motivates us to consider geometries of decision surfaces beyond hyperplanes, such as hyperspheres, in order to
properly represent isometries.

Going beyond planar decision surfaces to non-planar ones
increases the complexity of the model, but this has proved to
be beneficial performance-wise [5, 3, 14]. To construct and
represent such surfaces, one needs to consider more general
spaces, in which case, Klein geometries [20] provide a useful
theoretical framework.
In this paper, we employ Clifford algebra as a tool to
perform computations in conformal geometry. Building
on top of the previous works on Clifford neurons [6] and
spherical decision surfaces [18], we explore the multilayer
hypersphere perceptron (MLHP) [2] model applied to the
problem of classifying the 3D Tetris shapes, essentially a
collection of point clouds, see Section 5.1 and Fig. 3. To
the best of our knowledge, MLHP has not been previously
investigated in this context. We focus specifically on 3D geometry, which is important for tasks such as pose estimation,
which in turn is a prerequisite for grasping, 3D inpainting,
and augmented reality.
Striving to make the decision-making process more intuitive and be consistent with the dimensionality of the input
space geometry, we perform the conformal embedding in a
Minkowski space. Consequently, we observe that the decision surfaces of the MLHP units become combinations of
hyperspheres. We call such an extension of the MLHP model
the multilayer geometric perceptron (MLGP) and refer to
its respective layer units as geometric neurons. Owing to
the homogeneous representation [8], we provide an interpretation of our model parameters directly in the Euclidean
space, which is only intuitive if the embedding agrees with
the input geometry.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
(a) We demonstrate how spherical decision surfaces improve the understanding of the decision-making process
of neural networks, provided that their construction is
done adhering to the input space geometry.
(b) We propose an extension to the MLHP, the MLGP
model1 with geometric neurons, and show that, apart
from being more geometrically explainable, it achieves
favorable quantitative results when classifying the 3D
Tetris shapes, and is superior when they are perturbed.
1 The code is available at github.com/pavlo-melnyk/mlgp-embedme.

1276

