Dynamic High-Pass Filtering and Multi-Spectral Attention for
Image Super-Resolution
Salma Abdel Magid1 , Yulun Zhang2 , Donglai Wei3 , Won-Dong Jang1 ,
Zudi Lin1 , Yun Fu2 , Hanspeter Pfister1
1
Harvard University 2 Northeastern University 3 Boston College

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
pushed forward the frontier of super-resolution (SR) research. However, current CNN models exhibit a major
flaw: they are biased towards learning low-frequency signals. This bias becomes more problematic for the image SR
task which targets reconstructing all fine details and image
textures. To tackle this challenge, we propose to improve the
learning of high-frequency features both locally and globally and introduce two novel architectural units to existing SR models. Specifically, we propose a dynamic highpass filtering (HPF) module that locally applies adaptive
filter weights for each spatial location and channel group
to preserve high-frequency signals. We also propose a matrix multi-spectral channel attention (MMCA) module that
predicts the attention map of features decomposed in the
frequency domain. This module operates in a global context to adaptively recalibrate feature responses at different frequencies. Extensive qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate that our proposed modules achieve better
accuracy and visual improvements against state-of-the-art
methods on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Image SR is a modeling task that estimates a highresolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR) counterpart. Image SR is a challenging and ill-posed problem
since multiple solutions exist for any LR input. Given the
recent advances in deep learning, convolutinal neural network (CNN) based SR methods have been leveraged in a
wide variety of research domains such as biomedicine, object recognition, and hyper-spectral imaging [9, 21, 32, 43].
The promising results and potential impact of SR in
these domains have garnered attention from the vision research community. Many CNN-based methods have been
proposed [4, 5, 6, 7, 17, 20, 47, 49] and significantly outperform traditional methods. In line with the ‘very deep’

Urban100: img 024

HR

Bicubic

DBPN [11]

CSNLN [29]

RCAN [47]

Ours

Figure 1: Visual comparison (×4) on “image 024” from Urban100. Existing methods suffer from blurring artifacts.
paradigm, these methods use over-parameterized networks
with hundreds of layers. This approach is usually coupled
with a recent architectural breakthrough known as residual
learning. Residual learning alleviates the degradation problem due to increased depth, and simplifies the learning task,
which improves network convergence.
Although these advancements have enhanced performance and are now commonplace in SR networks, these
methods still suffer from a serious flaw (see Figure 1). It
has been demonstrated that neural networks exhibit a bias
towards low-frequency signals. Figure 2 illustrates a prime
example of this. In the output of a popular and robust SR
baseline, RCAN [47], we can see that the high-frequency
data are significantly reduced, causing the reconstruction to
be overly smooth. This is due to many aspects of training,
such as the loss function, architecture type, and optimization method. Ledig et al. [20] already showed that standard
pixel-wise metrics (`1 or `2 ) tend to pull the reconstruction
towards an average of the possible reconstructions equidistant in terms of the `2 loss on the natural image manifold.
Similarly, higher frequencies struggle to propagate due
to the architecture and optimization method of the networks
[2]. They become quickly saturated with low-frequency
patterns first, thereby halting the learning of additional information. Since there is high information redundancy between channels, many recent works propose using various
attention mechanisms to re-weight channels. The classic
channel attention mechanism, SENet [13], suffers from one
major drawback. Qin et al. [33] theoretically demonstrated
that by using global average pooling, SENet discards all
other frequencies except the lowest one. Another issue

4288

