Instance Similarity Learning for Unsupervised Feature Representation
Ziwei Wang1,2,3 , Yunsong Wang1 , Ziyi Wu1 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{wang-zw18, wangys16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; dazitu616@gmail.com;
{lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an instance similarity learning (ISL) method for unsupervised feature representation.
Conventional methods assign close instance pairs in the
feature space with high similarity, which usually leads to
wrong pairwise relationship for large neighborhoods because the Euclidean distance fails to depict the true semantic similarity on the feature manifold. On the contrary,
our method mines the feature manifold in an unsupervised
manner, through which the semantic similarity among instances is learned in order to obtain discriminative representations. Specifically, we employ the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) to mine the underlying feature manifold, where the generated features are applied as the proxies to progressively explore the feature manifold so that the
semantic similarity among instances is acquired as reliable
pseudo supervision. Extensive experiments on image classification demonstrate the superiority of our method compared with the state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at https://github.com/ZiweiWangTHU/ISL.git.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved the state-of-theart performance in various vision applications such as face
recognition [7, 45, 34], object detection [41, 33, 30], image
retrieval [14, 42, 32] and many others. However, most successful deep neural networks are trained with strong supervision, which requires a large amount of labeled data with
expensive annotation cost and strictly limits the deployment
of deep models. Hence, it is desirable to train deep neural
networks with only the unlabeled data while achieving comparable performance with supervised learning.
To enable deep neural networks to learn from the unlabeled data, unsupervised learning methods have been wide∗ Corresponding author

Clustering

Instance specificity
analysis

Neighborhood
discovery

ISL

Figure 1. The difference among clustering methods, instance
specificity analysis methods, neighborhood discovery methods
and our method. The clustering methods are error-prone because
of the complicated inter-class boundaries, and the instance specificity analysis methods are weakly discriminative due to the ambiguous supervision that treats each sample as an independent
class. Meanwhile, the neighborhood discovery methods regard the
instances close to the anchor as similar samples and fails to depict
the true semantic similarity in large neighborhoods on the feature
manifold. On the contrary, we mine the feature manifold and learn
the instance-to-instance relationship with reliable semantic similarity, so that informative features can be obtained.

ly studied recently. The clustering methods [24, 47, 3]
shown in the first column of Figure 1 provide pseudo labels
to train the networks according to the cluster indexes, which
are error-prone due to the complex inter-class boundaries.
The instance specificity analysis methods [46, 2, 38, 16, 21]
depicted in the second column of Figure 1 regard every single sample as an independent class to avoid clustering.
However, the offered supervision is ambiguous and results
in weak class discrimination. Meanwhile, designing pretext tasks with self-supervised learning [8, 51, 44] shares
the same limitations of instance specificity analysis methods due to the discrepancy between the auxiliary supervision
and the target task. In order to mitigates the disadvantages
of clustering and instance specificity analysis, neighbor-

10336

