Image Shape Manipulation from a Single Augmented Training Sample
Yael Vinker*
Eliahu Horwitz*
Nir Zabari
Yedid Hoshen
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
http://www.vision.huji.ac.il/deepsim/
{yael.vinker, eliahu.horwitz, nir.zabari, yedid.hoshen}@mail.huji.ac.il

Training Image Pair

(a)

(b)

Manipulate the Primitive

(c)

(d)

Output

(e)

Figure 1: Image manipulation learned from a single training pair. Given a single real image (b) and a corresponding
primitive representation (a), our model learns to map between the primitive (a) to the target image (b). At inference, the
original primitive (c) is manipulated by the user, the changes are highlighted in red (d). Then, the manipulated primitive is
passed through the network which outputs a corresponding manipulated image (e) in the real image domain. On the right, we
can see that the manipulation was performed successfully, while preserving the internal statistics of the source image.

Abstract
In this paper, we present DeepSIM, a generative model
for conditional image manipulation based on a single image. We find that extensive augmentation is key for enabling
single image training, and incorporate the use of thin-platespline (TPS) as an effective augmentation. Our network
learns to map between a primitive representation of the image to the image itself. The choice of a primitive representation has an impact on the ease and expressiveness of the
manipulations and can be automatic (e.g. edges), manual
(e.g. segmentation) or hybrid such as edges on top of segmentations. At manipulation time, our generator allows for
making complex image changes by modifying the primitive
input representation and mapping it through the network.
Our method is shown to achieve remarkable performance
on image manipulation tasks.

ing datasets can be obtained, such as, mapping facial landmarks to facial images. In practice, however, there are many
settings in which the image to be manipulated is unique,
and a training set consisting of many similar input-output
samples is unavailable. Moreover, in some cases using a
large dataset might even lead to unwelcome outputs that do
not preserve the specific characteristics of the desired image. Training generative models on just a single image, is
an exciting recent research direction, which may hold the
potential to extend the scope of neural-network-based image manipulation methods to unique images. In this paper,
we introduce - DeepSIM, a simple-to-implement yet highly
effective method for training deep conditional generative
models from a single image pair. Our method is capable
of solving various image manipulation tasks including: (i)
shape warping (Fig. 2) (ii) object rearrangement (Fig. 5) (iii)
object removal (Fig. 5) (iv) object addition (Fig. 2) (v) creation of painted and photorealistic animated clips (Fig. 8
and videos on our project page).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have significantly boosted performance on image manipulation tasks for which large train*Equal contribution

Given a single target image, first, a primitive representation is created for the training image. This can either be
unsupervised (i.e. edge map, unsupervised segmentation),
supervised (i.e. segmentation map, sketch, drawing), or a

13769

