Adaptive Surface Reconstruction with Multiscale Convolutional Kernels
Benjamin Ummenhofer

Vladlen Koltun

Intel Labs
benjamin.ummenhofer@intel.com

Figure 1: Left: Reconstruction of a scene with varying scale. The surface triangle mesh adapts to the scale to capture details such as the
fountain. Right: Like the surface mesh, our volume discretization adapts to the available information and our multiscale convolutional
kernels adapt to the grid, allowing us to efficiently infer and learn an implicit representation of the surface with ConvNets.

Abstract
We propose generalized convolutional kernels for 3D reconstruction with ConvNets from point clouds. Our method
uses multiscale convolutional kernels that can be applied
to adaptive grids as generated with octrees. In addition
to standard kernels in which each element has a distinct
spatial location relative to the center, our elements have a
distinct relative location as well as a relative scale level.
Making our kernels span multiple resolutions allows us to
apply ConvNets to adaptive grids for large problem sizes
where the input data is sparse but the entire domain needs
to be processed. Our ConvNet architecture can predict the
signed and unsigned distance fields for large data sets with
millions of input points and is faster and more accurate than
classic energy minimization or recent learning approaches.
We demonstrate this in a zero-shot setting where we only
train on synthetic data and evaluate on the Tanks and Temples dataset of real-world large-scale 3D scenes.

1. Introduction
Generating a description of the surface of objects or
whole scenes is a key problem in 3D reconstruction. While
the acquisition of images and scans becomes easier and easier, combining this information into a global and consistent
3D structure becomes more difficult with the increasing size
of the datasets. However, large datasets are particularly interesting as they can digitize our 3D world and enable applications like navigation or virtual sightseeing.

An important part of many 3D pipelines is volumetric
fusion, which fuses partial observations into a global 3D
description. In this approach, the problem of finding the 2D
surface is turned into finding a 3D scalar field from which
the surface can be extracted as a level set. An inherent problem of this approach is the cubic growth of the volume leading to high computational costs. Another difficulty arises
from noisy input data that requires the use of good priors in
the fusion process.
To tackle these challenges many works have proposed to
use specialized adaptive data structures like octrees to store
3D grids more efficiently and adapt algorithms to directly
operate on these structures. These types of algorithms are
often highly specialized and therefore have high engineering costs. They also often employ PDEs, which implement
rather simple priors that prefer surfaces with minimum curvature or minimum area.
In contrast to this are learning approaches that can learn
complex priors from data, which makes them well suited for
the fusion task. Especially ConvNets have become a standard method in image processing pipelines due to their flexibility and efficiency for data laid out in regular 2D grids.
While ConvNets naturally generalize to 3D data they also
suffer from the cubic growth in complexity.
To make use of ConvNets for volumetric fusion, we
propose to generalize the standard convolutional kernels to
adaptive grids. Adaptive grids not only allow to efficiently
store data but also allow to capture information at different
scales as shown in Figure 1, which is important for the reconstruction of large datasets where some regions are more

5651

