HAIR: Hierarchical Visual-Semantic Relational Reasoning for Video Question
Answering

1

Fei Liu1,2
Jing Liu1,2∗
Weining Wang1
Hanqing Lu1,2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
liufei2017@ia.ac.cn

{jliu, weining.wang, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Relational reasoning is at the heart of video question answering. However, existing approaches suffer from several
common limitations: (1) they only focus on either objectlevel or frame-level relational reasoning, and fail to integrate the both; and (2) they neglect to leverage semantic
knowledge for relational reasoning. In this work, we propose a Hierarchical VisuAl-Semantic RelatIonal Reasoning
(HAIR) framework to address these limitations. Speciﬁcally, we present a novel graph memory mechanism to perform relational reasoning, and further develop two types
of graph memory: a) visual graph memory that leverages
visual information of video for relational reasoning; b) semantic graph memory that is speciﬁcally designed to explicitly leverage semantic knowledge contained in the classes
and attributes of video objects, and perform relational reasoning in the semantic space. Taking advantage of both
graph memory mechanisms, we build a hierarchical framework to enable visual-semantic relational reasoning from
object level to frame level. Experiments on four challenging benchmark datasets show that the proposed framework
leads to state-of-the-art performance, with fewer parameters and faster inference speed. Besides, our approach also
shows superior performance on other video+language task.

1. Introduction
Video Question Answering (VideoQA), an emerging
task that requires machines to answer questions about
videos in a natural language form, has recently drawn increasing interests from researchers. The task is particularly challenging, as it requires ﬁne-grained understanding of video content involving various complex relations
such as object-object relation, frame-frame relation etc.
Thus, relational reasoning plays an important role in solv∗ Corresponding author.

Q: What does the woman do after hold bucket?

A: Dump bucket

(a)

woman hold
bucket

(b)

...

...

... ...
Write
GNN

woman dump
bucket

woman dump bucket
after hold bucket

... ...
Read

Memory Network

Write

...
Read

Graph Memory

Figure 1. (a) Hierarchical relational reasoning. Humans perform
object-level ﬁrst and then frame-level relational reasoning for understanding the whole video content. (b) A concise comparison of
vanilla GNN, memory network and our graph memory.

ing VideoQA problem. Recent works [9, 12, 14, 28, 20, 43]
have introduced memory networks [44, 35], attention mechanisms [46] or Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [22]
for relational reasoning in VideoQA. Although achieving
promising results, these existing approaches suffer from two
common limitations.
First, current approaches for VideoQA only focus on
either object-level [14] or frame-level relational reasoning [9, 12, 26, 51, 20], and do not integrate the both in
a hierarchical manner. Given a video clip and an associated question, as shown in Figure 1(a), a typical reasoning
process for human is that we ﬁrst recognize relevant objects and their interaction in each video frame (e.g. woman
hold bucket, woman dump bucket), and then correlate these
frames to understand a sequence of actions and their temporal relationship (e.g. woman dump bucket after hold bucket).
Finally, the correct answer can be naturally derived based
on the understanding of video content. Such a process of
relational reasoning is conducted in a hierarchical way, i.e.,
from object level to frame level. It is desired to endow the
machines with the same characteristic as human. However,

1698

