Federated Learning for Non-IID Data via
Unified Feature Learning and Optimization Objective Alignment
Lin Zhang1,2 Yong Luo3 Yan Bai1,2 Bo Du3 Ling-Yu Duan1,2 *
1
Institute of Digital Media (IDM), Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{zhanglin.imre, yanbai, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, {luoyong, dubo}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) aims to establish a shared
model across decentralized clients under the privacypreserving constraint. Despite certain success, it is still
challenging for FL to deal with non-IID (non-independent
and identical distribution) client data, which is a general
scenario in real-world FL tasks. It has been demonstrated
that the performance of FL will be reduced greatly under
the non-IID scenario, since the discrepant data distributions will induce optimization inconsistency and feature divergence issues. Besides, naively minimizing an aggregate
loss function in this scenario may have negative impacts
on some clients and thus deteriorate their personal model
performance. To address these issues, we propose a Unified Feature learning and Optimization objectives alignment method (FedUFO) for non-IID FL. In particular, an
adversary module is proposed to reduce the divergence on
feature representation among different clients, and two consensus losses are proposed to reduce the inconsistency on
optimization objectives from two perspectives. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our FedUFO can outperform
the state-of-the-art approaches, including the competitive
one data-sharing method. Besides, FedUFO can enable
more reasonable and balanced model performance among
different clients.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the machine learning based artificial intelligence (AI) technologies often rely heavily on large amounts
of training data. However, together with the over-collection
and over-utilization of personal private data, the risks of privacy disclosure and abuse are increased. For example, in
finance, medical treatment and smart city applications, data
leakage may lead to huge loss on properties, and even life.
* Ling-Yu Duan is the corresponding author.

global
model

aggregation

aggregation

global/group
information
exploitation

…

…
local models

…
feature &
optimization
objective
alignment

…
local models

client data
model

(a) FedAVG

…
posterior models

(b) FedUFO

Figure 1. A comparison of the traditional FedAVG and the proposed FedUFO. By making use of the global, group data information extracted from global and local models, our FedUFO effectively aligns the feature representation and optimization objective
on local, group and global levels.

To establish health and sustainable AI ecosystem, McMahan et al. [20] proposed a new machine learning paradigm
- Federated Learning (FL), which breaks the data barriers
across different clients (such as regions and industries) under privacy-protection constraint. The main idea of FL is to
change the transmission and aggregation from data-level to
model-level, so that the advantage of big data can be taken
in the AI applications without privacy disclosure. Inspired
by this paradigm, data-preserving decentralized learning
has been studied in a variety of applications [3, 4, 5, 18].
In real-world FL tasks, data distributions of different
clients may vary since the data are usually collected from
different sources or scenarios. However, existing FL approaches often simply ignore the distribution divergence,
and it has been demonstrated that performance of the global
model on non-IID (non-independent and identical distribution) federated data can be much worse than that on the IID
ones [22, 9, 16]. The reason is proved to be the weight divergence derived from the discrepant data distribution [32, 19],
i.e., the local models are optimized to different directions,
which are far from the ideal. The distribution divergence of

4420

