DeepPRO: Deep Partial Point Cloud Registration of Objects
Donghoon Lee

Onur C. Hamsici

Steven Feng
Apple

Prachee Sharma

Thorsten Gernoth

{donghoonlee,ohamsici,shuo_feng,prachee_sharma,tgernoth}@apple.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of online and real-time registration of partial point clouds obtained from an unseen realworld rigid object without knowing its 3D model. The point
cloud is partial as it is obtained by a depth sensor capturing
only the visible part of the object from a certain viewpoint. It
introduces two main challenges: 1) two partial point clouds
do not fully overlap and 2) keypoints tend to be less reliable
when the visible part of the object does not have salient local
structures. To address these issues, we propose DeepPRO, a
keypoint-free and an end-to-end trainable deep neural network. Its core idea is inspired by how humans align two
point clouds: we can imagine how two point clouds will look
like after the registration based on their shape. To realize
the idea, DeepPRO has inputs of two partial point clouds
and directly predicts the point-wise location of the aligned
point cloud. By preserving the ordering of points during
the prediction, we enjoy dense correspondences between
input and predicted point clouds when inferring rigid transform parameters. We conduct extensive experiments on the
real-world Linemod and synthetic ModelNet40 datasets. In
addition, we collect and evaluate on the PRO1k dataset, a
large-scale version of Linemod meant to test generalization
to real-world scans. Results show that DeepPRO achieves
the best accuracy against thirteen strong baseline methods,
e.g., 2.2mm ADD on the Linemod dataset, while running 50
fps on mobile devices.

1. Introduction
In this work, we are interested in developing an online
and a real-time point cloud registration algorithm for unseen
real-world objects. In other words, as we move a depth sensor or an object, we aim to find 3D rotation and translation
parameters between the depth sensor and object based on the
captured point cloud at the current and previous frames. Estimated parameters by the registration algorithm is essential
for a number of applications such as tracking and reconstruction of the 3D object. We list key challenges for this problem
that are not fully addressed in existing literature.

First, we observe a part of an object from a certain viewpoint at a time. Without knowing 3D model of unseen objects, the only input are two partial point clouds. Since input
partial point clouds do not fully overlap with each other, unlike previous works [32, 39, 28], we cannot make one-to-one
correspondence assumption between input points or point
clusters. In addition, recent works on object point cloud
registration rely on 3D CAD models in the ModelNet40
dataset [35] as shown in Table 1. Due to a big domain gap
between real-world partial point clouds and synthetic 3D
CAD models as shown in Figure 1, [2, 32, 33, 38] use different heuristic approaches to simulate the partial observation,
e.g., pick a random point and gather its neighbors from the
full point cloud. However, such methods do not properly
model complex self-occlusions, object materials and sensor
noises of real data. In our experiments, state-of-the-art models trained on the synthetic dataset do not generalize well on
real-world data as shown in Figure 4 and Table 2.
Second, it is often difficult to extract meaningful number
of precise keypoints for object point clouds. For outdoorscale [12, 19] or indoor-scale [40] point clouds, it is relatively
easy to extract keypoints as they have rich local structures
and salient geometries [18, 9, 8]. However, for small objects,
its partial point cloud might not always contain a number of
distinguishable local structures for keypoints. In addition,
irregular sensor noises around different object materials and
depth edges exacerbate the reliability of keypoints. We empirically demonstrate that existing keypoint-based methods
that work well on outdoor or indoor point clouds become
less accurate on object point clouds in Table 2.
Third, the registration algorithm should be efficient and
effective for a small baseline. We can focus on the small
baseline since modern depth sensing devices typically capture at 30 fps or faster. Hence, the pose difference between
two consecutive frames would be small. To achieve real-time
performance, it is encouraged to avoid expensive multi-step
iterative approaches such as the classical iterative closest
point (ICP) [5] and its variants for global optimization [37].
However, these expensive methods are often adopted in offline point cloud registration systems [41, 1, 29] or used as
an ad-hoc post-processing [32, 6] to improve the accuracy.

5683

