Pyramid Point Cloud Transformer for Large-Scale Place Recognition
Le Hui, Hang Yang, Mingmei Cheng, Jin Xie∗ and Jian Yang∗
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{le.hui, hangyang, chengmm, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep learning based point cloud descriptors
have achieved impressive results in the place recognition
task. Nonetheless, due to the sparsity of point clouds, how
to extract discriminative local features of point clouds to
efficiently form a global descriptor is still a challenging
problem. In this paper, we propose a pyramid point cloud
transformer network (PPT-Net) to learn the discriminative
global descriptors from point clouds for efficient retrieval.
Specifically, we first develop a pyramid point transformer
module that adaptively learns the spatial relationship of the
different k-NN neighboring points of point clouds, where
the grouped self-attention is proposed to extract discriminative local features of the point clouds. The grouped
self-attention not only enhances long-term dependencies
of the point clouds, but also reduces the computational
cost. In order to obtain discriminative global descriptors,
we construct a pyramid VLAD module to aggregate the
multi-scale feature maps of point clouds into the global
descriptors. By applying VLAD pooling on multi-scale
feature maps, we utilize the context gating mechanism on
the multiple global descriptors to adaptively weight the
multi-scale global context information into the final global
descriptor. Experimental results on the Oxford dataset and
three in-house datasets show that our method achieves the
state-of-the-art on the point cloud based place recognition
task. Code is available at https://github.com/
fpthink/PPT-Net.

1. Introduction
Place recognition is an important task in the computer
vision and robotics communities, and has been widely
applied to many fields such as autonomous driving [19, 20,
∗ Corresponding authors

Le Hui, Hang Yang, Mingmei Cheng, Jin Xie and Jian Yang are
with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for HighDimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key
Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, China.

26], augmented reality [34], robot navigation [16, 33, 27],
and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [2, 14,
29]. Place recognition is mainly divided into two categories:
image-based and point cloud-based. For image-based place
recognition, given a query image of a local scene, the goal
is to retrieve the best match in the database, so that the exact
location of the query image relative to the reference map of
the scenarios can be determined. However, the image-based
place recognition is sensitive to environmental changes,
such as seasonal and illumination changes. Therefore, point
cloud-based place recognition approaches are proposed to
alleviate these limitations by using 3D point clouds.
In the past few years, with the development of various point cloud processing methods [36, 38, 50, 46, 4],
many efforts have been made for point cloud based place
recognition. Mikaela et al. [47] proposed PointNetVLAD,
which first uses PointNet [36] to extract point features and
then adopts NetVLAD [1] to generate global descriptors
for retrieval. Based on PointNetVLAD, Zhang et al. [57]
proposed the point contextual attention network (PCAN)
to predict the significance of point features to generate
discriminative global descriptors. However, the point features of these methods are obtained through PointNet,
which cannot capture the local geometric structures of
the point clouds. Liu et al. [30] proposed a large-scale
location description network (LPD-Net), which employs
a graph-based aggregation module in both coordinate and
feature spaces to extract the local features of the point
clouds by combining the handcrafted features of the point
clouds. Lately, Xia et al. [52] proposed a self-attention
and orientation encoding network (SOE-Net) that uses the
self-attention unit to capture the spatial relationship of the
point clouds to enhance local features. Nevertheless, the
point-wise self-attention operation cannot fully exploit the
neighboring structure of each point to capture the longterm dependencies between different regions of the point
clouds well. Particularly, since the multi-scale structure information of the regions is not incorporated in the generated
local descriptors, they may not be discriminative enough
to characterize the regions in the point clouds with varying
densities.

6098

