Gait Recognition in the Wild: A Benchmark
∗

Zheng Zhu1* Xianda Guo2 Tian Yang2 Junjie Huang2
†
Jiankang Deng3 Guan Huang2 Dalong Du2 Jiwen Lu1 Jie Zhou1
1
Tsinghua University 2 XForwardAI 3 Imperial College London
{zhengzhu,lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn {xianda.guo,guan.huang,dalong.du}@xforwardai.com

Abstract
Gait benchmarks empower the research community to
train and evaluate high-performance gait recognition systems. Even though growing efforts have been devoted to
cross-view recognition, academia is restricted by current
existing databases captured in the controlled environment. In this paper, we contribute a new benchmark for Gait
REcognition in the Wild (GREW). The GREW dataset is
constructed from natural videos, which contains hundreds
of cameras and thousands of hours streams in open systems. With tremendous manual annotations, the GREW
consists of 26K identities and 128K sequences with rich
attributes for unconstrained gait recognition. Moreover,
we add a distractor set of over 233K sequences, making
it more suitable for real-world applications. Compared
with prevailing predefined cross-view datasets, the GREW
has diverse and practical view variations, as well as more
natural challenging factors. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first large-scale dataset for gait recognition in the wild. Equipped with this benchmark, we dissect
the unconstrained gait recognition problem. Representative appearance-based and model-based methods are explored, and comprehensive baselines are established. Experimental results show (1) The proposed GREW benchmark is necessary for training and evaluating gait recognizer in the wild. (2) For state-of-the-art gait recognition approaches, there is a lot of room for improvement.
(3) The GREW benchmark can be used as effective pretraining for controlled gait recognition. Benchmark website
is https://www.grew-benchmark.org/.

1. Introduction
Gait recognition aims to identify a person according to
his/her walking style in a video. Compared with face, fingerprint, iris and palmprint, gait is hard to disguise and can
work at a long distance, giving it unique potential for crime
prevention, forensic identification, and social security.
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

(a) CASIA-B

(b) OU-MVLP

(c) A subject with clothes changing in the GREW (Cropped)

Figure 1: Examples comparison for CASIA-B [74], OU-MVLP [51] and
the proposed GREW. The first two are captured under constrained environments, while the GREW is constructed in the wild. Since OU-MVLP [51]
does not release RGB data, visualization results from its original paper are
adopted. Faces are masked in the GREW for privacy concern.

Recognizing gait under a controlled environment has
achieved significant progress due to the boom of deep learning. The essential engines of recent gait recognition consist
of network architecture evolution [20, 9, 62, 65, 16, 72, 71,
31, 44, 50, 4, 63, 67, 39], loss function design [78, 17, 75,
79], and growing gait benchmarks [42, 7, 74, 37, 51, 23].
Even though gait recognition has achieved impressive advance in past years and it possesses the unique advantage of
long-distance recognition, this technique has not yet been
widely deployed in real-world applications. A notable obstacle is that there is almost no public benchmark to train
and evaluate gait recognizer in the wild.
To our knowledge, most gait datasets are captured in relatively fixed and constrained environments such as laboratory or static outdoors. CASIA-B [74] and OU-MVLP
[51] are most popularly used datasets in recent gait recognition research as shown in Figure 1. CASIA-B contains
124 subjects and 13,640 sequences, which is constructed in
2006. OU-MVLP consists of 10,307 identities and 288,596
walking videos, making it a big gait dataset with respect to #subjects. The statistics of more datasets are shown

14789

