Re-energizing Domain Discriminator with Sample Relabeling
for Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Xin Jin1
1

Cuiling Lan2 *

Wenjun Zeng2
2

University of Science and Technology of China

Zhibo Chen1∗

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China

jinxustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn {culan,wezeng}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Many unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods
exploit domain adversarial training to align the features to
reduce domain gap, where a feature extractor is trained to
fool a domain discriminator in order to have aligned feature
distributions. The discrimination capability of the domain
classifier w.r.t. the increasingly aligned feature distributions
deteriorates as training goes on, thus cannot effectively further drive the training of feature extractor. In this work,
we propose an efficient optimization strategy named Reenforceable Adversarial Domain Adaptation (RADA) which
aims to re-energize the domain discriminator during the
training by using dynamic domain labels. Particularly, we
relabel the well aligned target domain samples as source
domain samples on the fly. Such relabeling makes the less
separable distributions more separable, and thus leads to a
more powerful domain classifier w.r.t. the new data distributions, which in turn further drives feature alignment. Extensive experiments on multiple UDA benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness and superiority of our RADA.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of deep learning has helped
achieve significant improvements for many computer vision
tasks. Those learned models usually have high performance
on the test data that share similar characteristics as the training data, but suffer from significant performance degradation when deployed in new environments [11, 13, 26, 25].
There are domain gaps between the training source data
(source domain) and the testing target data (target domain).
Besides, annotating the data for the target domain is expensive and time-consuming. To mitigate the notorious domain
gap issue without manual annotation efforts, unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) [11, 13, 19, 22, 64, 27, 9] is recently extensively explored, which aims to learn from labeled source domain and unlabeled target domain.
* Corresponding Author.

source data

chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

target data

Source

relabeled
target samples

object
classifier

domain
classifier

Source

Target

(a) Previous Methods

Target

(b) Our Method

Figure 1: Motivation and our idea. (a) Previous methods
align domain distributions by adversarially training the domain classifier with static domain labels of the samples.
The discrimination capability of the domain classifier w.r.t.
the increasingly aligned feature distributions deteriorates as
training goes on (i.e., more samples are inseparable), which
in turn provides less driving power to the feature extractor
for alignment and prevents effective optimization. (b) We
propose a new solution which allows dynamic domain labels. We relabel the “well aligned” target samples as source
domain, which makes the two less separable distributions
more separable and thus leads to a more powerful domain
classifier, which in turn further drives feature alignment.
For domain adaptation, theoretical analysis by BenDavid et al. [1] shows that reducing the feature differences
between the source and target domains can reduce the upper bound of the target domain error. Many domain adaptation methods tend to learn domain invariant/transferable
feature representations [15, 17, 14, 35]. Inspired by the
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [16], adversarial learning has been successfully applied for UDA [13, 46,
7, 43, 49, 31, 62, 10]. The core idea of adversarial domain adaptation approaches is to train a domain discriminator/classifier to distinguish between the source and target
domains and train the generator/feature extractor to minimize the feature discrepancy between the source and target domain in order to fool the discriminator in a minmax
two-player game. High discrimination capability for the domain discriminator is desired in order to be able to drive the
feature alignment. Typically, a domain adversarial neural

9174

