Beyond Road Extraction: A Dataset for Map Update using Aerial Images
Favyen Bastani
MIT CSAIL

Sam Madden
MIT CSAIL

favyen@csail.mit.edu

madden@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
The increasing availability of satellite and aerial imagery has sparked substantial interest in automatically updating street maps by processing aerial images. Until
now, the community has largely focused on road extraction, where road networks are inferred from scratch from
an aerial image. However, given that relatively high-quality
maps exist in most parts of the world, in practice, inference
approaches must be applied to update existing maps rather
than infer new ones. With recent road extraction methods
showing high accuracy, we argue that it is time to transition to the more practical map update task, where an existing map is updated by adding, removing, and shifting roads,
without introducing errors in parts of the existing map that
remain up-to-date. In this paper, we develop a new dataset
called MUNO21 for the map update task, and show that it
poses several new and interesting research challenges. We
evaluate several state-of-the-art road extraction methods on
MUNO21, and find that substantial further improvements in
accuracy will be needed to realize automatic map update.

1. Introduction
Maintaining street map datasets is an extraordinarily
labor-intensive and expensive process, with several companies today spending hundreds of millions of dollars annually on the task [14, 15]. The cost of updating maps, coupled with the increasing availability of aerial and satellite
imagery, has sparked much interest in automatically processing aerial images to update maps [2, 3, 8, 13, 16, 17,
18, 19, 24, 25, 29, 30, 31]. To date, most proposed methods have focused on road extraction, where methods infer
all roads in an aerial image. The inferred road network
is generally represented as a spatial network, i.e., a graph
where vertices are assigned longitude-latitude coordinates
and edges correspond to detected roads. Road extraction
methods are typically evaluated by comparing inferred road
networks with a ground truth road network (either handlabeled in the aerial image or taken from a map dataset).
However, inferred road networks are not directly useful:

instead, in practice, inference approaches must identify positions where existing maps do not reflect the current physical road network, and update the map at those positions —
overwriting the existing map would not be sensible since it
contains street names, speed limits, tunnels, and other crucial features not visible from an aerial view.
A naive approach for updating maps using existing road
extraction methods is to fuse inferred roads into the existing
map: we can first remove redundant inferred roads that duplicate roads already present in the map, and integrate the
remaining inferred roads. However, this approach has several shortcomings: (a) connections between inferred roads
and the existing map may not be inferred accurately; (b)
roads in the existing map that have been physically removed
or were simply incorrect will remain in the map; and (c) areas where the road topology has changed (e.g., a junction
modified into a roundabout) will not be updated correctly.
Thus, map update is not only more directly practical
than road extraction, but also poses several new and interesting research challenges. We argue that, with state-ofthe-art methods reporting high accuracy scores on road extraction (between 75% and 85% across several metrics and
datasets [13, 25]), it is time for a shift in focus from road extraction to the more general and complex map update task.
In this paper, we develop a large-scale and comprehensive dataset for the map update task. We call our
dataset MUNO211 , for MapUpdate-NAIP/OSM, since we
use NAIP aerial imagery2 and OpenStreetMap (OSM) data.
MUNO21 spans regions totaling over 6000 sq km in area,
spread over 21 cities across the United States. It includes
time series of aerial images and map data to capture the
evolution of both the physical road network and real street
maps over time — we collect NAIP aerial images at each
of four years over the eight-year timespan from 2012–2019,
and OSM extracts from each year during the same timespan. We focus on the US in part due to the availability of
public domain aerial imagery, but also because the US is a
1 The MUNO21 dataset and code are available at https://favyen.
com/muno21/.
2 The National Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP) provides public
domain 60-100 cm/pixel aerial imagery over the continental US.

11905

