Learning of Visual Relations: The Devil is in the Tails
Alakh Desai* 1 , Tz-Ying Wu* 1 , Subarna Tripathi2 , and Nuno Vasconcelos1
1

University of California San Diego, USA
2
Intel Labs, USA

Abstract
Model

Significant effort has been recently devoted to modeling
visual relations. This has mostly addressed the design of
architectures, typically by adding parameters and increasing model complexity. However, visual relation learning is
a long-tailed problem, due to the combinatorial nature of
joint reasoning about groups of objects. Increasing model
complexity is, in general, ill-suited for long-tailed problems
due to their tendency to overfit. In this paper, we explore
an alternative hypothesis, denoted the Devil is in the Tails.
Under this hypothesis, better performance is achieved by
keeping the model simple but improving its ability to cope
with long-tailed distributions. To test this hypothesis, we devise a new approach for training visual relationships models, which is inspired by state-of-the-art long-tailed recognition literature. This is based on an iterative decoupled
training scheme, denoted Decoupled Training for Devil in
the Tails (DT2). DT2 employs a novel sampling approach,
Alternating Class-Balanced Sampling (ACBS), to capture
the interplay between the long-tailed entity and predicate
distributions of visual relations. Results show that, with an
extremely simple architecture, DT2-ACBS significantly outperforms much more complex state-of-the-art methods on
scene graph generation tasks. This suggests that the development of sophisticated models must be considered in
tandem with the long-tailed nature of the problem.

1. Introduction
Scene graphs provide a compact structured description
of complex scenes and the semantic relationships between
objects/entities. Modeling and learning such visual relations benefit several high-level Vision-and-Language tasks
such as caption generation [45, 44], visual question answering [16], image retrieval [20, 34], image generation
[19, 24, 33] and robotic manipulation planning [29]. Scene
* Authors have equal contributions.

Visual Relations
Robot
Kicking

Ball

Knowledge

Knowledge

Knowledge

Figure 1. The devil is in the tails: Architecture design and learning
process of visual relations need to consider the long-tailed nature
of both entity and predicate class distributions.

graph generation requires the understanding of the locations and the class associated with the entity as well as
the relationship between a pair of entities. The relationship between a pair of entities is usually formulated as a
< subject − predicate − object > tuple, where subject
and object are two entities. Scene graph generation (SGG)
faces the challenges from both the long-tailed entity recognition problem and visual relation recognition problem.
While long-tailed entity recognition has been addressed
in the literature [28, 1, 5, 21], the imbalance becomes more
prevalent for the SGG tasks, owing to the severe long-tailed
nature of the predicate distribution. Take Figure 1 for example. While the class of the subject (“ball”) is popular, the
class of the object (“robot”) and the predicate (“kicking”)
can be infrequent, leading to the rare occurrence of the tuple “robot-kicking-ball”. This shows that even when the
entity class distribution is balanced, the imbalanced predicate class distribution can lead to a more imbalanced tuple distribution. Of course, such imbalance issues can be
exacerbated if both entity classes and predicate classes are
skewed (e.g. “tripod-mounted-on-donkey”). The combination of long-tailed entity and predicate classes makes SGG

15404

