InSeGAN: A Generative Approach to Segmenting
Identical Instances in Depth Images
Anoop Cherian1 Gonçalo Dias Pais2∗ Siddarth Jain1 Tim K. Marks1 Alan Sullivan1
1
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs (MERL), Cambridge, MA
2
Instituto Superior Técnico, University of Lisbon, Portugal

1. Introduction
Identifying (nearly) identical instances of objects is a
problem that is ubiquitous in daily life. For example, when
taking a paperclip from a container, choosing an apple from
a box, or removing a book from a library shelf, humans
subconsciously solve this problem because we have an understanding of what the individual instances are. How∗ Work done as part of an internship at MERL.

Rendered Single Instances by InstaGAN

Rendered Image

Input Depth Image

goncalo.pais@tecnico.ulisboa.pt

Segmentation

2

Rendered Single Instances by InstaGAN

In this paper, we present InSeGAN, an unsupervised
3D generative adversarial network (GAN) for segmenting
(nearly) identical instances of rigid objects in depth images. Using an analysis-by-synthesis approach, we design
a novel GAN architecture to synthesize a multiple-instance
depth image with independent control over each instance.
InSeGAN takes in a set of code vectors (e.g., random noise
vectors), each encoding the 3D pose of an object that is represented by a learned implicit object template. The generator has two distinct modules. The first module, the instance
feature generator, uses each encoded pose to transform the
implicit template into a feature map representation of each
object instance. The second module, the depth image renderer, aggregates all of the single-instance feature maps
output by the first module and generates a multiple-instance
depth image. A discriminator distinguishes the generated
multiple-instance depth images from the distribution of true
depth images. To use our model for instance segmentation,
we propose an instance pose encoder that learns to take
in a generated depth image and reproduce the pose code
vectors for all of the object instances. To evaluate our approach, we introduce a new synthetic dataset, “Insta-10,”
consisting of 100,000 depth images, each with 5 instances
of an object from one of 10 classes. Our experiments on
Insta-10, as well as on real-world noisy depth images, show
that InSeGAN achieves state-of-the-art performance, often
outperforming prior methods by large margins.

Rendered Image

Abstract

Input Depth Image

{cherian, sjain, tmarks, sullivan}@merl.com

Segmentation

1

Figure 1. Segmentations and single instances disentangled by InSeGAN on two multiple-instance depth images (Left: Nut with
5 instances; Right: Cone with 10 instances—challenging). InSeGAN needs only unlabelled multiple-instance depth images for
training. For each input image, the hallucinated depth image (“rendered image”) and the single instances disentangled from the depth
image (“rendered single instances”) are shown. We use depth
pooling (Z-buffering) and thresholding to produce instance segmentation (“segmentation”) from the generated single instances.
Note that our method learns the shape of the object automatically.

ever, when robots are deployed for such a picking task, they
need to be able to identify the instances for planning their
grasp and approach [30, 2]. Such a problem is commonplace in large manufacturing, industrial, and agricultural
contexts [43, 42, 40, 16, 20]. Examples include an industrial robot picking parts from a bin, a warehouse robot picking and placing packages into a delivery truck, or even a
fruit-picking robot picking identical fruits in a supermarket.
In these scenarios, the robot’s owners often have no access
to a 3D model of the object to be picked, and annotating individual instances for training can be costly, inconvenient,
and unscalable. However, they may have access to a large
number of unlabeled images each containing multiple instances of the object, such as depth images of boxes as they

10023

