Deep Hybrid Self-Prior for Full 3D Mesh Generation
Xingkui Wei1∗

1

Zhengqing Chen1∗
Fudan University

2

Yanwei Fu1† Zhaopeng Cui2 Yinda Zhang3†
Zhejiang University 3 Google

Input
Poisson
Point2Mesh
Ours
Poisson
Ours
Figure 1. We propose to utilize the deep hybrid 2D-3D self-prior in neural networks to generate the high-quality textured 3D
mesh model from the sparse colored point cloud.

Abstract
We present a deep learning pipeline that leverages network self-prior to recover a full 3D model consisting of both
a triangular mesh and a texture map from the colored 3D
point cloud. Different from previous methods either exploiting 2D self-prior for image editing or 3D self-prior for pure
surface reconstruction, we propose to exploit a novel hybrid
2D-3D self-prior in deep neural networks to signiﬁcantly
improve the geometry quality and produce a high-resolution
texture map, which is typically missing from the output of
commodity-level 3D scanners. In particular, we ﬁrst generate an initial mesh using a 3D convolutional neural network with 3D self-prior, and then encode both 3D information and color information in the 2D UV atlas, which is further reﬁned by 2D convolutional neural networks with the
self-prior. In this way, both 2D and 3D self-priors are utilized for the mesh and texture recovery. Experiments show
that, without the need of any additional training data, our
method recovers the 3D textured mesh model of high quality from sparse input, and outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods in terms of both geometry and texture quality.

1. Introduction
Textured mesh is one of the most desirable representation for 3D objects, which has been widely used in many
applications, such as industrial design and digital entertainment because it enables not only the 3D related task like
∗ Equal contribution

† Corresponding author

Project page: https://yqdch.github.io/DHSP3D

collision detection but also the rendering capability. As a result, the ability to create a full 3D model consisting of both a
3D triangular mesh and a texture map is a long-lasting problem and consistently draws attention. While purely imagebased solution exists [24], the 3D scanners with active illumination usually provide much more accurate 3D models
and are robust against challenging cases, e.g. texture-less
regions. Unfortunately, many commodity-level 3D scanners, e.g. Artec Eva [1], iReal 2S [3], Einscan Pro [2] etc,
only produce colored point clouds as the output, where the
object surfaces and texture maps are missing. There are
plenty of works that generate a mesh model from a point
cloud, but they usually rely on strong assumptions [42, 36],
require pre-training on large dataset [8, 39, 18, 11], and do
not produce a texture.
In this work, we propose a method for reconstructing
a full 3D model, i.e., a textured triangular mesh, from a
colored point cloud. This task is highly under-constrained,
and thus prior knowledge is extremely important. It is well
known that deep learning model is good at learning prior
from a large dataset [42, 18, 11], but also at the same time
prone to overﬁtting to the dataset bias. Instead, Ulyanov
et al. [48] proposed to randomly initialize a convolutional
neural network (CNN) to upsample a given image, which
used the network structure as a prior without the need of
any additional training data. Sharing the similar spirit, we
resort to such self-prior naturally encoded in the neural network for the full 3D model reconstruction task. As one of
the most related prior arts, Hanocka et al. [23] proposed
to create a mesh, without texture, from a point cloud using a MeshCNN [22] to deform from the convex hull. They
found that the graph-based CNN can also learn the self-prior

5805

