Adaptive Boundary Proposal Network for Arbitrary Shape Text Detection
Shi-Xue Zhang1 , Xiaobin Zhu1∗, Chun Yang1 , Hongfa Wang3 , Xu-Cheng Yin1,2,4
1

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2

USTB-EEasyTech Joint Lab of Artificial Intelligence, 3 Tencent Technology (Shenzhen) Co.
4

Ltd

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, University of Science and Technology Beijing

zhangshixue111@163.com, {zhuxiaobin, chunyang, xuchengyin}@ustb.edu.cn, hongfawang@tencent.com

Abstract
Arbitrary shape text detection is a challenging task due
to the high complexity and variety of scene texts. In this
work, we propose a novel adaptive boundary proposal network for arbitrary shape text detection, which can learn
to directly produce accurate boundary for arbitrary shape
text without any post-processing. Our method mainly consists of a boundary proposal model and an innovative adaptive boundary deformation model. The boundary proposal
model constructed by multi-layer dilated convolutions is
adopted to produce prior information (including classification map, distance field, and direction field) and coarse
boundary proposals. The adaptive boundary deformation
model is an encoder-decoder network, in which the encoder
mainly consists of a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)
and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). It aims to perform boundary deformation in an iterative way for obtaining text instance shape guided by prior information from
the boundary proposal model. In this way, our method can
directly and efficiently generate accurate text boundaries
without complex post-processing. Extensive experiments on
publicly available datasets demonstrate the state-of-the-art
performance of our method. Code is available at the website: https://github.com/GXYM/TextBPN .

1. Introduction
Scene text detection has been widely applied in various
applications, such as online education, product search, and
video scene parsing. Benefiting from the rapid development
of deep learning, text detection methods [29, 11, 42, 22]
have achieved impressive performance on images in which
text instances are regular shape or aspect ratio. Recently,
arbitrary shape text detection has attracted ever-increasing
interests for it can well adapt to real applications.
Although arbitrary shape text detection methods [2, 12,
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the boundary proposal deformation process: (a) Boundary proposal; (b) Sampling on boundaries; (c) Extracting node feature matrix; (d) Learning offsets of sampling vertexes via adaptive boundary deformation model.

41] have achieved great improvements in recent years, there
are still many issues to be addressed due to the challenging
characteristic of scene texts, including varied shape, texture,
scale, etc. Segmentation-based methods [37, 33, 12] have
sparked a new wave of arbitrary shape text detection that
locate text regions by a pixel-level prediction for enhancing
the robustness to shape variations. However, there are still
two main problems that remain to be explored.
One problem is that segmentation-based methods tend
to fail in separating adjacent text instances in image. To
solve this problem, existing methods [19, 34, 30, 40] usually shrink annotation boundaries as kernels (e.g., text kernel [34], text center region [19]) to distinguish different
text instances. For rebuilding a complete text, these methods usually need to merge the pixels in text regions to kernels by pre-defined expansion rules or auxiliary information
(e.g., similarity vector [34]). However, the merging process
in [37, 33] are always performed by pixel-to-pixel, which is
complex and inefficient. The other problem is that the final
detected contours of texts in existing segmentation-based
methods usually contain a lot of defects and noises. This
because the performance of existing segmentation-based
methods [4, 12, 33, 34] greatly relies on the accuracy of
contour detection, neglecting adaptively adjusting detected
contours. Different from generic object instances, text instances usually don’t have closed contours and often contain

1305

