Improving Generalization of Batch Whitening by
Convolutional Unit Optimization
Yooshin Cho

Hanbyel Cho
Youngsoo Kim
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea

Junmo Kim

{choys95, tlrl4658, ysoo.kim, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Batch Whitening is a technique that accelerates and stabilizes training by transforming input features to have a
zero mean (Centering) and a unit variance (Scaling), and
by removing linear correlation between channels (Decorrelation). In commonly used structures, which are empirically optimized with Batch Normalization, the normalization layer appears between convolution and activation function. Following Batch Whitening studies have employed the
same structure without further analysis; even Batch Whitening was analyzed on the premise that the input of a linear layer is whitened. To bridge the gap, we propose a
new Convolutional Unit that in line with the theory, and
our method generally improves the performance of Batch
Whitening. Moreover, we show the inefficacy of the original
Convolutional Unit by investigating rank and correlation of
features. As our method is employable off-the-shelf whitening modules, we use Iterative Normalization (IterNorm), the
state-of-the-art whitening module, and obtain significantly
improved performance on five image classification datasets:
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, CUB-200-2011, Stanford Dogs,
and ImageNet. Notably, we verify that our method improves
stability and performance of whitening when using large
learning rate, group size, and iteration number. Code is
available at https://github.com/YooshinCho/
pytorch_ConvUnitOptimization.

1. Introduction
Batch Normalization (BN) [11] is considered as a key
component of deep neural networks. It significantly stabilizes and accelerates training by normalizing input features
to have a zero mean (Centering) and a unit variance (Scaling), which is followed by a linear transform. Numerous
follow-up studies have been proposed following the success
of BN, and Batch Whitening [8, 20, 10, 9] studies were proposed that not only centering and scaling, but also removing
linear correlation between input channels (Decorrelation) to

3x3 Conv

Norm

ReLU

(a) Original

Norm

Grouped
Shift

Grouped
Shift

1x1 Conv

Norm

Norm

1x1 Conv

ReLU

ReLU

(c) Shift

(d) Ours+Shift

3x3 Conv

ReLU

(b) Ours

Figure 1: Illustration of the Convolutional Units. (a) is the
Original Convolutional Unit. (b) is our modified Convolutional Unit that whitens the input of convolution. (c) is the
Original Convolutional Unit that employs Grouped Shift.
(d) is our modified Convolutional Unit that employs shift to
directly whiten the input of point-wise convolution
improve BN. Although it is well-known that decorrelation
increases network capacity, and stabilizes and accelerates
training, it is not used in practice due to its ambiguity and
complexity. Unlike centering and scaling, decorrelation is
not an one-to-one mapping transform, and obtaining the inverse square root of the covariance matrix is computationally complex.
Naturally, previous whitening studies have focused on
introducing computationally efficient whitening methods,
and investigating the reasons for the varying performance
of each whitening method. Specifically, whitening methods [8, 20, 10] based on ZCA [2, 13], Cholesky Decomposition [5], and Newton’s iterations [3] were proposed,
and Iterative Normalization (IterNorm) [10], based on Newton’s iterations, archeived the state-of-the-art performance
owing to its small stochasticity. The superiority of IterNorm was investigated in [9] by comparing it with other
whitening modules, but the performance gain is yet to be
fully explored. To investigate the efficacy of IterNorm, we
train ResNet [7] and Wide-Residual Network (WRN) [26]

5321

