Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation with
Pixel-Level Contrastive Learning from a Class-wise Memory Bank
Inigo Alonso1
1

Alberto Sabater1
David Ferstl2
Luis Montesano1,3
Ana C. Murillo1
RoPeRT group, at DIIS - I3A, Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain
2
Magic Leap, Zürich, Switzerland
3
Bitbrain, Zaragoza, Spain

{inigo, asabater, montesano, acm}@unizar.es, dferstl@magicleap.com

Abstract
This work presents a novel approach for semi-supervised
semantic segmentation. The key element of this approach
is our contrastive learning module that enforces the segmentation network to yield similar pixel-level feature representations for same-class samples across the whole dataset.
To achieve this, we maintain a memory bank which is continuously updated with relevant and high-quality feature
vectors from labeled data. In an end-to-end training, the
features from both labeled and unlabeled data are optimized to be similar to same-class samples from the memory bank. Our approach not only outperforms the current state-of-the-art for semi-supervised semantic segmentation but also for semi-supervised domain adaptation on
well-known public benchmarks, with larger improvements
on the most challenging scenarios, i.e., less available labeled data. Code is available at https://github.com/
Shathe/SemiSeg-Contrastive

1. Introduction
The goal of semantic segmentation consists in assigning a semantic class label to each pixel in an image. It is
an essential computer vision task for semantic scene understanding that plays a relevant role in many applications such
as medical imaging [30] or autonomous driving [2]. As for
many other computer vision tasks, deep convolutional neural networks have shown significant improvements in semantic segmentation [2, 19, 1]. All these examples follow
supervised learning approaches requiring a large set of annotated data to generalize well. However, the availability of
labeled data is a common bottleneck in supervised learning,
especially for tasks such as semantic segmentation, which
require tedious and expensive per-pixel annotations.
Semi-supervised learning assumes that only a small subset of the available data is labeled. It tackles the issue of

Figure 1. Proposed contrastive learning module overview. At
each training iteration, the teacher network fξ updates the feature
memory bank with a subset of selected features from labeled samples. Then, the student network fθ extracts features △ from both
labeled and unlabeled samples, which are optimized to be similar
to same-class features from the memory bank ○.

limited labeled data by extracting knowledge from unlabeled samples. Semi-supervised learning has been applied
to a wide range of applications [37], including semantic
segmentation [11, 17, 26]. Previous semi-supervised segmentation works are mostly based on per-sample entropy
minimization [17, 21, 28] and per-sample consistency regularization [11, 36, 28]. These segmentation methods do not
enforce any type of structure on the learned features to increase inter-class separability across the whole dataset. Our
hypothesis is that overcoming this limitation can lead to better feature learning and performance, especially when the
amount of available labeled data is low.
This work presents a novel approach for semi-supervised
semantic segmentation, following a teacher-student scheme

8219

