PrimitiveNet: Primitive Instance Segmentation with Local Primitive Embedding
under Adversarial Metric
Jingwei Huang1 , Yanfeng Zhang1 , and Mingwei Sun1,2
1

Riemann Lab, Huawei Technologies.

2

Wuhan University

Abstract
We present PrimitiveNet, a novel approach for highresolution primitive instance segmentation from point
clouds on a large scale. Our key idea is to transform the
global segmentation problem into easier local tasks. We
train a high-resolution primitive embedding network to predict explicit geometry features and implicit latent features
for each point. The embedding is jointly trained with an
adversarial network as a primitive discriminator to decide
whether points are from the same primitive instance in local neighborhoods. Such local supervision encourages the
learned embedding and discriminator to describe local surface properties and robustly distinguish different instances.
At inference time, network predictions are followed by a region growing method to finalize the segmentation. Experiments show that our method outperforms existing state-ofthe-arts based on mean average precision by a significant
margin (46.3%) on ABC dataset [31]. We can process extremely large real scenes covering more than 0.1km2 . Ablation studies highlight the contribution of our core designs.
Finally, our method can improve geometry processing algorithms to abstract scans as lightweight models. Code and
data will be available based on Pytorch1 and Mindspore2 .

1. Introduction
3D scanning techniques have made rapid advances in recent years with 3D sensors. State-of-the-art algorithms [47,
28, 65, 12] or commercial softwares [1] ease the reconstruction and digitization of the real-world environments. However the quality and the complexity of the output model
are below the required standards for target applications
including gaming and virtual/augmented reality (AR/VR).
For example, a typical indoor scan contains several mil1 https://github.com/hjwdzh/PrimitiveNet
2 https://gitee.com/mindspore/mindspore/tree/
master/model_zoo/research/3d/PrimitiveNet

(a) Object segmentation

(b) Chunk segmentation

(c) Scene segmentation

(d) Scene abstraction

Figure 1. We propose PrimitiveNet to robustly segment primitive
instances at the level of (a) objects or (b) chunks of scenes. (c)
We can handle extremely large scenes covering 0.1km2 . (d) We
improve scene abstraction and deliver lightweight models.

lion faces filled with noises, which is not affordable for a
cell phone. Main directions to address these issues include
local mesh decimation [18, 37, 52] and primitive instance
assembly [5, 32, 23, 2]. Mesh decimation collapses edges
iteratively but fails to preserve important structures. Primitive assembly requires segmenting points into instances of
primitives and thus is limited by the segmentation quality.
We aim to significantly improve the segmentation quality
and the final production of lightweight models from scans.
Primitive instance segmentation has a long history in
geometry processing with two standard solutions using
Ransac [53] or region growing [41, 51]. The main challenge is to find appropriate parameters to robustly recover
shapes from noises and robustly preserve boundaries of similar primitives. Recently, this problem is partially addressed
using deep learning techniques [35, 57, 39] at the object
level. However, they require to extract global shape properties and have limited capacity for correctly predicting small

15343

