HandFoldingNet: A 3D Hand Pose Estimation Network Using
Multiscale-Feature Guided Folding of a 2D Hand Skeleton
Wencan Cheng1 , Jae Hyun Park1 , Jong Hwan Ko2 *
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
2
College of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
1

{cwc1260, xoxc4565, jhko}@skku.edu

Abstract
With increasing applications of 3D hand pose estimation
in various human-computer interaction applications, convolution neural networks (CNNs) based estimation models
have been actively explored. However, the existing models
require complex architectures or redundant computational
resources to trade with the acceptable accuracy. To tackle
this limitation, this paper proposes HandFoldingNet, an accurate and efficient hand pose estimator that regresses the
hand joint locations from the normalized 3D hand point
cloud input. The proposed model utilizes a folding-based
decoder that folds a given 2D hand skeleton into the corresponding joint coordinates. For higher estimation accuracy, folding is guided by multi-scale features, which include both global and joint-wise local features. Experimental results show that the proposed model outperforms the existing methods on three hand pose benchmark datasets with
the lowest model parameter requirement. Code is available
at https://github.com/cwc1260/HandFold.

1. Introduction
3D hand pose estimation aims to estimate joint locations
from input hand images. Accurate and real-time estimation is critical in various human-computer interaction applications, especially in virtual reality and augmented reality
[20, 7, 23]. Recently, many studies achieved impressive
progress by utilizing hand depth images from depth cameras. However, it still remains challenging to achieve accurate and real-time estimation, due to various issues such as
self-occlusion, noise, high dimensionality, and various orientations of a hand [12, 9, 24, 6].
With the advancement of deep neural networks (DNNs),
various DNN-based hand pose estimation techniques
achieved powerful performances. In most of these techniques, 2D convolution neural networks (CNNs) have been
* Jong Hwan Ko is the corresponding author.

Point cloud

3D pose
2D hand
skeleton

“force”

“fold”

Figure 1. Illustration of the folding concept. The network can be
interpreted as emulating the ”force” through multi-scale features
extracted from the point cloud. The ”force” will drive a 2D hand
skeleton to ”fold” into the 3D joint coordinates representing the
hand pose.

adopted to perform direct hand depth image processing
[40, 10, 14, 30, 3]. However, 2D CNNs cannot fully take advantage of 3D spatial information of the depth image, which
is essential for achieving high accuracy. An intuitive solution is to discretize hand depth images into a 3D voxelized
representation and perform 3D-to-3D inference using a 3D
CNN [11, 24]. However, its critical limitation is the cubic
growth of memory consumption with an increase in the image resolution [31]. Thus, application of 3D CNNs has been
limited to low-resolution images, which may lead to lose of
critical details for estimation.
In contrast, the point cloud is being regarded as an efficient and precise representation for 3D hand pose estimation, as it models hand depth images into the continuous 3D coordinates without discretization. However, the
point cloud could not be directly processed by conventional
DNNs due to the irregular order of points, until the emergence of PointNet [28]. With a concise symmetric architecture composed of a point-wise shared-weights multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) and a max-pooling layer, PointNet is invariant with the order of the input points.
Based on this architecture, a series of PointNet-based
hand pose estimation models [9, 12, 4, 21] have been pro-

11260

