Video Pose Distillation for Few-Shot, Fine-Grained Sports Action Recognition
James Hong1

Matthew Fisher2 Michaël Gharbi2 Kayvon Fatahalian1
1
2
Stanford University
Adobe Research

Abstract
Human pose is a useful feature for fine-grained sports
action understanding. However, pose estimators are often
unreliable when run on sports video due to domain shift
and factors such as motion blur and occlusions. This leads
to poor accuracy when downstream tasks, such as action
recognition, depend on pose. End-to-end learning circumvents pose, but requires more labels to generalize.
We introduce Video Pose Distillation (VPD), a weaklysupervised technique to learn features for new video domains, such as individual sports that challenge pose estimation. Under VPD, a student network learns to extract
robust pose features from RGB frames in the sports video,
such that, whenever pose is considered reliable, the features match the output of a pretrained teacher pose detector. Our strategy retains the best of both pose and end-toend worlds, exploiting the rich visual patterns in raw video
frames, while learning features that agree with the athletes’
pose and motion in the target video domain to avoid overfitting to patterns unrelated to athletes’ motion.
VPD features improve performance on few-shot, finegrained action recognition, retrieval, and detection tasks in
four real-world sports video datasets, without requiring additional ground-truth pose annotations.

1. Introduction
Analyzing sports video requires robust algorithms to automate fine-grained action recognition, retrieval, and detection in large-scale video collections. Human pose is a useful
feature when sports are centered around people.
State-of-the-art skeleton-based deep learning techniques
for action recognition [31, 57] rely on accurate 2D pose
detection to extract the athletes’ motion, but the best pose
detectors [45, 54] routinely fail on fast-paced sports video
with complex blur and occlusions, often in frames crucial to the action (Figure 1). To circumvent these issues,
end-to-end learned models operate directly on the video
stream [7, 13, 28, 43, 51, 62]. However, because they consume pixel instead of pose inputs, when trained with few
labels, they tend to latch onto specific visual patterns [9, 52]

Figure 1: Limitations of current 2D pose detectors. Stateof-the-art pose estimators [45] produce noisy and incorrect results in frames with challenging motions, common in
sports video. Here are examples from figure skating, tennis,
gymnastics, and diving where pose estimates are incorrect.
rather than the fine-grained motion (e.g., an athlete’s clothes
or the presence of a ball). As a result, prior pose and end-toend methods often generalize poorly on fine-grained tasks
in challenging sports video, when labels are scarce. While
collecting large datasets with fine action and pose annotations is possible, doing so for each new sport does not scale.
We propose Video Pose Distillation (VPD), a weaklysupervised technique in which a student network learns to
extract robust pose features from RGB video frames in a
new video domain (a single sport). VPD is designed such
that, whenever pose is reliable, the features match the output of a pretrained teacher pose detector. Our strategy retains the best of both pose and end-to-end worlds. First, like
directly supervised end-to-end methods, our student can exploit the rich visual patterns present in the raw frames, including but not limited to the athlete’s pose, and continue to
operate when pose estimation is unsuccessful. Second, by
constraining our descriptors to agree with the pose estimator whenever high-confidence pose is available, we avoid
the pitfall of overfitting to visual patterns unrelated to the
athlete’s action. And third, weak pose supervision allows us
to enforce an additional constraint: we require that the student predicts not only instantaneous pose but also its temporal derivative. This encourages our features to pick up
on visual similarities over time (e.g., an athlete progress-

9254

