Event-Intensity Stereo: Estimating Depth by the Best of Both Worlds
S. Mohammad Mostafavi I.§
GIST, South Korea

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST, South Korea

Jonghyun Choi†
GIST, South Korea

mostafavi@gist.ac.kr

kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

jhc@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Event cameras can report scene movements as an asynchronous stream of data called the events. Unlike traditional cameras, event cameras have very low latency (microseconds vs milliseconds) very high dynamic range (140
dB vs 60 dB), and low power consumption, as they report
changes of a scene and not a complete frame. As they report per pixel feature-like events and not the whole intensity frame they are immune to motion blur. However, event
cameras require movement between the scene and camera
to fire events, i.e., they have no output when the scene is
relatively static. Traditional cameras, however, report the
whole frame of pixels at once in fixed intervals but have
lower dynamic range and are prone to motion blur in case
of rapid movements. We get the best from both worlds and
use events and intensity images together in our complementary design and estimate dense disparity from this combination. The proposed end-to-end design combines events and
images in a sequential manner and correlates them to estimate dense depth values. Our various experimental settings
in real-world and simulated scenarios exploit the superiority of our method in predicting accurate depth values with
fine details. We further extend our method to extreme cases
of missing the left or right event or stereo pair and also investigate stereo depth estimation with inconsistent dynamic
ranges or event thresholds on the left and right pairs.

1. Introduction
Stereo depth estimation is inspired from the human
binocular vision. Estimating the depth from two or more
views is one of the long-persisting topics that is tackled in
many ways [24]. Early-stage stereo depth estimation methods consider matching all the pixels in a pair of stereo images to estimate the underlying 3D geometry of the scene.
The camera parameters and the stereo setup are mainly
available through calibration, and the task is to triangulate
the matched pairs to recover the disparity or depth [33].
Stereo matching is still challenging because of the ill-posed
§ : now at Lunit Inc. (lunit.io). † : corresponding author.

Figure 1. Estimating dense depth using our event-intensity stereo
depth estimation framework. Our end-to-end network can estimate depth from the combination of Event-Intensity Stereo (b),
Intensity-only stereo (c), or Event-only stereo (d) pairs. Using
event-intensity stereo, we can reach higher quality depth in comparison to event-only or intensity-only inputs, as it can surpass the
shortcomings of each source while gathering the best from them.

nature of the problem, occlusions, imperfect imaging settings, blurred or low dynamic range images, repetitive patterns, and texture-less regions [24]. Recent methods estimate depth using learning-based frameworks without relying on hand-crafted parameters, and can also estimate
metric depth based on the prior knowledge of the network
[4, 5, 20, 41], thanks to the modern GPUs, creative architectures, and public-available large scale datasets.
In spite of the significant progress, poor lighting conditions and complex materials properties are issues that have
been less studied [24]. Infusing new sensing devices to enrich the input media is a direction worth researching. To this
end we investigate in event-intensity cameras as a complementary source to enrich details captured from the scene.
Event cameras are new vision sensors that report changes
of intensity individually per pixel, and asynchronous to
other pixels, at the time of such changes. The output of
an event camera, the events, are reported as a stream that
varies based on the movement speed and direction of the

4258

