Towards High Fidelity Monocular Face Reconstruction with Rich Reflectance
using Self-supervised Learning and Ray Tracing
Abdallah Dib1 * Cédric Thébault1∗ Junghyun Ahn1∗ Philippe-Henri Gosselin1
Christian Theobalt2 Louis Chevallier1
1

InterDigital R&I

2

Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics

Figure 1. A deep neural network trained in a self-supervised manner with a differentiable ray tracer estimates a complete set of facial
attributes – 3D head pose, geometry, personalized albedo (diffuse and specular) from unconstrained monocular image. Reconstruction
based on these attributes enables a variety of applications, such as relighting.

Abstract
Robust face reconstruction from monocular image in
general lighting conditions is challenging. Methods combining deep neural network encoders with differentiable
rendering have opened up the path for very fast monocular
reconstruction of geometry, lighting and reflectance. They
can also be trained in self-supervised manner for increased
robustness and better generalization. However, their differentiable rasterization-based image formation models, as
well as underlying scene parameterization, limit them to
Lambertian face reflectance and to poor shape details.
More recently, ray tracing was introduced for monocular face reconstruction within a classic optimization-based
framework and enables state-of-the art results. However,
optimization-based approaches are inherently slow and lack
robustness. In this paper, we build our work on the aforementioned approaches and propose a new method that
greatly improves reconstruction quality and robustness in
general scenes. We achieve this by combining a CNN encoder with a differentiable ray tracer, which enables us
to base the reconstruction on much more advanced per* Equal contribution

sonalized diffuse and specular albedos, a more sophisticated illumination model and a plausible representation of
self-shadows. This enables to take a big leap forward in
reconstruction quality of shape, appearance and lighting
even in scenes with difficult illumination. With consistent
face attributes reconstruction, our method leads to practical applications such as relighting and self-shadows removal. Compared to state-of-the-art methods, our results
show improved accuracy and validity of the approach.

1. Introduction
Fast and accurate image-based face reconstruction has
many applications in several domains including rig based
realistic videoconferencing, interactive AR/VR experiences
and special effects for professionals like facial attribute
manipulation/transfer or relighting. Also, supporting unconstrained pose and in-the-wild capture conditions without specific hardware, such as multi-view setup, allows for
enhanced flexibility and extended applicability. However,
captured images reflect the complex interaction between
light and faces including shadows and specularities, which
poses a real challenge for face reconstruction. Speed is also

12819

