Interactive Prototype Learning for Egocentric Action Recognition
Xiaohan Wang1,2 Linchao Zhu3 Heng Wang4 Yi Yang1
1
CCAI, Zhejiang University 2 Baidu Research
3
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney 4 Facebook AI Research
wxh1996111@gmail.com

linchao.zhu@uts.edu.au

hengwang00@gmail.com

Abstract

yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Bottle
Potato

Egocentric video recognition is a challenging task that
requires to identify both the actor’s motion and the active
object that the actor interacts with. Recognizing the active object is particularly hard due to the cluttered background with distracting objects, the frequent field of view
changes, severe occlusion, etc. To improve the active object classification, most existing methods use object detectors or human gaze information, which are computationally expensive or require labor-intensive annotations. To
avoid these additional costs, we propose an end-to-end
Interactive Prototype Learning (IPL) framework to learn
better active object representations by leveraging the motion cues from the actor. First, we introduce a set of verb
prototypes to disentangle active object features from distracting object features. Each prototype corresponds to
a primary motion pattern of an egocentric action, offering a distinctive supervision signal for active object feature learning. Second, we design two interactive operations to enable the extraction of active object features,
i.e., noun-to-verb assignment and verb-to-noun selection.
These operations are parameter-efficient and can learn judicious location-aware features on top of 3D CNN backbones. We demonstrate that the IPL framework can generalize to different backbones and outperform the state-ofthe-art on three large-scale egocentric video datasets, i.e.,
EPIC-KITCHENS-55, EPIC-KITCHENS-100 and EGTEA.

1. Introduction
Egocentric videos have become popular on social media and have attracted increasingly more attention in computer vision since the introduction of datasets, such as
EGTEA [21], Charades-Ego [32], EPIC-KITCHENS [6, 5,
7]. Unlike third-person videos where actions usually happen at a distance, egocentric videos focus on person and object interactions at a closer look. Understanding egocentric
videos requires to identify both the motion from the actor
and the object that the actor interacts with. Recent egocen-

What is the active object?

Bowl
Pan
Bag

Distracting Objects

Active object: “Potato”

Motion-Relevant Region

Figure 1. The motivation of Interactive Prototype Learning (IPL)
framework. The noun classification is difficult as the active object can be surrounded by a considerable number of distracting
objects. Our framework aims to collaboratively learn judicious
motion-relevant spatio-temporal features for more accurate noun
(active object) classification.

tric video datasets [5, 7] are usually constructed by decomposing an action into a combination of a verb and a noun,
where action recognition can be achieved by classifying the
associated verb and noun. For instance, “cut potato” is divided into a verb “cut” and a noun “potato”. Such a formulation helps to distinguish the subtle semantic differences
among actions.
Egocentric videos focus on domain-specific fine-grained
actions, while the existing third-person datasets [18] are
more generic and collected from various domains, like
sports and daily activities. In egocentric videos, the background scene is often similar among different actions. For
instance, “cutting carrot” and “peeling potato” can both
happen in the same kitchen scene. Hence, the usefulness of
scene context information is limited in egocentric videos,
making the recognition task more challenging.
Besides the aforementioned challenges, noun classification is particularly difficult as the active object [9, 11] involved in the action can be surrounded by a considerable
number of distracting objects, e.g., the bowls and pans surrounding the active object “potato” in Fig. 1. Indeed, noun

8168

