Physics-Enhanced Machine Learning for Virtual Fluorescence Microscopy
Colin L. Cooke* 1 , Fanjie Kong1 , Amey Chaware1 , Kevin C. Zhou2 , Kanghyun Kim2 , Rong Xu1 , D.
Michael Ando3 , Samuel J. Yang3 , Pavan Chandra Konda2 , and Roarke Horstmeyer1,2
1

Duke University, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
2
Duke University, Biomedical Engineering Department
3
Google Research, Applied Science Team

Abstract
This paper introduces a new method of data-driven microscope design for virtual fluorescence microscopy. We
use a deep neural network (DNN) to effectively design optical patterns for specimen illumination that substantially
improve upon the ability to infer fluorescence image information from unstained microscope images. To achieve this
design, we include an illumination model within the DNN’s
first layers that is jointly optimized during network training. We validated our method on two different experimental setups, with different magnifications and sample types,
to show a consistent improvement in performance as compared to conventional microscope imaging methods. Additionally, to understand the importance of learned illumination on the inference task, we varied the number of illumination patterns being optimized (and thus the number of
unique images captured) and analyzed how the structure of
the patterns changed as their number increased. This work
demonstrates the power of programmable optical elements
at enabling better machine learning algorithm performance
and at providing physical insight into next generation of
machine-controlled imaging systems.

1. Introduction
The optical microscope remains a critical tool across
a wide variety of disciplines, ranging from high-content
screening in biological labs to quality control in factories.
With the continued growth of automated software analysis
tools, many microscope images are now rarely viewed directly in their raw format by humans, but are instead commonly processed first by a computer. Examples include the
automatic classification of different cell types within large
* Colin Cooke is corresponding author: colin.cooke@duke.edu
Source code available at: github.com/clvcooke/virtual-fluorescence

cell cultures [1], segmentation of cancerous areas from thin
pathology tissue sections [2], and, as focused upon here, the
automatic creation of fluorescence images from bright-field
data [3], which we term “virtual fluorescence” (an example
of the virtual fluorescence process is shown in Figure 1).
Despite the continued advancement of image analysis
software, microscope hardware has changed relatively little
over the past several centuries. Most microscopes still consist of standard illumination units and objective lenses that
are optimized for direct human inspection. Optical microscopes are constrained by several physical limitations, including a limited resolution, field-of-view, image contrast,
and depth-of-field, which restrict the amount of information
that can be captured within each image. Standard microscope design biases this limited information towards human
analysis, potentially impacting the accuracy of automated
analysis.
Here, we attempt to optimize the hardware of a new
microscope design to improve the performance of a deep
learning based image labelling task. To achieve this goal,
we present a modified neural network which includes a
physical model of our experimental microscope, which is
optimized jointly with the deep neural network (DNN) during training. In this work, we limit our physical model to
include only the spectral and angular properties of the microscope’s illumination, realized through a programmable
LED array, but leave open the possibility of considering
other important parameters (focus setting, lens design, detector properties) in future work. Our proposed system
models the microscope illumination pattern as a set of linear
weights that are directly integrated into the DNN, allowing the calculation of gradients through back-propagation
and end-to-end optimization during supervised training. After training, the optimized “physical” weights can be interpreted as the distribution of LED brightnesses and colors
to use in our experimental imaging setup, which transfers
performance gains seen in training to a physical setup.

3803

