Domain Adaptive Video Segmentation via Temporal Consistency Regularization
Dayan Guan, Jiaxing Huang, Aoran Xiao, Shijian Lu*
Singtel Cognitive and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab for Enterprises, Nanyang Technological University
{Dayan.Guan, Jiaxing.Huang, Aoran.Xiao, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg

1. Introduction
Video semantic segmentation aims to assign pixel-wise
semantic labels to video frames, and it has been attracting increasing attention as one essential task in video analysis and understanding [19, 53, 15, 45, 60]. With the
advance of deep neural networks (DNNs), several studies have been conducted in recent years with very impressive video segmentation performance [65, 40, 20, 33, 37,
38, 26, 47]. However, most existing works require large
amounts of densely annotated training videos which entail
a prohibitively expensive and time-consuming annotation
process [3, 14]. One approach to alleviate the data annotation constraint is to resort to self-annotated synthetic
videos that are collected with computer-generated virtual
scenes [62, 24], but models trained with the synthesized
* Corresponding author.

Target
Target (Ours)

Video semantic segmentation is an essential task for the
analysis and understanding of videos. Recent efforts largely
focus on supervised video segmentation by learning from
fully annotated data, but the learnt models often experience clear performance drop while applied to videos of
a different domain. This paper presents DA-VSN, a domain adaptive video segmentation network that addresses
domain gaps in videos by temporal consistency regularization (TCR) for consecutive frames of target-domain videos.
DA-VSN consists of two novel and complementary designs.
The ﬁrst is cross-domain TCR that guides the prediction of
target frames to have similar temporal consistency as that
of source frames (learnt from annotated source data) via
adversarial learning. The second is intra-domain TCR that
guides unconﬁdent predictions of target frames to have similar temporal consistency as conﬁdent predictions of target
frames. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our proposed domain adaptive video segmentation network which outperforms multiple baselines consistently by
large margins.

Source

Abstract

Previous Frame

Current Frame

Figure 1. Temporal consistency helps in domain adaptive video
segmentation: A video segmentation model trained in a Source
domain often experiences clear performance drop while applied to
videos of a Target domain. We employ temporal consistency, the
inherent and universal nature of videos, as a constraint to regularize inter-domain and intra-domain adaptation for optimal video
segmentation in target domain as in Target (ours).

data often experience clear performance drops while applied to videos of natural scenes largely due to the domain
shift as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Domain adaptive video segmentation is largely neglected
in the literature despite its great values in both research
and practical applications. It could be addressed from two
approaches by leveraging existing research. The ﬁrst approach is domain adaptive image segmentation [80, 69,
79, 58, 21, 74] which could treat each video frame independently to achieve domain adaptive video segmentation.
However, domain adaptive image segmentation does not
consider temporal information in videos which is very important in video semantic segmentation. The second approach is semi-supervised video segmentation [56, 78, 5]
that exploits sparsely annotated video frames for segmenting unannotated frames of the same video. However, semisupervised video segmentation was designed for consecu-

8053

