Achieving on-Mobile Real-Time Super-Resolution with Neural Architecture and
Pruning Search
Zheng Zhan⇤1 , Yifan Gong⇤1 , Pu Zhao⇤1 , *Geng Yuan1 , Wei Niu2 , Yushu Wu1 , Tianyun Zhang3 ,
Malith Jayaweera1 , David Kaeli1 , Bin Ren2 , Xue Lin1 , Yanzhi Wang1
1
Northeastern University, 2 College of William & Mary, 3 Cleveland State University
{zhan.zhe, gong.yifa, zhao.pu, xue.lin, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu,
t.zhang85@csuohio.edu, kaeli@ece.neu.edu, bren@cs.wm.edu

Abstract
Though recent years have witnessed remarkable
progress in single image super-resolution (SISR) tasks
with the prosperous development of deep neural networks
(DNNs), the deep learning methods are confronted with
the computation and memory consumption issues in practice, especially for resource-limited platforms such as mobile devices. To overcome the challenge and facilitate the
real-time deployment of SISR tasks on mobile, we combine
neural architecture search with pruning search and propose
an automatic search framework that derives sparse superresolution (SR) models with high image quality while satisfying the real-time inference requirement. To decrease
the search cost, we leverage the weight sharing strategy by introducing a supernet and decouple the search
problem into three stages, including supernet construction, compiler-aware architecture and pruning search, and
compiler-aware pruning ratio search. With the proposed
framework, we are the first to achieve real-time SR inference (with only tens of milliseconds per frame) for implementing 720p resolution with competitive image quality (in
terms of PSNR and SSIM) on mobile platforms (Samsung
Galaxy S20).

1. Introduction
In recent year, people have ever-increasing demands for
image processing to achieve higher resolutions, leading to
the rapid development of SR. In general, the SR principle
is to convert low-resolution images to high-resolution images with clearer details and more information. It has been
adopted in various applications such as crime scene analysis
to identify unnoticeable evidence or medical image processing for more accurate diagnosis.
* Equal contribution.

With the fast growth of live streaming and video recording, video contents enjoy high popularity. However, videos
often have lower resolution due to the limited communication bandwidth or higher resolution of the display. Besides,
live streaming usually has a real-time1 requirement that the
latency of each frame should not exceed a threshold. Thus,
it is desirable to achieve real-time SR for video locally.
Compared with the classic interpolation algorithms to
improve image or video resolution, deep learning-based SR
can deliver higher visual qualities by learning the mappings from the low-resolution to high-resolution images
from external datasets. Despite its superior visual performance, deep learning-based SR is usually more expensive
with large amounts of computations and huge power consumption (typically hundreds of watts on powerful GPUs)
[19, 17, 53], leading to difficulties for the real-time implementations. Moreover, in practice, as SR is often deployed
on edge devices such as mobile phones for live streaming or
video capturing due to the wide spread of mobile phones,
the limited memory and computing resources on edge devices make it even harder for achieving real-time SR.
Weight pruning [60, 22, 26] is often adopted to remove
the redundancy in DNNs to reduce the resource requirement
and accelerate the inference. There are various pruning
schemes including unstructured pruning [23, 22, 20, 44],
coarse-grained structured pruning [50, 71, 70, 47, 42], and
fine-grained structured pruning [45, 18, 21]. Unstructured
pruning removes arbitrary weights, leading to irregular
pruned weight matrices and limited hardware parallelism.
Structured pruning maintains a full matrix format of the
remaining weights such that the pruned model is compatible with GPU acceleration for inference. Recently, finegrained structured pruning including pattern-based pruning
and block-based pruning are proposed to provide a finer
pruning granularity for higher accuracy while exhibiting
1 We believe targeting sub 100ms can be reasonably called real-time
[49] and we require the real-time implementation to be faster than 50ms.

4821

