Mixture-based Feature Space Learning for Few-shot Image Classification
Arman Afrasiyabi⋆• , Jean-François Lalonde⋆ , Christian Gagné⋆†•
⋆
Université Laval, † Canada CIFAR AI Chair, • Mila
https://lvsn.github.io/MixtFSL/

Abstract
We introduce Mixture-based Feature Space Learning
(MixtFSL) for obtaining a rich and robust feature representation in the context of few-shot image classification. Previous
works have proposed to model each base class either with
a single point or with a mixture model by relying on offline
clustering algorithms. In contrast, we propose to model
base classes with mixture models by simultaneously training the feature extractor and learning the mixture model
parameters in an online manner. This results in a richer
and more discriminative feature space which can be employed to classify novel examples from very few samples.
Two main stages are proposed to train the MixtFSL model.
First, the multimodal mixtures for each base class and the
feature extractor parameters are learned using a combination of two loss functions. Second, the resulting network and
mixture models are progressively refined through a leaderfollower learning procedure, which uses the current estimate
as a “target” network. This target network is used to make
a consistent assignment of instances to mixture components,
which increases performance and stabilizes training. The
effectiveness of our end-to-end feature space learning approach is demonstrated with extensive experiments on four
standard datasets and four backbones. Notably, we demonstrate that when we combine our robust representation with
recent alignment-based approaches, we achieve new stateof-the-art results in the inductive setting, with an absolute
accuracy for 5-shot classification of 82.45% on miniImageNet, 88.20% with tieredImageNet, and 60.70% in FC100
using the ResNet-12 backbone.

1. Introduction
The goal of few-shot image classification is to transfer
knowledge gained on a set of “base” categories, containing a
large number of training examples, to a set of distinct “novel”
classes having very few examples [16, 47]. A hallmark of
successful approaches [18, 64, 73] is their ability to learn
rich and robust feature representations from base training
images, which can generalize to novel samples.

A common assumption in few-shot learning is that classes
can be represented with unimodal models. For example, Prototypical Networks [64] (“ProtoNet” henceforth) assumed
each base class can be represented with a single prototype.
Others, favoring standard transfer learning [1, 8, 24], use a
classification layer which push each training sample towards
a single vector. While this strategy has successfully been
employed in “typical” image classification (e.g., ImageNet
challenge [58]), it is somewhat counterbalanced because the
learner is regularized by using validation examples that belong to the same training classes. Alas, this solution does not
transfer to few-shot classification since the base, validation,
and novel classes are disjoint. Indeed, Allen et al. [2] showed
that relying on that unimodal assumption limits adaptability
in few-shot image classification and is prone to underfitting
from a data representation perspective.
To alleviate this limitation, Infinite Mixture Prototypes [2]
(IMP) extends ProtoNet by representing each class with multiple centroids. This is accomplished by employing an offline clustering (extension of DP-means [36]) where the nonlearnable centroids are recomputed at each iteration. This
approach however suffers from two main downsides. First,
it does not allow capturing the global distribution of base
classes since a small subset of the base samples are clustered
at any one time—clustering over all base samples at each
training iteration would be prohibitively expensive. Second,
relying on DP-means in an offline, post hoc manner implies
that feature learning and clustering are done independently.
In this paper, we propose “Mixture-based Feature Space
Learning” (MixtFSL) to learn a multimodal representation
for the base classes using a mixture of trainable components—
learned vectors that are iteratively refined during training.
The key idea is to learn both the representation (feature
space) and the mixture model jointly in an online manner,
which effectively unites these two tasks by allowing the gradient to flow between them. This results in a discriminative
representation, which in turn yields superior performance
when training on the novel classes from few examples.
We propose a two-stage approach to train our MixtFSL.
In the first stage, the mixture components are initialized by
the combination of two losses that ensure that: 1) samples

9041

