Clothing Status Awareness for Long-Term Person Re-Identification
Yan Huang1,3 Qiang Wu1
JingSong Xu1
Yi Zhong2
ZhaoXiang Zhang3
1
School of Electrical and Data Engineering, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
2
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing China.
huangyan.750@outlook.com, {Qiang.Wu,JingSong.Xu}@uts.edu.au, yi.zhong@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Long-Term person re-identification (LT-reID) exposes
extreme challenges because of the longer time gaps between two recording footages where a person is likely to
change clothing. There are two types of approaches for
LT-reID: biometrics-based approach and data adaptation
based approach. The former one is to seek clothing irrelevant biometric features. However, seeking high quality biometric feature is the main concern. The latter one adopts
fine-tuning strategy by using data with significant clothing
change. However, the performance is compromised when
it is applied to cases without clothing change. This work
argues that these approaches in fact are not aware of clothing status (i.e., change or no-change) of a pedestrian. Instead, they blindly assume all footages of a pedestrian have
different clothes. To tackle this issue, a Regularization via
Clothing Status Awareness Network (RCSANet) is proposed
to regularize descriptions of a pedestrian by embedding the
clothing status awareness. Consequently, the description
can be enhanced to maintain the best ID discriminative feature while improving its robustness to real-world LT-reID
where both clothing-change case and no-clothing-change
case exist. Experiments show that RCSANet performs reasonably well on three LT-reID datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-Identification (re-ID) is to confirm the identity
of a person in visual traces. Based on the scale of time
gaps when footages are captured, there are two different
scenarios for person re-ID: 1) Short-Term re-ID (ST-reID)
and 2) Long-Term re-ID (LT-reID). The first scenario normally addresses the time gap of several minutes. In this
case, we can safely assume that a person does not change
clothing. This scenario is investigated first by the research
community and produces many state-of-the-art works with
encouraging performance [15, 41, 39, 45, 12, 10, 11]. In
recent years, more researches have focused on LT-reID. In

LT-reID, the time gap between two footages can be several
days or even longer. Therefore, besides significant challenges of non-human factors (i.e., image resolution, illumination, etc.) which can be observed in ST-reID, there are
significant challenges caused by human factor (i.e., clothing and dressing accessory) in LT-reID. Clothing change in
particular is very common in LT-reID, although it may not
necessarily change in some circumstances. Such changes
dramatically constrain the performance of methods for STreID when they are applied to LT-reID directly.
In order to tackle the challenge shown in LT-reID, various approaches are reported although they are still on a
preliminary level. These approaches can be categorized
into two types: 1) biometrics-based approach and 2) data
adaptation based approach.
Biometrics-based approaches strive to avoid clothingrelated information that is deemed not stable in LT-reID.
One type of these methods [36, 32, 37, 26, 21, 34, 17] explore biometric features for LT-reID such as motion, body
contour/shape, and face. Theoretically, the biometric feature should be robust. However, it heavily relies on highquality footages. For example, to obtain people motion
features, it needs to successfully extract the human body
from cluttered backgrounds and to track the human body
throughout the entire video period. Due to limitations of
image segmentation, tracking, and body part occlusion, it
is implausible to guarantee the reliability of motion feature
from footage [36]. Another type of biometrics-based approach introduces additional depth information using RGBD camera. The depth information does provide another
source of helpful information (e.g., 3D biometric information) for LT-reID [1, 19, 6, 30]. However, it introduces extra
complexity to the camera setup. In addition, due to its limited sensing distance, it is still far from real practice.
Instead of using biometric information, data adaptation
approaches attempt to use fine-tuning mechanisms [9, 13]
by elevating the performance of models pretrained on a STreID dataset (e.g., Market-1501 [39]) before training LTreID data with diverse clothing-change cases. Through

11895

