Towards Novel Target Discovery Through Open-Set Domain Adaptation
Taotao Jing† , Hongfu Liu‡ , and Zhengming Ding†
†
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, USA
‡
Michtom School of Computer Science, Brandeis University, USA
tjing@tulane.edu, hongfuliu@brandeis.edu, zding1@tulane.edu

Abstract
Open-set domain adaptation (OSDA) considers that the
target domain contains samples from novel categories unobserved in external source domain. Unfortunately, existing
OSDA methods always ignore the demand for the information of unseen categories and simply recognize them as “unknown” set without further explanation. This motivates us
to understand the unknown categories more specifically by
exploring the underlying structures and recovering their interpretable semantic attributes. In this paper, we propose a
novel framework to accurately identify the seen categories in
target domain, and effectively recover the semantic attributes
for unseen categories. Specifically, structure preserving partial alignment is developed to recognize the seen categories
through domain-invariant feature learning. Attribute propagation over visual graph is designed to smoothly transit
attributes from seen to unseen categories via visual-semantic
mapping. Moreover, two new cross-domain benchmarks are
constructed to evaluate the proposed framework in the novel
and practical challenge. Experimental results on open-set
recognition and semantic recovery demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over other compared baselines.

1. Introduction
In recent years, domain adaptation (DA) attracts great
interests to address the label insufficiency or unavailability
issues, which is the bottleneck to the success of deep learning
models [16]. DA casts a light by transferring existing knowledge from a relevant source domain to the target domain of
interest via eliminating the distribution gap across domains
[12, 29]. Most DA efforts focus on the closed-set domain
adaptation (CSDA) [12, 9], assuming the source and target
domain share identical label space, which is not always satisfied in real-world scenarios, since the target domain may
contain more than we know from source domain. Following
this, open-set domain adaptation (OSDA) has been widely
studied given the source domain only covers a sub-set of

the target domain label space[33, 29, 25, 22]. Unfortunately,
these pioneering OSDA attempts simply identify the known
categories while leaving the remaining unobserved samples
as an “unknown” outlier set. Without any further step, OSDA
fails to discover what the unknown categories really are. Interestingly, the target domain may contain some exactly-new
categories human beings never see before. This motivates
us to further analyze the unknown set more specifically and
discover novel categories.
In this paper, we define such a problem as Semantic Recovery Open-Set Domain Adaptation (SR-OSDA), where
source domain is annotated with both class labels and semantic attribute annotation, while target domain only contains the unlabeled and unannotated data samples from more
categories. The goal of SR-OSDA is to identify the seen
categories and also recover the missing semantic information
for unseen categories to interpret the new categories in target
domain. To our best knowledge, this is a completely new
problem in literature with no exploration. The challenges
now become two folds: (1) how to accurately identify seen
and unseen categories in target domain with well-labeled
source knowledge; (2) how to effectively recover the missing
attributes of unseen categories.
To this end, we propose a novel framework to simultaneously recognize the known categories and discover new
categories from target domain as well interpret them at the
semantic level. The general idea of our model is to learn
domain-invariant visual features by mitigating the crossdomain shift, and consequently build visual-semantic projection to recover the missing attributes of unknown target
categories. Our contributions are highlighted as follows:
• We are the first to address the SR-OSDA problem, and
propose a novel and effective solution to identify seen
categories and discover unseen one.
• We propose structure preserving partial alignment to
mitigate the domain shift when target covers larger
label space than source, and attributes propagation over
visual graph to seek the visual-semantic mapping for
better missing attribute recovery.
• Two new benchmarks are built for SR-OSDA evalua-

9322

