Motion Prediction using Trajectory Cues
Zhenguang Liu
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

Pengxiang Su
Jilin University
Changchun, Jilin, China

Shuang Wu
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Ave, Singapore

liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com

supx19@mails.jlu.edu.cn

wushuang@outlook.sg

Xuanjing Shen
Jilin University
Changchun, Jilin, China

Haipeng Chen
Jilin University
Changchun, Jilin, China

xjshen@jlu.edu.cn

chenhp@jlu.edu.cn

Yanbin Hao
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei, Anhui, China

Meng Wang
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, Anhui, China

haoyanbin@hotmail.com

eric.mengwang@gmail.com

Abstract

Predicting human motion from a historical pose sequence is at the core of many applications in computer
vision. Current state-of-the-art methods concentrate on
learning motion contexts in the pose space, however, the
high dimensionality and complex nature of human pose invoke inherent difficulties in extracting such contexts. In
this paper, we instead advocate to model motion contexts
in the joint trajectory space, as the trajectory of a joint
is smooth, vectorial, and gives sufficient information to
the model. Moreover, most existing methods consider only
the dependencies between skeletal connected joints, disregarding prior knowledge and the hidden connections between geometrically separated joints. Motivated by this, we
present a semi-constrained graph to explicitly encode skeletal connections and prior knowledge, while adaptively learn
implicit dependencies between joints.
We also explore the applications of our approach to a
range of objects including human, fish, and mouse. Surprisingly, our method sets the new state-of-the-art performance on 4 different benchmark datasets, a remarkable
highlight is that it achieves a 19.1% accuracy improvement over current state-of-the-art in average. To facilitate future research, we have released our code at https:
//github.com/Pose-Group/MPT.

1. Introduction
The ability for machines to anticipate and model human motion dynamics is very much coveted [29] in a wide
range of applications such as autonomous driving, human
tracking, and regulating the response of a robot when interacting with humans. As a result, future motion prediction has attracted considerable attention in the past decade
[9, 41, 46, 6, 39].
Whereas existing methods achieve accurate prediction
for a few immediate future frames, it is still difficult to expect accurate and natural forecasting in the long-term since
the information hidden in the conscious activity of a human
is complex and high-dimensional [15]. To tackle the challenge, we seek to reduce the complexity of motion context
modeling at the base level, i.e. representation space level,
and capture long range dependencies to yield accurate and
natural prediction on both short-term and long-term.
Fundamentally, human motion prediction aims to learn a
mapping function that bridges the historical skeleton pose
sequence to the future pose sequence. Poineering approaches adopt Gaussian Processes [40], Hidden Markov
Models [20], and Restricted Boltzmann Machine [38], to
predict future human skeleton poses. Unfortunately, these
models impose strong assumptions such as Gaussian distributions on the motion dynamics, leading to unsatisfactory
results.
Recent approaches explored using different sorts of deep
neural networks to address the issue [24, 16, 36, 23, 19, 4,
45, 1, 35]. One line of work [8, 12, 13, 22] utilized recur-

13299

