End-to-End Detection and Pose Estimation of Two Interacting Hands
Dong Uk Kim

Kwang In Kim
UNIST

Seungryul Baek

Abstract
Three dimensional hand pose estimation has reached a level
of maturity, enabling real-world applications for single-hand
cases. However, accurate estimation of the pose of two closely
interacting hands still remains a challenge as in this case, one
hand often occludes the other. We present a new algorithm
that accurately estimates hand poses in such a challenging scenario. The crux of our algorithm lies in a framework that jointly
trains the estimators of interacting hands, leveraging their interdependence. Further, we employ a GAN-type discriminator of
interacting hand pose that helps avoid physically implausible
configurations, e.g. intersecting fingers, and exploit the visibility of joints to improve intermediate 2D pose estimation. We
incorporate them into a single model that learns to detect hands
and estimate their pose based on a unified criterion of pose
estimation accuracy. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt
to build an end-to-end network that detects and estimates the
pose of two closely interacting hands (as well as single hands).
In the experiments with three datasets representing challenging
real-world scenarios, our algorithm demonstrated significant
and consistent performance improvements over state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Estimating hand pose finds numerous applications including
augmented and virtual reality, sign language recognition,
and gesture-based interfaces. The past decade has observed
significant progress in this field thanks to advances in deep
learning techniques. In particular, for isolated hands, skeletal
pose estimation techniques are mature enough for use in
practical applications. As such, recent effort has focused on
challenging cases where one estimates e.g. the pose of hands
captured in egocentric camera views [28, 54, 13] or interacting
with objects [47, 7, 8, 14, 4], or restores hand shape as well as
their skeletal pose [24, 3, 5, 57]. However, only recently, has
attention been paid to estimating the pose of two interacting
hands. This problem is challenging as interacting hands often
cause severe self-occlusions (see Fig. 1 for examples).
Most existing work in this scenario takes generative, model
fitting-based approaches, e.g. on depth maps [30, 49, 27, 42]

Figure 1: Example hand detection and 3D pose estimation
results on the InterHand2.6M dataset [25]: (Rows 1–2) skeletal
joints (overlaid on the inputs) estimated by Moon et al.’s
state-of-the-art system [25] and ours, respectively. Ours provides
more accurate pose estimation than [25] when two hands closely
interact with each other (last two columns). For interacting
hands, our joint estimation process is guided by the predicted
joint visibility as shown in the third row (yellow: invisible, green
and red: visible). For single-hands, visibility is not estimated
(see supplemental for cases where single-hand joint visibility is
also used). The last row visualizes our results in different views.
or RGB images [52] while very recently, convolutional neural network (CNN)-based discriminative learning approaches
have been investigated [25, 21]. CNN-based approaches have
been particularly successful in addressing occlusions occurring
in the context of egocentric views or objects under interac11189

