Neural TMDlayer: Modeling Instantaneous flow of features via SDE Generators
Zihang Meng1 Vikas Singh1 Sathya N. Ravi2
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
University of Illinois at Chicago
zihangm@cs.wisc.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu, sathya@uic.edu

Abstract
We study how stochastic differential equation (SDE)
based ideas can inspire new modifications to existing algorithms for a set of problems in computer vision. Loosely
speaking, our formulation is related to both explicit and implicit strategies for data augmentation and group equivariance, but is derived from new results in the SDE literature
on estimating infinitesimal generators of a class of stochastic processes. If and when there is nominal agreement between the needs of an application/task and the inherent
properties and behavior of the types of processes that we
can efficiently handle, we obtain a very simple and efficient
plug-in layer that can be incorporated within any existing
network architecture, with minimal modification and only a
few additional parameters. We show promising experiments
on a number of vision tasks including few shot learning,
point cloud transformers and deep variational segmentation
obtaining efficiency or performance improvements.

1. Introduction
Consider a deep neural network model with parameters
W which we train using the following update rule,
W ← W − η∇W Ez R (W, z)

(1)

where z is a random variable representing data and R(·) represents the loss function. Now, consider a slightly general
form of the same update formula,
W ← W − η∇W Ez R (W, T z) .

(2)

The only change here is the introduction of T which can be
assumed to be some data transformation matrix. If T = I,
we see that Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a special
case of (2) under the assumption that we approximate the
expectation in (2) with finite iid samples (or a mini-batch).
Let us unpack the data transformation notation a bit to
check what it offers. If a set of transformations T are chosen

beforehand, and applied to the data samples before training commences, T z simply represents data samples derived
via data augmentation. On the other hand, T z may not
necessarily be explicitly instantiated as above. For example, spherical CNN [16] shows that when point cloud type
data are embedded on the sphere with spherical convolutional operators, then it is possible to learn representations
of data that are equivariant to the group action of rotations
with no explicit data augmentation procedure. In particular,
these approaches register each data point on a standard template (like the sphere) on which efficient convolutions can
be defined based on differential geometric constructions – in
other words, utilizing the properties of the transformations
T of interest and how they relate the data points, such a
treatment enables the updates to implicitly take into account
the loss on T z. Conceptually, many results [16, 48, 42] on
equivariance show that by considering the entire orbit of
each sample (a 3D point cloud) during training, for special
types of T , it is possible to avoid explicit data augmentation.
We can take a more expanded view of the above idea.
Repeated application of a transformation T on data point
z produces a discrete sequence {z(t)}∞
t=0 where z(0) =
z, z(t) = T t−1 z. In general, the transformation matrix at
the t-th step, denoted by T (t), need not even be generated
from a fixed matrix. Indeed, in practice T (t) is selected
from a set of appropriate transformations such as rotation,
blur and so on, with some ordering, which could even be
stochastic. At a high level, approaches such as [16, 12] can
be seen as a special case of (2). Making this argument precise needs adding an appropriate number of auxiliary variables and by averaging over all possible realizable T ’s – the
specific steps are not particularly relevant since apart from
helping set up the intuition we just described, algorithms for
equivariance to specific group actions do not directly inform
our development. For the sake of convenience, we will primarily focus on the continuous time system since under the
same initial conditions, the trajectories of both (continuous
and discrete) systems coincide at all integers t.
What does z(t) actually represent? There are two interpretations of z(t): (i) it formalizes on-the-fly or instan-

11635

