Distributional Robustness Loss for Long-tail Learning
Dvir Samuel
Bar-Ilan University, Israel

Gal Chechik
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
NVIDIA Research, Israel

dvirsamuel@gmail.com

gal.chechik@biu.ac.il

Abstract
Real-world data is often unbalanced and long-tailed, but
deep models struggle to recognize rare classes in the presence of frequent classes. To address unbalanced data, most
studies try balancing the data, the loss, or the classifier to
reduce classification bias towards head classes. Far less attention has been given to the latent representations learned
with unbalanced data. We show that the feature extractor
part of deep networks suffers greatly from this bias. We
propose a new loss based on robustness theory, which encourages the model to learn high-quality representations
for both head and tail classes. While the general form of
the robustness loss may be hard to compute, we further derive an easy-to-compute upper bound that can be minimized
efficiently. This procedure reduces representation bias towards head classes in the feature space and achieves new
SOTA results on CIFAR100-LT, ImageNet-LT, and iNaturalist
long-tail benchmarks. We find that training with robustness
increases recognition accuracy of tail classes while largely
maintaining the accuracy of head classes. The new robustness loss can be combined with various classifier balancing
techniques and can be applied to representations at several
layers of the deep model.

Figure 1: Our distributional robustness loss is designed for
learning a representation where samples are kept close to
the centroid of their class. Here, the empirical centroid
µ
c2 (framed pink triangle) is estimated based only on few
samples (four pink triangles) and as a result it deviates far
from the true centroid (µ2 ). Our loss pulls the same-class
samples (green arrow), and pushes away other-class samples
(red arrows). The loss takes into account the estimation
error by pushing and pulling towards a worst-case possible
distribution within an uncertainty area around the estimated
centroid (dashed red line). Uncertainty areas are typically
larger for tail classes, compared with head classes that have
many samples (blue dashed line around µ
c1 ).

1. Introduction
Real-world data typically has a long-tailed distribution
over semantic classes: few classes are highly frequent, while
many classes are only rarely encountered. When trained
with such unbalanced data, deep models tend to produce
predictions that are biased and over-confident towards head
classes and fail to recognize tail classes.
Early approaches for handling unbalanced data used resampling [12, 17] or loss reweighing [18, 27] aiming to
re-balance the training process. Other approaches address
unbalanced data by transferring information from head to
tail classes [31, 46, 41, 29], or by applying an adaptive loss
[6] or regularization of classifiers [21]. The main focus of
these techniques is on balancing the multi-class classifier.

Far less attention has been given to the latent representations learned with unbalanced data. Intuitively, head classes
are encountered more often during training and are expected
to dominate the latent representation at the top layer of a
deep model. Counter to this intuition, [21] compared a series
of techniques for rebalancing representations and concluded
that ”data imbalance might not be an issue in learning
high-quality representations”, and that strong long-tailed
recognition can be achieved by only adjusting the classifier.
However, the effect of unbalanced data on the learned representations is far from being understood, and the extent to
which it may hurt classification accuracy is unknown. While
existing rebalancing methods do not improve representa-

9495

