Long-Term Temporally Consistent Unpaired Video Translation from Simulated
Surgical 3D Data
Dominik Rivoir1,2 , Micha Pfeiffer1 , Reuben Docea1 , Fiona Kolbinger1,3 ,
Carina Riediger3 , Jürgen Weitz2,3 , Stefanie Speidel1,2
1

NCT/UCC Dresden, Germany, 2 CeTI, TU Dresden, 3 University Hospital Dresden

{dominik.rivoir, micha.pfeiffer, reuben.docea, stefanie.speidel}@nct-dresden.de
{fiona.kolbinger, carina.riediger, juergen.weitz}@uniklinikum-dresden.de

Abstract

Simulated Surgical 3D Scene

Research in unpaired video translation has mainly focused on short-term temporal consistency by conditioning
on neighboring frames. However for transfer from simulated to photorealistic sequences, available information
on the underlying geometry offers potential for achieving
global consistency across views. We propose a novel approach which combines unpaired image translation with
neural rendering to transfer simulated to photorealistic surgical abdominal scenes. By introducing global learnable
textures and a lighting-invariant view-consistency loss, our
method produces consistent translations of arbitrary views
and thus enables long-term consistent video synthesis. We
design and test our model to generate video sequences from
minimally-invasive surgical abdominal scenes. Because labeled data is often limited in this domain, photorealistic
data where ground truth information from the simulated domain is preserved is especially relevant. By extending existing image-based methods to view-consistent videos, we aim
to impact the applicability of simulated training and evaluation environments for surgical applications. Code and data:
http://opencas.dkfz.de/video-sim2real.

1. Introduction
One of the most promising applications of GAN-based
image translation [14, 47] is the transfer from the simulated
domain to realistic images as it presents great potential for
applications in computer graphics. More importantly, unpaired translation [52] (i.e. no image correspondences between domains required during training) enables the generation of realistic data while preserving ground information
from the simulated domain which would otherwise be difficult to obtain (e.g. depth maps, optical flow or semantic
segmentation). This synthetic data can then facilitate training or evaluation in settings where labeled data is limited.

Neural Rendering
+
Unpaired Image Translation

Photorealistic, View-Consistent Images

Figure 1. By combining unpaired image translation with a neural rendering approach, we produce photorealistic and viewconsistent renderings of simulated surgical scenes. Note that fine
details like vessels are rendered consistently across viewpoints although they were not manually modelled in the simulated domain.

The availability of realistic, synthetic data is especially
crucial in the field of computer-assisted surgery (CAS) [26,
5]. CAS aims at providing assistance to the surgical team
(e.g. visualizing target structures or prediction of complications) by means of analyzing available sensor data. In
minimally-invasive surgery, where instruments and a camera are inserted into the patient’s body through small ports,
video is the predominant data source. Intelligent assis-

3343

