Persistent Homology based Graph Convolution Network for Fine-grained 3D
Shape Segmentation
Chi-Chong Wong
University of Macau

Chi-Man Vong
University of Macau

amilton.wong@connect.um.edu.mo

cmvong@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Fine-grained 3D segmentation is an important task in
3D object understanding, especially in applications such
as intelligent manufacturing or parts analysis for 3D objects. However, many challenges involved in such problem are yet to be solved, such as i) interpreting the complex structures located in different regions for 3D objects;
ii) capturing fine-grained structures with sufficient topology correctness. Current deep learning and graph machine learning methods fail to tackle such challenges and
thus provide inferior performance in fine-grained 3D analysis. In this work, methods in topological data analysis
are incorporated with geometric deep learning model for
the task of fine-grained segmentation for 3D objects. We
propose a novel neural network model called Persistent
Homology based Graph Convolution Network (PHGCN),
which i) integrates persistent homology into graph convolution network to capture multi-scale structural information
that can accurately represent complex structures for 3D objects; ii) applies a novel Persistence Diagram Loss (LP D )
that provides sufficient topology correctness for segmentation over the fine-grained structures. Extensive experiments
on fine-grained 3D segmentation validate the effectiveness
of the proposed PHGCN model and show significant improvements over current state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained 3D semantic segmentation is a task to semantically classify the labeling of each 3D point input in
detailed levels. It is an essential task for many applications for detailed processing and analysis of 3D shapes,
such as intelligent manufacturing, automatic interior design
and furniture arrangement, autonomous robotic manipulation, human-machine interaction, 3D clothing analysis.
Segmenting fine-grained 3D objects involves many challenges, due to the specific properties in fine-grained 3D objects, such as i) complex structures located in different re-

gions; ii) shape-dependent topological structures (e.g, handles of objects, doorknobs, device wires). These properties
always exhibit in slim parts or multiple small connected
components, which are semantically important to downstream tasks, such as robotic manipulation. Sufficiently interpreting such two main structures is essential for accurate 3D fine-grained semantic segmentation task. Failing
to tackle such challenges will drastically lower the performance of semantically understanding the 3D fine-grained
objects and produce incoherent segmentation output, which
is vital for intelligent manufacturing and robotic manipulation.
In recent years, deep neural network based methods
[6, 16, 21] and geometric learning methods [15, 27, 28] have
become the mainstream methods in 3D point cloud understanding tasks, from general 3D object classification to semantic segmentation on objects and scenes. In retrospect
to these methods, it is found that they are not designed
specifically for the task of understanding fine-grained 3D
objects with complex structures or shape dependent topological structures. Methods in [15, 27, 28] apply graph neural network (GNN) or graph convolutional network (GCN)
model to extract features from geometrical structures in 3D
point cloud. However, such approach only captures the
pairwise relations represented by edges, since the neighboring graphs constructed in GNN/GCN model only represent the pairwise relationships among 3D point clouds.
As a result, high dimensional relationships existed in complex structures of fine-grained 3D objects cannot be finely
captured. The recent work PartNet model [31] applies cascade binary labeling to represent a top-down recursive parts
decomposition for hierarchical segmentation. However, the
representation capability of binary labeling is limited by the
hierarchy depth and thus suffers from handling 3D objects
with multiple complex structures.
In fact, the geometric and topological information existed in complex structure is the essential clue to understand the shapes of fine-grained objects. Topological Data
Analysis (TDA) [3] is an emerging field which infers relevant topological and geometric features from complex data.

7098

