Vision Transformer with Progressive Sampling
Xiaoyu Yue∗1 Shuyang Sun∗2 Zhanghui Kuang3 Meng Wei4
Philip Torr2 Wayne Zhang3,6 Dahua Lin1,5
1
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence 2 University of Oxford
3
SenseTime Research 4 Tsinghua University 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
6
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
xyyue@cpii.hk

{kevinsun, phst}@robots.ox.ac.uk

{kuangzhanghui, wayne.zhang}@sensetime.com

weim18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Transformers
Transformers

∗ Equal Contribution.

xN
xN

Offsets
Offsets

Transformers [39, 11] have become the de-facto standard
architecture for natural language processing tasks. Thanks
to their powerful global relation modeling abilities, researchers attempt to introduce them to fundamental computer vision tasks such as image classification [6, 38, 12,
44, 32], object detection [56, 4, 53, 10, 37] and image segmentation [40] recently. However, transformers are initially

(a)

Transformer
Transformer

1. Introduction

…
…

Tokens
Tokens

Transformers with powerful global relation modeling
abilities have been introduced to fundamental computer vision tasks recently. As a typical example, the Vision Transformer (ViT) directly applies a pure transformer architecture on image classification, by simply splitting images into
tokens with a fixed length, and employing transformers to
learn relations between these tokens. However, such naive
tokenization could destruct object structures, assign grids
to uninterested regions such as background, and introduce
interference signals. To mitigate the above issues, in this
paper, we propose an iterative and progressive sampling
strategy to locate discriminative regions. At each iteration, embeddings of the current sampling step are fed into
a transformer encoder layer, and a group of sampling offsets is predicted to update the sampling locations for the
next step. The progressive sampling is differentiable. When
combined with the Vision Transformer, the obtained PS-ViT
network can adaptively learn where to look. The proposed
PS-ViT is both effective and efficient. When trained from
scratch on ImageNet, PS-ViT performs 3.8% higher than
the vanilla ViT in terms of top-1 accuracy with about 4×
fewer parameters and 10× fewer FLOPs. Code is available
at https://github.com/yuexy/PS-ViT.

Patches
Patches

Transformers
Transformers

Abstract

(b)
Figure 1. Comparison between the naive tokenization scheme in
ViT [12] and the progressive sampling in our proposed PS-ViT.
(a) The naive tokenization scheme generates a sequence of image
patches which are embedded and then fed into a stack of transformers. (b) Our PS-ViT iteratively samples discriminative locations. ×N indicates N sampling iterations.

tailored for processing mid-size sequences, and of quadratic
computational complexity w.r.t. the sequence length. Thus,
they cannot directly be used to process images with massive
pixels.
To overcome the computational complexity issue, the pioneer Vision Transformer (ViT) [12] adopts a naive tokenization scheme that partitions one image into a sequence
of regularly spaced patches, which are linearly projected
into tokens. In this way, the image is converted into hundreds of visual tokens, which are fed into a stack of transformer encoder layers for classification. ViT attains excellent results, especially when pre-trained on large-scale
datasets, which proves that full-transformer architecture is

387

