Seeking Similarities over Differences: Similarity-based Domain Alignment for
Adaptive Object Detection
Farzaneh Rezaeianaran1 Rakshith Shetty1 Rahaf Aljundi2
Daniel Olmeda Reino2 Shanshan Zhang3 Bernt Schiele1
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
In order to robustly deploy object detectors across a wide
range of scenarios, they should be adaptable to shifts in
the input distribution without the need to constantly annotate new data. This has motivated research in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) algorithms for detection. UDA methods learn to adapt from labeled source domains to unlabeled target domains, by inducing alignment
between detector features from source and target domains.
Yet, there is no consensus on what features to align and how
to do the alignment. In our work, we propose a framework
that generalizes the different components commonly used
by UDA methods laying the ground for an in-depth analysis of the UDA design space. Specifically, we propose a
novel UDA algorithm, ViSGA, a direct implementation of
our framework, that leverages the best design choices and
introduces a simple but effective method to aggregate features at instance-level based on visual similarity before inducing group alignment via adversarial training. We show
that both similarity-based grouping and adversarial training allows our model to focus on coarsely aligning feature
groups, without being forced to match all instances across
loosely aligned domains. Finally, we examine the applicability of ViSGA to the setting where labeled data are gathered from different sources. Experiments show that not only
our method outperforms previous single-source approaches
on Sim2Real and Adverse Weather, but also generalizes well
to the multi-source setting.

1. Introduction
Object detectors should be adaptable to “domain shift”
that can occur due to many factors including changes in
weather or camera, compared to the training data. Domain shifts can cause a significant drop in object detector performance [5, 17]. Domain adaptation methods [10, 9, 38, 26, 27, 29] study this problem, casting it
as a task of learning models from a source domain and

Toyota Motor Europe

3

Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Labeled Source Domain Image

Similarity
based Groups
Clustering
by visual
similarity

Group-level
Discriminator
Clustering
by visual
similarity

Unlabeled Target Domain Image

Figure 1. Depiction of visual similarity based grouping proposed
in our ViSGA method. Instance proposals from the detector are
aggregated based on visual similarity to create an adaptive number
of class-agnostic groups then they are aligned across the domains.

adapting to a target domain. In object detection, where
collecting bounding box annotations is expensive, it becomes critical that domain adaptation can be performed
without the need to annotate every new domain. This motivates the challenging setting of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [42, 39, 28, 2], where one has access to labeled source data and only unlabeled target data. Moreover,
training data itself could be gathered under different conditions, a scenario typically referred to as a multi-source
domain adaptation [31, 45, 46, 47].
A dominant line in UDA works is to learn invariant representations via aligning source and target domains, with
various proposed alignment strategies. Specifically in object detection, the questions of what features to align and
how to induce the alignment have been the subject of recent
research. Early works [5, 20] propose aligning both imagelevel features from the backbone network and all instancelevel features extracted from object proposals using adversarial training [13]. A recent state-of-the-art approach [44]
argues that it is beneficial to aggregate object proposals before alignment and suggests condensing all proposals into a
single category prototype vector before inducing alignment
using a contrastive loss. This raises questions on what is the
right aggregation-level at which to do feature alignment and
what is the right mechanism to induce this alignment.
In this work, we propose a novel UDA method for object

9204

