Searching for Robustness: Loss Learning for Noisy Classification Tasks
Boyan Gao1
Henry Gouk1
Timothy M. Hospedales1, 2
1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
2
Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom
{boyan.gao,henry.gouk,t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a “learning to learn” approach for discovering white-box classification loss functions that are robust to
label noise in the training data. We parameterise a flexible
family of loss functions using Taylor polynomials, and apply
evolutionary strategies to search for noise-robust losses in
this space. To learn re-usable loss functions that can apply
to new tasks, our fitness function scores their performance
in aggregate across a range of training datasets and architectures. The resulting white-box loss provides a simple and
fast “plug-and-play” module that enables effective labelnoise-robust learning in diverse downstream tasks, without
requiring a special training procedure or network architecture. The efficacy of our loss is demonstrated on a variety of
datasets with both synthetic and real label noise, where we
compare favourably to prior work.

1. Introduction
The success of modern deep learning is predicated on
large amounts of accurately labelled training data. However,
training with large quantities of gold-standard labelled data
is often not achievable. This is because professional annotation is often too costly to achieve at scale and so machine
learning practitioners resort to less reliable crowd-sourcing,
web-crawled incidental annotations [6], or imperfect machine annotation [27]; while in other situations the data is
hard to classify reliably even by human experts, and thus
label-noise is inevitable. These considerations have led to
a large body of work focusing on developing noise-robust
learning approaches [38, 13]. Diverse solutions have been
studied including those that modify the training algorithm
through teacher-student [23, 13] learning, or identify and
down-weight noisy instances [38]. Much simpler, and therefore more widely applicable, are attempts to define noiserobust loss functions that provide drop-in replacements for
standard losses such as cross-entropy [45, 54, 10]. These
studies hand engineer robust losses, motivated by different
considerations including risk minimisation [10] and informa-

Meta-Test
Hoodie

Noisy Fashion Data

+

Training

!!∗

Robust loss "! ∗
Deploy

Meta-Train

CMA-ES Loss
Optimization

Loss "!

Noisy MNIST

+

Architecture/
Dataset
Randomization
Training

Clean MNIST
Accuracy

!#∗"

Clean MNIST

Figure 1. Schematic of our robust loss search framework. (1) We
train a robust loss function so as to optimise validation performance
of a CNN trained with synthetic label noise using this loss. (2)
Thanks to dataset and architecture randomisation, our AutoRobustLoss (ARL) is reusable and can be deployed to new tasks, including
those without clean validation set to drive robust learning.

tion theory [51]. In this paper we explore an alternative datadriven AutoML [21] approach to loss design, and search for
a simple white-box function that provides a general-purpose
noise-robust drop-in loss. While AutoML approaches have
been widely [36, 9] and successfully [43] applied to general
purpose neural architecture search (NAS), their application
to discovery of reusable losses is much less widely studied.
We perform evolutionary search on a space of loss functions parameterised as Taylor polynomials. Every function
in this space is smooth and differentiable, and thus provides a
valid loss that can be easily plugged into existing deep learning frameworks. Meanwhile, this search space provides a
good trade-off between the flexibility to represent non-trivial
losses, and a low-dimensional white-box parameterisation
that is efficient to search and reusable across tasks without
overfitting. To score a given loss during our search, we use it
to train neural networks on noisy data, and then evaluate the
16670

