Image Synthesis via Semantic Composition
Yi Wang1 Lu Qi1 Ying-Cong Chen2 Xiangyu Zhang3 Jiaya Jia1,4
1
CUHK 2 HKUST 3 MEGVII Technology 4 SmartMore
{yiwang,luqi,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

yingcong.ian.chen@gmail.com

zhangxiangyu@megvii.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel approach to synthesize
realistic images based on their semantic layouts. It hypothesizes that for objects with similar appearance, they share
similar representation. Our method establishes dependencies between regions according to their appearance correlation, yielding both spatially variant and associated representations. Conditioning on these features, we propose
a dynamic weighted network constructed by spatially conditional computation (with both convolution and normalization). More than preserving semantic distinctions, the given
dynamic network strengthens semantic relevance, benefiting global structure and detail synthesis. We demonstrate
that our method gives the compelling generation performance qualitatively and quantitatively with extensive experiments on benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Semantic image synthesis transforms the abstract semantic layout to realistic images, an inverse task of semantic
segmentation (Figure 1). It is widely used in image manipulations and content creation. Recent methods on this task
are built upon generative adversarial networks (GAN) [7],
modeling image distribution conditioning on segmentation
masks.
Despite its substantial achievement [14, 31, 24, 21, 29,
4, 26, 16, 30], this line of research is still challenging due to
the high complexity of characterizing object distributions.
Recent advance [24, 21] on GAN-based image synthesis
concentrates on how to exploit spatial semantic variance
in the input for better preserving layout and independent
semantics, leading to further generative performance improvement. They both use different parametric operators
to handle different objects.
Specifically, SPADE [24] proposes a spatial semanticsdependent denormalization operation for the common normalization, as the feature statistics are highly correlated
with semantics. CC-FPSE [21] extends this idea to convolution using dynamic weights, generating spatially-variant

Figure 1. Semantic image synthesis results of our method on face
and scene datasets.

convolutions from the semantic layouts. Relationships between objects are implicitly modeled by the weight-sharing
convolutional kernels (SPADE) or hierarchical structures
brought by stacked convolutions. We believe when performing semantic-aware operations, enhancing object relationship could be further beneficial to final synthesis, since
context and long-range dependency have proven effective in
several vision tasks [6, 32, 43, 41, 34].
To explicitly build connection between objects and stuff
in image synthesis, we propose a semantic encoding and
stylization method, named semantic-composition generative adversarial network (SC-GAN). We first generate the
semantic-aware and appearance-correlated representations
from mapping the discrete semantic layout to their corresponding images.
Our idea is inspired by the following observation. Different semantics are with labels in scene or face parsing
datasets. Some of them are highly correlated in appearance,
e.g., the left and right eyes in CelebAMask-HQ [19]. We
abstract objects in images or feature maps into vectors by
encoding the semantic layout, which we call semantic vectors. This intermediate representation is to characterize the
relationship between different semantics based on their appearance similarity.
With these semantic vectors, we create semantic-aware
and appearance-consistent local operations in a semanticstylization fashion. Consistent with the proposed semantic vectors, these dynamic operators are also variant in se-

13749

