Episodic Transformer for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Alexander Pashevich1 *
Cordelia Schmid2
Chen Sun2,3
1
Inria 2 Google Research 3 Brown University
Abstract
Interaction and navigation defined by natural language
instructions in dynamic environments pose significant challenges for neural agents. This paper focuses on addressing
two challenges: handling long sequence of subtasks, and
understanding complex human instructions. We propose
Episodic Transformer (E.T.), a multimodal transformer that
encodes language inputs and the full episode history of visual observations and actions. To improve training, we
leverage synthetic instructions as an intermediate representation that decouples understanding the visual appearance
of an environment from the variations of natural language
instructions. We demonstrate that encoding the history with
a transformer is critical to solve compositional tasks, and
that pretraining and joint training with synthetic instructions further improve the performance. Our approach sets
a new state of the art on the challenging ALFRED benchmark, achieving 38.4% and 8.5% task success rates on seen
and unseen test splits.

1. Introduction
Having an autonomous agent performing various household tasks is a long-standing goal of the research community. To benchmark research progress, several simulated environments [3, 53, 56] have recently emerged where
the agents navigate and interact with the environment following natural language instructions. Solving the visionand-language navigation (VLN) task requires the agent to
ground human instructions in its embodied perception and
action space. In practice, the agent is often required to
perform long compositional tasks while observing only a
small fraction of the environment from an egocentric point
of view. Demonstrations manually annotated with human
instructions are commonly used to teach an agent to accomplish specified tasks.
This paper attempts to address two main challenges of
VLN: (1) handling highly compositional tasks consisting of
many subtasks and actions; (2) understanding the complex
human instructions that are used to specify a task. Figure 1
* Work done as an intern at Google Research.

Figure 1: An example of a compositional task in the ALFRED
dataset [56] where the agent is asked to bring two vases to a cabinet. We show several frames from an expert demonstration with
corresponding step-by-step instructions. The instructions expect
the agent to be able to navigate to a fireplace which is not visible
in its current egocentric view and to remember its previous location by referring to it as ”where you were standing previously”.

shows an example task that illustrates both challenges. We
show six key steps from a demonstration of 53 actions. To
fulfill the task, the agent is expected to remember the location of a fireplace at t = 0 and use this knowledge much
later (at t = 31). It also needs to solve object- (e.g. “another vase”) and location-grounded (e.g. “where you were
standing previously”) coreference resolution in order to understand the human instructions.
Addressing the first challenge requires the agent to remember its past actions and observations. Most recent VLN
approaches rely on recurrent architectures [39, 60, 68, 73]
where the internal state is expected to keep information
about previous actions and observations. However, the recurrent networks are known to be inefficient in capturing
long-term dependencies [66] and may fail to execute long
action sequences [25, 56]. Motivated by the success of the
attention-based transformer architecture [65] at language
understanding [9, 17] and multimodal learning [18, 59], we
propose to use a transformer encoder to combine multi-

15942

