LIGA-Stereo: Learning LiDAR Geometry Aware Representations for
Stereo-based 3D Detector
Xiaoyang Guo
Shaoshuai Shi Xiaogang Wang Hongsheng Li
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xyguo, ssshi, xgwang, hsli}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Stereo-based 3D detection aims at detecting 3D objects
from stereo images, which provides a low-cost solution
for 3D perception. However, its performance is still inferior compared with LiDAR-based detection algorithms. To
detect and localize accurate 3D bounding boxes, LiDARbased detectors encode high-level representations from LiDAR point clouds, such as accurate object boundaries and
surface normal directions. In contrast, high-level features
learned by stereo-based detectors are easily affected by
the erroneous depth estimation due to the limitation of
stereo matching. To solve the problem, we propose LIGAStereo (LiDAR Geometry Aware Stereo Detector) to learn
stereo-based 3D detectors under the guidance of high-level
geometry-aware representations of LiDAR-based detection
models. In addition, we found existing voxel-based stereo
detectors failed to learn semantic features effectively from
indirect 3D supervisions. We attach an auxiliary 2D detection head to provide direct 2D semantic supervisions.
Experiment results show that the above two strategies improved the geometric and semantic representation capabilities. Compared with the state-of-the-art stereo detector,
our method has improved the 3D detection performance
of cars, pedestrians, cyclists by 10.44%, 5.69%, 5.97%
mAP respectively on the official KITTI benchmark. The
gap between stereo-based and LiDAR-based 3D detectors
is further narrowed. The code is available at https:
//xy-guo.github.io/liga/.

1. Introduction
In recent years, LiDAR-based 3D detection [57, 28, 46,
45, 61, 60] has achieved increasing performance and stability in autonomous driving and robotics. However, the
high cost of LiDAR sensors has limited its applications in
low-cost products. Stereo matching [3, 18, 26, 35] is the
most common depth sensing technique using only cameras.
Compared with LiDAR sensors, stereo cameras are at a

LiDAR Points

Stereo Images

Sparse 3D
Network
Feature in
3D Space
3D Stereo
Network

Feature in
Bird’s view
Feature
Imitation

Figure 1. Our method utilizes superior geometry-aware features
from LiDAR-based 3D detection models to guide the training of
stereo-based 3D detectors.

much lower cost and higher resolutions, which makes it a
suitable alternative solution for 3D perception. 3D detection from stereo images aims at detecting objects using estimated depth maps [39, 52, 64] or implicit 3D geometry
representations [30, 10, 53]. However, the performance of
existing stereo-based 3D detection algorithms is still inferior compared with LiDAR-based algorithms.
LiDAR-based detection algorithms take raw point cloud
as inputs and then encode the 3D geometry information into
intermediate and high-level feature representations. To detect and localize accurate 3D bounding boxes, the model
must learn robust local features about object boundaries
and surface normal directions, which are essential for predicting accurate bounding box size and orientation. The
features learned by LiDAR-based detectors provide robust
high-level summarization of accurate 3D geometry structures. In comparison, due to the limitation of stereo matching, the inaccurately estimated depth or implicit 3D representation have difficulties in encoding accurate 3D geometry of objects, especially for distant ones. In addition, the
target box supervisions only provide object-level supervisions (location, size, and orientation).
This inspires us to utilize superior LiDAR detection
models to guide the training of stereo detection model via
imitating the geometry-aware representations encoded by
the LiDAR model. Comparing with traditional knowledge
distillation [24] for recognition tasks, we did not take the final erroneous classification and regression predictions from

3153

