Keypoint Communities
Duncan Zauss, Sven Kreiss, Alexandre Alahi
EPFL VITA lab
CH-1015 Lausanne
duncan.zauss@epfl.ch

Abstract
We present a fast bottom-up method that jointly detects
over 100 keypoints on humans or objects, also referred to
as human/object pose estimation. We model all keypoints
belonging to a human or an object –the pose– as a graph
and leverage insights from community detection to quantify
the independence of keypoints. We use a graph centrality
measure to assign training weights to different parts of a
pose. Our proposed measure quantifies how tightly a keypoint is connected to its neighborhood. Our experiments
show that our method outperforms all previous methods for
human pose estimation with fine-grained keypoint annotations on the face, the hands and the feet with a total of 133
keypoints. We also show that our method generalizes to car
poses.

1. Introduction
Recent large-scale datasets with fine-grained annotations
of complex poses present a new challenge for pose estimation methods. Beyond detecting a coarse person bounding
box and a small set of keypoints for large body joints, we
now have large datasets that include over 100 extra finegrained keypoints in the face, the hands and the feet. Resolving these fine details will allow us to build robust representations of humans for downstream tasks like action
recognition [24, 2], and intent prediction [25, 31].
Training our current pose estimation algorithms on poses
with mixed coarse and fine keypoints presents a challenge
as they assume a uniform importance of all keypoints in a
pose. We introduce a principled keypoint weighting method
to take into account the difference of the importance of
coarse and fine-grained keypoints. Figure 1 shows a complex person and car poses. For instance, the person pose
contains coarse keypoints like the hips and shoulders and
fine-grained keypoints like the ones along the eyebrows.
In [12], Jin et al. share a large scale annotation for complex human body poses and propose their method, ZoomNet, that set the state-of-the-art for this type of complex

Figure 1: Our proposed keypoint weighting method for
complex poses yields state-of-the-art results for whole body
human pose estimation and for complex car poses, whilst
running at high frame rates.

human body pose. Their method first localizes a person
with their major keypoints and then estimates the areas of
the hands and face. On the estimated areas, it runs a separate head that is zoomed-in on that area to determine finegrained keypoint locations. In contrast, we propose a fast,
bottom-up method that directly estimates all keypoints in
parallel. Our method does not need predefined areas for
fine-grained estimation and, therefore, generalizes to any
pose, like a fine-grained car pose. Such a car pose is proposed in the ApolloCar3D dataset [35] and we show that
our method generalizes to this pose as well.
Complex, coarse and fine-grained poses present a challenge for current pose estimation methods that assume a
uniform distribution of keypoints across a person or object.
A cluster of fine-grained keypoints overly emphasizes that
region and focuses the neural network optimization on that
area reducing the importance of other regions that only have
a single keypoint. We propose a method that quantifies how
tightly connected these keypoints are and that rebalances
the training weights such that all areas of a pose are equally

11057

