Adaptive Graph Convolution for Point Cloud Analysis
Haoran Zhou1

Yidan Feng2 Mingsheng Fang1 Mingqiang Wei2∗
Jing Qin3 Tong Lu1∗
1
2
Nanjing University Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Abstract
Convolution on 3D point clouds that generalized from
2D grid-like domains is widely researched yet far from perfect. The standard convolution characterises feature correspondences indistinguishably among 3D points, presenting an intrinsic limitation of poor distinctive feature learning. In this paper, we propose Adaptive Graph Convolution
(AdaptConv) which generates adaptive kernels for points
according to their dynamically learned features. Compared
with using a fixed/isotropic kernel, AdaptConv improves the
flexibility of point cloud convolutions, effectively and precisely capturing the diverse relations between points from
different semantic parts. Unlike popular attentional weight
schemes, the proposed AdaptConv implements the adaptiveness inside the convolution operation instead of simply assigning different weights to the neighboring points. Extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations show that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art point cloud classification and segmentation approaches on several benchmark
datasets. Our code is available at https://github.com/
hrzhou2/AdaptConv-master .

1. Introduction
Point cloud is a standard output of 3D sensors, e.g., LiDAR scanners and RGB-D cameras; it is considered as the
simplest yet most efficient shape representation for 3D objects. A variety of applications arise with the fast advance
of 3D point cloud acquisition techniques, including robotics
[31], autonomous driving [20, 43] and high-level semantic
analysis [35, 15]. Recent years have witnessed considerable attempts to generalize convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to point cloud data for 3D understanding. However,
unlike 2D images, which are organized as regular grid-like
structures, 3D points are unstructured and unordered, discretely distributed on the underlying surface of a sampled
object.
∗ Co-corresponding authors (mqwei@nuaa.edu.cn/lutong@nju.edu.cn)

2
3
1

4

(a)
2

𝑎2

2

𝑎3

𝑒Ƹ2
𝑒Ƹ3

3

1

4

𝑎4

4

(b)

3

1

𝑒Ƹ4
(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of adaptive kernels and fixed kernels in
the convolution. (a) The standard graph convolution applies a
fixed/isotropic kernel (black arrow) to compute features for each
point indistinguishably. (b) Based on these features, several attentional weights ai are assigned to determine their importance.
(c) Differently, AdaptConv generates an adaptive kernel êi that is
unique to the learned features of each point.

One common approach is to convert point clouds into
regular volumetric representations and hence traditional
convolution operations can be naturally applied to them
[24, 30]. Such a scheme, however, often introduces excessive memory cost and is difficult to capture fine-grained geometric details. In order to handle the irregularity of point
clouds without conversions, PointNet [27] applies multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) independently on each point,
which is one of the pioneering works to directly process
sparse 3D points.
More recently, several researches have been proposed
to utilize the graph-like structures for point cloud analysis. Graph CNNs [44, 21, 41, 4, 7] represent a point cloud
as graph data according to the spatial/feature similarity between points, and generalize 2D convolutions on images to
3D data. In order to process an unordered set of points with
varying neighborhood sizes, standard graph convolutions
harness shared weight functions over each pair of points
to extract the corresponding edge feature. This leads to a

4965

