Hand Image Understanding via Deep Multi-Task Learning
Xiong Zhang1∗, Hongsheng Huang2 , Jianchao Tan3 , Hongmin Xu4 ,
Cheng Yang1 , Guozhu Peng1 , Lei Wang1 , Ji Liu3
1

YY Live, Baidu Inc., 2 Joyy Inc., 3 AI Platform, Kwai Inc., 4 OPPO Inc.,

Abstract
Analyzing and understanding hand information from
multimedia materials like images or videos is important
for many real world applications and remains active in research community. There are various works focusing on recovering hand information from single image, however, they
usually solve a single task, for example, hand mask segmentation, 2D/3D hand pose estimation, or hand mesh reconstruction and perform not well in challenging scenarios. To
further improve the performance of these tasks, we propose
a novel Hand Image Understanding (HIU) framework to extract comprehensive information of the hand object from a
single RGB image, by jointly considering the relationships
between these tasks. To achieve this goal, a cascaded multitask learning (MTL) backbone is designed to estimate the
2D heat maps, to learn the segmentation mask, and to generate the intermediate 3D information encoding, followed
by a coarse-to-fine learning paradigm and a self-supervised
learning strategy. Qualitative experiments demonstrate that
our approach can recover reasonable mesh representations
even in challenging situations. Quantitatively, our method
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches on
various widely-used datasets, in terms of diverse evaluation
metrics https://github.com/MandyMo/HIU-DMTL.

1. Introduction
Hand image understanding (HIU) keeps active in both
computer vision and graphics communities, aiming to recover the spatial configurations from RGB/depth images,
including 2D/3D hand pose estimation, hand mask segmentation and hand mesh reconstruction, which have been employed in various domains [23, 25, 30, 33, 49, 52]. Recovering the spatial configurations is still challenging, due to
the inherent depth and scale ambiguity, diverse appearance
variation, and complicated articulations. While a bunch
of existing works have considered markerless HIU, most
of whom require depth camera [37, 62, 51, 41, 26, 15,
∗ corresponding author, zhangxiong@yy.com

Stack - 1

Stack - 2

Stack - K

Input

Figure 1. Hand Image Understanding. The figure illustrates the
fundamental idea of this work. We derive the 2D hand pose, hand
mask, hand mesh (including 3D hand pose) representation simultaneous from a monocular RGB image of the hand object in a
coarse-to-fine manner.

67, 28, 32, 14, 22, 21] or synchronized multi-view images [3, 18, 46, 51, 59] to deal with the aforementioned
challenges. As a consequence, most of those methods are
impractical in real-world situations where only monocular
RGB images are available.
For the monocular RGB scenario, the main obstacles reside in three-folds. Firstly, the lack of high-quality largescale datasets with precise annotations. Existing datasets
are either synthesized using software [73, 19, 35], or labeled
in a semi-automated manner [74, 27], or collected in a controlled experimental environment [66, 68, 50]. Secondly,
the incapability of the current datasets makes the trained
models not generalize well to various wild images, especially under self occlusions and complex configurations,
which may hinder its applications. Thirdly, contemporary
approaches fail to exploit unlabeled images, which is more
widely distributed than those with annotations.
The above obstacles motivate us to bring out two questions: Can the existing multi-modality data be harnessed
comprehensively to tackle the aforementioned difficulties?
Can the tremendous wild images without labels be exploited
well enough to favor the HIU?
In this work, we demonstrate the answers to be yes, and
the fundamental idea is illustrated in Figure 1. Specifically,
an innovative multi-task learning (MTL) framework is designed to tackle the HIU problem, which follows the cascade coarse-to-fine design manner. Concretely, the frame11281

