Are we Missing Confidence in Pseudo-LiDAR Methods
for Monocular 3D Object Detection?
Andrea Simonelli1 Samuel Rota Bulò2 Lorenzo Porzi2 Peter Kontschieder2 Elisa Ricci1
1
University of Trento, Fondazione Bruno Kessler 2 Facebook Reality Labs

Abstract
Pseudo-LiDAR-based methods for monocular 3D object detection have received considerable attention in the
community due to the performance gains exhibited on the
KITTI3D benchmark, in particular on the commonly reported validation split. This generated a distorted impression about the superiority of Pseudo-LiDAR-based (PLbased) approaches over methods working with RGB images
only. Our first contribution consists in rectifying this view
by pointing out and showing experimentally that the validation results published by PL-based methods are substantially biased. The source of the bias resides in an overlap
between the KITTI3D object detection validation set and
the training/validation sets used to train depth predictors
feeding PL-based methods. Surprisingly, the bias remains
also after geographically removing the overlap. This leaves
the test set as the only reliable set for comparison, where
published PL-based methods do not excel. Our second contribution brings PL-based methods back up in the ranking
with the design of a novel deep architecture which introduces a 3D confidence prediction module. We show that 3D
confidence estimation techniques derived from RGB-only
3D detection approaches can be successfully integrated into
our framework and, more importantly, that improved performance can be obtained with a newly designed 3D confidence measure, leading to state-of-the-art performance on
the KITTI3D benchmark.

1. Introduction
By providing information about pose, location and category of objects in the 3D space, 3D object detection constitutes an enabling technology for applications like autonomous driving or augmented reality. To obtain accurate
localisation performance, existing solutions rely on depth
information inferred from stereo cameras or derived from
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensors. The downsides of both variants are an increase of costs, the necessity
of involved recalibration routines and the inhibition of the
product design form factors due to fabrication constraints.

Figure 1: Performance of state-of-the-art 3D detection
methods on the KITTI3D validation and test sets1 . RGBbased methods (orange circles) exhibit a low performance
discrepancy between the two sets, whereas Pseudo-LiDARbased methods (green triangles) perform much better (up
to 10 AP) on validation than on test. This indicates a
bias, which we display by means of a blue-toned colormap.
These results also show that the best performing RGBbased methods generally benefit from exploiting a 3D Confidence (circled orange circles), a component which has not
yet been introduced in any PL-based methods.
To overcome these issues, an emerging branch of 3D object detection methods is entirely based on monocular cameras [1, 9, 19, 20, 25, 27, 29]. Monocular cameras are a
cheap alternative to the expensive LiDAR or stereo setups,
but, at the same time, incur a substantially increased algorithmic complexity due to the absence of depth observations. Indeed, accurate estimation of an objects’ distance to
the camera is the most difficult task in monocular, image1 We took as reference the performance on class Car in the Moderate
difficulty, computed with the AP |R40 metric i.e. the one used as reference
on the official KITTI3D benchmark.

3225

