Unlocking the Potential of Ordinary Classifier: Class-specific Adversarial
Erasing Framework for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Hyeokjun Kweon*, Sung-Hoon Yoon∗ , Hyeonseong Kim, Daehee Park, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
{0327june,yoon307,brain617,bag2824,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) using
image-level classification labels usually utilizes the Class
Activation Maps (CAMs) to localize objects of interest in
images. While pointing out that CAMs only highlight the
most discriminative regions of the classes of interest, adversarial erasing (AE) methods have been proposed to further
explore the less discriminative regions. In this paper, we
review the potential of the pre-trained classifier which is
trained on the raw images. We experimentally verify that
the ordinary classifier1 already has the capability to activate the less discriminative regions if the most discriminative regions are erased to some extent. Based on that, we
propose a class-specific AE-based framework that fully exploits the potential of an ordinary classifier. Our framework
(1) adopts the ordinary classifier to notify the regions to be
erased and (2) generates a class-specific mask for erasing
by randomly sampling a single specific class to be erased
(target class) among the existing classes on the image for
obtaining more precise CAMs. Specifically, with the guidance of the ordinary classifier, the proposed CAMs Generation Network (CGNet) is enforced to generate a CAM
of the target class while constraining the CAM not to intrude the object regions of the other classes. Along with
the pseudo-labels refined from our CAMs, we achieve the
state-of-the-art WSSS performance on both PASCAL VOC
2012 and MS-COCO dataset only with image-level supervision. The code is available at https://github.com/
KAIST-vilab/OC-CSE.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been spotlighted for its effectiveness and evolved to achieve a higher level of performance than conventional techniques. In semantic segmentation [6, 7, 30, 41, 42], it has also achieved significant performance improvement. However, unlike other tasks such
* The first two authors contributed equally. In alphabetical order.
1 Throughout this paper, we will refer to a classifier pre-trained on raw

images as a term ‘ordinary classifier’.

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison between the CAMs of
baseline (ordinary classifier [2]) and ours on the PASCAL
VOC 2012. From 1 to 6: original images, ground truth segmentations, baseline CAMs, our CAMs at epoch 1, 5, 9.
as object detection and classification, semantic segmentation requires dense pixel-level annotated labels that are
time-consuming and costly to acquire. Accordingly, many
attempts have been made for weakly-supervised semantic
segmentation (WSSS) that only uses image-level classification labels [1–3, 10, 22, 33, 34, 37], scribbles [24, 31], and
bounding boxes [8, 16, 26]. Among them, the most widely
used approach is to utilize only image-level classification
labels that can be easily obtained on massive amounts of
data. In order to localize the object regions with the imagelevel labels, most existing approaches [1–3,5,10–12,23,28,
29, 33, 34, 37] utilize Class Activation Maps (CAMs) [40],
represent the importance of image regions for the class prediction. To the best of our knowledge, most of the existing WSSS researches have pointed out that the CAMs high-

6994

