Shape-Biased Domain Generalization via Shock Graph Embeddings
Maruthi Narayanan, Vickram Rajendran
Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
Laurel, MD 20723

Benjamin Kimia
Brown University
School of Engineering

{Maruthi.Narayanan, Vickram.Rajendran}@jhuapl.edu

benjamin kimia@brown.edu

Abstract
There is an emerging sense that the vulnerability of Image Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), i.e., sensitivity to image corruptions, perturbations, and adversarial attacks, is connected with Texture Bias. This relative lack of
Shape Bias is also responsible for poor performance in Domain Generalization (DG). The inclusion of a role of shape
alleviates these vulnerabilities and some approaches have
achieved this by training on negative images, images endowed with edge maps, or images with conflicting shape
and texture information. This paper advocates an explicit
and complete representation of shape using a classical computer vision approach, namely, representing the shape content of an image with the shock graph of its contour map.
The resulting graph and its descriptor is a complete representation of contour content and is classified using recent
Graph Neural Network (GNN) methods. The experimental results on three domain shift datasets, Colored MNIST,
PACS, and VLCS demonstrate that even without using appearance the shape-based approach exceeds classical Image CNN based methods in domain generalization.

1. Introduction
The incredible success of deep learning methods has outpaced our understanding of how they work. An avalanche of
new Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) methods, many
with computer vision applications, have been developed in
the context of improving performance without a simultaneous development of fundamental understanding of its mechanisms. This has side-lined an integration with the traditional classical AI/computer vision approaches and cognitive science studies. The insight from the classical methods on representation and search is ignored mainly because
it is not clear how to integrate the two paradigms: one
of developing representations based on feedback from degree of success [43], and one on developing representations
based on the more classic geometric and world scene reasoning [53].

Hand in hand with the continued success of CNNs in
difficult problems such as image classification [57, 26, 49,
50, 56, 44, 37, 13, 65, 74, 5, 45, 47, 18, 60], their vulnerabilities have also been identified. Image CNNs struggle
with “domain shift” i.e., when the training conditions (resolutions, sensors, etc.) do not match the conditions of the
operating domain. Small corruptions e.g., noise, blur, fog,
etc., and perturbations which do not affect human perception [2] affect the performance of Image CNNs as benchmarked by [34]. In particular, when these small changes
are adversarial, i.e., targeted to the architecture of the CNN
for maximal effect [67, 30, 54, 12], the performance can be
seriously affected (adversarial attack).
There is an emerging understanding that underlying
these vulnerabilities is a lack of representation of shape.
While initially it was argued, e.g., by visualizations in [78],
that Image CNNs construct low-level primitives such as corners and edges in lower layers, which in turn lead to more
complex shapes in higher layers [61, 43, 41] there is increasing evidence that appearance (texture bias) and not global
shape (shape bias) is the cornerstone of correct classification by CNNs [10, 66]. Baker et al [3] explored the role of
object shape in CNNs trained for image classification and
found that the global object shape, which is arguably the
most important cue for human categorization of objects, is
not represented. Similarly, Geirhos et al. [25] show that
Image CNNs only rely on object texture rather than object
shape and show how with proper training the introduction
of a shape bias improves performance. In the field of cognitive science, Malhotra and Bowers [52] systematically explore the impact of non-shape features in the categorization performance of CNNs on the CIFAR-10 [42] dataset.
They conclude that even though the CNN mimics the hierarchical architecture and learning processes of biological
vision, they pick up optimal features to perform prediction
which do not include shape. They conjecture that the lack
of an intrinsic shape bias in a typical Image CNN architecture can be the key to susceptibility to adversarial attacks.
Zhang and Zhu [79] find that adversarially trained networks
are less texture-biased and more shape-biased. More re-

1315

