Webly Supervised Fine-Grained Recognition:
Benchmark Datasets and An Approach
Zeren Sun1 , Yazhou Yao1 *, Xiu-Shen Wei1,2∗ , Yongshun Zhang2 ,
Fumin Shen3 , Jianxin Wu2 , Jian Zhang4 , Heng Tao Shen3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 4 University of Technology Sydney

Abstract
Learning from the web can ease the extreme dependence of deep learning on large-scale manually labeled
datasets. Especially for fine-grained recognition, which
targets at distinguishing subordinate categories, it will
significantly reduce the labeling costs by leveraging free
web data. Despite its significant practical and research
value, the webly supervised fine-grained recognition
problem is not extensively studied in the computer vision community, largely due to the lack of high-quality
datasets. To fill this gap, in this paper we construct two
new benchmark webly supervised fine-grained datasets,
termed WebFG-496 and WebiNat-5089, respectively. In
concretely, WebFG-496 consists of three sub-datasets
containing a total of 53,339 web training images with
200 species of birds (Web-bird), 100 types of aircrafts
(Web-aircraft), and 196 models of cars (Web-car). For
WebiNat-5089, it contains 5089 sub-categories and more
than 1.1 million web training images, which is the largest
webly supervised fine-grained dataset ever. As a minor
contribution, we also propose a novel webly supervised
method (termed “Peer-learning”) for benchmarking these
datasets. Comprehensive experimental results and analyses
on two new benchmark datasets demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves superior performance over the
competing baseline models and states-of-the-art. Our
benchmark datasets and the source codes of Peer-learning
have been made available at https://github.com/
NUST-Machine-Intelligence-Laboratory/
weblyFG-dataset.

1. Introduction
Recent success of deep learning has shown that a deep
network in conjunction with abundant well-labeled training
* Corresponding author.

data is the most promising approach for fine-grained recognition [1, 2, 19, 20]. However, even with the availability of
scalable crowd-sourcing platforms like Amazon Mechanical Turk, constructing a large-scale fine-grained dataset like
iNat2017 [4] is still an extremely difficult work since distinguishing subtle differences among fine-grained categories
(e.g., different animals [5, 11], or plants [12, 17]) usually
requires domain-specific expert knowledge.
To reduce the cost of manual fine-grained annotation,
many methods have been proposed, which are primarily focused on semi-supervised learning [18]. These works inevitably involve various forms of human intervention and
remain labor-consuming [26]. To further reduce manual
annotations as well as to learn more practical fine-grained
models, training directly from web images is becoming increasingly popular [13, 14, 15, 16]. Nevertheless, the lacking of a benchmark dataset makes it difficult to fairly compare the performances of these algorithms. This is the motivation of this work and we aim to provide a benchmark
dataset for evaluating webly supervised fine-grained recognition algorithms.
Webly supervised fine-grained recognition consists of
three challenges: (1) Label noise - Different from manually
labeled datasets, fine-grained web images are often associated with label noises due to the influence of error-prone
automatic or non-domain-expert annotations. We consider
two types of label noises, which we call “cross-domain” and
“cross-category” noises. To be specific, cross-domain noise
is the portion of images that are not of any categories in the
same fine-grained domain, e.g., for birds, it is the fraction
of images that do not contain a bird (cf. images with purple
bounding boxes in Fig. 1 (a)). In contrast, cross-category
noise is the portion of images that have the wrong labels
within a fine-grained class, e.g., an image of a bird with the
wrong category label (cf. images with red bounding boxes
in Fig. 1 (a)). According to existing works [24], deep neural
networks have memorization effects, which will memorize

10602

