4DComplete: Non-Rigid Motion Estimation Beyond the Observable Surface
Yang Li1
1

Hikari Takehara2

The University of Tokyo

2

Takafumi Taketomi2

Bo Zheng2

Tokyo Research Center, Huawei

3

Matthias Nießner3

Technical University Munich

Figure 1: Given an input partial scan and inter-frame scene flow from a non-rigidly deforming scene (left), our method jointly
recovers missing geometry (middle) and a volumetric motion field (right). The colors show the motion directions on the unit
sphere (bottom right corner) where the vector’s length corresponds to the magnitude of the motion.

Abstract
Tracking non-rigidly deforming scenes using range sensors has numerous applications including computer vision,
AR/VR, and robotics. However, due to occlusions and physical limitations of range sensors, existing methods only handle the visible surface, thus causing discontinuities and incompleteness in the motion field. To this end, we introduce 4DComplete, a novel data-driven approach that estimates the non-rigid motion for the unobserved geometry.
4DComplete takes as input a partial shape and motion observation, extracts 4D time-space embedding, and jointly
infers the missing geometry and motion field using a sparse
fully-convolutional network. For network training, we constructed a large-scale synthetic dataset called DeformingThings4D, which consists of 1,972 animation sequences
spanning 31 different animals or humanoid categories with
dense 4D annotation. Experiments show that 4DComplete
1) reconstructs high-resolution volumetric shape and motion field from a partial observation, 2) learns an entangled 4D feature representation that benefits both shape and
motion estimation, 3) yields more accurate and natural deformation than classic non-rigid priors such as As-RigidAs-Possible (ARAP) deformation, and 4) generalizes well
to unseen objects in real-world sequences.

1. Introduction
Understanding the motion of non-rigidly deforming
scenes using a single range sensor lies at the core of many
computer vision, AR/VR, and robotics applications. In this
context, one fundamental limitation is that a single-view
range sensor cannot capture data in occluded regions, leading to incomplete observations of a 3D environment. As a
result, existing non-rigid motion tracking methods are restricted to the observable part of the scene. However, the
ability to infer complete motion from a partial observation
is indispensable for many high-level tasks. For instance, as
a nursing robot, to safely care for an elderly person (e.g.,
predict the person’s action and react accordingly), it needs
to understand both the complete body shape and how the
whole body moves even if the person is always partially occluded.
In order to address these challenges, we pose the question how can we infer the motion of the unobserved geometry in a non-rigidly deforming scene? Existing works such
as DynamicFusion [38] and VolumeDeform [26] propose to
propagate deformations from the visible surface to the invisible space through a latent deformation graph. Hidden deformations are then determined by optimizing hand-crafted
deformation priors such as As-Rigid-As-Possible [47] or
Embedded Deformation [49], which enforces that graph
vertices locally move in an approximately rigid manner.

12706

