PU-EVA: An Edge-Vector based Approximation Solution for Flexible-scale
Point Cloud Upsampling

1

Luqing Luo1 , Lulu Tang1∗, Wanyi Zhou2 , Shizheng Wang3 , Zhi-Xin Yang1†
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau
2
South China University of Technology
3
Institute of Microelectronics Chinese Academy of Sciences
{gabrielle tse, lulutamg}@outlook.com, 202021044254@mail.scut.edu.cn,
shizheng.wang@foxmail.com, zxyang@um.edu.mo

Abstract
High-quality point clouds have practical significance for
point-based rendering, semantic understanding, and surface reconstruction. Upsampling sparse, noisy and nonuniform point clouds for a denser and more regular approximation of target objects is a desirable but challenging task. Most existing methods duplicate point features for
upsampling, constraining the upsampling scales at a fixed
rate. In this work, the arbitrary point clouds upsampling
rates are achieved via edge-vector based affine combinations, and a novel design of Edge-Vector based Approximation for Flexible-scale Point clouds Upsampling (PU-EVA)
is proposed. The edge-vector based approximation encodes
neighboring connectivity via affine combinations based on
edge vectors, and restricts the approximation error within
a second-order term of Taylor’s Expansion. Moreover, the
EVA upsampling decouples the upsampling scales with network architecture, achieving the arbitrary upsampling rates
in one-time training. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate that the proposed PU-EVA outperforms
the state-of-the-arts in terms of proximity-to-surface, distribution uniformity, and geometric details preservation.

1. Introduction
With increasing capability of acquiring point clouds as
a direct approximation of an object or scene surface from
3D scanning sensors, typical applications processing raw
points are prevailing, such as point-based semantic understanding [3, 9, 24, 25, 27], point clouds rendering [4, 13]
and surface reconstruction [19, 29], etc. Hence, the quality of input points is critical for the digital designs. However, a couple of varying artifacts, including occlusion, light
∗ Equal contributions as co-first author
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Point cloud upsampling results of an elephant by using (a) PU-Net [34], (b) 3PU [32], (c) PU-GAN [16] and (d) our
PU-EVA. Note that our PU-EVA with edge-vector based approximation generates points more uniform with fine-grained details,
compared to other state-of-the-arts.

reflection, surface materials, sensor resolutions and viewing angles, hinder high-quality practical acquisition of point
clouds. It is desirable to upsample raw point clouds for a
better description of an underlying surface, by converting
the sparse, noisy, and non-uniform points into the dense,
regular and uniform ones.
Intuitively, as a similar task in 2D computer vision, image super-resolution [15, 18, 23, 26, 31] is supposedly to
lend well-developed techniques for point clouds upsampling. Nevertheless, the intrinsic irregularity of point clouds
makes effective implementations for image interpolations
not applicable in 3D world. Based on this, different criteria should also be considered for point clouds upsampling.
First, the upsampled points should lie on or be close to the
underlying surfaces of target objects. Next, the upsampled
results should distribute uniformly, instead of being clustered together. Last, the generated points should preserve
geometric details of the target objects.
The previous works often upsample points by simply du-

16208

