Memory-augmented Dynamic Neural Relational Inference
Dong Gong, Zhen Zhang, Javen Qinfeng Shi, Anton van den Hengel∗
The Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
https://donggong1.github.io/memdnri

Abstract

Input

Prior &
Encoder

Relation

Decoder

Prior &
Encoder

bt+1
x

Pred.

!t+2
x

…
…

Input

Pred.
…

…

zt

xt+1

Ment

…
…

∗ This work was partly funded by the Centre for Augmented Reasoning
at the Australian Institute for Machine Learning.

xt

…

Interacting systems are ubiquitous in computer vision,
in which the entities influence and restrict each other. The
characteristics of each entity are highly correlated with others in various ways [35, 37, 38, 21]. For example, multi-

…

1. Introduction

…

…

Mrel

Dynamic interacting systems are prevalent in vision
tasks. These interactions are usually difficult to observe
and measure directly, and yet understanding latent interactions is essential for performing inference tasks on dynamic
systems like forecasting. Neural relational inference (NRI)
techniques are thus introduced to explicitly estimate interpretable relations between the entities in the system for trajectory prediction. However, NRI assumes static relations;
thus, dynamic neural relational inference (DNRI) was proposed to handle dynamic relations using LSTM. Unfortunately, the older information will be washed away when the
LSTM updates the latent variable as a whole, which is why
DNRI struggles with modeling long-term dependences and
forecasting long sequences. This motivates us to propose
a memory-augmented dynamic neural relational inference
method, which maintains two associative memory pools:
one for the interactive relations and the other for the individual entities. The two memory pools help retain useful relation features and node features for the estimation in
the future steps. Our model dynamically estimates the relations by learning better embeddings and utilizing the longrange information stored in the memory. With the novel
memory modules and customized structures, our memoryaugmented DNRI can update and access the memory adaptively as required. The memory pools also serve as global
latent variables across time to maintain detailed long-term
temporal relations readily available for other components
to use. Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
show the effectiveness of the proposed method on modeling
dynamic relations and forecasting complex trajectories.

Relation

z

t+1

Decoder

Figure 1. Memory-augmented dynamic neural relational inference. The prior/encoder term is used to dynamically estimate the
relation type distribution zt for each step, which is used to predict
the future via the decoder. We use dual memory pools and the corresponding memory modules to maintain the long-term temporally
global information of the relations and entities.

ple instances in a scene influence each other following certain physical rules or underlying purposes, and human body
joints are interacting and are influenced by each other in
body movements [21]. Modeling and reasoning the interactive relations are crucial for understanding the dynamic
system and can benefit other subsequent tasks, such as behavior prediction. The underlying relations can usually be
perceived easily but may not be seen and measured directly
[35, 21]. For example, except for the observable skeleton,
more latent relations among the human body joints cannot
be directly observed. They change dynamically with erratic
movements and external influence. Thus, it is difficult to
obtain the ground truth of the latent interactions, making
dynamic relational inference and prediction challenging.
There has been an amount of work proposed to implicitly model and learn the interacting system relying on the
graph neural networks (GNNs) with messaging passing on
the fully connected graph [37, 30, 18, 39, 9, 38] or attention models [3, 27]. Although the implicit relation modeling can benefit the learning, it does not provide much
interoperability and powerful prior to the interaction system. Thus, neural relational inference (NRI) [21] was proposed to explicitly represent and infer the interaction among
the entities in a dynamic system. NRI infers the interaction relations as latent variables and applies them to per-

11843

