Hypercorrelation Squeeze for Few-Shot Segmentation
Juhong Min

Dahyun Kang

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/HSNet/

Abstract

The advent of deep convolutional neural networks [17,
20, 64] has promoted dramatic advances in many computer
vision tasks including object tracking [28, 29, 45], visual
correspondence [22, 44, 48], and semantic segmentation [7,
47, 62] to name a few. Despite the effectiveness of deep
networks, their demand for a heavy amount of annotated
examples from large-scale datasets [9, 11, 35] still remains a
fundamental limitation since data labeling requires substantial human efforts, especially for dense prediction tasks, e.g.,
semantic segmentation. To cope with the challenge, there
have been various attempts in semi- and weakly-supervised
segmentation approaches [6, 26, 39, 66, 72, 77, 88] which
in turn effectively alleviated the data-hunger issue. However,
given only a few annotated training examples, the problem
of poor generalization ability of the deep networks is yet
the primary concern that many few-shot segmentation methods [10, 12, 13, 19, 33, 36, 37, 46, 54, 61, 63, 69, 70, 74, 75,
80, 83, 86, 87, 89] struggle to address.

geometric (fine)

1. Introduction

semantic (coarse)

Few-shot semantic segmentation aims at learning to segment a target object from a query image using only a few
annotated support images of the target class. This challenging task requires to understand diverse levels of visual cues
and analyze fine-grained correspondence relations between
the query and the support images. To address the problem,
we propose Hypercorrelation Squeeze Networks (HSNet)
that leverages multi-level feature correlation and efficient
4D convolutions. It extracts diverse features from different
levels of intermediate convolutional layers and constructs a
collection of 4D correlation tensors, i.e., hypercorrelations.
Using efficient center-pivot 4D convolutions in a pyramidal
architecture, the method gradually squeezes high-level semantic and low-level geometric cues of the hypercorrelation
into precise segmentation masks in coarse-to-fine manner.
The significant performance improvements on standard fewshot segmentation benchmarks of PASCAL-5i , COCO-20i ,
and FSS-1000 verify the efficacy of the proposed method.

Query

Support

Visual correspondences at multiple levels (Hypercorrelation)

squeeze

squeeze

Correlation pattern analysis (Hypercorrelation squeeze)

Figure 1: Our model performs visual reasoning in coarse-to-fine
manner by gradually squeezing high-dimensional hypercorrelation
to the target segmentation mask with efficient 4D convolutions.

In contrast, human visual system easily achieves generalizing appearances of new objects given extremely limited supervision. The crux of such intelligence lies at the
ability in finding reliable correspondences across different
instances of the same class. Recent work on semantic correspondence shows that leveraging dense intermediate features [38, 42, 44] and processing correlation tensors with
high-dimensional convolutions [30, 58, 71] are significantly
effective in establishing accurate correspondences. However,
while recent few-shot segmentation research began active
exploration in the direction of correlation learning, most
of them [36, 37, 46, 65, 73, 75, 80] neither exploit diverse
levels of feature representations from early to late layers of
a CNN nor construct pair-wise feature correlations to capture fine-grained correlation patterns. There have been some
attempts [74, 86] in utilizing dense correlations with multilevel features, but they are yet limited in the sense that they
simply employ the dense correlations for graph attention,
using only a small fraction of intermediate conv layers.
In this work we combine the two of the most influential techniques in recent research of visual correspondence,
multi-level features and 4D convolutions, and deign a novel

6941

