Pose Invariant Topological Memory for Visual Navigation
Asuto Taniguchi

Fumihiro Sasaki

asuto.taniguchi@jp.ricoh.com

fumihiro.fs.sasaki@jp.ricoh.com

Ryota Yamashina
ryohta.yamashina@jp.ricoh.com

Ricoh Company, LTD.

Abstract
Planning for visual navigation using topological memory, a memory graph consisting of nodes and edges, has
been recently well-studied. The nodes correspond to past
observations of a robot, and the edges represent the reachability predicted by a neural network (NN). Most prior methods, however, often fail to predict the reachability when
the robot takes different poses, i.e. the direction the robot
faces, at close positions. This is because the methods observe first-person view images, which significantly changes
when the robot changes its pose, and thus it is fundamentally difficult to correctly predict the reachability from
them. In this paper, we propose pose invariant topological memory (POINT) to address the problem. POINT observes omnidirectional images and predicts the reachability
by using a spherical convolutional NN, which has a rotation invariance property and enables planning regardless
of the robot’s pose. Additionally, we train the NN by contrastive learning with data augmentation to enable POINT
to plan with robustness to changes in environmental conditions, such as light conditions and the presence of unseen
objects. Our experimental results show that POINT outperforms conventional methods under both the same and different environmental conditions. In addition, the results with
the KITTI-360 dataset show that POINT is more applicable
to real-world environments than conventional methods.

1. Introduction
Planning for visual navigation has been widely studied.
Typically, a geometric map of an environment is constructed
by visual simultaneous localization and mapping (vSLAM)
[33, 23], and a path to a goal is planned by using a planning algorithm such as A* search [31]. However, in practical cases, vSLAM requires much effort to obtain a geometrically accurate map, such as combination with highprecision odometry or global navigation satellite system

𝑜𝑔

Data collection
and
edge predictor training

Topological memory
construction

𝑜𝑐

Planning

Figure 1. Overview of topological memory based planning. A
robot moves around an environment to collect data and train an
edge predictor with the data. Then, a topological memory is constructed on the basis of the edge predictor. The topological memory has nodes sampled from collected data and edges connected
between nodes if the nodes are predicted to be close (thus reachable) by the edge predictor. Finally, given current observations oc
and goal observations og , planning is performed on the topological
memory using an algorithm such as the Dijkstra algorithm [27].

(GNSS) sensors, and map modification and parameter tuning by an expert. On the other hand, a number of works
have proposed planning methods using topological memory
[11, 32, 9, 24, 26, 36, 3], which is a memory graph where
each node corresponds to a past observation of a robot and
the edge between two nodes represents their reachability,
i.e. whether the positions corresponding to the nodes are
physically close or distant. In particular, recent works, such
as semi-parametric topological memory (SPTM) [32] and
hallucinative topological memory (HTM) [26], leverage a
neural network (NN) to predict the reachability. We call
such an NN an edge predictor. These methods do not aim
to build a geometrically accurate map, and thus do not require any combination with other high-precision sensors or
map modification and parameter tuning by an expert. Since
it is to be desired that visual navigation can be easily performed without such requirements, we focus on topological
memory based methods. The overview of planning based
on topological memory is shown in Figure 1.
Previous topological memory based planning methods,
however, have a difficulty; the edge predictor often fails
prediction given observations with different poses. To explain the reason, we illustrate the procedure of the topologi-

15384

