Hypersim: A Photorealistic Synthetic Dataset for
Holistic Indoor Scene Understanding
Mike Roberts Jason Ramapuram Anurag Ranjan Atulit Kumar
Miguel Angel Bautista Nathan Paczan Russ Webb Joshua M. Susskind
Apple
http://github.com/apple/ml-hypersim

Abstract
For many fundamental scene understanding tasks, it is
difficult or impossible to obtain per-pixel ground truth labels from real images. We address this challenge by introducing Hypersim, a photorealistic synthetic dataset for
holistic indoor scene understanding. To create our dataset,
we leverage a large repository of synthetic scenes created
by professional artists, and we generate 77,400 images of
461 indoor scenes with detailed per-pixel labels and corresponding ground truth geometry. Our dataset: (1) relies exclusively on publicly available 3D assets; (2) includes complete scene geometry, material information, and lighting information for every scene; (3) includes dense per-pixel semantic instance segmentations and complete camera information for every image; and (4) factors every image into
diffuse reflectance, diffuse illumination, and a non-diffuse
residual term that captures view-dependent lighting effects.
We analyze our dataset at the level of scenes, objects,
and pixels, and we analyze costs in terms of money, computation time, and annotation effort. Remarkably, we
find that it is possible to generate our entire dataset from
scratch, for roughly half the cost of training a popular opensource natural language processing model. We also evaluate sim-to-real transfer performance on two real-world
scene understanding tasks – semantic segmentation and 3D
shape prediction – where we find that pre-training on our
dataset significantly improves performance on both tasks,
and achieves state-of-the-art performance on the most challenging Pix3D test set. All of our rendered image data, as
well as all the code we used to generate our dataset and
perform our experiments, is available online.

1. Introduction
For many fundamental scene understanding tasks, it is
difficult or impossible to obtain per-pixel ground truth labels from real images. In response to this challenge, the
computer vision community has developed several photore-

Figure 1. Overview of the Hypersim dataset. For each color
image (a), Hypersim includes the following ground truth layers:
depth (b); surface normals (c); instance-level semantic segmentations (d,e); diffuse reflectance (f); diffuse illumination (g); and
a non-diffuse residual image that captures view-dependent lighting effects like glossy surfaces and specular highlights (h). Our
diffuse reflectance, diffuse illumination, and non-diffuse residual
layers are stored as HDR images, and can be composited together
to exactly reconstruct the color image.

alistic synthetic datasets and interactive simulation environments that have spurred rapid progress towards the goal of
holistic indoor scene understanding [6, 7, 9, 10, 14, 15, 19,
22, 24, 31, 33, 36, 37, 39, 43, 44, 45, 46, 49, 52, 61, 62, 63,
65, 70, 72, 75, 76, 79, 83, 84].

10912

