Multiresolution Deep Implicit Functions for 3D Shape Representation
Zhang Chen1,2, *
Christian Häne1

Yinda Zhang1
Kyle Genova1
Sean Fanello1
Ruofei Du1
Cem Keskin1
Thomas Funkhouser1
1
2
Google
ShanghaiTech University

Sofien Bouaziz1
Danhang Tang1

Abstract
We introduce Multiresolution Deep Implicit Functions
(MDIF), a hierarchical representation that can recover fine
geometry detail, while being able to perform global operations such as shape completion. Our model represents a
complex 3D shape with a hierarchy of latent grids, which can
be decoded into different levels of detail and also achieve
better accuracy. For shape completion, we propose latent
grid dropout to simulate partial data in the latent space
and therefore defer the completing functionality to the decoder side. This along with our multires design significantly
improves the shape completion quality under decoder-only
latent optimization. To the best of our knowledge, MDIF is
the first deep implicit function model that can at the same
time (1) represent different levels of detail and allow progressive decoding; (2) support both encoder-decoder inference
and decoder-only latent optimization, and fulfill multiple
applications; (3) perform detailed decoder-only shape completion. Experiments demonstrate its superior performance
against prior art in various 3D reconstruction tasks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep implicit functions (DIF) have gained
much popularity as a 3D shape representation in applications such as compression [30], shape completion [8], neural
rendering [24, 32], and super-resolution [4]. In contrast
to explicit representations such as point clouds, voxels, or
meshes, a 3D shape is encoded into a compact latent vector,
which when combined with a sampled 3D location as input
to a decoder can be used to evaluate an implicit function for
surface reconstruction.
In this paper, our objective is to design a DIF for shape
1 represent
representation that has three main properties: ⃝
shapes with arbitrarily fine details (adding more bits to
⃝ support both
the representation provides more details), 2
encoder-decoder inference and decoder-only latent optimiza3 enable
tion, and can be applied to different tasks, and ⃝
* Work done while the author was an intern at Google.

GT

Level 0

Level 2

Level 4

Figure 1: Example results of our model for auto-encoding
Teaser
(row 1 and 2) and shape completion (row 3) in different
levels of detail. Green dots represent the observed depth
pixels for the completion task.
detail-preserving shape completion from inputs with large
unobserved regions. These properties are all important for a
shape representation. Yet, to the best of our knowledge, no
prior method has achieved all three properties.
Existing DIF methods can be classified into global and
local approaches. Early methods mostly belong to the global
category [26, 3, 22, 37, 23], where a single latent vector is
used to represent the whole shape. These approaches learn to
encode a global shape prior in a compact latent space, which
can then be leveraged to fulfill various reconstruction tasks.
However, due to the limited capacity of the latent space
and the global nature of these approaches, global methods
usually lack fine-grained detail.
More recently, local approaches [18, 1] have been proposed. These methods divide the space into local regions
and encode each one with a latent vector. Such local representations provide better accuracy and generalization when
representing shapes, especially under decoder-only latent
optimization. However, they do not model a global prior. As
a result, they cannot be used for shape completion with large
unobserved regions since in such regions there is no data to
optimize the latent vectors. To overcome this issue, [12, 4]

13087

