Revisiting Adversarial Robustness Distillation: Robust Soft Labels
Make Student Better
Bojia Zi1,2 *, Shihao Zhao1,2 *, Xingjun Ma3†, Yu-Gang Jiang1,2†
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan Univeristy
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
3
School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia

Abstract
Adversarial training is one effective approach for training robust deep neural networks against adversarial attacks. While being able to bring reliable robustness, adversarial training (AT) methods in general favor high capacity models, i.e., the larger the model the better the robustness. This tends to limit their effectiveness on small models,
which are more preferable in scenarios where storage or
computing resources are very limited (e.g., mobile devices).
In this paper, we leverage the concept of knowledge distillation to improve the robustness of small models by distilling from adversarially trained large models. We first revisit
several state-of-the-art AT methods from a distillation perspective and identify one common technique that can lead
to improved robustness: the use of robust soft labels – predictions of a robust model. Following this observation, we
propose a novel adversarial robustness distillation method
called Robust Soft Label Adversarial Distillation (RSLAD)
to train robust small student models. RSLAD fully exploits
the robust soft labels produced by a robust (adversariallytrained) large teacher model to guide the student’s learning
on both natural and adversarial examples in all loss terms.
We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our RSLAD
approach over existing adversarial training and distillation methods in improving the robustness of small models
against state-of-the-art attacks including the AutoAttack.
We also provide a set of understandings on our RSLAD and
the importance of robust soft labels for adversarial robustness distillation. Code: https://github.com/zibojia/RSLAD.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become the standard models for solving complex real-world learning problems, such as image classification [25, 19], speech recog* Equal contribution:
Bojia Zi(bjzi19@fudan.edu.cn) and Shihao
Zhao(shzhao19@fudan.edu.cn)
† Correspondence to Xingjun Ma (daniel.ma@deakin.edu.au) and YuGang Jiang (ygj@fudan.edu.cn)

nition [46] and natural language processing [45]. However,
studies have shown that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [43, 15], where imperceptible adversarial perturbations on the input can easily subvert the model’s prediction. This raises security concerns on the deployment of
DNNs in safety-critical scenarios such as autonomous driving [13, 7, 11] and medical diagnosis [31].
Different types of methods have been proposed to defend
DNNs against adversarial attacks [22, 30, 32, 26, 57, 48],
amongst which adversarial training (AT) has been found to
be the most effective approach [2, 10]. AT can be regarded
as a type of data augmentation technique that crafts adversarial versions of the natural examples for model training.
AT is normally formulated as a min-max optimization problem with the inner maximization generates adversarial examples while the outer minimization optimizes the model’s
parameters on the adversarial examples generated during
the inner maximization [32, 57, 47].
While being able to bring reliable robustness, AT methods have several drawbacks that may limit their effectiveness in certain application scenarios. Arguably, the most
notable drawback is its hunger for high capacity models, i.e., the larger the model the better the robustness
[49, 44, 35, 16]. However, there are scenarios where small
and lightweight models are more preferable than large models. One example is the deployment of small DNNs in devices with limited memory and computational power such
as smart phones and autonomous vehicles [37]. This has
motivated the use of knowledge distillation along with AT
to boost the robustness of small DNNs by distilling from
robust large models [14, 3, 8, 62], a process known as Adversarial Robustness Distillation (ARD).
In this paper, we build upon previous works in both AT
and ARD, and investigate the key element that can boost
the robustness of small DNNs via distillation. We compare the loss functions adopted by several state-of-the-art
AT methods and identify one common technique behind the
improved robustness: the use of predictions of an adversarially trained model. We denote this type of supervision as

16443

