Hypergraph Neural Networks for Hypergraph Matching
Xiaowei Liao1,2
1

Yong Xu1,2,3,*

Haibin Ling4,*

School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China Univ. of Tech., Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Communication and Computer Network Laboratory of Guangdong, China
4
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY USA
liao.xw@mail.scut.edu.cn, yxu@scut.edu.cn, hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Hypergraph matching is a useful tool to find feature correspondence by considering higher-order structural information. Recently, the employment of deep learning has
made great progress in the matching of graphs, suggesting its potential for hypergraphs. Hence, in this paper, we
present the first, to our best knowledge, unified hypergraph
neural network (HNN) solution for hypergraph matching.
Specifically, given two hypergraphs to be matched, we first
construct an association hypergraph over them and convert
the hypergraph matching problem into a node classification
problem on the association hypergraph. Then, we design
a novel hypergraph neural network to effectively solve the
node classification problem. Being end-to-end trainable,
our proposed method, named HNN-HM, jointly learns all
its components with improved optimization. For evaluation, HNN-HM is tested on various benchmarks and shows
a clear advantage over state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Feature correspondence is essential for many computer
vision tasks, such as shape matching [2], image registration [17], and object recognition [26]. Given two sets of features, feature correspondence aims to match each feature in
one set to a feature in the other set. Usually, features in the
same set are related and have an inherent structure, which
can benefit the corresponding task. Using the pairwise relations between features (second-order structure), one can
build two graphs from the two feature sets (nodes represent
features, and edges represent relations) and convert the corresponding problem into a graph matching problem [14,33].
Similarly, to incorporate higher-order structural information
(i.e. relations involving more than two features), one can
build two hypergraphs and convert the problem into a hy* Corresponding authors.

A

D
C

B

E

Figure 1. A hypergraph. This hypergraph has five nodes (A, B, C,
D, and E) and two hyperedges ({A, B, C} and {C, D, E}).

pergraph matching problem [10, 44].
A hypergraph (illustrated in Fig. 1) is a generalization of
a graph, stimulated by the idea that each hyperedge captures
the relation among multiple (usually more than two) nodes.
The task of hypergraph matching is to find the node correspondence between two given hypergraphs by considering
the affinities of their corresponding nodes and hyperedges.
Given the affinities of nodes and hyperedges, a hypergraph
matching problem can be formulated as a challenging combinatorial optimization problem. Most hypergraph matching algorithms focus on how to approximately solve that optimization problem [10, 19, 20, 27, 28, 40, 44]. While these
algorithms have kept pushing the frontier of performance,
they are practically limited due to the hand-crafted affinities and task-agnostic combinatorial solver. Recently, the
employment of deep learning has made great progress in the
research of graph matching problems [12, 30, 36, 39, 41, 42],
suggesting its potential for hypergraph matching problems.
Inspired by the work mentioned above, in this paper, we
present the first, to our best knowledge, unified hypergraph
neural network (HNN) solution for hypergraph matching
(illustrated in Fig. 2). Specifically, given two hypergraphs
G 1 and G 2 to be matched, we first construct an association
hypergraph G a over them. Each node in G a represents a
pair of nodes from G 1 and G 2 , and each hyperedge in G a
captures the higher-order relationship between two hyperedges from G 1 and G 2 . With G a , the matching between G 1
and G 2 is converted to a node selection problem on G a .
Then, we propose a novel hypergraph neural network to

1266

