SPatchGAN: A Statistical Feature Based Discriminator for Unsupervised
Image-to-Image Translation
Xuning Shao, Weidong Zhang
NetEase Games AI Lab
599 Wangshang Road, Binjiang District, Hangzhou, P.R. China
{shaoxuning, zhangweidong02}@corp.netease.com

Abstract
For unsupervised image-to-image translation, we propose a discriminator architecture which focuses on the statistical features instead of individual patches. The network
is stabilized by distribution matching of key statistical features at multiple scales. Unlike the existing methods which
impose more and more constraints on the generator, our
method facilitates the shape deformation and enhances the
fine details with a greatly simplified framework. We show
that the proposed method outperforms the existing state-ofthe-art models in various challenging applications including selfie-to-anime, male-to-female and glasses removal.

Input

SPatchGAN

Input

SPatchGAN

Input

SPatchGAN

U-GAT-IT

Council-GAN ACL-GAN

(a) Selfie-to-anime
U-GAT-IT

Council-GAN ACL-GAN

1. Introduction
Unsupervised image-to-image translation has become an
area of growing interest in computer vision. Powered by
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [7], recent works
[37, 17, 20, 31, 1, 10, 6, 30, 19] are able to change the local
texture and style of the images without the assistance of any
paired data. However, these methods still have difficulty
with tasks which require a larger shape deformation. Our
goal is to improve unsupervised image-to-image translation
for applications which involve geometric changes between
the source and the target domains.
GANs are trained by a game between a generator network and a discriminator network. At the core of the modern unsupervised image translation frameworks [37, 10, 16,
27, 26, 35] is a PatchGAN discriminator [11]. Instead of
giving a single real vs. fake probability for the whole image,
PatchGAN produces multiple outputs for multiple overlapping image patches. It helps with the convergence of the
network by involving less parameters and stopping at a relatively low-level scale [11].
PatchGAN is feasible for identifying a specific type of
texture all over the image, since it processes all the patches
by the same set of convolutional weights. However, we find

(b) Male-to-female
U-GAT-IT

Council-GAN ACL-GAN

(c) Glasses removal

Figure 1: Example results for our SPatchGAN and the baselines. Our method generates natural looking hairstyle in
Figure 1a and Figure 1b, and suppresses the traces of glasses
in Figure 1c. The improvements in shape deformation are
highlighted with green circles.

it less capable of dealing with complicated shape changes
like selfie-to-anime. In such a case, the discriminative fea-

6546

