Learning High-Fidelity Face Texture Completion without Complete Face Texture
Jongyoo Kim, Jiaolong Yang, Xin Tong
Microsoft Research Asia
{jongk,jiaoyan,xtong}@microsoft.com

(a) Input

(b) Inferred texture

(c) Zoom-in of (b)

(d) Rendered image

(e) Zoom-in of (d)

Figure 1: Examples of single-image face texture completion results. Our neural network, trained in an unsupervised manner
without any complete face texture, can generate high-fidelity results with natural skin details and facial hair.

Abstract
For face texture completion, previous methods typically
use some complete textures captured by multiview imaging
systems or 3D scanners for supervised learning. This paper
deals with a new challenging problem – learning to complete invisible texture in a single face image without using
any complete texture. We simply leverage a large corpus
of face images of different subjects (e. g., FFHQ) to train
a texture completion model in an unsupervised manner. To
achieve this, we propose DSD-GAN, a novel deep neural
network based method that applies two discriminators in
UV map space and image space. These two discriminators
work in a complementary manner to learn both facial structures and texture details. We show that their combination is
essential to obtain high-fidelity results. Despite the network
never sees any complete facial appearance, it is able to generate compelling full textures from single images.

1. Introduction
Human face analysis and digitization are among the most
popular topics in computer vision and graphics. Most face
photos we take do not represent a full view of a face due
to occlusion by the face itself or other objects. In fact, selfocclusion is ubiquitous for face images in the wild as shown
by the examples in Fig. 1, leading to invisible texture content. The task of face texture completion is to infer the invisible face content and recover full-face appearance. It has
a wide variety of applications ranging from 3D avatar creation [14, 20], 3D morphable model construction [2, 31],
and face image manipulation [13, 36], to high-level vision
tasks such as face recognition [13, 6]. This work is devoted
to texture1 completion learning using deep neural networks
for single face images.
However, learning face texture completion is not
1 Following [6], we use texture to refer to a facial appearance on an
image, not an albedo or intrinsic image.

13990

