WarpedGANSpace: Finding non-linear RBF paths in GAN latent space
Christos Tzelepis, Georgios Tzimiropoulos, Ioannis Patras
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End road, E1 4NS London, UK
{c.tzelepis, g.tzimiropoulos, i.patras}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of discovering, in
an unsupervised manner, interpretable paths in the latent
space of pretrained GANs, so as to provide an intuitive and
easy way of controlling the underlying generative factors.
In doing so, it addresses some of the limitations of the stateof-the-art works, namely, a) that they discover directions
that are independent of the latent code, i.e., paths that are
linear, and b) that their evaluation relies either on visual
inspection or on laborious human labeling. More specifically, we propose to learn non-linear warpings on the latent space, each one parametrized by a set of RBF-based
latent space warping functions, and where each warping
gives rise to a family of non-linear paths via the gradient
of the function. Building on the work of [34], that discovers linear paths, we optimize the trainable parameters of
the set of RBFs, so as that images that are generated by
codes along different paths, are easily distinguishable by a
discriminator network. This leads to easily distinguishable
image transformations, such as pose and facial expressions
in facial images. We show that linear paths can be derived
as a special case of our method, and show experimentally
that non-linear paths in the latent space lead to steeper,
more disentangled and interpretable changes in the image
space than in state-of-the art methods, both qualitatively
and quantitatively. We make the code and the pretrained
models publicly available at: https://github.com/
chi0tzp/WarpedGANSpace.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Warpings of vector space Rd due to two RBF
functions, f i and f j , lead to different non-linear paths in Rd
for any given z ∈ Rd (dashed bold lines) via their gradients,
∇f i and ∇f j . Solid black lines represent isohypses of the
warpings and the colored vectors represent the vector fields
induced by their gradients. (b) Illustration of a non-linear
path due to warping f j , starting from a latent code z and
moving along the gradient ∇f j by steps of magnitude .

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10] have
emerged as the leading generative learning paradigm, exhibiting clear superiority in terms of the quality of generated
realistic and aesthetically pleasing images [25, 3, 17, 18,
19]. However, despite their generative efficiency, GANs do
not provide an inherent way of comprehending or controlling the underlying generative factors. To address this, the
research community has directed its efforts towards study-

ing the structure of GAN’s latent space [28, 30, 18, 33, 7,
37, 1, 34, 35, 9, 14, 32, 26, 11]. These works study the structure of GAN’s latent space and attempt to find interpretable
directions on it; that is, directions sampling across which are
expected to generate images where only a few (ideally one)
factors of variations are “activated”. Meaningful humaninterpretable directions can refer to either domain-specific
16393

