Anonymizing Egocentric Videos
Daksh Thapar, Aditya Nigam
Indian Institute of Technology Mandi

Chetan Arora
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi

dakshthapar.github.io,faculty.iitmandi.ac.in/˜aditya

www.cse.iitd.ac.in/˜chetan

Abstract
In egocentric videos, the face of a wearer capturing the
video is never captured. This gives a false sense of security that the wearer’s privacy is preserved while sharing such videos. However, egocentric cameras are typically harnessed to wearer’s head, and hence, also capture
wearer’s gait. Recent works have shown that wearer gait
signatures can be extracted from egocentric videos, which
can be used to determine if two egocentric videos have
the same wearer. In a more damaging scenario, one can
even recognize a wearer using hand gestures from egocentric videos, or identify a wearer in third person videos such
as from a surveillance camera. We believe, this could be
a death knell in sharing of egocentric videos, and fatal
for egocentric vision research. In this work, we suggest a
novel technique to anonymize egocentric videos, which create carefully crafted, but small, and imperceptible optical
flow perturbations in an egocentric video’s frames. Importantly, these perturbations do not affect object detection or
action/activity recognition from egocentric videos but are
strong enough to dis-balance the gait recovery process. In
our experiments on benchmark EPIC-Kitchens dataset, the
proposed perturbation degrades the wearer recognition performance of [42], from 66.3% to 13.4%, while preserving
the activity recognition performance of [10] from 89.6%
to 87.4%. To test our anonymization with more wearer
recognition techniques, we also developed a stronger, and
more generalizable wearer recognition method based on
camera egomotion cues. The approach achieves state-ofthe-art (SOTA) performance of 59.67% on EPIC-Kitchens,
compared to 55.06% by [42]. However, the accuracy of our
recognition technique also drops to 12% using the proposed
anonymizing perturbations.

1. Introduction
Egocentric videos are typically captured through wearable cameras harnessed on a person’s head, recording
in a hand-free style, without any explicit user intervention. The unique perspective gives a wearer ability to
share his/her experience as seen through his/her own eyes.

Egocentric Video

Identity removal by adding noise to camera motion

Anonymized egocentric video (Our Proposal)

Figure 1: Wearer recognition from egocentric videos is a critical
privacy breach. In this paper we propose to add carefully crafted,
but subtle 3D rotations in the egocentric videos which can lead to
the failure of wearer recognition techniques. Row 1 shows original frames of an egocentric video, whereas 3rd rows shows the
frames after proposed transformation. Note that the transformations are imperceptible. We show in our experiments that they also
do not affect the performance of other video analysis tasks. On the
other hand, naively adding random rotations (row 2) causes visual distortion (note the red portions near the borders due to large
rotations), but does not lead to significant deterioration in wearer
recognition ability as shown in our experiments.

The potential utility of such cameras in applications like
law-enforcement, geriatric care, and life-logging has also
spawned serious research in egocentric videos. The computer vision community has responded with a variety of
large scale publicly available egocentric video datasets viz.
FPSI [8], EGTEA [22], and EPIC-Kitchens [5]. Some
notable tasks in egocentric vision taken-up so-far include
egocentric video summarization, temporal segmentation, as
well as object, action, and activity recognition from firstperson viewpoint [16, 45, 20, 33, 28, 19, 9, 46, 15, 44, 24].
While the wearable, hands-free, and always-on nature of
egocentric cameras have been one of the reasons for their
popularity, they have also brought in unique privacy concerns. Hence, both general users, as well as researchers,
have been careful in not collecting the videos in private
places such as bedrooms or toilets. However, outdoor egocentric videos, and especially the scenarios when no other
person is seen in the videos are generally considered safe
and shared freely. This has been due to the popular per-

2320

