GroupFormer: Group Activity Recognition with Clustered Spatial-Temporal
Transformer
Shuaicheng Li1∗ , Qianggang Cao1∗ , Lingbo Liu2 , Kunlin Yang1† , Shinan Liu1 , Jun Hou1 , Shuai Yi1
1
Sensetime Research, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{lishuaicheng,caoqianggang,yangkunlin,liushinan,houjun,yishuai}@sensetime.com
liulingbo918@gmail.com

Abstract
Group activity recognition is a crucial yet challenging
problem, whose core lies in fully exploring spatial-temporal
interactions among individuals and generating reasonable
group representations. However, previous methods either
model spatial and temporal information separately, or directly aggregate individual features to form group features.
To address these issues, we propose a novel group activity recognition network termed GroupFormer. It captures
spatial-temporal contextual information jointly to augment
the individual and group representations effectively with
a clustered spatial-temporal transformer. Specifically, our
GroupFormer has three appealing advantages: (1) A tailormodified Transformer, Clustered Spatial-Temporal Transformer, is proposed to enhance the individual representation and group representation. (2) It models the spatial and
temporal dependencies integrally and utilizes decoders to
build the bridge between the spatial and temporal information. (3) A clustered attention mechanism is utilized to dynamically divide individuals into multiple clusters for better learning activity-aware semantic representations. Moreover, experimental results show that the proposed framework outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the Volleyball
dataset and Collective Activity dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/xueyee/GroupFormer

1. Introduction
Group activity recognition is a critical studied problem
due to its wide applications in surveillance systems, video
analysis, and social behaviors analysis. Different from
conventional action recognition, group activity recognition
concentrates on understanding the scene of multiple individuals. The intuitive tactic to recognize group activity is to
model relevant relations between individuals and infer their
∗ indicates equal contribution.
† denotes corresponding author.

Spiking

blocking

digging

Left Spiking

Figure 1. Examples of a clip centered at the annotated frame. The
actors with ‘spiking’, ‘blocking’, ‘digging’ actions perform temporally, but they may perform strong spatial-temporal dependencies, which shows the importance of considering spatial and temporal interactions for reasoning about the ‘Left Spiking’ activity.

collective activity. Nevertheless, exploiting individual relations for inferring collective activity is very challenging,
especially due to the complicated variations in both spatial
and temporal transition in untrimmed scenarios.
Sorts of efforts have been dedicated to capturing relation context in videos for the sake of group activities inferring. Earlier methods [6, 25, 31, 37, 34, 15] utilized recurrent neural network (RNN) to model the dynamics of
the individuals, which require a large amount of computational cost. More recent works [20, 47, 18, 33, 23] applied
attention-based methods to model the individual relations
for inferring group activity. [47] built relational graphs and
considered the actor interactions in several frames. [33]
captured spatial and temporal self-attention respectively,
which are added and utilized to reinforce the mean-field
CRF [50]. [20] introduced the standard Transformer encoder as the feature extractor to selectively exploit the spatial actor relations without considering the temporal dynamical information. [23] proposed a relation learning network
to model and distill the group-relevant actions and activities
by two agents.
However, the aforementioned methods confront two

13668

