Large Scale Interactive Motion Forecasting for Autonomous Driving :
The WAYMO O PEN M OTION DATASET
Scott Ettinger 1 , Shuyang Cheng 1 , Benjamin Caine 2 , Chenxi Liu 1 , Hang Zhao 1 , Sabeek Pradhan 1 ,
Yuning Chai 1 , Ben Sapp 1 , Charles Qi 1 , Yin Zhou 1 , Zoey Yang 1 , Aurélien Chouard 1 , Pei Sun 1 ,
Jiquan Ngiam 2 , Vijay Vasudevan 2 , Alexander McCauley 1 , Jonathon Shlens 2 , Dragomir Anguelov 1
1
Waymo LLC, 2 Google Brain

Abstract
As autonomous driving systems mature, motion forecasting has received increasing attention as a critical requirement for planning. Of particular importance are interactive
situations such as merges, unprotected turns, etc., where
predicting individual object motion is not sufficient. Joint
predictions of multiple objects are required for effective
route planning. There has been a critical need for highquality motion data that is rich in both interactions and annotation to develop motion planning models. In this work,
we introduce the most diverse interactive motion dataset
to our knowledge, and provide specific labels for interacting objects suitable for developing joint prediction models.
With over 100,000 scenes, each 20 seconds long at 10 Hz,
our new dataset contains more than 570 hours of unique
data over 1750 km of roadways. It was collected by mining
for interesting interactions between vehicles, pedestrians,
and cyclists across six cities within the United States. We
use a high-accuracy 3D auto-labeling system to generate
high quality 3D bounding boxes for each road agent, and
provide corresponding high definition 3D maps for each
scene. Furthermore, we introduce a new set of metrics that
provides a comprehensive evaluation of both single agent
and joint agent interaction motion forecasting models. Finally, we provide strong baseline models for individualagent prediction and joint-prediction. We hope that this new
large-scale interactive motion dataset will provide new opportunities for advancing motion forecasting models.

1. Introduction
Motion forecasting has received increasing attention as
a critical requirement for planning in autonomous driving
systems [8, 14, 40, 36, 28, 34]. Due to the complexity of
scenes that autonomous systems need to safely handle, predicting object motion in the scene is a difficult task, suitable
for machine learning models. Building effective motion

(a) A vehicle waits for a pedestrian to fully cross the crosswalk
before commencing a turn.

(b) A vehicle accelerates onto the street only after the incoming
vehicle turns.

Figure 1: Examples of interactions between agents in a
scene in the WAYMO O PEN M OTION DATASET. Each example highlights how predicting the joint behavior of agents
aids in predicting likely future scenarios. Solid and dashed
lines indicate the road graph and associated lanes. Each numeral indicates a unique agent in the scene.
forecasting models requires large amounts of high quality
real world data. Creating a dataset for motion forecasting
is complicated by the fact that the distribution of real world
data is highly imbalanced [4, 18, 32, 38]; in the common
case, vehicles drive straight at a constant velocity. In order to develop effective models, a dataset must contain and
measure performance on a wide range of behaviors and trajectory shapes for different object types that an autonomous
system will encounter in operation.
We argue that critical situations (e.g., merges, lane
changes, and unprotected turns) require the joint prediction
of a set of multiple interacting objects, not just a single object. An example of a pedestrian and vehicle interacting is
illustrated in Figure 1a where a vehicle waits for a pedestrian to fully cross the street before turning. In Figure 1b,

9710

