Scalable Vision Transformers with Hierarchical Pooling
Zizheng Pan Bohan Zhuang† Jing Liu Haoyu He Jianfei Cai
Dept of Data Science and AI, Monash University

Abstract
DeiT-B

1. Introduction
Equipped with the self-attention mechanism that has
strong capability of capturing long-range dependencies,
Transformer [37] based models have achieved significant
breakthroughs in many computer vision (CV) and natural
language processing (NLP) tasks, such as machine translation [10, 9], image classification [11, 36], segmentation
[43, 39] and object detection [3, 48]. However, the good
performance of Transformers comes at a high computational cost. For example, a single Transformer model requires more than 10G Mult-Adds to translate a sentence of
only 30 words. Such a huge computational complexity hinders the widespread adoption of Transformers, especially
on resource-constrained devices, such as smart phones.
† Corresponding author. Email: bohan.zhuang@monash.edu

DeiT-S

80

Top-1 Acc (%)

The recently proposed Visual image Transformers (ViT)
with pure attention have achieved promising performance
on image recognition tasks, such as image classification.
However, the routine of the current ViT model is to maintain a full-length patch sequence during inference, which
is redundant and lacks hierarchical representation. To this
end, we propose a Hierarchical Visual Transformer (HVT)
which progressively pools visual tokens to shrink the sequence length and hence reduces the computational cost,
analogous to the feature maps downsampling in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). It brings a great benefit
that we can increase the model capacity by scaling dimensions of depth/width/resolution/patch size without introducing extra computational complexity due to the reduced sequence length. Moreover, we empirically find that the average pooled visual tokens contain more discriminative information than the single class token. To demonstrate the
improved scalability of our HVT, we conduct extensive experiments on the image classification task. With comparable FLOPs, our HVT outperforms the competitive baselines
on ImageNet and CIFAR-100 datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/MonashAI/HVT.

75

R-50
Scale HVT-Ti-4
R-34
DeiT-Ti

70

R-18
HVT-Ti-1

65

0

4

R-152

R-101

HVT-S-1

HVT
DeiT
ResNet
8

12

GFLOPs

16

20

Figure 1: Performance comparisons on ImageNet. With
comparable GFLOPs (1.25 vs. 1.39), our proposed Scale
HVT-Ti-4 surpasses DeiT-Ti by 3.03% in Top-1 accuracy.
To improve the efficiency, there are emerging efforts to
design efficient and scalable Transformers. On the one
hand, some methods follow the idea of model compression
to reduce the number of parameters and computational overhead. Typical methods include knowledge distillation [19],
low-bit quantization [29] and pruning [12]. On the other
hand, the self-attention mechanism has quadratic memory
and computational complexity, which is the key efficiency
bottleneck of Transformer models. The dominant solutions include kernelization [20, 28], low-rank decomposition [41], memory [30], sparsity [4] mechanisms, etc.
Despite much effort has been made, there still lacks specific efficient designs for Visual Transformers considering
taking advantage of characteristics of visual patterns. In
particular, ViT models maintain a full-length sequence in
the forward pass across all layers. Such a design can suffer
from two limitations. Firstly, different layers should have
different redundancy and contribute differently to the accuracy and efficiency of the network. This statement can be
supported by existing compression methods [35, 23], where
each layer has its optimal spatial resolution, width and bitwidth. As a result, the full-length sequence may contain

377

