DeePSD: Automatic Deep Skinning And Pose Space Deformation For 3D
Garment Animation
Hugo Bertiche1,2 , Meysam Madadi1,2 , Emilio Tylson1 and Sergio Escalera1,2
1
Universitat de Barcelona and 2 Computer Vision Center, Spain
hugo bertiche@hotmail.com

Abstract
We present a novel solution to the garment animation
problem through deep learning. Our contribution allows
animating any template outfit with arbitrary topology and
geometric complexity. Recent works develop models for
garment edition, resizing and animation at the same time by
leveraging the support body model (encoding garments as
body homotopies). This leads to complex engineering solutions that suffer from scalability, applicability and compatibility. By limiting our scope to garment animation only, we
are able to propose a simple model that can animate any
outfit, independently of its topology, vertex order or connectivity. Our proposed architecture maps outfits to animated 3D models into the standard format for 3D animation (blend weights and blend shapes matrices), automatically providing of compatibility with any graphics engine.
We also propose a methodology to complement supervised
learning with an unsupervised physically based learning
that implicitly solves collisions and enhances cloth quality.

1. Introduction
Virtual dressed human animation has been a topic of
interest for decades due to its numerous applications in
entertainment and videogame industries, and recently, in
virtual and augmented reality. Depending on the application we find two main classical computer graphics approaches. On the one hand, Physically Based Simulation
(PBS) [6, 17, 23, 24, 29, 30, 33] approaches are able to
obtain highly realistic cloth dynamics at the expense of a
huge computational cost. On the other hand, Linear Blend
Skinning (LBS) [12, 13, 15, 20, 31, 32] and Pose Space
Deformation (PSD) [3, 4, 16, 18] models are suitable for
environments with limited computational resources or realtime performance demand. To do so, realism is highly compromised. Then, computer graphics approaches present a
trade-off between realism and computational performance.

Figure 1: We present a novel approach for outfit animation.
Our methodology allows generalization to unseen outfits. It
can handle multiple layers of cloth, arbitrary topology and
complex geometric details without retraining.

Deep learning has already proven successful in complex
3D tasks [5, 10, 19, 21, 25, 26, 28]. Due to the interest
in the topic and the recently available 3D datasets on garments, we see the scientific community pushing this research line [1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 14, 22, 27]. Most proposals are
built as non-linear PSD models learnt through deep learning. These methods yield models describing one or few
garment types and, therefore, they lack on generalization
capabilities. To overcome this, recent works propose encoding garment types as a subset of body vertices [7, 22]. This
allows generalizing to more garments, yet bounds its representation capacity to body homotopies only. Thus, these
approaches need to model each garment individually and
cannot handle details such as pockets nor multiple layers of
cloth, heavily hurting their scalability and applicability in
real life scenarios.
We propose learning a mapping from the space of template outfits to the space of animated 3D models. We will
show how this allows generalization to completely unseen
garments with arbitrary topology and vertex connectivity.
We can achieve this by identifying edition/resizing and animation as separate tasks, and focusing on the latter. Our
method works with whole outfits (instead of single garments), multiple layers of cloth and resolutions, while also
allowing complex geometric details (see Fig. 1 for some

5471

