RePOSE: Fast 6D Object Pose Refinement via Deep Texture Rendering
Shun Iwase1

Xingyu Liu1
Rawal Khirodkar1
Rio Yokota2
Kris M. Kitani1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Tokyo Institute of Technology

Abstract
We present RePOSE, a fast iterative refinement method
for 6D object pose estimation. Prior methods perform refinement by feeding zoomed-in input and rendered RGB
images into a CNN and directly regressing an update of
a refined pose. Their runtime is slow due to the computational cost of CNN, which is especially prominent in
multiple-object pose refinement. To overcome this problem,
RePOSE leverages image rendering for fast feature extraction using a 3D model with a learnable texture. We call
this deep texture rendering, which uses a shallow multilayer perceptron to directly regress a view-invariant image
representation of an object. Furthermore, we utilize differentiable Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) optimization to refine
a pose fast and accurately by minimizing the distance between the input and rendered image representations without the need of zooming in. These image representations
are trained such that differentiable LM optimization converges within few iterations. Consequently, RePOSE runs
at 92 FPS and achieves state-of-the-art accuracy of 51.6%
on the Occlusion LineMOD dataset - a 4.1% absolute improvement over the prior art, and comparable result on the
YCB-Video dataset with a much faster runtime. The code is
available at https://github.com/sh8/repose.

1. Introduction
In many applications of 6D object pose estimation like
robotic grasping and augmented reality (AR), fast runtime
is critical. State-of-the-art 6D object pose estimation methods [19, 40, 28] demonstrate that iterative 6D object pose refinement improves the accuracy largely. Nevertheless, since
recent 6D object pose refinement methods [21, 19] directly
regress an update of a pose to align a zoomed-in input image
of an object against a template image (e.g., 3D rendering of
that object) using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN),
we presume that the CNN’s computational cost of zoomedin inputs can be a bottleneck toward the real-time 6D object
pose estimation.
We have mainly two choices of refinement strategies. As
described, the former one is CNN-based direct regression,

Refined Pose
(a)
Textured
3D Model

(b)
Rendered
Feature
Deep Texture
Renderer

2

𝑁 times

LM
Optim.

(c)
Refined Pose

(e)
CNN Feature

(d)
Input Image
CNN

2

Figure 1: RePOSE Framework: (a) 3D model with deep
texture is projected to obtain (b) the rendered image representation with the deep texture renderer. (c) The pose is
refined iteratively by minimizing the projection error of the
rendered image representation and (e) the CNN feature extracted from (d) the input image via Levenberg-Marquardt
(LM) optimization.

which generally requires large computational cost. The latter one is a classical non-linear optimization [24] which iteratively updates a pose by minimizing the photometric error
between input and template images. Their runtime per iteration is quite fast. Since the photometric error explicitly considers each pixel, they can obtain enough details for accurate optimization without the need of zooming in. However,
they can fail under diverse illumination or gross pose differences. Although non-linear least squares methods such as
inverse compositional image alignment [5, 22] or active appearance models [13, 23] are extremely efficient, straightforward implementations of such methods can be unstable
under significant illumination or pose changes. In addition,
their runtime can be slower if many iterations are performed
until convergence.
We leverage and improve the latter method to realize
both quick and accurate refinement. In this paper, we propose RePOSE, a new feature-based non-linear optimization
framework for 6D object pose refinement. The main tech-

3303

