Excavating the Potential Capacity of Self-Supervised Monocular Depth
Estimation
Rui Peng

Ronggang Wang
Yawen Lai
Luyang Tang
Yangang Cai
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University

{ruipeng,tly926}@stu.pku.edu.cn {alanlyawen,caiyangang}@pku.edu.cn rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised methods play an increasingly important
role in monocular depth estimation due to their great potential and low annotation cost. To close the gap with supervised methods, recent works take advantage of extra constraints, e.g., semantic segmentation. However, these methods will inevitably increase the burden on the model. In this
paper, we show theoretical and empirical evidence that the
potential capacity of self-supervised monocular depth estimation can be excavated without increasing this cost. In
particular, we propose (1) a novel data augmentation approach called data grafting, which forces the model to explore more cues to infer depth besides the vertical image position, (2) an exploratory self-distillation loss, which is supervised by the self-distillation label generated by our new
post-processing method - selective post-processing, and (3)
the full-scale network, designed to endow the encoder with
the specialization of depth estimation task and enhance the
representational power of the model. Extensive experiments
show that our contributions can bring significant performance improvement to the baseline with even less computational overhead, and our model, named EPCDepth, surpasses the previous state-of-the-art methods even those supervised by additional constraints. Code is available at
https://github.com/prstrive/EPCDepth.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation has always been a fundamental problem of computer vision, which dominates the performance
of various applications, e.g., virtual reality, autonomous
driving, robotics, etc. As the cheapest solution, monocular depth estimation (MDE) has made considerable progress
due to the evolvement of Convolution Neural Networks
[27, 44, 45, 16]. However, most existing state-of-the-art approaches rely on supervised training [7, 6, 8, 29, 1], whose
training datasets collection is a cumbersome and formidable
challenge. As an alternative, self-supervised methods elimi-

Monodepth [12]

Monodepth2 [13]

DepthHint [49]

EdgeDepth [68]

EPCDepth

Figure 1. Depth estimation from a single image. Our model
(EPCDepth), trained only on stereo data, performs the best and
produces the sharpest and most complete result with the least computational cost.

nate the need for ground-truth depth through recasting depth
estimation as the reconstruction problem among stereo images [10, 12, 49, 68], monocular video [67, 2, 42, 32] or a
combination of both [62, 13].
In terms of performance alone, recent works have shown
that the gap between self-supervision and full-supervision
has made a de facto reduction. But on the other hand, this
reduction largely benefits from the sophisticated model architecture and extra constraints from external modalities,
e.g., semantic segmentation [2, 26, 68, 15], optical flow
[57, 40], depth normal [54], etc. Apparently, these factors
substantially increase the burden of the model training and
run counter to the concept of self-supervision to some extent. In this paper, we show the potential of self-supervised
monocular depth estimation even without these additional

15560

