CM-NAS: Cross-Modality Neural Architecture Search
for Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
Chaoyou Fu1,2∗ Yibo Hu3∗ Xiang Wu2 Hailin Shi3 Tao Mei3 Ran He1,2†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
3
NLPR & CEBSIT & CRIPAC, CASIA
JD AI Research
{chaoyou.fu, rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {shihailin, tmei}@jd.com
{huyibo871079699,alfredxiangwu}@gmail.com

Abstract
Visible-Infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) aims
to match cross-modality pedestrian images, breaking
through the limitation of single-modality person ReID in
dark environment. In order to mitigate the impact of large
modality discrepancy, existing works manually design various two-stream architectures to separately learn modalityspecific and modality-sharable representations. Such a
manual design routine, however, highly depends on massive experiments and empirical practice, which is time consuming and labor intensive. In this paper, we systematically study the manually designed architectures, and
identify that appropriately separating Batch Normalization
(BN) layers is the key to bring a great boost towards crossmodality matching. Based on this observation, the essential objective is to find the optimal separation scheme for
each BN layer. To this end, we propose a novel method,
named Cross-Modality Neural Architecture Search (CMNAS). It consists of a BN-oriented search space in which
the standard optimization can be fulfilled subject to the
cross-modality task. Equipped with the searched architecture, our method outperforms state-of-the-art counterparts in both two benchmarks, improving the Rank-1/mAP
by 6.70%/6.13% on SYSU-MM01 and by 12.17%/11.23%
on RegDB. Code is released at https://github.com/
JDAI-CV/CM-NAS.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) refers to matching pedestrian images acquired from disjoint cameras [20, 53, 62]. In
recent years, it has received substantial attention due to its
significant practical value in video surveillance [47]. Conventional person ReID is only devoted to single-modality,
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

i.e. all the pedestrian images are taken by visible cameras
during day time. Benefiting from the strenuous efforts of
researchers, impressive achievements have been made on
most benchmarks [57, 1, 54]. Nevertheless, the visible cameras cannot image clearly in dark environment, which impedes the popularization and application of person ReID
[39]. To overcome this obstacle, in addition to the visible
(VIS) cameras, infrared (IR) cameras that are robust to illumination variants are also equipped in many surveillance
scenarios [5]. Therefore, in practice, we often need to match
VIS and IR pedestrian images, raising the task of VI-ReID.
Modality discrepancy, caused by different wavelengths
of VIS and IR images, is one of the most difficult challenges in VI-ReID. Existing works have manually designed
various two-stream architectures [49, 50, 24] to mitigate
the impact of the large modality discrepancy. Specifically,
as exemplified in Fig. 2, some layers are separated into
two branches to learn modality-specific representations for
VIS an IR data respectively, while the remaining layers are
shared to learn modality-sharable representations. The intuition behind this design is that VIS and IR images contain both modality-specific information, e.g. the spectrum,
and modality-sharable information, e.g. the identity. At this
point, an obvious problem is raised: which layers should
be separated into two branches and which layers should be
shared? Some methods separate the layers in the first one
[47, 50] or five [52] blocks, while some others even share
the whole network [42]. There is still no consensus on the
optimal design of the neural architecture for VI-ReID.
In this paper, to investigate the impact of different separation schemes, we manually design a total of 195 different two-stream architectures. Given that Batch Normalization (BN) plays a crucial role in learning modality distributions [45], we also perform separation in units of BN
layers, in addition to the entire block as usual. As illustrated in Section 3.1, after comprehensively comparing the
performances of all the architectures, we obtain two major

11823

