SLIDE: Single Image 3D Photography with
Soft Layering and Depth-aware Inpainting
Varun Jampani∗ , Huiwen Chang∗ , Kyle Sargent, Abhishek Kar, Richard Tucker, Michael Krainin,
Dominik Kaeser, William T. Freeman, David Salesin, Brian Curless, Ce Liu
Google Research

Input Image

Ours-No-BG
Novel View

Ours
Novel View

3D-Photo
Novel View

Figure 1: Appearance Details with SLIDE. View synthesis results show better preservation of hair structures in SLIDE
(Ours) compared to that of 3D-Photo [31]. We also show the novel view (Ours-No-BG) where the background (BG) layer is
greyed-out to showcase our soft layering. See the supplementary video for a better illustration of view synthesis results.

Abstract
Single image 3D photography enables viewers to view
a still image from novel viewpoints. Recent approaches
combine monocular depth networks with inpainting networks to achieve compelling results. A drawback of these
techniques is the use of hard depth layering, making them
unable to model intricate appearance details such as thin
hair-like structures. We present SLIDE, a modular and
unified system for single image 3D photography that uses
a simple yet effective soft layering strategy to better preserve appearance details in novel views. In addition, we
propose a novel depth-aware training strategy for our inpainting module, better suited for the 3D photography task.
The resulting SLIDE approach is modular, enabling the
use of other components such as segmentation and matting for improved layering. At the same time, SLIDE
uses an efficient layered depth formulation that only requires a single forward pass through the component networks to produce high quality 3D photos. Extensive experimental analysis on three view-synthesis datasets, in
combination with user studies on in-the-wild image collections, demonstrate superior performance of our technique in comparison to existing strong baselines while being conceptually much simpler. Project page: https:
//varunjampani.github.io/slide

∗ Equal Contribution.

1. Introduction
Still images remain a popular choice for capturing, storing, and sharing visual memories despite the advances in
richer capturing technologies such as depth and video sensing. Recent advances [34, 39, 26, 31, 16, 17] show how
such 2D images can be “brought to life” just by interactively changing the camera viewpoint, even without scene
movement, thereby creating a more engaging 3D viewing
experience. Following recent works, we use the term ‘Single image 3D photography’ to describe the process of converting a 2D image into a 3D viewing experience. Single
image 3D photography is quite challenging, as it requires
estimating scene geometry from a single image along with
inferring the dissoccluded scene content when moving the
camera around. Recent state-of-the-art techniques for this
problem can be broadly classified into two approaches modular systems [26, 31] and monolithic networks [34, 39].
Modular systems [31, 26, 16, 17] leverage state-of-theart 2D networks such as single-image depth estimation, 2D
inpainting, and instance segmentation. Given recent advances in monocular depth estimation [29, 21, 20] and inpainting [40, 41] fueled by deep learning on large-scale
2D datasets, these modular approaches have been shown to
work remarkably well on in-the-wild images. A key component of these modular approaches is decomposing the scene
into a set of layers based on depth discontinuities. The scene
is usually decomposed into a set of layers with hard discontinuities and thus can not model soft appearance effects such
12518

