Unsupervised Dense Deformation Embedding Network for
Template-Free Shape Correspondence
Ronghan Chen1,2,3
1

Yang Cong1,2∗

Jiahua Dong1,2,3

State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences†
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
chenronghan@sia.cn, congyang81@gmail.com, dongjiahua1995@gmail.com

Abstract
Shape correspondence from 3D deformation learning
has attracted appealing academy interests recently. Nevertheless, current deep learning based methods require the
supervision of dense annotations to learn per-point translations, which severely over-parameterize the deformation
process. Moreover, they fail to capture local geometric details of original shape via global feature embedding. To
address these challenges, we develop a new Unsupervised
Dense Deformation Embedding Network (i.e., UD2 E-Net),
which learns to predict deformations between non-rigid
shapes from dense local features. Since it is non-trivial to
match deformation-variant local features for deformation
prediction, we develop an Extrinsic-Intrinsic Autoencoder
to first encode extrinsic geometric features from source into
intrinsic coordinates in a shared canonical shape, with
which the decoder then synthesizes corresponding target
features. Moreover, a bounded maximum mean discrepancy loss is developed to mitigate the distribution divergence between the synthesized and original features. To
learn natural deformation without dense supervision, we
introduce a coarse parameterized deformation graph, for
which a novel trace and propagation algorithm is proposed
to improve both the quality and efficiency of the deformation. Our UD2 E-Net outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised methods by 24% on Faust Inter challenge and even
supervised methods by 13% on Faust Intra challenge.

1. Introduction
Alignment of deformable 3D shapes is a ubiquitous challenge in the field of computer vision and graphics with
∗ The corresponding author is Prof. Yang Cong.
† This work is supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2019YFB1310300 and the National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grant 61821005.

Extrinsic Feature Space

Head

Shared Canonical Shape
(Intrinsic Coordinate Space)

Figure 1. Illustration of our UD2 E-Net model, which achieves the
bidirectional mapping between extrinsic feature space and intrinsic coordinate space for dense deformation embedding.

many applications, including non-rigid reconstruction, deformation transfer and texture mapping. Traditional methods [33, 23] infer parametric deformation by optimizing
correspondences construction and objective minimization
iteratively. However, the optimization heavily depends on
initialization and is prone to being stuck in local minima,
especially for large articulated deformations. With the advent of 3D deep learning techniques [28, 29], deep deformation learning methods [13, 14, 39, 43, 21] leveraging a large amount of data have been applied for large
deformation prediction. Generally, these techniques directly regress dense translations or positions for all input 3D
points, which neglects the implicit deformation disciplines
and severely over-parameterizes the deformation leading to
high-frequency artifacts. Unfortunately, these approaches
require strong supervision of dense correspondences (e.g.,
usually more than 5000 per human body shape), which consumes huge labor-intensive efforts.
Furthermore, most existing state-of-the-art methods [21,
13, 14, 5, 39, 44, 15] encode the target shape into a global
feature for deformation learning, which neglects the lowlevel geometric details and fails to infer fine-grained defor-

8361

