On Feature Decorrelation in Self-Supervised Learning
Tianyu Hua* 1,2 , Wenxiao Wang* 1 , Zihui Xue2,3 , Sucheng Ren2,5 , Yue Wang4 , and Hang Zhao†1,2
1

3

Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
UT Austin 4 MIT 5 South China University of Technology

Abstract
In self-supervised representation learning, a common
idea behind most of the state-of-the-art approaches is to
enforce the robustness of the representations to predefined
augmentations. A potential issue of this idea is the existence
of completely collapsed solutions (i.e., constant features),
which are typically avoided implicitly by carefully chosen
implementation details. In this work, we study a relatively
concise framework containing the most common components from recent approaches. We verify the existence of
complete collapse and discover another reachable collapse
pattern that is usually overlooked, namely dimensional collapse. We connect dimensional collapse with strong correlations between axes and consider such connection as a
strong motivation for feature decorrelation (i.e., standardizing the covariance matrix). The gains from feature decorrelation are verified empirically to highlight the importance
and the potential of this insight.

(a) complete collapse

(b) dimensional collapse

Distance

Encoder

Encoder
x2

x1
image x

(c) decorrelated

1. Introduction
Deep learning is prevailing in a wide range of domains,
including computer vision [20], natural language processing [13] and speech recognition [47], while the utility of
the most classical, supervised methods are sometimes restricted by limited or costly data labeling. Recently, selfsupervised learning has proven capable of offering visual
representations with high utility and therefore reducing the
need for massive annotations. The past year has witnessed
significant advancements in this field: A line of work focuses on determining augmentations that better suit the selfsupervised fashion, including revisiting typical augmentations [43], using adversarial perturbations [24, 32, 23], and
searching augmentation policies [36]; A line of work alters the sampling strategy to expand the source of positive
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding to hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

(d) the concise framework

Figure 1: An overview of the key components of this
work: 1a and 1b are two reachable collapse patterns in selfsupervised settings; 1c is an illustration of the goal of feature decorrelation; 1d is a sketch of the concise framework
used in this work.

pairs [49, 2, 44] and calibrate the contribution of negative
samples [44, 38, 27]; Another line of work uses clusteringbased mechanisms to characterize the relation of crosssample views [5, 6, 1, 7]. Despite the technical variety, there
is one high-level idea that remains in most if not all of the
recent approaches, learning representations that are robust
to augmentations [35, 8, 19, 43].
This idea is fairly intuitive but it does not rule out trivial, collapsed solutions by design. In consequence, existing
work must incorporate a way that helps to mitigate the issue

9598

