AutoShape: Real-Time Shape-Aware Monocular 3D Object Detection
Zongdai Liu,

Dingfu Zhou ,*

Feixiang Lu,

Jin Fang and Liangjun Zhang

Robotics and Autonomous Driving Laboratory, Baidu Research,
National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, China
{liuzongdai, zhoudingfu, lufeixiang, fangjin, liangjunzhang}@baidu.com

Abstract
Existing deep learning-based approaches for monocular
3D object detection in autonomous driving often model the
object as a rotated 3D cuboid while the object’s geometric shape has been ignored. In this work, we propose an
approach for incorporating the shape-aware 2D/3D constraints into the 3D detection framework. Specifically, we
employ the deep neural network to learn distinguished 2D
keypoints in the 2D image domain and regress their corresponding 3D coordinates in the local 3D object coordinate first. Then the 2D/3D geometric constraints are built
by these correspondences for each object to boost the detection performance. For generating the ground truth of
2D/3D keypoints, an automatic model-fitting approach has
been proposed by fitting the deformed 3D object model and
the object mask in the 2D image. The proposed framework has been verified on the public KITTI dataset and
the experimental results demonstrate that by using additional geometrical constraints the detection performance
has been significantly improved as compared to the baseline method. More importantly, the proposed framework
achieves state-of-the-art performance with real time. Data
and code will be available at https://github.com/
zongdai/AutoShape

1. Introduction
Perceiving 3D shapes and poses of surrounding obstacles is an essential task in autonomous driving (AD) perception systems. The accuracy and speed performance of
3D objection detection is important for the following motion planning and control modules in AD. Many 3D object detectors [50, 14] have been proposed, mainly for depth
sensors such as LiDAR [35, 45] or stereo cameras [46, 18],
which can provide the distance information of the environments directly. However, LiDAR sensors are expensive and
stereo rigs suffer from on-line calibration issues. There* Corresponding author

Figure 1: (a): 3D Bbox corners and center are commonly used
for monocular 3D object detection. However, the rich structure
information from 3D vehicle shapes and their projection on 2D
images are not employed. (b) shows our shape-aware constraints
constructed from an aligned 3D model. Such 2D-3D keypoints
carry more semantic and geometric information and enable to construct stronger geometric constraints for monocular 3D detection.

fore, monocular camera based 3D object detection becomes
a promising direction.
The main challenge for monocular-based approaches is
to obtain accurate depth information. In general, depth estimation from a single image without any prior information
is a challenging problem and recent many deep learningbased approaches achieve good results [7]. With the estimated depth map, pseudo LiDAR point cloud can be reconstructed via pre-calibrated intrinsic camera parameters
and 3D detectors designed for LiDAR point cloud can be
applied directly on pseudo LiDAR point cloud [33] [37].
Furthermore, [33] integrates the depth estimation and 3D
object detection network together following an end-to-end
manner. However, heavy computation burden is one main
bottleneck of such two-stage approaches.
To improve the efficiency, many direct regressionbased approaches have been proposed (e.g., SMOKE [24],
RTM3D [19]) and achieved promising results. By representing the object as one center point, the object detection task is formulated as keypoints detection and its corresponding attributes (e.g., size, offsets, orientation, depth,

15641

