MeshTalk: 3D Face Animation from Speech
using Cross-Modality Disentanglement
Alexander Richard1 Michael Zollhöfer1 Yandong Wen2 Fernando de la Torre2 Yaser Sheikh1
1
Facebook Reality Labs 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{richardalex, zollhoefer, yasers}@fb.com

yandongw@andrew.cmu.edu

ftorre@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a generic method for generating full
facial 3D animation from speech. Existing approaches to
audio-driven facial animation exhibit uncanny or static upper face animation, fail to produce accurate and plausible co-articulation or rely on person-specific models that
limit their scalability. To improve upon existing models,
we propose a generic audio-driven facial animation approach that achieves highly realistic motion synthesis results for the entire face. At the core of our approach is
a categorical latent space for facial animation that disentangles audio-correlated and audio-uncorrelated information based on a novel cross-modality loss. Our approach ensures highly accurate lip motion, while also synthesizing plausible animation of the parts of the face that
are uncorrelated to the audio signal, such as eye blinks
and eye brow motion. We demonstrate that our approach
outperforms several baselines and obtains state-of-the-art
quality both qualitatively and quantitatively. A perceptual user study demonstrates that our approach is deemed
more realistic than the current state-of-the-art in over
75% of cases. We recommend watching the supplemental
video before reading the paper: https://github.com/
facebookresearch/meshtalk

1. Introduction
Speech-driven facial animation is a highly challenging
research problem with several applications such as facial
animation for computer games, e-commerce, or immersive
VR telepresence. The demands on speech-driven facial animation differ depending on the application. Applications
such as speech therapy or entertainment (e.g., Animojies or
AR effects) do not require a very presice level of realism in
the animation. In the production of films, movie dubbing,
driven virtual avatars for e-commerce applications or immersive telepresence, on the contrary, the quality of speech
animation requires a high degree of naturalness, plausibility, and has to provide intelligibility comparable to a natural
speaker. The human visual system has been evolutionary

Figure 1. Given a neutral face mesh of a person and a speech signal
as input, our approach generates highly realistic face animations
with accurate lip shape and realistic upper face motion such as eye
blinks and eyebrow raises.

adapted to understanding subtle facial motions and expressions. Thus, a poorly animated face without realistic coarticulation effects or out of lip-sync is deemed to be disturbing for the user.
Psychological literature has observed that there is an important degree of dependency between speech and facial
gestures. This dependency has been exploited by audiodriven facial animation methods developed in computer vision and graphics [4, 2]. With the advances in deep learning,
recent audio-driven face animation techniques make use of
person-specific approaches [22, 26] that are trained in a supervised fashion based on a large corpus of paired audio
and mesh data. These approaches are able to obtain highquality lip animation and synthesize plausible upper face
motion from audio alone. To obtain the required training
data, high-quality vision-based motion capture of the user is

1173

