MixMo: Mixing Multiple Inputs for Multiple Outputs via Deep Subnetworks
Alexandre Ramé* †1 , Rémy Sun* 1,2 and Matthieu Cord1,3
1

2

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, Paris, France
Optronics & Missile Electronics, Land & Air Systems, Thales
3
Valeo.ai

Abstract
Recent strategies achieved ensembling “for free” by fitting concurrently diverse subnetworks inside a single base
network. The main idea during training is that each subnetwork learns to classify only one of the multiple inputs
simultaneously provided. However, the question of how to
best mix these multiple inputs has not been studied so far.
In this paper, we introduce MixMo, a new generalized
framework for learning multi-input multi-output deep subnetworks. Our key motivation is to replace the suboptimal summing operation hidden in previous approaches by a
more appropriate mixing mechanism. For that purpose, we
draw inspiration from successful mixed sample data augmentations. We show that binary mixing in features - particularly with rectangular patches from CutMix - enhances
results by making subnetworks stronger and more diverse.
We improve state of the art for image classification on
CIFAR-100 and Tiny ImageNet datasets. Our easy to implement models notably outperform data augmented deep
ensembles, without the inference and memory overheads.
As we operate in features and simply better leverage the
expressiveness of large networks, we open a new line of research complementary to previous works.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown exceptional performance in computer vision tasks, notably
classification [42]. However, among other limitations, obtaining reliable predictions remains challenging [34, 58].
For additional robustness in real-world scenarios or to win
Kaggle competitions, CNNs usually pair up with two practical strategies: data augmentation and ensembling.
Data augmentation reduces overfitting and improves
* Equal contribution.
† Correspondence to alexandre.rame@lip6.fr

Figure 1: MixMo overview. We embed M = 2 inputs
into a shared space with convolutional layers (c1 , c2 ), mix
them, pass the embedding through further layers and output 2 predictions via dense layers (d1 , d2 ). The key point
of our MixMo is the mixing block. Mixing with patches
performs better than basic summing: 85.40% vs. 83.06%
(MIMO [30]) on CIFAR-100 with WRN-28-10.

generalization, notably by diversifying training samples
[51]. Traditional approaches are label-preserving. In contrast, recent mixed sample data augmentation (MSDA)
create artificial samples by mixing multiple inputs and their
labels proportionally to a ratio λ. The seminal work Mixup
[86] linearly interpolates pixels while Manifold Mixup [76]
interpolates latent features in the network. Binary masking
MSDAs [21, 29, 41] such as CutMix [83] have since diversified mixed samples by pasting patches from one image
onto another in place of interpolation.
Aggregating predictions from a diverse set of neural networks (i.e. with different failure cases) strongly improves
generalization [14, 28, 43], notably uncertainty estimation
[2, 27, 58]. An ensemble of several small networks usually
performs better than one large network empirically [9, 50].
Yet, unfortunately, ensembling is costly in time and memory
both at training and inference: this often limits applicability.

823

