Improving De-raining Generalization via Neural Reorganization
Jie Xiao† , Man Zhou† , Xueyang Fu,* Aiping Liu, Zheng-Jun Zha
University of Science and Technology of China, China
{ustchbxj,manman}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu,aipingl,zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing image de-raining networks could only
learn fixed mapping rules between paired rainy/clean images on single synthetic dataset and then stay static for
lifetime. However, since single synthetic dataset merely
provides a partial view for the distribution of rain streaks,
deep models well trained on an individual synthetic dataset
tend to overfit on this biased distribution. This leads to
the inability of these methods to well generalize to complex and changeable real-world rainy scenes, thus limiting their practical applications. In this paper, we try
for the first time to accumulate the de-raining knowledge
from multiple synthetic datasets on a single network parameter set to improve the de-raining generalization of
deep networks. To achieve this goal, we explore Neural Reorganization (NR) to allow the de-raining network
to keep a subtle stability-plasticity trade-off rather than
naive stabilization after training phase. Specifically, we
design our NR algorithm by borrowing the synaptic consolidation mechanism in the biological brain and knowledge distillation. Equipped with our NR algorithm, the
deep model can be trained on a list of synthetic rainy
datasets by overcoming catastrophic forgetting, making it
a general-version de-raining network. Extensive experimental validation shows that due to the successful accumulation of de-raining knowledge, our proposed method can
not only process multiple synthetic datasets consistently, but
also achieve state-of-the-art results when dealing with realworld rainy images.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning models have achieved significant progress on single image de-raining task [32, 6, 4,
34, 43, 13, 50, 41, 28, 5, 42, 39, 33, 18]. This task aims
to recover the clean image from its rain-polluted version,
benefiting subsequent downstream computer vision tasks
[16, 2, 19, 15, 31, 46, 26, 49, 25], e.g., object detection,
* Corresponding author. † Co-first authors contributed equally

image classification, person identification, etc.

Figure 1: Visual comparison between the state-of-the-art
PreNet and our Neural Reorganization on real-world rainy
scene with heavy and light rain. The red check mark indicates that the network successfully works on it. Specifically,
it is clear that our proposed Neural Reorganization scheme
is capable of dealing with various real-world rainy scenes
(i.e., heavy and light rain). While the original PreNet could
only take effect on specific type of rain streak and fail on
untouched type of training stage.
While existing methods obtain promising results, most
of them only focus on learning specific mapping rules on
the given individual synthetic rainy dataset. They may suffer from severe performance degradation when applying
to real-world scenes, as the learned specific mapping rule
on given individual synthetic rainy dataset is incapable of
describing them. As shown in Figure 1, taking the stateof-the-art de-raining network PreNet [29] for example, we
first train PreNet on the given light rainy dataset Rain100L
[38] and then test it on the collected real-world rainy samples from the Real-Internet dataset [35]. It is clear that the
trained PreNet only works well on light rainy scene and
fails to remove rain-streaks on heavy rainy samples (Case
1). Similarly, when trained on the given heavy rainy dataset
Rain100H [38], the trained PreNet suffers from severe artifacts (Case 2) as shown in red box. Therefore, how to
obtain a general-version image de-raining network (GID),
which can tackle various types of rain streaks with a single set of parameters and generalizing well to complex realworld rainy scenes, has attracted more and more attention.
Inspired by high-level computer vision tasks, e.g., im-

4987

