TransPose: Keypoint Localization via Transformer
Sen Yang Zhibin Quan Mu Nie Wankou Yang*
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{yangsenius, 101101872, niemu, wkyang}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
While CNN-based models have made remarkable
progress on human pose estimation, what spatial dependencies they capture to localize keypoints remains unclear. In this work, we propose a model called TransPose, which introduces Transformer for human pose estimation. The attention layers built in Transformer enable
our model to capture long-range relationships efficiently
and also can reveal what dependencies the predicted keypoints rely on. To predict keypoint heatmaps, the last attention layer acts as an aggregator, which collects contributions from image clues and forms maximum positions of
keypoints. Such a heatmap-based localization approach via
Transformer conforms to the principle of Activation Maximization [19]. And the revealed dependencies are imagespecific and fine-grained, which also can provide evidence
of how the model handles special cases, e.g., occlusion.
The experiments show that TransPose achieves 75.8 AP and
75.0 AP on COCO validation and test-dev sets, while being
more lightweight and faster than mainstream CNN architectures. The TransPose model also transfers very well on
MPII benchmark, achieving superior performance on the
test set when fine-tuned with small training costs. Code and
pre-trained models are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved impressive performances in the field of human pose estimation. DeepPose [56] is the early classic method, directly
regressing the numerical coordinate locations of keypoints.
Afterwards, fully convolutional networks like [60, 36, 38,
63, 12, 40, 61, 51] have become the mainstream by predicting keypoints heatmaps, which implicitly learn spatial
dependencies between body parts. Yet, most prior works
take deep CNN as a powerful black box predictor and focus
on improving the network structure, what exactly happens
inside the models or how they capture the spatial relationships between body parts remains unclear. However, from
* Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/yangsenius/TransPose

Attentio
n Map
Image

Low-level
Convolutional
Blocks

ATTENTION
Layer #1

ATTENTION
Layer #2

ATTENTION
Layer #3

Localized
Keypoints

Figure 1. A schematic diagram of TransPose. Below: The inference pipeline. Above: Dependency areas for each predicted keypoint location. In this example, the person’s left-ankle is occluded
by a dog. Which exact image clues the model uses to infer the
occluded joint? The attention map (red box) gives fine-grained
evidence beyond intuition: such a pose estimator highly relies on
the image clues around the left ankle, left upper leg, and joints on
the right leg to estimate the location of occluded left ankle.

the scientific and practical standpoints, the interpretability
of the model can aid practitioners the ability to understand
how the model associates structural variables to reach the
final predictions and how a pose estimator handles various
input images. It also can help model developers for debugging, decision-making, and further improving the design.
For existing pose estimators, some issues make it challenging to figure out their decision processes. (1) Deepness. The CNN-based models, such as [60, 38, 61, 51],
are usually very deep non-linear models that hinder the interpretation of the function of each layer. (2) Implicit relationships. The global spatial relationships between body
parts are implicitly encoded within the neuron activations
and the weights of CNNs. It is not easy to decouple such
relationships from large amounts of weights and activations
in neural networks. And solely visualizing the intermediate
features with a large number of channels (e.g. 256, 512 in
SimpleBaseline architecture [61]) provides little meaning-

11802

