Dynamic DETR: End-to-End Object Detection with Dynamic Attention
Xiyang Dai

Yinpeng Chen
Jianwei Yang
Lu Yuan
Lei Zhang
Microsoft

Pengchuan Zhang

{xidai, yiche, jianwyan, penzhan, luyuan, leizhang}@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel Dynamic DETR (Detection with Transformers) approach by introducing dynamic attentions into both the encoder and decoder stages
of DETR to break its two limitations on small feature resolution and slow training convergence. To address the
first limitation, which is due to the quadratic computational complexity of the self-attention module in Transformer encoders, we propose a dynamic encoder to approximate the Transformer encoder’s attention mechanism
using a convolution-based dynamic encoder with various
attention types. Such an encoder can dynamically adjust
attentions based on multiple factors such as scale importance, spatial importance, and representation (i.e., feature
dimension) importance. To mitigate the second limitation
of learning difficulty, we introduce a dynamic decoder by
replacing the cross-attention module with a ROI-based dynamic attention in the Transformer decoder. Such a decoder
effectively assists Transformers to focus on region of interests from a coarse-to-fine manner and dramatically lowers
the learning difficulty, leading to a much faster convergence
with fewer training epochs. We conduct a series of experiments to demonstrate our advantages. Our Dynamic DETR
significantly reduces the training epochs (by 14×), yet results in a much better performance (by 3.6 on mAP). Meanwhile, in the standard 1× setup with ResNet-50 backbone,
we archive a new state-of-the-art performance that further
proves the learning effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims at predicting a set of bounding
boxes and category labels for each object of interest. Modern object detectors are based on convolutional neural networks, and share the same paradigm – a backbone for feature extraction and a head for localization and classification tasks [22, 10]. Until recently, Detection Transformer
(DETR) has been proposed as an alternative solution to the

Figure 1. Convergence curve comparison between our proposed
approach and state-of-the-art methods. Our Dynamic DETR
largely reduces the training epochs (by 14×), yet results in a significantly better performance (by 3.6).

object detection problem. It views object detection as a
set-based matching problem. By leveraging Transformers
[25] originally developed for language tasks, it is able to
model the relations of objects and their global image context from a set of learned object queries. It then performs a
global optimization that forces unique predictions from object queries via bipartite matching, effectively removing the
need of hand-designed components such as non-maximum
suppression (NMS) and anchor generation in traditional object detection methods.
However, DETR suffers from several problems that prevent it from wide adoption in the community. On one hand,
the input resolution of features maps is limited in the native
Transformer as feature encoder, since the complexity of the
self-attention module grows quadratically with the increase
of the input resolution. It results in incompatibility to the
typical feature pyramid that is widely used in modern object detectors, and relatively low performance at detecting
small objects. On the other hand, it requires much longer

2988

