Panoptic Segmentation of Satellite Image Time Series
with Convolutional Temporal Attention Networks
Vivien Sainte Fare Garnot
Loic Landrieu
LASTIG, Univ. Gustave Eiffel, ENSG, IGN, F-94160 Saint-Mande, France
{vivien.sainte-fare-garnot,

loic.landrieu}@ign.fr

Abstract
Unprecedented access to multi-temporal satellite imagery has opened new perspectives for a variety of Earth
observation tasks. Among them, pixel-precise panoptic segmentation of agricultural parcels has major economic and
environmental implications. While researchers have explored this problem for single images, we argue that the
complex temporal patterns of crop phenology are better addressed with temporal sequences of images. In this paper, we present the first end-to-end, single-stage method
for panoptic segmentation of Satellite Image Time Series
(SITS). This module can be combined with our novel image
sequence encoding network which relies on temporal selfattention to extract rich and adaptive multi-scale spatiotemporal features. We also introduce PASTIS, the first openaccess SITS dataset with panoptic annotations. We demonstrate the superiority of our encoder for semantic segmentation against multiple competing architectures, and set up
the first state-of-the-art of panoptic segmentation of SITS.
Our implementation and PASTIS are publicly available.

1. Introduction
The precision and availability of Earth observations have
continuously improved thanks to sustained advances in
space-based remote sensing, such as the launch of the Planet
[5] and the open-access Sentinel constellations [8]. In particular, satellites with high revisit frequency contribute to a
better understanding of phenomena with complex temporal
dynamics. Crop mapping—the driving application of this
paper—relies on exploiting such temporal patterns [37] and
entails major financial and environmental stakes. Indeed,
remote monitoring of the surface and nature of agricultural
parcels is necessary for a fair allocation of agricultural subsidies (50 and 22 billion euros per year in Europe and in
the US, respectively) and for ensuring that best crop rotation practices are respected. More generally, the automated
analysis of SITS represents a significant interest for a wide

Figure 1: Overview. We propose an end-to-end, singlestage model for panoptic segmentation of agricultural
parcels from time series of satellite images. Note the difficulty of resolving the parcels’ borders from a single image,
highlighting the need for modeling temporal dynamics.

range of applications, such as surveying urban development
and deforestation.
The task of monitoring both the content and extent of
agricultural parcels can be framed as the panoptic segmentation of an image sequence. Panoptic segmentation consists of assigning to each pixel a class and a unique instance
label, and has become a standard visual perception task in
computer vision [18, 25]. However, panoptic segmentation
is a fundamentally different task for SITS versus sequences
of natural images or videos. Indeed, understanding videos
requires tracking objects through time and space [43]. In
yearly SITS, the targets are static in a geo-referenced frame,
which removes the need for spatial tracking. Additionally,
SITS share a common temporal frame of reference, which
means that the time of acquisition itself contains information useful for modeling the underlying temporal dynamics.
In contrast, the frame number in videos is often arbitrary.
Finally, while objects on the Earth surface generally do not
occlude one another, as is commonly the case for objects in
natural images, varying cloud cover can make the analysis
of SITS arduous. For the specific problem addressed in this

4872

