MUSIQ: Multi-scale Image Quality Transformer
Junjie Ke1 , Qifei Wang1 , Yilin Wang2 , Peyman Milanfar1 , Feng Yang1
1
Google Research, 2 Google
{junjiek, qfwang, yilin, milanfar, fengyang}@google.com

Abstract
Image quality assessment (IQA) is an important research
topic for understanding and improving visual experience.
The current state-of-the-art IQA methods are based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The performance of
CNN-based models is often compromised by the fixed shape
constraint in batch training. To accommodate this, the input images are usually resized and cropped to a fixed shape,
causing image quality degradation. To address this, we design a multi-scale image quality Transformer (MUSIQ) to
process native resolution images with varying sizes and aspect ratios. With a multi-scale image representation, our
proposed method can capture image quality at different
granularities. Furthermore, a novel hash-based 2D spatial
embedding and a scale embedding is proposed to support
the positional embedding in the multi-scale representation.
Experimental results verify that our method can achieve
state-of-the-art performance on multiple large scale IQA
datasets such as PaQ-2-PiQ [41], SPAQ [11], and KonIQ10k [16]. 1

1. Introduction
The goal of image quality assessment (IQA) is to quantify
perceptual quality of images. In the deep learning era, many
IQA approaches [11, 33, 34, 41, 47] have achieved significant success by leveraging the power of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, the CNN-based IQA models are often constrained by the fixed-size input requirement
in batch training, i.e., the input images need to be resized
or cropped to a fixed shape as shown in Figure 1 (b). This
preprocessing is problematic for IQA because images in the
wild have varying aspect ratios and resolutions. Resizing
and cropping can impact image composition or introduce
distortions, thus changing the quality of the image.
To learn IQA on the full-size image, the existing CNNbased approaches use either adaptive pooling or resizing to
get a fixed-size convolutional feature map. MNA-CNN [24]
1 Checkpoints and code are available at https://github.com/
google-research/google-research/tree/master/musiq

Figure 1. In CNN-based models (b), images need to be resized or
cropped to a fixed shape for batch training. However, such preprocessing can alter image aspect ratio and composition, thus impacting image quality. Our patch-based MUSIQ model (a) can process
the full-size image and extract multi-scale features, which aligns
with the human visual system.

processes a single image in each training batch which is not
practical for training on a large dataset. Hosu et al. [15]
extracts and stores fixed-size features offline, which costs
additional storage for every augmented image. To keep aspect ratio, Chen et al. [7] proposes a dedicated convolution to preserve aspect ratio in the convolutional receptive
field. Its evaluation verifies the importance of aspect-ratiopreserving (ARP) in the IQA tasks. But it still needs resizing and smart grouping for effective batch training.
In this paper, we propose a patch-based multi-scale image quality Transformer (MUSIQ) to bypass the CNN constraints on fixed input size and predict the quality effectively
on the native resolution image as shown in Figure 1 (a).
Transformer [36] is first proposed for natural language processing (NLP) and has recently been studied for various vision tasks [4–6, 10]. Among these, the Vision Transformer
(ViT) [10] splits each image into a sequence of fixed-size
patches, encodes each patch as a token, and then applies

5148

