Probabilistic Modeling for Human Mesh Recovery
Nikos Kolotouros1 , Georgios Pavlakos 2 , Dinesh Jayaraman 1 Kostas Daniilidis1
1
University of Pennsylvania 2 UC Berkeley

Abstract
This paper focuses on the problem of 3D human reconstruction from 2D evidence. Although this is an inherently
ambiguous problem, the majority of recent works avoid the
uncertainty modeling and typically regress a single estimate for a given input. In contrast to that, in this work,
we propose to embrace the reconstruction ambiguity and
we recast the problem as learning a mapping from the input to a distribution of plausible 3D poses. Our approach
is based on the normalizing flows model and offers a series of advantages. For conventional applications, where
a single 3D estimate is required, our formulation allows
for efficient mode computation. Using the mode leads to
performance that is comparable with the state of the art
among deterministic unimodal regression models. Simultaneously, since we have access to the likelihood of each
sample, we demonstrate that our model is useful in a series of downstream tasks, where we leverage the probabilistic nature of the prediction as a tool for more accurate estimation. These tasks include reconstruction from
multiple uncalibrated views, as well as human model fitting, where our model acts as a powerful image-based prior
for mesh recovery. Our results validate the importance of
probabilistic modeling, and indicate state-of-the-art performance across a variety of settings. Code and models
are available at: https://www.seas.upenn.edu/
˜nkolot/projects/prohmr.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D human pose from any form of 2D
observations (image, 2D keypoints, silhouettes) is a fundamentally ambiguous problem. Of course, this is a very old
insight, identified even from the very first approaches [25]
dealing with the problem of single-view human pose reconstruction. However, the current norm for the state-of-the-art
approaches is to return a single 3D estimate which is typically computed in a deterministic manner. In this work, we
argue that there is great value at capturing a distribution of
3D poses conditioned on the preferred input.
Our reliance on systems that return a single deterministic

Figure 1: Probabilistic modeling for 3D human mesh recovery. We propose to recast the problem of 3D human
reconstruction as learning a mapping from the input to a
distribution of 3D poses. The output distribution has high
probability mass on a diverse set of poses that are consistent
with the 2D evidence.
3D pose output often happens out of convenience; it makes
comparison on conventional benchmarks straightforward
and fair, while a single output is enough for many downstream applications. Recent literature for 3D human pose
reconstruction is currently dominated by such approaches
and they are very popular for image [22] or keypoint [43] input, for skeleton-based [32] or mesh-based [23] reconstruction, as well as regression [17] or optimization-based [4]
approaches. On the other end of the spectrum, there have
always been approaches that advocate in favor of generating multiple predictions per input. Recent efforts have
demonstrated interesting potential [3, 27], but often rely on
ensemble-type prediction, modifying current systems into
combining N output heads instead of one. This can lead to
cumbersome architectural choices, inability to scale and/or
limited expressivity for the output distribution.
Our approach aims to bridge this gap and demonstrate
the value of predicting a distribution of 3D poses conditioned on the provided 2D input. To achieve this, we propose an elegant and efficient approach with many desirable
properties missing from recent work, and we demonstrate
its effectiveness. Instead of regressing a single estimate for
the provided input, we use Normalizing Flows to regress
a distribution of plausible poses. This allows us to train
a network which returns a conditional distribution of 3D
poses as a function of the input (e.g., image or 2D keypoints), as depicted in Figure 1. Our probabilistic model
11605

