Weakly Supervised Contrastive Learning
Mingkai Zheng1∗ Fei Wang2 * Shan You1,3† Chen Qian1
Changshui Zhang3 Xiaogang Wang1,4 Chang Xu5
1
SenseTime Research 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
{zhengmingkai,youshan,qianchen}@sensetime.com, wangfei91@mail.ustc.edu.cn
zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
Unsupervised visual representation learning has gained
much attention from the computer vision community because of the recent achievement of contrastive learning.
Most of the existing contrastive learning frameworks adopt
the instance discrimination as the pretext task, which treating every single instance as a different class. However,
such method will inevitably cause class collision problems,
which hurts the quality of the learned representation. Motivated by this observation, we introduced a weakly supervised contrastive learning framework (WCL) to tackle this
issue. Specifically, our proposed framework is based on two
projection heads, one of which will perform the regular instance discrimination task. The other head will use a graphbased method to explore similar samples and generate a
weak label, then perform a supervised contrastive learning task based on the weak label to pull the similar images
closer. We further introduced a K-Nearest Neighbor based
multi-crop strategy to expand the number of positive samples. Extensive experimental results demonstrate WCL improves the quality of self-supervised representations across
different datasets. Notably, we get a new state-of-the-art result for semi-supervised learning. With only 1% and 10%
labeled examples, WCL achieves 65% and 72% ImageNet
Top-1 Accuracy using ResNet50, which is even higher than
SimCLRv2 with ResNet101.

1. Introduction
Modern deep convolutional neural networks demonstrate outstanding performance on various computer vision
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

Similar Samples

Figure 1. A example of the class collision problem. A typical instance discrimination method will treats the first column and the
third column as a negative pair since there are different instance.
However, the semantic information of the first column and the
third column are very similar, treat them as positive pair should
be much more reasonable.

datasets [11, 15, 30] and edge devices [45, 36, 44, 35].
However, most successful methods are trained in the supervised fashion; they usually require a large volume of
labeled data that is very hard to collect. Meanwhile, the
quality of data annotations dramatically affects the performance. Recently, self-supervised learning shows its
superiority and achieves promising results for unsupervised and semi-supervised learning in computer vision (e.g.
[6, 7, 19, 8, 9, 5, 18, 50]). These methods can learn generalpurpose visual representations without labels and have a
good performance on linear classification and transferability to different tasks or datasets. Notably, a big part of the
recent self-supervised representation learning framework is
based on the idea of contrastive learning.

10042

