Revisiting Stereo Depth Estimation From a Sequence-to-Sequence Perspective
with Transformers

Zhaoshuo Li, Xingtong Liu, Nathan Drenkow, Andy Ding, Francis X. Creighton, Russell H. Taylor,
and Mathias Unberath
Johns Hopkins University
{zli122, mathias}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Stereo depth estimation relies on optimal correspondence matching between pixels on epipolar lines in the
left and right images to infer depth. In this work, we revisit the problem from a sequence-to-sequence correspondence perspective to replace cost volume construction with
dense pixel matching using position information and attention. This approach, named STereo TRansformer (STTR),
has several advantages: It 1) relaxes the limitation of a
fixed disparity range, 2) identifies occluded regions and provides confidence estimates, and 3) imposes uniqueness constraints during the matching process. We report promising results on both synthetic and real-world datasets and
demonstrate that STTR generalizes across different domains, even without fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Stereo depth estimation is of substantial interest since it
enables the reconstruction of 3D information. To this end,
corresponding pixels are matched between the left and right
camera image; the difference in corresponding pixel location, i. e. the disparity, can then be used to infer depth and
reconstruct the 3D scene. Recent deep learning-based approaches to stereo depth estimation have shown promising
results but several challenges remain.
One such challenge relates to the use of a limited disparity range. Disparity values can, in theory, range from zero
to the image width depending on the resolution/baseline of
the cameras, and their proximity to the physical objects.
However, many of the best performing approaches are constrained to a manually pre-specified disparity range (typically a maximum of 192 px) [21]. These methods rely on
“cost volumes” in which matching costs are computed for
multiple candidate matches and a final predicted disparity

value is computed as the aggregated sum. This self-imposed
disparity range is necessary to enable memory-feasible implementations of these methods but is not flexible to properties of the physical scene and/or the camera setup. In applications such as autonomous driving and endoscopic intervention, it is important to recognize close objects irrespective of camera setup (with disparity values potentially
larger than 192) to avoid collisions, suggesting the need to
relax the fixed disparity range assumption.
Geometric properties and constraints such as occlusion
and matching uniqueness, which led to the success of nonlearning based approaches such as [18], are also often missing from learning-based approaches. For stereo depth estimation, occluded regions do not have a valid disparity.
Prior algorithms generally infer disparities for occluded regions via a piece-wise smoothness assumption, which may
not always be valid. Providing a confidence estimate together with the disparity value would be advantageous for
down-stream analysis, such as for registration or scene understanding algorithms, to enable weighting or rejection of
occluded and low-confidence estimates. However, most
prior approaches do not provide such information. Moreover, pixels in one image should not be matched to multiple pixels in the other image (up to image resolution) since
they correspond to the same location in the physical scene
[28]. Although this constraint can be clearly useful to resolve ambiguity, most existing learning-based approaches
do not impose it.
The aforementioned problems largely arise from shortcomings of the contemporary view of stereo matching
which attempts to construct a cost volume. Approaches that
consider disparity estimation from a sequence-to-sequence
matching perspective along epipolar lines can avoid these
challenges. Such methods are not new, to our knowledge,
the first attempt using dynamic programming was proposed
in 1985 [28], where intra- and inter-epipolar line information is used together with a uniqueness constraint. How-

6197

