VMNet: Voxel-Mesh Network for Geodesic-Aware 3D Semantic Segmentation
Zeyu HU* 1 , Xuyang Bai1 , Jiaxiang Shang1 , Runze Zhang2 , Jiayu Dong2 , Xin Wang2 , Guangyuan Sun2 , Hongbo Fu†3 , and
Chiew-Lan Tai1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Lightspeed & Quantum Studios, Tencent
3
City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
In recent years, sparse voxel-based methods have become the state-of-the-arts for 3D semantic segmentation of
indoor scenes, thanks to the powerful 3D CNNs. Nevertheless, being oblivious to the underlying geometry, voxelbased methods suffer from ambiguous features on spatially
close objects and struggle with handling complex and irregular geometries due to the lack of geodesic information.
In view of this, we present Voxel-Mesh Network (VMNet),
a novel 3D deep architecture that operates on the voxel
and mesh representations leveraging both the Euclidean
and geodesic information. Intuitively, the Euclidean information extracted from voxels can offer contextual cues
representing interactions between nearby objects, while the
geodesic information extracted from meshes can help separate objects that are spatially close but have disconnected
surfaces. To incorporate such information from the two
domains, we design an intra-domain attentive module for
effective feature aggregation and an inter-domain attentive module for adaptive feature fusion. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of VMNet: specifically, on
the challenging ScanNet dataset for large-scale segmentation of indoor scenes, it outperforms the state-of-the-art
SparseConvNet and MinkowskiNet (74.6% vs 72.5% and
73.6% in mIoU) with a simpler network structure (17M
vs 30M and 38M parameters). Code release: https:
//github.com/hzykent/VMNet

1. Introduction
Thanks to the tremendous progress of RGB-D scanning
methods in recent years [63, 27, 10], reliable tracking and
reconstruction of 3D surfaces using hand-held, consumergrade devices have become possible. Using these methods,
large-scale 3D datasets with reconstructed surfaces and semantic annotations are now available [8, 4]. Nevertheless,
compared to 3D surface reconstruction, 3D scene understanding, i.e., understanding the semantics of reconstructed
scenes, is still a relatively open research problem.
* intern at Tencent Lightspeed & Quantum Studios
† corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of geodesic information loss caused by
voxelization. Considering the green point at the arm of a chair,
on an input 3D mesh surface (Left), its geodesic neighbors (blue)
can be easily collected, and the points of different objects are naturally separated. After voxelization (Right), geodesic information
is discarded and only Euclidean neighbors (red) that are agnostic
to the underlying surface can be extracted. The scan section is
taken from the ScanNet dataset [8].

Inspired by the success of 2D CNN in image semantic
segmentation [5, 36], researchers have paid much attention
to the straightforward extension of this idea to 3D, by performing volumetric convolution on regular grids [39, 66,
44]. Specifically, surface reconstructions are first projected
to a discrete 3D grid representation, and then 3D convolutional filters are applied to extract features by sliding kernels
over neighboring grid voxels [54, 62, 72]. Such features
can be smoothly propagated in the Euclidean domain to
accumulate strong contextual information. Unfortunately,
dense voxel-based methods require intensive computational
power and are thus limited to low-resolution cases [35]. To
process large-scale data, sparse voxel convolutions [17, 7]
have been proposed to lower the computational requirement by ignoring inactive voxels. Benefiting from the efficient sparse voxel convolutions, complex networks have
been built, achieving leading results on several 3D semantic segmentation benchmarks [8, 4] and outperforming other
methods by large margins.
Despite the remarkable achievements, voxel-based
methods are not perfect. One of their major limitations
is the geodesic information loss caused by the voxelization process (see Fig. 1). Recent public datasets like ScanNet [8] provide 3D scene reconstructions in the form of
high-quality triangular meshes, in which the surface information is naturally encoded. On these meshes, vertices belonging to different objects are well separated, and geodesic

15488

