TACo: Token-aware Cascade Contrastive Learning for Video-Text Alignment
Jianwei Yang
Microsoft Research

Yonatan Bisk
Carnegie Mellon University

Jianfeng Gao
Microsoft Research

jianwyan@microsoft.com

ybisk@cs.cmu.edu

jfgao@microsoft.com

Abstract

𝐾 ′ hard negatives
Contrastive Loss 𝐿3

Contrastive learning has been widely used to train
transformer-based vision-language models for video-text
alignment and multi-modal representation learning. This
paper presents a new algorithm called Token-Aware
Cascade contrastive learning (TACo) that improves contrastive learning using two novel techniques. The first is the
token-aware contrastive loss which is computed by taking
into account the syntactic classes of words. This is motivated by the observation that for a video-text pair, the
content words in the text, such as nouns and verbs, are
more likely to be aligned with the visual contents in the
video than the function words. Second, a cascade sampling
method is applied to generate a small set of hard negative examples for efficient loss estimation for multi-modal
fusion layers. To validate the effectiveness of TACo, in
our experiments we finetune pretrained models for a set of
downstream tasks including text-video retrieval (YouCook2,
MSR-VTT and ActivityNet), video action step localization
(CrossTask), video action segmentation (COIN). The results
show that our models attain consistent improvements across
different experimental settings over previous methods, setting new state-of-the-art on three public text-video retrieval
benchmarks of YouCook2, MSR-VTT and ActivityNet.

1. Introduction
Aligning or grounding language to videos is a challenging topic in the context of vision-language (VL) research
as it requires the model to understand contents, dynamics,
and causality presented in videos [3]. Inspired by the success of BERT [10] in natural language processing, there is a
growing interest in applying transformer-based multi-modal
models for video-text alignment and representation learning [40, 39, 59, 32, 14, 27]. These models are typically
pretrained on large amounts of noisy video-text pairs using
contrastive learning [34, 33], and then applied in a zeroshot manner or finetuned for various downstream tasks,
such as text-video retrieval [51], video action step localization [60], video action segmentation [42], video question

…
Hard negative mining
H

Multi-modal Fusion Layers
Contrastive Loss 𝐿2

alignment
scores

(add, tomatoes, pan, stir)

Contrastive Loss 𝐿1

Language
Encoder
Add blended tomatoes
to pan and stir.

Text-video pair

Video
Encoder

…
𝐾 − 1 negatives

Figure 1: The proposed token-aware cascade contrastive
learning pipeline. We compute three contrastive losses: 1)
sentence-level loss L1 over all negative examples; 2) tokenlevel loss L2 on content words (noun, verb) over all negative examples; 3) sentence-level loss L3 over hard negative
examples sampled based on L1 and L2 online.
answering [43, 26] and video captioning [57].
In this paper, we present a new variant of contrastive learning, Token-Aware Cascade contrastive learning (TACo) to improve the video-text alignment for both
large-scale pretraining and downstream specific tasks. As
the name indicates, TACo makes two modifications to the
conventional contrastive learning used in video-language
domain. The first is the token-aware contrastive loss which
is computed by taking into account the syntactic classes of
words. This is motivated by the observation that, given
a video and its corresponding text, content words, such
as nouns and verbs, are more likely than function words
to be aligned with (or grounded to) visual contents in the
video. Conventional contrastive learning typically compute
the loss after aggregating over all the words in the text and
frames in the video (loss L1 or L3 in Fig. 1). In contrast,
the token-aware contrastive loss is computed using only a
subset of words whose syntactic classes belong to a predefined set (e.g., nouns and verbs), which forces the grounding of individual words to the video (loss L2). For example,
we pay particular attention to the words “add”, “tomatos”,
“pan” and “stir” in Fig. 1.

11562

