Baking Neural Radiance Fields for Real-Time View Synthesis
Peter Hedman

Pratul P. Srinivasan

Ben Mildenhall
Google Research

Jonathan T. Barron

Paul Debevec

https://nerf.live

Abstract
Neural volumetric representations such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have emerged as a compelling technique for learning to represent 3D scenes from images with
the goal of rendering photorealistic images of the scene
from unobserved viewpoints. However, NeRF’s computational requirements are prohibitive for real-time applications: rendering views from a trained NeRF requires querying a multilayer perceptron (MLP) hundreds of times per
ray. We present a method to train a NeRF, then precompute
and store (i.e. “bake”) it as a novel representation called
a Sparse Neural Radiance Grid (SNeRG) that enables realtime rendering on commodity hardware. To achieve this, we
introduce 1) a reformulation of NeRF’s architecture, and
2) a sparse voxel grid representation with learned feature
vectors. The resulting scene representation retains NeRF’s
ability to render fine geometric details and view-dependent
appearance, is compact (averaging less than 90 MB per
scene), and can be rendered in real-time (higher than 30
frames per second on a laptop GPU). Actual screen captures are shown in our video.

1. Introduction
The task of view synthesis — using observed images
to recover a 3D scene representation that can render the
scene from novel unobserved viewpoints — has recently
seen dramatic progress as a result of using neural volumetric representations. In particular, Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [31] are able to render photorealistic novel views
with fine geometric details and realistic view-dependent appearance by representing a scene as a continuous volumetric
function, parameterized by a multilayer perceptron (MLP)
that maps from a continuous 3D position to the volume
density and view-dependent emitted radiance at that location. Unfortunately, NeRF’s rendering procedure is quite
slow: rendering a ray requires querying an MLP hundreds
of times, such that rendering a frame at 800 × 800 resolution takes roughly a minute on a modern GPU. This prevents NeRF from being used for interactive view synthesis

Figure 1: Our method “bakes” NeRF’s continuous neural
volumetric scene representation into a discrete Sparse Neural Radiance Grid (SNeRG) for real-time rendering on commodity hardware (∼ 65 frames per second on a MacBook
Pro in the example shown here). Our method is more than
two orders of magnitude faster than prior work for accelerating NeRF’s rendering procedure and more than an order
of magnitude faster than the next-fastest alternative (Neural
Volumes) while achieving substantially higher-quality.

applications such as virtual and augmented reality, or even
simply inspecting a recovered 3D model in a web browser.
We address the problem of rendering a trained NeRF in
real-time, see Figure 1. Our approach accelerates rendering by three orders of magnitude, achieving 12 milliseconds
per frame on a single GPU. We precompute and store (i.e.
“bake”) a trained NeRF into a sparse 3D voxel grid data
structure, which we call a Sparse Neural Radiance Grid
(SNeRG). Each active voxel in a SNeRG contains opacity, diffuse color, and a learned feature vector that encodes

5875

