Composable Augmentation Encoding for Video Representation Learning
Chen Sun1,2 Arsha Nagrani1 Yonglong Tian3 Cordelia Schmid1
1
Google Research 2 Brown University 3 MIT
{chensun, anagrani, cordelias}@google.com

yonglong@mit.edu

Abstract
We focus on contrastive methods for self-supervised
video representation learning. A common paradigm in contrastive learning is to construct positive pairs by sampling
different data views for the same instance, with different
data instances as negatives. These methods implicitly assume a set of representational invariances to the view selection mechanism (e.g., sampling frames with temporal
shifts), which may lead to poor performance on downstream
tasks which violate these invariances (fine-grained video
action recognition that would benefit from temporal information). To overcome this limitation, we propose an ‘augmentation aware’ contrastive learning framework, where
we explicitly provide a sequence of augmentation parameterisations (such as the values of the time shifts used to
create data views) as composable augmentation encodings
(CATE) to our model when projecting the video representations for contrastive learning. We show that representations
learned by our method encode valuable information about
specified spatial or temporal augmentation, and in doing so
also achieve state-of-the-art performance on a number of
video benchmarks.

1. Introduction
We focus on contrastive learning [16] of self-supervised
video representations. The contrastive objective is simple:
it pulls the latent representations of positive pairs close to
each other, while pushing negative pairs apart. It is a natural
fit for self-supervised learning, where positive and negative
pairs can be constructed from the data itself, without the
need for additional annotations.
Amongst different positive pair generation techniques, a
particularly successful one has been augmentation-invariant
contrastive learning [8, 20, 61], which has shown impressive results for image representation learning. In this instance discrimination framework, positive pairs are constructed by applying artificial aggressive photo-geometric
data augmentations to create different versions of the same
instances – learned representations are thus encouraged to

View 2: ! !"!#

View 1: ! !
In
Enc

ia
var

ode

nt

"′

Awa

Representation space

e
tim
to

r e of

time

Figure 1. Standard self-supervised contrastive learning methods
are augmentation-invariant, they ingest two augmented views of
the same instance and encourage their latent representations to be
similar. For videos, if the two views were sampled with a temporal
shift, this approach would learn representations that are invariant
to time changes, losing valuable temporal dynamics information
(e.g. the action of slicing oranges) for downstream tasks. We instead project latent representations by additionally encoding the
relative transformation of the two views (e.g. the time shift by t0 )
with a composable augmentation encoding (CATE) to make the
representation augmentation-aware.

be invariant to these data augmentations.
A number of self-supervised works also extend this idea
to videos, where instead of artificial augmentations, they
treat temporal shift as a natural data augmentation [46, 57],
where two frames from the same video with a temporal shift
form a positive pair. While this is useful for capturing highlevel semantic information, e.g. knowledge of object categories, it can remove fine-grained information that may be
useful depending on the downstream task – as previously
studied in images [8, 63]. Consider the case of the oranges
in Figure 1 – for object classification, invariance to small
time shifts in a video that can result in view point changes
or shape deformations may be useful and even desirable.
However, for a downstream task involving reasoning about
temporal relationships, such as recognising the state transition between a whole orange and orange slices caused by
the act of cutting fruit, a representation invariant to temporal
shifts may have lost valuable information.
We argue that augmentation-aware information can be

8834

