Learning to Know Where to See: A Visibility-Aware Approach for Occluded
Person Re-identification
Jinrui Yang1,2,3,7 , Jiawei Zhang1,2,3 , Fufu Yu7 , Xinyang Jiang6 , Mengdan Zhang7 , Xing Sun7∗ ,
Yingcong Chen4,5 , and Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China, 2 Pazhou Lab
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
6
Microsoft Research Asia, 7 Youtu Lab, Tencent
{yangjr27,zhangjw67}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,fufuyu@tencent.com,xinyangjiang@microsoft.com,
{davinazhang,winfredsun}@tencent.com ,yingcong.ian.chen@gmail.com,wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Person re-identification (ReID) has gained an impressive
progress in recent years. However, the occlusion is still a
common and challenging problem for recent ReID methods.
Several mainstream methods utilize extra cues (e.g., human
pose information) to distinguish human parts from obstacles to alleviate the occlusion problem. Although achieving
inspiring progress, these methods severely rely on the finegrained extra cues, and are sensitive to the estimation error
in the extra cues. In this paper, we show that existing methods may degrade if the extra information is sparse or noisy.
Thus we propose a simple yet effective method that is robust
to sparse and noisy pose information. This is achieved by
discretizing pose information to the visibility label of body
parts, so as to suppress the influence of occluded regions.
We show in our experiments that leveraging pose information in this way is more effective and robust. Besides, our
method can be embedded into most person ReID models
easily. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of
our model on common occluded person ReID datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) [6, 26] aims to match images of a person across disjoint cameras, which is widely
used in video surveillance, security and smart city. Despite
the great progress in the recent years, there is still some
practical problems that remain unsolved. Especially, occlusion [31] is one common problem that deteriorates the person ReID performance in real-word scenarios. In practice,
people can be easily occluded by some obstacles (e.g. baggage, counters, cars, trees) or walk out of the camera fields,
* Corresponding author: Wei-Shi Zheng, Xing Sun

0.98

0.08

0.90

Sparse granularity Finer granularity
but clean
but noisy

(a)

(b)

Part
features

Noisy pose cues
Clean pose cues

Visibility
scores

(c)

Figure 1. (a), (b) illustrate the relationship between the pose granularity and the estimation error on existing person ReID datasets
using the off-the-shelf pose estimator. The existing state-of-the-art
methods heavily rely on the fine-grained pose cues but suffer noisy
pose detections. Thus, they are hard to directly learn an occlusionrobust feature. (c) illustrates our basic idea. Our model learns a
robust mapping from imperfect pose cues to the visibility of body
parts to alleviate the effect of occlusion.

making the prediction results prone to error.
In recent years, plenty of efforts [31, 32, 17, 4, 21, 11]
have been made to solve this occluded person ReID problem. Usually, they adopt extra cues, such as pose or human
parsing, to assist in judging the occlusion scenarios. However, these methods assume the existence of fine-grained
and error-free extra cues, which is difficult to achieve in
practical scenarios. For example, [17, 4] utilizes 18 pose
keypoints. And if we use less keypoints, the performance
could drop. However, such fine-grained keypoints may
come with high estimation error in practice. As illustrated
in Fig. 1 (a) to (b), we can see that as the granularity of
pose improves, the estimation error also increases, and the
estimation error may degrade the robustness of the existing
ReID model. In this paper, we aim to find a solution to handle the occlusion problem without heavily relying on the
pose information, i.e., it can achieve comparable/superior
performance with coarse pose information.

11885

