Learning Target Candidate Association to Keep Track of What Not to Track
Christoph Mayer

Martin Danelljan

Danda Pani Paudel

Luc Van Gool

The presence of objects that are confusingly similar
to the tracked target, poses a fundamental challenge in
appearance-based visual tracking. Such distractor objects
are easily misclassified as the target itself, leading to eventual tracking failure. While most methods strive to suppress
distractors through more powerful appearance models, we
take an alternative approach.
We propose to keep track of distractor objects in order to continue tracking the target. To this end, we introduce a learned association network, allowing us to propagate the identities of all target candidates from frameto-frame. To tackle the problem of lacking groundtruth correspondences between distractor objects in visual tracking, we propose a training strategy that combines partial annotations with self-supervision. We conduct comprehensive experimental validation and analysis of our approach on several challenging datasets.
Our tracker sets a new state-of-the-art on six benchmarks, achieving an AUC score of 67.1% on LaSOT [21]
and a +5.8% absolute gain on the OxUvA long-term
dataset [41]. The code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/visionml/pytracking

1. Introduction
Generic visual object tracking is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. The task involves estimating the state of the target object in every frame of a
video sequence, given only the initial target location. Most
prior research has been devoted to the development of robust appearance models, used for locating the target object
in each frame. The two currently dominating paradigms
are Siamese networks [2, 35, 34] and discriminative appearance modules [3, 13]. While the former employs a template
matching in a learned feature space, the latter constructs
an appearance model through a discriminative learning formulation. Although these approaches have demonstrated
promising performance in recent years, they are effectively
limited by the quality and discriminative power of the appearance model.

Current Frame

Abstract

Previous Frame

Computer Vision Lab, D-ITET, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

0.26

0.27

0.75

0.43

Target
Candidate
Association
Network
0.35 0.33
0.39 0.23

0.40

Target Candidate

Target Object

Distractor Object

Figure 1. Visualization of the proposed target candidate association network used for tracking. For each target candidate ( ) we
extract a set of features such as score, position and appearance in
order to associate candidates across frames. The proposed target
association network then allows to associate these candidates ( )
with the detected distractors ( ) and the target object ( ) of the
previous frame. Lines connecting circles represent associations.

As one of the most challenging factors, co-occurrence
of distractor objects similar in appearance to the target is
a common problem in real-world tracking applications [4,
56, 46]. Appearance-based models struggle to identify the
sought target in such cases, often leading to tracking failure.
Moreover, the target object may undergo a drastic appearance change over time, further complicating the discrimination between target and distractor objects. In certain scenarios, e.g., as visualized in Fig. 1, it is even virtually impossible to unambiguously identify the target solely based
on appearance information. Such circumstances can only
be addressed by leveraging other cues during tracking, for
instance the spatial relations between objects. We therefore
set out to address problematic distractors by exploring such
alternative cues.
We propose to actively keep track of distractor objects
in order to ensure more robust target identification. To
this end, we introduce a target candidate association network, that matches distractor objects as well as the target
across frames. Our approach consists of a base appearance
tracker, from which we extract target candidates in each
frame. Each candidate is encoded with a set of distinctive
features, consisting of the target classifier score, location,
and appearance. The encodings of all candidates are jointly

13444

