Overfitting the Data: Compact Neural Video Delivery via Content-aware Feature
Modulation
∗

†

Jiaming Liu1 , Ming Lu2* , Kaixin Chen1* , Xiaoqi Li1* , Shizun Wang1* , Zhaoqing Wang1 , Enhua Wu3 ,
‡
Yurong Chen2 , Chuang Zhang1 , and Ming Wu1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Intel Labs China
3
State Key Lab of Computer Science, IOS, CAS & FST, University of Macau
{liujiaming,zhangchuang}@bupt.edu.cn,lu199192@gmail.com

Abstract
Internet video delivery has undergone a tremendous
explosion of growth over the past few years. However, the
quality of video delivery system greatly depends on the
Internet bandwidth. Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are
utilized to improve the quality of video delivery recently.
These methods divide a video into chunks, and stream LR
video chunks and corresponding content-aware models
to the client. The client runs the inference of models to
super-resolve the LR chunks. Consequently, a large number
of models are streamed in order to deliver a video. In
this paper, we first carefully study the relation between
models of different chunks, then we tactfully design a joint
training framework along with the Content-aware Feature
Modulation (CaFM) layer to compress these models for
neural video delivery. With our method, each video
chunk only requires less than 1% of original parameters
to be streamed, achieving even better SR performance.
We conduct extensive experiments across various SR
backbones, video time length, and scaling factors to
demonstrate the advantages of our method. Besides, our
method can be also viewed as a new approach of video coding. Our primary experiments achieve better video quality
compared with the commercial H.264 and H.265 standard
under the same storage cost, showing the great potential
of the proposed method. Code is available at:https:
//github.com/Neural-video-delivery/
CaFM-Pytorch-ICCV2021

∗ Equal Contribution.
† This work was done when Jiaming Liu was an intern at Intel Labs
China supervised by Ming Lu
‡ Chuang Zhang is responsible for correspondence.

1. Introduction
Internet video is achieving explosive growth over the
past few years, which brings a huge burden to the video delivery infrastructure. The quality of video heavily depends
on the bandwidth between servers and clients. Techniques
at both sides evolve over time to handle the scalability challenges at Internet scale. Inspired by the increasing computational power of client/server and recent advances in deep
learning, several works are proposed to apply Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) to video delivery system [14, 30]. The
core idea of these works is to stream both the low resolution video and content-aware models from servers to clients.
The clients run the inference of models to super-resolve the
LR videos. In this manner, better user Quality of Experience (QoE) can be obtained under limited Internet bandwidth.
In contrast to current approaches on Single Image SuperResolution (SISR) [24, 8, 20, 32, 15] and Video SuperResolution (VSR) [2, 26, 3], content-aware DNNs leverage
neural network’s overfitting property and use the training
accuracy to achieve high performance. Specifically, a video
is first divided into several chunks, and then a separate DNN
is trained for each chunk. The low resolution chunks and
corresponding trained models are delivered to the clients
over the Internet. Different backbones [24, 8, 20, 32, 15]
can be used as the DNN for each chunk. This kind of
DNN-based video delivery system has achieved better performance compared with commercial video delivery techniques like WebRTC [14].
Although it is promising to apply DNNs to video delivery, existing methods still have several limitations [18]. One
major limitation is that they need to train one DNN for each
chunk, resulting in a large number of separate models for a
long video. This brings additional storage and bandwidth

4631

