On the Importance of Distractors for Few-Shot Classification
Rajshekhar Das1
Yu-Xiong Wang2
José M.F. Moura1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
rajshekd@andrew.cmu.edu

yxw@illinois.edu

Positive Pairs

Abstract
Few-shot classification aims at classifying categories of
a novel task by learning from just a few (typically, 1 to 5)
labelled examples. An effective approach to few-shot classification involves a prior model trained on a large-sample
base domain, which is then finetuned over the novel fewshot task to yield generalizable representations. However,
task-specific finetuning is prone to overfitting due to the
lack of enough training examples. To alleviate this issue,
we propose a new finetuning approach based on contrastive
learning that reuses unlabelled examples from the base domain in the form of distractors. Unlike the nature of unlabelled data used in prior works, distractors belong to
classes that do not overlap with the novel categories. We
demonstrate for the first time that inclusion of such distractors can significantly boost few-shot generalization. Our
technical novelty includes a stochastic pairing of examples sharing the same category in the few-shot task and a
weighting term that controls the relative influence of taskspecific negatives and distractors. An important aspect of
our finetuning objective is that it is agnostic to distractor labels and hence applicable to various base domain settings.
More precisely, compared to state-of-the-art approaches,
our method shows accuracy gains of up to 12% in crossdomain and up to 5% in unsupervised prior-learning settings. Our code is available at https://github.com/
quantacode/Contrastive-Finetuning.git

1. Introduction
The ability to learn from very few examples is innate to
human intelligence. In contrast, large amounts of labelled
examples are required by modern machine learning algorithms to learn a new task. This limits their applicability
to domains where data is either expensive to annotate and
collect or simply inaccessible due to privacy concerns. To
overcome this limitation, few-shot classification has been
proposed as a generic framework for learning to classify
with very limited supervision [12, 31, 34, 59]. Under this
paradigm, most approaches leverage prior knowledge from

moura@andrew.cmu.edu

Few-Shot Task

Negative Pairs

Kakapos

Pairs with
Only
Task-Specific
Samples

Honduran
Emeralds

Distractors
Pairs with
Task-Specific
Samples and
Distractors

Figure 1. Classification of Kakapos vs. Honduran Emeralds
with just few examples per class and many distractors: The
idea is to leverage unlabelled data in the form of distractors that
need not be semantically related to the classes in the few-shot task.
The hope is that by pairing distractors and task samples as negatives (bottom six red boxes) and encouraging greater dissimilarity between such pairs, image representations of the two classes,
Kakapos and Honduran Emeralds, will be pushed farther away.
This would ultimately lead to better classification.

a (labelled) base domain to solve a novel task by either
finetuning-based transfer [9, 64] or meta-learning [12, 15,
49, 57, 59, 62, 69]. In particular, when the base and novel
domains are related, the hope is that representations learnt
in the base domain can be generalized to novel tasks, thus
facilitating positive knowledge transfer.
While the above paradigm is effective for tasks that can
leverage large datasets like ImageNet [52] as the related
base domain, for others, such as rare species classification [68] or medical image classification [70], acquiring
necessary prior knowledge can be exceedingly difficult due
to the absence of a related base domain with labelled data.
To relax such data requirements, recent techniques explore
alternative ways such as unsupervised learning [25, 28] or
cross-domain learning [1, 15, 45, 66] to obtain representations useful for novel tasks. In the absence of labelled base
data, approaches like [25, 27, 28] seek to benefit from selfsupervised representation learning over unlabelled data in a
related domain. In a more challenging scenario where related base data is hard to obtain, cross-domain techniques
[10, 64, 66] exploit representations learnt in other domains

9030

