SketchAA: Abstract Representation for Abstract Sketches
Lan Yang1,2 Kaiyue Pang2 Honggang Zhang1 Yi-Zhe Song2
1
PRIS, School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
{ylan, zhhg}@bupt.edu.cn, {kaiyue.pang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
What makes free-hand sketches appealing for humans
lies with its capability as a universal tool to depict the visual
world. Such flexibility at human ease, however, introduces
abstract renderings that pose unique challenges to computer vision models. In this paper, we propose a purposemade sketch representation for human sketches. The key
intuition is that such representation should be abstract at
design, so to accommodate the abstract nature of sketches.
This is achieved by interpreting sketch abstraction on two
levels: appearance and structure. We abstract sketch structure as a pre-defined coarse-to-fine visual block hierarchy,
and average visual features within each block to model appearance abstraction. We then discuss three general strategies on how to exploit feature synergy across different levels of this abstraction hierarchy. The superiority of explicitly abstracting sketch representation is empirically validated on a number of sketch analysis tasks, including sketch
recognition, fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval, and
generative sketch healing. Our simple design not only yields
strong results on all said tasks, but also offers intuitive feature granularity control to tailor for various downstream
tasks. Code will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Sketches are different to photos. They exhibit a severe
lack of visual cues, often made up of just a few coarse
strokes other than full of color and texture. The remarkable
thing is however despite its abstract nature, humans are still
acute to recognizing sketches somewhat equally well to that
for a full-blown color photo – one only needs to observe
a smiley face to tell the emotion other than seeing a true
photo. It is precisely this abstract nature that triggered much
of the research on human sketches [13, 42, 56, 19, 16, 58].
With the proliferation of touchscreen devices, this interest
has also resulted in a series of practical applications, from
sketch-based image retrieval [55, 39, 57, 12, 4], to sketch to
photo synthesis [59, 40, 7, 17, 6].

Sketches

Structure

Appearance

Figure 1: We represent human sketch based on the insight
of sketch abstraction as a process happening on two fronts:
appearance and structure.

At the very core of all such advancements is learning a
feature representation that is most suitable for sketch data.
The early days saw the use of HoG [9] descriptors repurposed for sketch [14, 13, 37]. Coming to the deep era,
sketch representation learning mainly takes two streams: (i)
CNNs that treat sketches as pixel-maps [56, 12, 36], and
(ii) RNNs that utilize the temporal stroke-by-stroke nature
of sketches [19, 38, 30]. They each have its pros and cons,
though what none of them did was accommodating for the
abstract nature of sketches at design. This is also evident in
that similar to how HoG was re-purposed for sketch, such
CNN and RNN-based approaches were also mainly small
deviations from their original photo forms [56, 19].
In this paper, we set out to change that. We aim to design a sketch feature learning scheme that directly tackles
the abstract nature of sketches. Our key intuition is therefore the actual feature learning should resemble that of an
abstraction process. We envisage this abstraction process to
happen on two fronts – appearance and structure. We take
the appearance abstraction process as just feature averaging
within a local visual block, and abstract sketch structure as
a hierarchy of multi-granularity grid blocks (see Figure 1).
Such representation of sketch data has a nice interpre-

10097

