Sparse Needlets for Lighting Estimation with Spherical Transport Loss
Fangneng Zhan * 1,2,4 Changgong Zhang * 2 Wenbo Hu 3,2 Shijian Lu † 1
Feiying Ma 2 Xuansong Xie 2 Ling Shao 4
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Accurate lighting estimation is challenging yet critical to many computer vision and computer graphics tasks
such as high-dynamic-range (HDR) relighting. Existing approaches model lighting in either frequency domain or spatial domain which is insufficient to represent the complex
lighting conditions in scenes and tends to produce inaccurate estimation. This paper presents NeedleLight, a new
lighting estimation model that represents illumination with
needlets and allows lighting estimation in both frequency
domain and spatial domain jointly. An optimal thresholding
function is designed to achieve sparse needlets which trims
redundant lighting parameters and demonstrates superior
localization properties for illumination representation. In
addition, a novel spherical transport loss is designed based
on optimal transport theory which guides to regress lighting
representation parameters with consideration of the spatial
information. Furthermore, we propose a new metric that
is concise yet effective by directly evaluating the estimated
illumination maps rather than rendered images. Extensive
experiments show that NeedleLight achieves superior lighting estimation consistently across multiple evaluation metrics as compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Lighting estimation aims to recover illumination from a
single image with limited field of view. It has a wide range
of applications in various computer vision and computer
graphics tasks such as high-dynamic-range (HDR) relighting in mixed reality, etc. However, lighting estimation is a
challenging and ill-posed problem as it needs to predict the
illumination coming from a full sphere of directions including those unobserved from the current view in the scene.
Additionally, it often requires to infer HDR illuminations
from low-dynamic-range (LDR) observations so as to light
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

virtual objects realistically while inserting them into real
scene images as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Lighting estimation has been tackled by regressing the
parameters of various lighting representations in either frequency domain [7, 15]) or spatial domain [14, 13, 33, 34].
However, lighting estimation in frequency domain normally represents illumination with Spherical Harmonics
(SH) which lack spatial localization capabilities. Thus it
tends to capture global lighting instead of the exact spatial locations of the light sources which often leads to weak
shading and shadow effects as illustrated in Garon et al. [15]
of Fig. 1. Lighting estimation in spatial domain has been
addressed by direct generation of the illumination maps or
indirect reconstruction through spherical Gaussian function.
However, direct generation of illumination maps often leads
to worse generalization as lighting estimation is an underconstrained problem by itself, and spherical Gaussian often
involves a complicated training process as described in [13].
Both types of approaches in spatial domain do not explicitly consider lighting frequency, and thus lead to inaccurate
relighting performance as illustrated in Gardner et al. [13]
of Fig. 1. The high frequency information also tends to be
blurred due to the use of naive L2 loss in the training. Additionally, existing evaluation metrics in lighting estimation
usually assess the objects rendered with the predicted illumination maps, which is time-consuming and sensitive to
the test setting.
In this work, we propose NeedleLight, a new model
that introduces needlet for accurate and robust lighting estimation from a single image. As a new generation of
spherical wavelets, needlet enjoys good localization properties in both frequency and spatial domain which makes it
ideal to be the basis for illumination representation. Moreover, to remove the redundant parameters in needlet coefficients which will disturb the regression of principle light
sources, we design an optimal thresholding function to
achieve sparse needlets which improve the lighting estimation greatly.
Unlike spherical harmonic coefficients, needlet coefficients are spatially localized over a unit sphere. To utilize

12830

