MBA-VO: Motion Blur Aware Visual Odometry
Peidong Liu1

Xingxing Zuo1
Viktor Larsson1
Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
2
Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Lab, Zürich

Abstract
Motion blur is one of the major challenges remaining
for visual odometry methods. In low-light conditions where
longer exposure times are necessary, motion blur can appear even for relatively slow camera motions. In this paper
we present a novel hybrid visual odometry pipeline with direct approach that explicitly models and estimates the camera’s local trajectory within the exposure time. This allows us to actively compensate for any motion blur that
occurs due to the camera motion. In addition, we also
contribute a novel benchmarking dataset for motion blur
aware visual odometry. In experiments we show that by directly modeling the image formation process, we are able
to improve robustness of the visual odometry, while keeping comparable accuracy as that for images without motion blur. Both the code and the datasets can be found from
https://github.com/ethliup/MBA-VO.

1. Introduction
Visual odometry (VO) determines the relative camera
motion from captured images. As a fundamental block
for many vision applications, such as robotics and virtual/augmented/mixed reality, great progress has been made
during the last two decades. There have been many algorithms proposed in the literature: ranging from classical
geometric approaches, deep learning based approaches to
hybrid approaches. The geometric approaches recover the
motion based on multi-view geometric constraints. Both
the reprojection error (e.g. ORB-SLAM [23]) and the photometric consistency (e.g. DSO [7]) are commonly used
constraints for the optimization. Deep learning based approaches formulate the problem as an end-to-end regression problem. Current state-of-the-art networks are still not
able to achieve comparable performance to the classical approaches for large scale environments. Hybrid approaches
usually embed a deep network inside a classical pipeline, to
further improve their accuracy and robustness.
While many state-of-the-art algorithms have been proposed, motion blur is still a major challenge remaining for

Figure 1. Motion Blur Aware Visual Odometry. We propose a full
pipeline for performing motion blur aware visual odometry. By
explicitly modelling the image formation process during tracking,
we can actively compensate for motion blur in the direct image
alignment.

visual odometry methods. Motion blur is one of the most
common artifacts that degrade images. It usually occurs in
low-light conditions where longer exposure times are necessary. This affects both feature based approaches (e.g. ORBSLAM [23]), which struggle to detect keypoints, and direct
methods (e.g. DSO [7]) which rely on strong image gradients for their alignment. While relocalization strategies
can partially mitigate the problem by allowing the VO to
recover after losing track, VO would still fail if the camera
continues to move in un-explored areas.
In this paper, we thus propose a novel hybrid visual
odometry method which is robust to motion blur. As conventional algorithms, our method consists of a front-end
tracker and a back-end mapper. During tracking, instead of
estimating the camera pose at a particular point in time, we
estimate the local camera motion trajectory within the exposure time for each frame. This allows us to explicitly model
the motion blur in the image and leverage it for tracking. We
assume that the reference keyframe image is sharp, which
is achieved by applying a deep deblurring network on the
original motion blurred image. Since keyframes are usually
sampled with a frequency much lower than frame-rate (and
are less sensitive to latency), we can thus take advantage of a
powerful deep network for keyframe deblurring (e.g. [32]).
To estimate the camera motion trajectory during image capture, we locally re-blur the sharp reference keyframe image
that is then used for direct image alignment against current
tracked frame. The back-end jointly optimizes the camera
poses and scene geometry based on the deblurred keyframe
images, by maximizing the photometric consistency. We

5550

