Learning Instance-level Spatial-Temporal Patterns for Person Re-identification
Min Ren1 2∗, Lingxiao He3 , Xingyu Liao3 ,Wu Liu3 , Yunlong Wang2 , Tieniu Tan2
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
CRIPAC NLPR, Institute of Automation Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
JD AI Research
{min.ren, yunlong.wang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {helingxiao3, liaoxingyu5, liuwu1}@jd.com, tnt@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to match pedestrians under dis-joint cameras. Most Re-ID methods formulate it as visual representation learning and image
search, and its accuracy is consequently affected greatly
by the search space. Spatial-temporal information has
been proven to be efficient to filter irrelevant negative samples and significantly improve Re-ID accuracy. However,
existing spatial-temporal person Re-ID methods are still
rough and do not exploit spatial-temporal information sufficiently. In this paper, we propose a novel Instance-level and
Spatial-Temporal Disentangled Re-ID method (InSTD), to
improve Re-ID accuracy. In our proposed framework, personalized information such as moving direction is explicitly considered to further narrow down the search space.
Besides, the spatial-temporal transferring probability is
disentangled from joint distribution to marginal distribution, so that outliers can also be well modeled. Abundant experimental analyses are presented, which demonstrates the superiority and provides more insights into our
method. The proposed method achieves mAP of 90.8%
on Market-1501 and 89.1% on DukeMTMC-reID, improving from the baseline 82.2% and 72.7%, respectively. Besides, in order to provide a better benchmark for person re-identification, we release a cleaned data list of
DukeMTMC-reID with this paper: https://github.
com/RenMin1991/cleaned-DukeMTMC-reID/

1. Introduction
Person re-identification aims to retrieve pedestrians
across non-overlapping camera views. Most existing person
re-identification methods focus on the visual feature representations of pedestrian images [6, 11, 14, 27, 32, 35, 38, 36,
42], such as appearance, clothes, and textures. The auxiliary
information of person images is also adopted recently, such
∗ This work is done when Min Ren is an intern at JD AI Research.

Figure 1. For each pair of pedestrian images, instance-level spatial
and temporal constraints are provided separately by the proposed
framework. Then they are adaptively combined with the visual
feature similarity for matching.

as parsing information [5, 13, 15, 22, 25], pose of the pedestrians [3, 19, 20], or human body key points [33]. However,
the performances of these methods are still far from the requirements of real-world situations. Because it is hard for
visual representations to discriminate pedestrian with similar appearance and clothes.
Recent methods model spatial-temporal patterns [8, 18,
21, 34] to filter out the irrelevant candidates and narrow
down the search space. Specifically, these methods mainly
formulate spatial-temporal pattern as a joint distribution
P (Sci ,cj , T ), where Sci ,cj means moving from camera i to
camera j, T means time interval. It has been proven to be
efficient to significantly improve re-identification accuracy.
However, there are two problems of the existing methods.
Firstly, the existing spatial-temporal methods only consider
camera-level but neglect instance-level information. The
state information of each pedestrian is neglected while it
is essential for spatial-temporal patterns of the person. Secondly, existing methods formulate spatial-temporal patterns
as a joint distribution, meaning that only those candidates

14930

