The Benefit of Distraction: Denoising Camera-Based Physiological
Measurements using Inverse Attention
Ewa M. Nowara∗ , Daniel McDuff† , Ashok Veeraraghavan∗
∗
Rice University, Houston, TX
†
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA
{emn3,vashok}@rice.edu, damcduff@microsoft.com

Attention networks perform well on diverse computer vision tasks. The core idea is that the signal of interest is
stronger in some pixels (“foreground”), and by selectively
focusing computation on these pixels, networks can extract
subtle information buried in noise and other sources of corruption. Our paper is based on one key observation: in
many real-world applications, many sources of corruption,
such as illumination and motion, are often shared between
the “foreground” and the “background” pixels. Can we
utilize this to our advantage? We propose the utility of
inverse attention networks, which focus on extracting information about these shared sources of corruption. We
show that this helps to effectively suppress shared covariates and amplify signal information, resulting in improved
performance. We illustrate this on the task of camera-based
physiological measurement where the signal of interest is
weak and global illumination variations and motion act as
significant shared sources of corruption. We perform experiments on three datasets and show that our approach of
inverse attention produces state-of-the-art results, increasing the signal-to-noise ratio by up to 5.8 dB, reducing heart
rate and breathing rate estimation errors by as much as 30
%, recovering subtle waveform dynamics, and generalizing
from RGB to NIR videos without retraining.

1. Introduction
Attention mechanisms have been successfully applied
in many areas of machine learning and computer vision [25, 45], including object detection [32], activity recognition [37], language tasks [1, 49], machine translation [2],
and camera-based physiological measurement [5]. Attention networks often perform well because they can identify
pixels that are most likely to contain strong signals of interest. By focusing on pixels useful for the task of interest and ignoring the remaining regions, attention networks
are often robust to diverse sources of variations in a video.

Avg. Pixel Value

Abstract

Hair andSkin Pixel Traces

60
40
20
0
0

no pulse
20

pulse

40

60
80
100
120
Time(s)
Figure 1. Temporal changes of hair (green) and skin (red) pixel intensities in a video are often correlated, e.g., when large head motion is present. Physiological signals are very subtle and strongest
in the skin but are easily corrupted. We propose an approach using
the regions ignored by most attention mechanisms (such as hair) to
provide estimates of these corruptions and learn a denoising mapping to remove them from the physiological signal of interest.

In this paper, we refer to the regions containing the signal
of interest as the “foreground” and the other regions as the
“background”. We focus on a counter-intuitive question –
is there important information contained within the “background” regions that are typically ignored by attention models? And, can we exploit the information in those regions to
improve the quality of estimation for the underlying signals
of interest in the “foreground”? If noise or variations not
related to the signal of interest are present in the video, they
will likely corrupt the signal of interest. If these corruptions
are random, then keeping as many “foreground” pixels as
possible and ignoring the noisy “background” pixels is sufficient for a model to work well. However, these variations
are often not random, but rather they are caused by a specific source which likely similarly affects multiple regions
in the video.
To illustrate the effectiveness of using the inverse atten-

4955

