Single View Physical Distance Estimation using Human Pose
Xiaohan Fei Henry Wang Lin Lee Cheong Xiangyu Zeng∗ Meng Wang Joseph Tighe
Amazon Web Services
{xiaohfei, yuanhenw, lcheong, xianzeng, mengw, tighej}@amazon.com

Abstract
We propose a fully automated system that simultaneously estimates the camera intrinsics, the
ground plane, and physical distances between people from a single RGB image or video captured by
a camera viewing a 3-D scene from a fixed vantage point. To automate camera calibration and
distance estimation, we leverage priors about human pose and develop a novel direct formulation for
pose-based auto-calibration and distance estimation,
which shows state-of-the-art performance on publicly
available datasets. The proposed approach enables existing camera systems to measure physical distances
without needing a dedicated calibration process or
range sensors, and is applicable to a broad range of
use cases such as social distancing and workplace
safety. Furthermore, to enable evaluation and drive
research in this area, we contribute to the publicly
available MEVA dataset with additional distance annotations, resulting in “MEVADA” – an evaluation
benchmark for the pose-based auto-calibration and
distance estimation problem.

1. Introduction
Estimating physical distances between objects
from a single view is an emerging and challenging
problem in computer vision. This task has wide
applicability to many real-world situations such as
deciding on appropriate movements in autonomous
vehicles and robots, determining distances between
players in sports, and estimating safe distances between people or dangerous objects in open spaces.
Standard image-based approaches to this task
typically require complex factory or on-site camera
calibration procedures [19, 30, 54, 57, 11] (e.g., using a checkerboard) or specialized hardware. The
former measures distances within an Euclidean reconstruction of a 3-D scene observed from multiple
∗ Work was done when Xiangyu was at Amazon.

Figure 1: Sample output (best viewed at 5× and in color)
of our fully automated system (Sect. 5) with potential
applications in social distancing. Left: The plot is generated from the Oxford Town Center dataset [20], where
the grids in cyan represent the estimated ground plane
(each cell is 6ft. × 6ft.), red indicates people within 6 feet
from others, i.e., possibly unsafe regarding social distancing guidelines [13], green means safe, the links show
each person’s nearest neighbor in 3-D with estimated
distance (in feet) superimposed in pink. Top right: A
top-down view of the scene. Bottom right: A heat
map of individuals considered unsafe aggregated over
time, which may guide safety measures, e.g., workplace
re-arrangement, to be taken.

vantage points by at least one moving or multiple
static pre-calibrated cameras. The latter utilizes
RGB-D cameras or range sensors where metric distance measures are directly available. These cameras
are expensive, not widely deployed and are limited
in range and operating conditions.
Three challenges limit widespread adoption of
objects distance estimation: (i) the majority of available video cameras output only RGB images, (ii)
applying standard checkerboard-based calibration
on-site for the vast majority of uncalibrated, alreadyinstalled cameras is prohibitively expensive, and (iii)
in most security installations scenes are only observable from one camera view. We present a distance
estimation method that can be applied to singleview RGB images that utilizes reference objects of
roughly-known dimension present in scenes, such as
cars, furniture, windows, etc., to “auto-calibrate” a

1
12406

