Transformer-Based Attention Networks for Continuous Pixel-Wise Prediction
Guanglei Yang1,2 Hao Tang3 Mingli Ding1 Nicu Sebe2 Elisa Ricci2,4
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, China 2 DISI, University of Trento, Italy
3
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 4 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
{yangguanglei,dingml}@hit.edu.cn,hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch,{niculae.sebe,e.ricci}@unitn.it

Abstract

1. Introduction

to improve their ability in modeling global contexts. Traditionally, both stacked convolution layers and consecutive
down-sampling are used in the encoders to generate sufﬁciently large receptive ﬁelds of deep layers. This problem is
typically circumvented rather than resolved to some extent.
Unfortunately, existing strategies bring several drawbacks:
(1) the training of very deep nets is affected by the fact that
consecutive multiplications wash out low-level features; (2)
the local information crucial to dense prediction tasks is discarded since the spatial resolution is reduced gradually. To
overcome these limitations, several methods have been recently proposed. One solution is manipulating the convolutional operation directly by using for example large kernel
sizes [42], atrous convolutions [5], and image/feature pyramids [71]. Another solution is to integrate attention modules into the fully convolutional network architecture. Such
a module aims to model global interactions of all pixels in
the feature map [60]. When applied to monocular depth
prediction [65, 64] a general approach is to combine the
attention module with a multi-scale fusion method. More
recently, Huynh et al. [31] proposed a depth-attention volume to incorporate a non-local coplanarity constraint to the
network. Guizilini et al. [26] rely on a ﬁxed pre-trained semantic segmentation network to guide global representation
learning. Though these methods’ performance is improved
signiﬁcantly, still the above mentioned issues persist.

Over the past decade, convolutional neural networks
have become the privileged methodology to address fundamental and challenging computer vision tasks requiring
dense pixel-wise prediction, such as semantic segmentation [6, 21], monocular depth prediction [39, 18], and normal surface computation [43]. Since the seminal work of
[27], existing depth prediction models’ have been dominated by encoders implemented with architectures such as
ResNet and VGG-Net. The encoder progressively reduces
the spatial resolution and learns more concepts with larger
receptive ﬁelds. Because context modeling is critical for
pixel-level prediction, deep feature representation learning
is arguably the most critical model component [5]. However, it is still challenging for depth prediction networks

Transformers were initially used to model sequence-tosequence predictions in NLP tasks to obtain a larger receptive ﬁeld and have recently attracted tremendous interest in the computer vision community. The ﬁrst purely
self-attention-based Vision Transformer (ViT) for image
recognition was proposed in [16] attaining excellent results on ImageNet compared with the convolutional networks. Moreover, SETR [72] replaces the encoders with
pure Transformers, obtaining competitive results on the
CityScapes dataset. Interestingly, we found that a SETRlike pure Transformer-based segmentation network produces unsatisfactory performance due to the lack of spatial
inductive bias in modeling the local information. Meanwhile, most previous methods based on deep feature rep-

While convolutional neural networks have shown a
tremendous impact on various computer vision tasks, they
generally demonstrate limitations in explicitly modeling
long-range dependencies due to the intrinsic locality of
the convolution operation. Initially designed for natural
language processing tasks, Transformers have emerged as
alternative architectures with innate global self-attention
mechanisms to capture long-range dependencies. In this
paper, we propose TransDepth, an architecture that beneﬁts from both convolutional neural networks and transformers. To avoid the network losing its ability to capture locallevel details due to the adoption of transformers, we propose a novel decoder that employs attention mechanisms
based on gates. Notably, this is the ﬁrst paper that applies transformers to pixel-wise prediction problems involving continuous labels (i.e., monocular depth prediction and
surface normal estimation). Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed TransDepth achieves state-of-theart performance on three challenging datasets. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/ygjwd12345/
TransDepth.

16269

