Generating Attribution Maps with Disentangled Masked Backpropagation
Adria Ruiz
Antonio Agudo
Francesc Moreno-Noguer
Institut de Robotica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
{aruiz,aagudo,fmoreno}@iri.upc.edu

Abstract
Attribution map visualization has arisen as one of the
most effective techniques to understand the underlying inference process of Convolutional Neural Networks. In this
task, the goal is to compute an score for each image pixel
related to its contribution to the network output. In this
paper, we introduce Disentangled Masked Backpropagation (DMBP), a novel gradient-based method that leverages on the piecewise linear nature of ReLU networks to
decompose the model function into different linear mappings. This decomposition aims to disentangle the attribution maps into positive, negative and nuisance factors
by learning a set of variables masking the contribution of
each filter during back-propagation. A thorough evaluation
over standard architectures (ResNet50 and VGG16) and
benchmark datasets (PASCAL VOC and ImageNet) demonstrates that DMBP generates more visually interpretable attribution maps than previous approaches. Additionally, we
quantitatively show that the maps produced by our method
are more consistent with the true contribution of each pixel
to the final network output.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are ubiquitous
in current state-of-the-art approaches for automatic visual
understanding. Despite their outstanding performance in
multiple tasks [10, 14, 40], they are still characterized as
black-boxes whose internal inference rules are difficult to
interpret. As a consequence, the trustability of this type of
models is limited and it holds back their broader adoption
in applications such as autonomous driving [17] or medical
diagnosis [6], where it is crucial to ensure that model decisions are reliable and not based on data artifacts or biases.
In this context, several strategies have been explored to
visualize the underlying rules guiding the model’s decision
process [39]. Attribution map generation is one of the most
effective methods for this purpose [3, 21, 25, 31, 33, 37].
This task aims to assign an score to each individual input (i.e., pixels) determining their contribution to the fi-

laptop

dromedary

tripod

sheep

dog

motorbike

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed method for attribution
map generation. Given an input image, we want to obtain a
score for each pixel estimating their contribution to the CNN output for a target label (in bold). Our approach is able to identify discriminative image pixels that contribute positively (red) or
negatively (blue) to the prediction, and pixels corresponding to
nuisance factors that have no effect on the output (white). For
instance, in bottom-middle, positive attributions are assigned to
the dog whereas negative scores correspond to pixels belonging
to the cat. Additionally, no attributions are assigned to the nondiscriminative background pixels. The disentanglement of this
components produces fine-grained pixel-level attributions revealing the patterns used by the network during inference. We show
that the generated attribution maps are more informative and visually interpretable than the ones obtained by previous methods.

nal network output (e.g., the probability for a given class).
By visualizing attribution maps, it is then easy to verify
whether network inference is guided by intuitive rules such
as the identification of discriminative image regions related
to high-level semantic concepts (see Fig. 1).
A promising approach to generate reliable attribution
maps are gradient-based techniques [28, 33, 37, 31]. To determine the importance of each pixel, these methods use different mechanisms to backpropagate the information from
the output to the input image through the intermediate layers. An appealing property of gradient-based methods is
that, compared to other approaches producing coarse and
less informative attribution maps [21, 25], they can identify
1905

