Attack-Guided Perceptual Data Generation for Real-world Re-Identification
Yukun Huang*
Xueyang Fu∗
Zheng-Jun Zha†
University of Science and Technology of China, China
kevinh@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu,zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In unconstrained real-world surveillance scenarios, person re-identification (Re-ID) models usually suffer from different low-level perceptual variations, e.g., cross-resolution
and insufficient lighting. Due to the limited variation range
of training data, existing models are difficult to generalize to scenes with unknown perceptual interference types.
To address the above problem, in this paper, we propose
two disjoint data-generation ways to complement existing
training samples to improve the robustness of Re-ID models. Firstly, considering the sparsity and imbalance of samples in the perceptual space, a dense resampling method
from the estimated perceptual distribution is performed.
Secondly, to dig more representative generated samples
for identity representation learning, we introduce a graphbased white-box attacker to guide the data generation process with intra-batch ranking and discriminate attention. In
addition, two synthetic-to-real feature constraints are introduced into the Re-ID training to prevent the generated data
from bringing domain bias. Our method is effective, easyto-implement, and independent of the specific network architecture. Applying our approach to a ResNet-50 baseline can already achieve competitive results, surpassing
state-of-the-art methods by +1.2% at Rank-1 on the MLRCUHK03 dataset.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to identify the
sample person across non-overlapping cameras, which can
be viewed as a sub-task of image retrieval. However, due to
identity-unrelated drastic variations, learning a robust and
discriminative identity representation for real-world Re-ID
in unconstrained scenarios is challenging. In general, these
variations can be divided roughly into two categories: lowlevel perceptual variations (referred to as visual degradation), such as resolution and illumination; and high-level
semantic variations, including view, pose, occlusions, etc.
* Co-first authors.
† Corresponding author.

(a) A lightweight image adjuster which can predict the resolution quality score of input images (Red Line) and adjust the image resolutions
based on given values (Green Line).

(b) Taking the overall resolution distribution of the data source as prior
knowledge, global-aware dense resolution augmentation can be performed
for each sample (Green Line). An intra-batch white-box attacker is further
introduced to provide guidance from high-level vision tasks (Red Line).

Figure 1. An overview of proposed Global-Aware and AttackGuided perceptual data generation (GAAG).

Compared with the former, semantic variations have been
explored sufficiently by existing Re-ID methods, e.g., predefined regional partition [36, 35, 30] and human part alignment [18, 51]. In this work, we focus on low-level perceptual variations and take cross-resolution Re-ID as the main
task.
Due to the powerful representation learning capability,
deep convolutional neural networks-based Re-ID models
[26, 43, 29] can effectively deal with these variations in constrained scenarios. However, since real-world applications
are more diverse and unpredictable, these deep models that
rely on training data heavily are difficult to generalize to
unseen situations. Although collecting enough labeled data
is a feasible solution, it is too expensive and impractical to
build a manually labeled database covering all possible situations. Therefore, many works attempt to complement the

215

