Click to Move: Controlling Video Generation with Sparse Motion
Pierfrancesco Ardino1,2 , Marco De Nadai2 , Bruno Lepri2 , Elisa Ricci1,2 , Stéphane Lathuilière3
1

University of Trento 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler
3
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Abstract
This paper introduces Click to Move (C2M), a novel
framework for video generation where the user can control the motion of the synthesized video through mouse
clicks specifying simple object trajectories of the key objects in the scene. Our model receives as input an initial frame, its corresponding segmentation map and the
sparse motion vectors encoding the input provided by the
user. It outputs a plausible video sequence starting from
the given frame and with a motion that is consistent with
user input. Notably, our proposed deep architecture incorporates a Graph Convolution Network (GCN) modelling
the movements of all the objects in the scene in a holistic manner and effectively combining the sparse user motion information and image features. Experimental results
show that C2M outperforms existing methods on two publicly available datasets, thus demonstrating the effectiveness of our GCN framework at modelling object interactions. The source code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/PierfrancescoArdino/C2M .

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed several breakthroughs in
the generation of high dimensional data such as images [6,
8, 24] or videos [36, 40]. However, most practical and commercial applications require to control generated visual data
on inputs provided by the user. For instance, in image manipulation, photo editing software [1] applies deep learning models to allow users to change portions of an image [27, 31, 48].
Regarding videos, several possible ways to control the
generated sequences have been considered. For instance,
the generation of frames can be conditioned on simple
categorical attributes [13], short sentences [22] or sound
[35]. An interesting recent research direction comprises
works that attempt to condition the video generation process providing motion information as input [33, 34, 36, 43].
These approaches allow to generate videos of moving faces

Figure 1. Illustration of the video generation process of Click to
Move (C2M): 1) the user selects the objects in a scene and specify
their movements. 2) Our network models the interactions between
all objects through the GCN and 3) predicts their displacement. 4)
The network produces a realistic and temporally consistent video.

[43], human silhouettes and, in general, of arbitrary objects [33, 34, 36]. However, these works mainly deal with
videos depicting a single object. It is indeed extremely more
challenging to animate images and generate videos when
multiple objects are present in the scene, as there is no simple way to disentangle the information associated with each
object and easily model and control its movement.
This paper introduces Click to Move (C2M), the first
approach that allows users to generate videos in complex
scenes by conditioning the movements of specific objects
through mouse clicks. Fig.1 illustrates the video generation
process of C2M. The user only needs to select few objects in
the scene and to specify the 2D location where each object
should move. Our proposed framework receives as inputs
an initial frame with its segmentation map and synthesizes
a video sequence depicting objects for which movements
are coherent with the user inputs. The proposed deep architecture comprises three main modules: (i) an appearance
encoder that extracts the feature representation from the first
frame and the associated segmentation map, (ii) a motion

14749

