Contrastive Coding for Active Learning under Class Distribution Mismatch
Pan Du1,2 , Suyun Zhao1,2,* , Hui Chen2,† , Shuwen Chai2,† , Hong Chen1,2 , Cuiping Li1,2
Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering of MOE Renmin University of China1
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China2
{dupan, zhaosuyun, chenhui1025, chaishuwen, chong, licuiping}@ruc.edu.cn

Class distribution of labeled data and unlabeled data

Abstract
Labeled Data

Active learning (AL) is successful based on the assumption that labeled and unlabeled data are obtained from the
same class distribution. However, its performance deteriorates under class distribution mismatch, wherein the unlabeled data contain many samples out of the class distribution of labeled data. To effectively handle the problems
under class distribution mismatch, we propose a contrastive
coding based AL framework named CCAL. Unlike the existing AL methods that focus on selecting the most informative
samples for annotating, CCAL extracts both semantic and
distinctive features by contrastive learning and combines
them in a query strategy to choose the most informative unlabeled samples with matched categories. Theoretically, we
prove that the AL error of CCAL has a tight upper bound.
Experimentally, we evaluate its performance on CIFAR10,
CIFAR100, and an artificial cross-dataset that consists of
five datasets; consequently, CCAL achieves state-of-the-art
performance by a large margin with remarkably lower annotation cost. To the best of our knowledge, CCAL is the
first work related to AL for class distribution mismatch.

1. Introduction
Deep Learning, which largely depends on sufficient labeled data, has achieved unprecedented breakthroughs in
supervised learning [23]. Nevertheless, it is impractical
to obtain abundant labeled data because labeling requires
enormous human and financial costs [36].
Active learning (AL) selects the most informative samples to query their labels, delivering a competitive target
model while saving annotation costs relative to the supervised learning [36]. In traditional AL methods, it’s generally assumed that labeled and unlabeled data are drawn
from the same class distribution, i.e., the categories of unlabeled data are the same as those of labeled ones. Unfortunately, this assumption cannot be maintained in many
*Corresponding Author
†Equal Contribution

Unlabeled Data

dog

dog

cat

cat

ID_C

dog

deer

cat

horse

car

airplane

flower

ship

OOD_C

ID_C: In class distribution of labeled data. OOD_C: Out of class distribution of labeled data.

Figure 1: An instance of class distribution mismatch. Unlabeled data contains some samples that are out of the class
distribution of labeled data.
real-world scenarios since that unlabeled data always contain lots of samples out of the class distribution of labeled
data, i.e., some categories of unlabeled data are not presented in labeled ones. For example, when crawling a large
set of images (as shown in Figure 1) [49] by keyword filtering (“dog”, “cat”) from the Internet for binary image
classification, many unlabeled images not belonging to target classes ( such as “deer”, “horse”, “airplane”, “ship”,
“car”, “flower”) are collected. The same problem has already been found in medical diagnoses containing unseen
lesions [11, 48] and the house annotation of remote sensing images containing numerous natural sceneries. These
scenarios have been formalized as the learning framework,
called class distribution mismatch [11] [7].
Under class distribution mismatch, an AL algorithm will
suffer a sharp drop in performance if only focusing on
querying the “most informative” samples. One main reason
for this phenomenon is that a large set of samples with mismatched categories will be queried, which are invalid for the
target model, thereby wasting the annotation budget. Thus,
it is essential to reduce the cost for invalid queries while improving the information of samples queried (valid queries)
in class distribution mismatch. Heuristically, we introduce
both invalid query error and valid query error to combat the
problem, as described in Eq.1. Specifically, an invalid query
error is attributed to those queried samples invalid for improving the target model, and a valid query error is due to

8927

