BuildingNet: Learning to Label 3D Buildings
Pratheba Selvaraju1
Mohamed Nabail1
Marios Loizou2
Maria Maslioukova2
Melinos Averkiou2
Andreas Andreou2
Siddhartha Chaudhuri3
Evangelos Kalogerakis1
1
2
3
UMass Amherst
University of Cyprus / CYENS CoE Cyprus
Adobe Research / IIT Bombay
garage

chimney

wall

lamp

window

plant/tree

dome

tower

unlabeled

predictions

human annotations

roof

column

ceiling

path

ground

fence

door

stairs

Figure 1: We introduce a dataset of 3D building meshes with annotated exteriors (top). We also present a graph neural network that processes building meshes and labels them by encoding structural and spatial relations between mesh components
(bottom). Our dataset also includes a point cloud track (blue box). Examples of erroneous network outputs are in red text.

Abstract
We introduce BuildingNet: (a) a large-scale dataset of
3D building models whose exteriors are consistently labeled, and (b) a graph neural network that labels building meshes by analyzing spatial and structural relations of
their geometric primitives. To create our dataset, we used
crowdsourcing combined with expert guidance, resulting in
513K annotated mesh primitives, grouped into 292K semantic part components across 2K building models. The
dataset covers several building categories, such as houses,
churches, skyscrapers, town halls, libraries, and castles. We
include a benchmark for evaluating mesh and point cloud
labeling. Buildings have more challenging structural complexity compared to objects in existing benchmarks (e.g.,
ShapeNet, PartNet), thus, we hope that our dataset can nurture the development of algorithms that are able to cope
with such large-scale geometric data for both vision and
graphics tasks e.g., 3D semantic segmentation, part-based
generative models, correspondences, texturing, and analysis of point cloud data acquired from real-world buildings. Finally, we show that our mesh-based graph neural network significantly improves performance over several baselines for labeling 3D meshes. Our project page
www.buildingnet.org includes our dataset and code.

1. Introduction
Architecture is a significant application area of 3D vision. There is a rich body of research on autonomous perception of buildings, led in large part by digital map developers seeking rich annotations and 3D viewing capabilities
for building exteriors [14], as well as roboticists who design
robots to operate in building interiors (e.g. [45]). Recent
advances in AR/VR also rely on computer-aided building
analysis [6]. Early work on digital techniques for architectural design, including freeform design explorations as well
as full-fledged constructions [15], led to the current ubiquity
of computational design tools in architectural studios. In addition, computers can automate the processing of architectural data such as photographs, satellite images and building
plans, for archival and analytical purposes (e.g. [62, 32]).
Thus, there is significant incentive to apply modern datadriven geometry processing to the analysis of buildings.
However, while buildings are bona fide geometric objects with well-established design principles and clear ontologies, their structural and stylistic complexity is typically
greater than, or at least markedly different from, those of
shapes in common 3D datasets like ShapeNet [5] and S-

10397

