Deep Halftoning with Reversible Binary Pattern
Menghan Xia1,3 Wenbo Hu1 Xueting Liu2 Tien-Tsin Wong1,3 *
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Caritas Institute of Higher Education
3
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems,
SIAT, Chinese Academy of Science
1

{mhxia, wbhu, ttwong}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

tliu@cihe.edu.hk

Abstract
Existing halftoning algorithms usually drop colors and
ﬁne details when dithering color images with binary dot
patterns, which makes it extremely difﬁcult to recover the
original information. To dispense the recovery trouble in future, we propose a novel halftoning technique that converts
a color image into binary halftone with full restorability to
the original version. The key idea is to implicitly embed
those previously dropped information into the halftone patterns. So, the halftone pattern not only serves to reproduce
the image tone, maintain the blue-noise randomness, but also represents the color information and ﬁne details. To this
end, we exploit two collaborative convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn the dithering scheme, under a nontrivial self-supervision formulation. To tackle the ﬂatness
degradation issue of CNNs, we propose a novel noise incentive block (NIB) that can serve as a generic CNN plug-in for
performance promotion. At last, we tailor a guiding-aware
training scheme that secures the convergence direction as
regulated. We evaluate the invertible halftones in multiple
aspects, which evidences the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Halftoning is commonly used in the printing industry [44] to reproduce tone with limited colors, e.g. black
and white, due to the cost consideration. During this process, both the color and ﬁne details of the original image are
inevitably lost. This makes the originals nearly impossible
to be recovered from these degraded halftones. Even the
state-of-the-art inverse halftoning methods [48, 16] can only recover an approximate grayscale version, since the color
is usually dropped before halftoning. Apparently, resolving
this dilemma requires a fore-looking halftoning technique
that retains the necessary information for restoration. This
paper makes the ﬁrst attempt to explore this novel problem.
Traditional halftoning methods distribute halftone dots
* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Observation: the halftone variants of David (a) (b) (c)
present similar visual quality but with different binary patterns, as
the overlaid RGB image visualized in (d). It indicates the possibility of modulating the patterns for additional usage.

mainly for tone reproduction, and we observe that this target still permits certain perturbation in term of the desired
binary pattern, as evidenced in Figure 1. It indicates the
possibility of utilizing such degree of freedom for additional usage, i.e. embedding the potentially missing color information and ﬁne details. Formally, this brings out a new
concept, i.e. reversible halftoning, which converts a color
image to a halftone that possesses restorability to the original color version. Inspired by invertible grayscale [47], we
adopt the invertible generative model to formulate our problem. However, generating quality halftones is much more
challenging than decolorization. First, convolutional neural
networks (CNN) that work with spatially shared kernels is
not native for halftoning, which suffer from ﬂatness degradation (as detailed in Section 3.1). Figure 3 illustrates an example that CNNs fail to introduce spatial variation in those
ﬂat regions. Second, it is non-trivial to achieve both complex visual simulation and accurate information embedding
via optimization over 1-bit pixels. Furthermore, the discrete
binary pattern poses challenge to capturing its properties via
general pixel-wise metrics.
To address ﬂatness degradation, we propose a Noise Incentive Block (NIB) that introduces spatial variation to the
feature space but still reserves the information intactness
through training along with the CNNs. In fact, NIB is a
model-agnostic plug-in and hence applicable to other relevant applications (see Section 4.3). We ﬁnd that the equipping the dithering network with NIB breaks the obstacle of ﬂatness degradation and make it feasible to dither

14000

