Dance with Self-Attention: A New Look of Conditional Random Fields on
Anomaly Detection in Videos
Didik Purwanto, Yie-Tarng Chen, and Wen-Hsien Fang
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Email:

{d10602806,ytchen,whf}@mail.ntust.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel weakly supervised approach
for anomaly detection, which begins with a relation-aware
feature extractor to capture the multi-scale convolutional
neural network (CNN) features from a video. Afterwards,
self-attention is integrated with conditional random fields
(CRFs), the core of the network, to make use of the ability
of self-attention in capturing the short-range correlations
of the features and the ability of CRFs in learning the interdependencies of these features. Such a framework can learn
not only the spatio-temporal interactions among the actors
which are important for detecting complex movements, but
also their short- and long-term dependencies across frames.
Also, to deal with both local and non-local relationships
of the features, a new variant of self-attention is developed
by taking into consideration a set of cliques with different
temporal localities. Moreover, a contrastive multi-instance
learning scheme is considered to broaden the gap between
the normal and abnormal instances, resulting in more accurate abnormal discrimination. Simulations reveal that the
new method provides superior performance to the state-ofthe-art works on the widespread UCF-Crime and ShanghaiTech datasets.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection seeks to recognize an event that deviates from normal behaviors and identify the instant of the
abnormal event occurring from a sequence of images. It has
received growing interests owing to its ubiquitous applications like criminal detection [1], intelligent surveillance [2],
and violent alerting [3], etc.
Detecting anomalies within real world videos can be demanding for a number of factors like a variety of illuminations, multiple camera angles, indoor and outdoor conditions, and inter- and intra- classes variation problem. Moreover, the abnormal activities often occur in a short period of
time.

Figure 1: Challenges of the anomaly detection: (a) anomaly is
formed by the spatial-temporal interactions among the actors; (b)
abnormal behaviors can occur in a short period of time.

Since many commonly used datasets only provide videolevel annotations, a plethora of weakly supervised anomaly
detection algorithms has been considered. For instance,
Sultani et al. [1] employed a multi-instance learning (MIL),
which incorporated both normal and abnormal samples with
weakly labeled annotations to detect the abnormal events.
Lin et al. [3] used a dual-branch module to learn the context
information. Also, Zhang et al. [4] considered an inner bag
loss to minimize the distance between the negative instances
in each bag. To better learn motion cue information, some
latest approaches made use of deep motion features [5, 6].
For example, Zhu et al. [5] proposed a temporal augmented
network to model the motion aware feature representation.
Liu et al. [7] eradicated the effect of the background information to learn the anomalies from specific areas. However,
[1, 5, 7] focused on the present information and did not fully
take advantage of the temporal dependencies across frames.
Recently, Zhong et al. [2] employed a graph convolutional
network (GCN) to iteratively refine the noisy anomaly labels. However, this iterative process trades performance for
complexity. Zaheer et al. [8] proposed a self-reasoning net-

173

