SA-ConvONet: Sign-Agnostic Optimization of
Convolutional Occupancy Networks
Jiapeng Tang1,4 , Jiabao Lei1 , Dan Xu2 , Feiying Ma4 , Kui Jia1,5,6 , and Lei Zhang3,4
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST, HK
3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, HK
4
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Figure 1: Given an un-oriented point cloud of a complex object (left) or a large-scale scene (right), our method can reconstruct
an accurate surface mesh without the use of oriented normals.

Abstract
Surface reconstruction from point clouds is a fundamental problem in the computer vision and graphics community. Recent state-of-the-arts solve this problem by individually optimizing each local implicit ﬁeld during inference. Without considering the geometric relationships between local ﬁelds, they typically require accurate normals
to avoid the sign conﬂict problem in overlapped regions
of local ﬁelds, which severely limits their applicability to
raw scans where surface normals could be unavailable. Although SAL breaks this limitation via sign-agnostic learning, further works still need to explore how to extend this
technique for local shape modeling. To this end, we propose
to learn implicit surface reconstruction by sign-agnostic optimization of convolutional occupancy networks, to simultaneously achieve advanced scalability to large-scale scenes,
generality to novel shapes, and applicability to raw scans in
Correspondence to Dan Xu and Kui Jia.

a uniﬁed framework. Concretely, we achieve this goal by a
simple yet effective design, which further optimizes the pretrained occupancy prediction networks with an unsigned
cross-entropy loss during inference. The learning of occupancy ﬁelds is conditioned on convolutional features from
an hourglass network architecture. Extensive experimental
comparisons with previous state-of-the-arts on both objectlevel and scene-level datasets demonstrate the superior accuracy of our approach for surface reconstruction from unorientated point clouds. The code is available at https:
//github.com/tangjiapeng/SA-ConvONet.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from point clouds is of signiﬁcance to perceive and understand surrounding 3D worlds for
intelligent systems, which plays a fundamental role in numerous practical applications, such as computer-aided design, 3D printing, and robotics grasping. Recently, this

6504

