Detecting Persuasive Atypicality by Modeling Contextual Compatibility
Meiqi Guo
Rebecca Hwa
Adriana Kovashka
Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA, USA
meiqi.guo@pitt.edu

{hwa, kovashka}@cs.pitt.edu

https://github.com/MeiqiGuo/ICCV2021-AtypicalityDetection

Abstract
We propose a new approach to detect atypicality in persuasive imagery. Unlike atypicality which has been studied in prior work, persuasive atypicality has a particular
purpose to convey meaning, and relies on understanding
the common-sense spatial relations of objects. We propose
a self-supervised attention-based technique which captures
contextual compatibility, and models spatial relations in a
precise manner. We further experiment with capturing common sense through the semantics of co-occurring object
classes. We verify our approach on a dataset of atypicality
in visual advertisements, as well as a second dataset capturing atypicality that has no persuasive intent.

1. Introduction
Visually creative images, such as advertisements or public service announcements, may purposefully contain atypical portrayals of objects as a rhetorical way for attracting
viewers’ attention [15]. In the marketing and communications research community, atypicality has gained attention
because of its importance to understanding the persuasiveness and rhetoric of visual media [28, 23, 48]. However,
detecting this type of atypicality is challenging for intelligent systems. First, atypicality may involve metaphorical
object transformations or intentionally surprising composed
objects. Second, the atypicality transformation types are
diverse and creative. Third, unpacking them may require
common-sense reasoning. For example, Fig. 1a is an atypical advertisement for a beverage. It is unusual for a pig to
wear a bridal veil even though the pig and veil are both normal objects. The ability to detect this type of purposefully
atypical objects and understand their roles in conveying the
intent of the image is necessary for an intelligent system to
reason about information in persuasive media. In this work,
we propose to model implicit knowledge of contextual compatibility in order to detect persuasive atypicality.
Our first hypothesis is that persuasive atypicality can be
detected by checking the compatibility between each possibly atypical object and the rest of the image as context.

Figure 1. These images illustrate the importance of object interactions and their spatial relative position for atypicality detection. (a)
Pig wearing a bridal veil is atypical; (b) If a handled brush instead
of a veil is on top of the pig’s head, then the image is typical; (c)
If the veil’s location is different, the image may also be typical.

For example, in Fig. 1a, the pig is not compatible with its
context (a bridal veil on its head), and the veil is also not
compatible with its context — on a pig’s head. We propose
an unsupervised approach by using reconstruction losses of
masked regions. We expect that a self-supervised model
trained on masked region reconstruction could learn enough
implicit knowledge of contextual compatibility; this pretrained model may then be used to detect atypical images.
Our second hypothesis is that the interactions between
objects and their spatial relative positions play a key role
in detecting atypicality. If it were a handled brush instead
of a bridal veil over the pig’s head (Fig. 1b), or if the veil
were placed at another location instead of on top of the pig’s
head (Fig. 1c), the image would no longer be atypical. In
order to better interpret object-object spatial interaction, we
propose a new method to compute the attention weights between key-query regions of our transformer-based models.
Finally, our third hypothesis is that, for some types of
persuasive atypicality, the semantic relation between nearby
object classes may offer compatibility clues beyond visual
features. In Fig. 1a, knowing that there is a “pig” and a
“bridal veil” and their spatial relationship may be helpful
to conclude that the image is atypical, instead of knowing
exactly what that pig or veil look like. To take advantage of

972

