Synchronization of Group-labelled Multi-graphs
Andrea Porfiri Dal Cin1 , Luca Magri1 , Federica Arrigoni2 , Andrea Fusiello3 and Giacomo Boracchi1
1

DEIB - Politecnico di Milano (Italy)

2

DISI - University of Trento (Italy)

3

DPIA - University of Udine (Italy)

Abstract
Synchronization refers to the problem of inferring the unknown values attached to vertices of a graph where edges
are labelled with the ratio of the incident vertices, and
labels belong to a group. This paper addresses the synchronization problem on multi-graphs, that are graphs with
more than one edge connecting the same pair of nodes. The
problem naturally arises when multiple measures are available to model the relationship between two vertices. This
happens when different sensors measure the same quantity,
or when the original graph is partitioned into sub-graphs
that are solved independently. In this case, the relationships
among sub-graphs give rise to multi-edges and the problem can be traced back to a multi-graph synchronization.
The baseline solution reduces multi-graphs to simple ones
by averaging their multi-edges, however this approach falls
short because: i) averaging is well defined only for some
groups and ii) the resulting estimator is less precise and
accurate, as we prove empirically. Specifically, we present
M ULTI S YNC, a synchronization algorithm for multi-graphs
that is based on a principled constrained eigenvalue optimization. M ULTI S YNC is a general solution that can cope
with any linear group and we show to be profitably usable
both on synthetic and real problems.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in Computer Vision can be formulated as
the synchronization [50] of group-labelled graphs: given
a network of nodes labelled with unknown elements of a
group Σ, it is required to estimate them from a collection
of noisy relative measurements expressed as ratios (or differences) attached to edges. A prominent example is when
the nodes of the graph are sensors and the goal is to recover
the unknown attitude and location of each sensor in a common reference frame. In this case, labels are in the Special
Euclidean Group Σ = SE(3), and the pairwise measurements are relative orientations. Depending on the group,
the synchronization formulation can be exploited to model
other relevant problems in Computer Vision, such as structure from motion, simultaneous localization and mapping

Figure 1: A multi-graph is a graph that admits multiple edges between its nodes. Nodes correspond to unknown group elements
xi ∈ SO(3) and edges correspond to known relative measures. A
multi-edge with cardinality 3, resulting for instance from different
estimates of relative transformations, is depicted in orange.

(SLAM), multi-view matching and image mosaicking.
Traditionally, synchronization is defined on a simple
graph, i.e., a graph where vertex pairs are connected by
at most one edge. In this work, instead, we deal with
the case where multiple measurements are available for the
same pair of nodes (multi-edge) and synchronization is performed on a multi-graph rather than on a simple graph (see
Fig. 1). This general multi-graph synchronization framework allows us to naturally account for multiple measurements between the same pair of nodes, which often happens in many applications. In SLAM, for instance, multiple sensors (cameras, IMU, GPS, . . . ) can estimate the 6
d.o.f motion of a vehicle. Another scenario where multigraphs naturally arise is in large-scale problems, where an
original graph is partitioned into smaller sub-graphs that are
solved independently to save computing time. In this context, the cut-edges connecting vertices from different subgraphs give rise to multi-edges and yield a multi-graph synchronization problem, as will be clarified in Sec. 5. This
partitioned approach not only reduces memory and processing time, but also enable multi-threading and parallelism.
In addition, it has relevant implications in terms of privacy
since it allows for data to be segregated so that each processing node sees only a portion of the data (see, e.g., [25]).
The naive synchronization solution on multi-graphs –

6453

