Multi-Level Curriculum for Training A Distortion-Aware Barrel Distortion
Rectiﬁcation Model
Kang Liao1,2 Chunyu Lin1,2 * Lixin Liao1,2 Yao Zhao1,2 Weiyao Lin3
1
2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University

Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
3

Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University

{kang liao, cylin, 16112056, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn, wylin@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Barrel distortion rectiﬁcation aims at removing the radial distortion in a distorted image captured by a wideangle lens. Previous deep learning methods mainly solve
this problem by learning the implicit distortion parameters
or the nonlinear rectiﬁed mapping function in a direct manner. However, this type of manner results in an indistinct
learning process of rectiﬁcation and thus limits the deep
perception of distortion. In this paper, inspired by the curriculum learning, we analyze the barrel distortion rectiﬁcation task in a progressive and meaningful manner. By
considering the relationship among different construction
levels in an image, we design a multi-level curriculum that
disassembles the rectiﬁcation task into three levels, structure recovery, semantics embedding, and texture rendering.
With the guidance of the curriculum that corresponds to the
construction of images, the proposed hierarchical architecture enables a progressive rectiﬁcation and achieves more
accurate results. Moreover, we present a novel distortionaware pre-training strategy to facilitate the initial learning
of neural networks, promoting the model to converge faster
and better. Experimental results on the synthesized and
real-world distorted image datasets show that the proposed
approach signiﬁcantly outperforms other learning methods,
both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Rectifying the distorted images is an indispensable preprocessing step for most computer vision tasks since the geometric distortion changes the original scene distribution.
Recent works [25][32][31][16][19][17][5] learn the barrel
distortion rectiﬁcation model in a direct manner, which
feeds distorted images into networks and only supervises
* Corresponding author

the ﬁnal outputs. Despite the end-to-end architecture, directly learning such a complex nonlinear mapping function
between different domains (from the distortion domain into
the alignment domain) is challenging. The pixel-level supervision on ﬁnal output cannot fully guide the rectiﬁcation
of geometry distribution. Moreover, this process cannot explicitly reason different construction levels of a distorted
image, limiting the models’ learning of the distortion features in rectiﬁcation task. Thus, previous direct learning
manners hinder the performance improvement of the rectiﬁcation algorithm. In this paper, inspired by curriculum
learning [4], we consider improving the barrel distortion
rectiﬁcation in a progressive and meaningful manner.
Curriculum learning, proposed by Bengio [4], is one
general paradigm that introduces a guided and meaningful
strategy to train a machine learning model. By imitating the
learning process of humans, the model can converge faster
by learning different knowledge at different learning stages
based on a curriculum. Inspired by this process, we construct a multi-level curriculum to train the deep barrel distortion rectiﬁcation model. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), similar to human painting from sketch, coloring to details, the
procedure of our curriculum displays a simple-to-complex
order from the structure, semantics to texture.
Additionally, to facilitate the initial learning of the rectiﬁcation model, we propose a distortion-aware pre-training
strategy. Pre-training on ImageNet [14] is a widely used
strategy in computer vision. Nevertheless, He et al. [9]
veriﬁed that it helps less if the target task is more sensitive to localization. Thus, it is not suitable for the rectiﬁcation task requiring a precise coordinate transformation.
Pre-training on ImageNet was demonstrated that it counts
against the distortion estimation task in [18] as ImageNet
does not contain any distorted images. Since it is difﬁcult
to make the model learn the implicit distortion parameters,
our distortion-aware pre-training strategy permits the model
a better network initialization and helps to perceive how dis-

4389

