Warp-Refine Propagation: Semi-Supervised Auto-labeling via Cycle-consistency
Aditya Ganeshan1 * Alexis Vallet2 Yasunori Kudo2 Shin-ichi Maeda2 Tommi Kerola2
Rares, Ambrus, 3 Dennis Park3 Adrien Gaidon3
1
Brown University 2 Preferred Networks, Inc. 3 Toyota Research Institute (TRI)

Abstract
Deep learning models for semantic segmentation rely on
expensive, large-scale, manually annotated datasets. Labelling is a tedious process that can take hours per image.
Automatically annotating video sequences by propagating
sparsely labeled frames through time is a more scalable alternative. In this work, we propose a novel label propagation
method, termed Warp-Refine Propagation, that combines
semantic cues with geometric cues to efficiently auto-label
videos. Our method learns to refine geometrically-warped labels and infuse them with learned semantic priors in a semisupervised setting by leveraging cycle-consistency across
time. We quantitatively show that our method improves
label-propagation by a noteworthy margin of 13.1 mIoU
on the ApolloScape dataset. Furthermore, by training with
the auto-labelled frames, we achieve competitive results
on three semantic-segmentation benchmarks, improving the
state-of-the-art by a large margin of 1.8 and 3.61 mIoU on
NYU-V2 and KITTI, while matching the current best results
on Cityscapes.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, i.e. assigning a semantic class to
each pixel in an input image, is an integral task in understanding shapes, geometry, and interaction of components from
images. The field has enjoyed revolutionary improvements
thanks to deep learning [20, 51, 34]. However, obtaining a
large-scale dataset with pixel-level annotations is particularly
expensive: for example, labeling takes 1.5 hours on average
per image in the Cityscapes dataset [11]. Despite the recent introduction of datasets that are significantly larger than
their predecessors [11, 41, 10, 28], scarcity of labeled data
remains a bottleneck when compared to other recognition
tasks in computer vision [33, 40, 22].
In the common scenario where data is provided as videos
with labels for sparsely subsampled frames, a prominent way
to tackle data scarcity is label propagation (LP), which automatically annotates additional video frames by propagating
labels through time [53, 3]. This intuitive idea to leverage
* Work done while A. Ganeshan was at Preferred Networks, Inc.

Figure 1: Quantitative comparison of different auto-labelling methods for multiple propagation lengths using ApolloScape [41] framewise ground-truth. We compare our propagation methods, warprefine and warp-inpaint, to prior-arts semantic-only and motiononly propagation, and show that warp-refine is vastly superior to
other auto-labeling approaches, especially for large time-steps.

motion-cues via temporal consistency in videos has been
widely explored, using estimated motion [2, 12, 26], patch
matching [3, 4], or predicting video frames [54]. However,
as discussed in Zhu et al. [54], estimating dense motion fields
across long periods of time remains notoriously difficult. Further, these methods are often sensitive to hyperparameters
(e.g. patch size), cannot handle de-occlusion, or require
highly accurate optical flow, thus limiting their applicability.
Another promising approach for obtaining large-scale annotation in semi-supervised settings is self-training (ST), in
which a teacher model, trained to capture semantic cues, is
used to generate additional annotations on unlabeled images
[18, 19, 56, 55]. While there have been significant improvements in ST, various challenges still remain in controlling
noise in pseudo-labels, such as heuristic decisions on confidence thresholds [35], class imbalance in pseudo-labels [13],
inaccurate predictions for small segments, and misalignment
of category definition between source and target domain.
To mitigate the drawbacks of LP and ST, we propose
i15499

