RAIN: Reinforced Hybrid Attention Inference Network for Motion Forecasting
Jiachen Li1,2 * Fan Yang3 Hengbo Ma2 Srikanth Malla1 Masayoshi Tomizuka2 Chiho Choi1
1
Honda Research Institute USA
2
University of California, Berkeley
3
Carnegie Mellon University
{jiachen li, hengbo ma, tomizuka}@berkeley.edu

fanyang3@andrew.cmu.edu

{smalla, cchoi}@honda-ri.com

Reward

Abstract
Motion forecasting plays a significant role in various domains (e.g., autonomous driving, human-robot interaction),
which aims to predict future motion sequences given a set
of historical observations. However, the observed elements
may be of different levels of importance. Some information may be irrelevant or even distracting to the forecasting
in certain situations. To address this issue, we propose a
generic motion forecasting framework (named RAIN) with
dynamic key information selection and ranking based on a
hybrid attention mechanism. The general framework is instantiated to handle multi-agent trajectory prediction and
human motion forecasting tasks, respectively. In the former
task, the model learns to recognize the relations between
agents with a graph representation and to determine their
relative significance. In the latter task, the model learns
to capture the temporal proximity and dependency in longterm human motions. We also propose an effective doublestage training pipeline with an alternating training strategy to optimize the parameters in different modules of the
framework. We validate the framework on both synthetic
simulations and motion forecasting benchmarks in different
domains, demonstrating that our method not only achieves
state-of-the-art forecasting performance, but also provides
interpretable and reasonable hybrid attention weights.

1. Introduction
Motion forecasting has been widely studied in various
domains, such as physical systems, human skeletons, and
multi-agent interacting systems (e.g., traffic participants,
sports players, etc). The problem is formulated as to predict future states or trajectories based on historical spatiotemporal observations. However, the observed information
may be of different levels of significance and in some situations not all the information is relevant for the forecasting.
* Work done during Jiachen’s internship at Honda Research Institute.

History
Observations

Complete
Info

Key
Info
RL Hard Attention

Ranked
Key Info

Future
Prediction

Soft Attention

Hybrid Attention
Sliding
Window

Figure 1. A high-level diagram of the proposed general prediction
framework with key information/element selection and ranking,
which consists of two major parts: an RL-based hard attention
mechanism to discriminate key information from complete observations and a soft attention mechanism to further figure out relative
significance of the key information. The whole procedure can be
iteratively applied over time with a sliding window to enable dynamic selection of key information to adapt to evolving situations.

Moreover, the key information may be varying as the situation evolves, which motivates the forecasting approach to
dynamically adjust its attention to different subsets of observations. Here we provide two illustrative real-world examples where key information is naturally selected based on either spatial relations or temporal dependencies. An on-road
vehicle usually only needs to pay attention to the traffic participants that are interacting or having a conflict with itself,
so only a subset of observations are indeed relevant when
predicting its future behavior. For human motion forecasting, it is observed that humans tend to repeat their motions,
which motivates dynamic attention to different segments of
previous motions given the current observation.
Attention mechanisms have been widely adopted to learn
the relative importance of elements. There are two major
types of attention mechanisms in literature: soft attention
and hard attention [63]. The soft attention is usually performed by applying a score function to input features followed by a softmax function to obtain the attention weights
in the range of [0, 1]. These operations are fully differentiable which can be trained by back-propagation with typical gradient-based optimizers. However, the softmax func-

16096

