Text is Text, No Matter What:
Unifying Text Recognition using Knowledge Distillation

Abstract
Text recognition remains a fundamental and extensively
researched topic in computer vision, largely owing to its
wide array of commercial applications. The challenging
nature of the very problem however dictated a fragmentation of research efforts: Scene Text Recognition (STR) that
deals with text in everyday scenes, and Handwriting Text
Recognition (HTR) that tackles hand-written text. In this
paper, for the first time, we argue for their unification – we
aim for a single model that can compete favourably with
two separate state-of-the-art STR and HTR models. We first
show that cross-utilisation of STR and HTR models trigger
significant performance drops due to differences in their inherent challenges. We then tackle their union by introducing a knowledge distillation (KD) based framework. This
however is non-trivial, largely due to the variable-length
and sequential nature of text sequences, which renders offthe-shelf KD techniques that mostly work with global fixed
length data, inadequate. For that, we propose four distillation losses, all of which are specifically designed to
cope with the aforementioned unique characteristics of text
recognition. Empirical evidence suggests that our proposed
unified model performs at par with individual models, even
surpassing them in certain cases. Ablative studies demonstrate that naive baselines such as a two-stage framework,
multi-task and domain adaption/generalisation alternatives
do not work that well, further authenticating our design.

1. Introduction
Text recognition has been studied extensively in the past
two decades [37], mostly due to its potential in commercial
applications. Following the advent of deep learning, great
progress [4, 35, 57, 63, 5, 8, 7] has been made in recognition
accuracy on different publicly available benchmark datasets
[41, 58, 30, 39]. Beyond supervised text recognition, very
recent attempts have been made that utilise synthetic training data via domain adaptation [67], learn optimal augmen-

% Word Recog. Acc.

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Aneeshan Sain1,2 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{a.bhunia, a.sain, p.chowdhury, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk.
100

85.9

80

78.2

81.8
70.4

60

76.9

53.4

40

STR Dataset
HTR Dataset

20
0

86.4

7.1
(a) HTR Model

(b) STR Model

(c) Joint Model

(d) Proposed

Figure 1. Despite performing well for scene images (IAM [39]), a
model trained on HTR datasets (a), performs poorly in STR scenarios (ICDAR-2015 [30]) and vice-versa (b). Although jointly
training a model (c) using both STR and HTR datasets helps improve the disparity between the datasets, the gap still remains far
behind the specialist models. Our KD based proposed method
leads to performance at par or even better than individual models.

tation strategy [38, 6], couple with visual question answering [10], and withhold adversarial attacks [60].
Albeit with great strides made, the field of text recognition remains fragmented, with one side focusing on Scene
Text Recognition (STR) [30], and the other on Handwriting
Text Recognition (HTR) [39]. This however is not surprising given the differences in the inherent challenges found in
each respective problem: STR studies text in scene images
posing challenges like complex backgrounds, blur, artefacts, uncontrolled illumination [63], whereas HTR tackles
handwritten texts where the main challenge lies with the
free-flow nature of writing [6] of different individuals. As
a result, utilising models trained for STR on HTR (and vice
versa) straightforwardly would trigger a significant performance drop (see Figure 1). This leads to our motivation –
how to design a unified text recognition model that works
ubiquitously across both scenarios.
While there is no existing work addressing this issue,
one might naively think of training a single text recognition network using training data from both STR and HTR
datasets. However, for the apparent issues of large domain
gap and model capacity limitation [54], while the jointly
trained model reduces the performance gap between HTR
and STR datasets, it still lags significantly behind individual

983

