Multi-Instance Pose Networks: Rethinking Top-Down Pose Estimation
⇤

†

Rawal Khirodkar1
Visesh Chari2
Amit Agrawal2
Ambrish Tyagi2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Amazon Lab 126
https://rawalkhirodkar.github.io/mipnet
Abstract
A key assumption of top-down human pose estimation
approaches is their expectation of having a single person/instance present in the input bounding box. This often
leads to failures in crowded scenes with occlusions. We
propose a novel solution to overcome the limitations of this
fundamental assumption. Our Multi-Instance Pose Network
(MIPNet) allows for predicting multiple 2D pose instances
within a given bounding box. We introduce a Multi-Instance
Modulation Block (MIMB) that can adaptively modulate
channel-wise feature responses for each instance and is
parameter efficient. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach by evaluating on COCO, CrowdPose, and OCHuman
datasets. Specifically, we achieve 70.0 AP on CrowdPose
and 42.5 AP on OCHuman test sets, a significant improvement of 2.4 AP and 6.5 AP over the prior art, respectively.
When using ground truth bounding boxes for inference, MIPNet achieves an improvement of 0.7 AP on COCO, 0.9 AP on
CrowdPose, and 9.1 AP on OCHuman validation sets compared to HRNet. Interestingly, when fewer, high confidence
bounding boxes are used, HRNet’s performance degrades
(by 5 AP) on OCHuman, whereas MIPNet maintains a relatively stable performance (drop of 1 AP) for the same inputs.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation aims at localizing 2D human
anatomical keypoints (e.g., elbow, wrist, etc.) in a given
image. Current human pose estimation methods can be
categorized as top-down or bottom-up methods. Top-down
methods [6, 13, 33, 40, 41, 43, 44] take as input an image
region within a bounding box, generally the output of a
human detector, and reduce the problem to the simpler task
of single human pose estimation. Bottom-up methods [3,
22, 29, 32], in contrast, start by independently localizing
keypoints in the entire image, followed by grouping them
into 2D human pose instances.
The single human assumption made by top-down approaches limits the inference to a single configuration of human joints (a single instance) that can best explain the input.
⇤ Work done during an internship at Amazon

† Now at Waymo

Figure 1: 2D pose estimation networks often fail in presence of
heavy occlusion. (Left) Bounding boxes corresponding to two persons. (Middle) For both bounding boxes, HRNet predicts the pose
for the front person and misses the occluded person. (Right) MIPNet allows multiple instances for each bounding box and recovers
the pose of the occluded person.

Top-down pose estimation approaches [6, 16, 30, 40, 44] are
currently the best performers on datasets such as COCO [25],
MPII [2]. However, when presented with inputs containing
multiple humans like crowded or occluded instances, topdown methods are forced to select a single plausible configuration per human detection. In such cases, top-down
methods may erroneously identify pose landmarks corresponding to the occluder (person in the front). See, for
example, Fig. 1 (Middle). Therefore, on datasets such as
CrowdPose [23] and OCHuman [48], which have a relatively
higher proportion of occluded instances (Table 1), the performance of top-down methods suffer due to the single person
assumption [8, 23, 48].
In this paper, we rethink the architecture for top-down
2D pose estimators by predicting multiple pose instances
for the input bounding box. The key idea of our proposed
architecture is to allow the model to predict more than one
pose instance for each bounding box. We demonstrate that
this conceptual change improves the performance of top-

3122

