Spatially-Adaptive Image Restoration using Distortion-Guided Networks
Kuldeep Purohit1
Maitreya Suin2
1
Michigan State University

A. N. Rajagopalan2
Vishnu Naresh Boddeti1
2
Indian Institute of Technology Madras

Abstract
We present a general learning-based solution for restoring images suffering from spatially-varying degradations.
Prior approaches are typically degradation-specific and
employ the same processing across different images and
different pixels within. However, we hypothesize that such
spatially rigid processing is suboptimal for simultaneously
restoring the degraded pixels as well as reconstructing
the clean regions of the image. To overcome this limitation, we propose SPAIR, a network design that harnesses distortion-localization information and dynamically
adjusts computation to difficult regions in the image. SPAIR
comprises of two components, (1) a localization network
that identifies degraded pixels, and (2) a restoration network that exploits knowledge from the localization network in filter and feature domain to selectively and adaptively restore degraded pixels. Our key idea is to exploit
the non-uniformity of heavy degradations in spatial-domain
and suitably embed this knowledge within distortion-guided
modules performing sparse normalization, feature extraction and attention. Our architecture is agnostic to physical formation model and generalizes across several types
of spatially-varying degradations. We demonstrate the efficacy of SPAIR individually on four restoration tasks- removal of rain-streaks, raindrops, shadows and motion blur.
Extensive qualitative and quantitative comparisons with
prior art on 11 benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
degradation-agnostic network design offers significant performance gains over state-of-the-art degradation-specific
architectures. Code available at https://github.com/humananalysis/spatially-adaptive-image-restoration.

1. Introduction
Images are often degraded during the data acquisition
process, especially under non-ideal imaging conditions.
Such degradations can be attributed to the medium and dynamics between the camera, scene elements and the illumination. For instance, as shown in Fig. 1 , (1) precipitation leads to snow/rain streaks occupying the volume between the scene and the camera, (2) presence of rain-drops

Figure 1. Visualization of degradation masks. The two rows show
degraded input images and corresponding predicted masks.

on the camera lens causes significant degradation in scene
visibility, (3) relative motion between the camera or scene
elements results in motion blur, and (4) harsh illumination
conditions can induce harsh shadows. Despite the disparate
source of degradations, they share the same underlying motif that affects the image quality, namely, degradation that
is spatially-varying in nature. For example, raindrops and
shadows degrade monolithic parts of the image depending
on their size and location, motion blur varies with scene
depth and degree of motion, and rain streaks effect only
sparse regions whose orientation depends on the relative
rain direction. Fig. 1 shows representative examples of
degraded images and respective distortion-maps. It can be
seen that a large number of pixels undergo little or no distortion. Another observation is that the amount of distortion
and its spatial distribution is different in every image.
Restoring such images is vital to improve their aesthetic
quality as well as the performance of downstream tasks,
viz, detection, segmentation, classification, and tracking.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) currently typify the
state-of-the-art for various image restoration tasks. Despite
recent progress, existing approaches share several key limitations. Firstly, all layers in their networks are generic CNN
layers, which apply the same set of spatially-invariant filters to every degraded image. Such layers are limited in
their ability to invert degradations that are highly imagedependent and spatially-varying. Secondly, most network
architectures are specifically tailored for individual degradation types as they are based on image formation models. Thirdly, the distortion-localization information embedded in the labeled datasets remains unused or sub-optimally
used in all existing solutions.
Static CNN based models trained to directly regress
clean intensities from degraded ones, perform poorly when

2309

