Real-world Video Super-resolution: A Benchmark Dataset
and A Decomposition based Learning Scheme
†

Xi Yang1,2,*, Wangmeng Xiang1,2,*, Hui Zeng1,2 , Lei Zhang1,2,
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
xxxxi.yang@connect.polyu.hk, {cswxiang, cshzeng, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to improve the spatial resolution of low-resolution (LR) videos. Existing
VSR methods are mostly trained and evaluated on synthetic datasets, where the LR videos are uniformly downsampled from their high-resolution (HR) counterparts by
some simple operators (e.g., bicubic downsampling). Such
simple synthetic degradation models, however, cannot well
describe the complex degradation processes in real-world
videos, and thus the trained VSR models become ineffective in real-world applications. As an attempt to bridge
the gap, we build a real-world video super-resolution (RealVSR) dataset by capturing paired LR-HR video sequences
using the multi-camera system of iPhone 11 Pro Max. Since
the LR-HR video pairs are captured by two separate cameras, there are inevitably certain misalignment and luminance/color differences between them. To more robustly
train the VSR model and recover more details from the LR
inputs, we convert the LR-HR videos into YCbCr space and
decompose the luminance channel into a Laplacian pyramid, and then apply different loss functions to different components. Experiments validate that VSR models trained on
our RealVSR dataset demonstrate better visual quality than
those trained on synthetic datasets under real-world settings. They also exhibit good generalization capability in
cross-camera tests. The dataset and code can be found at
https://github.com/IanYeung/RealVSR.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) [5] is a classical yet challenging
task in image/video processing and computer vision, aiming
at reconstructing high-resolution (HR) images/videos from
their low-resolution (LR) counterparts. There are two major research branches in the field of SR: single image superresolution (SISR) [9] and video super-resolution (VSR) [1].
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC

RIF grant (R5001-18).

LR

Vimeo-90k

RealVSR+Lv1

RealVSR+Lv2

Figure 1. Video super-resolution results on a real-world video
(captured by the iPhone 11 Pro Max) by EDVR [27] trained on
the synthetic Vimeo-90k datatset [31] and our RealVSR dataset.

While SISR mainly exploits the spatial redundancy within
an image, VSR utilizes both spatial and temporal redundancies to reconstruct the HR video. With the increasing popularity of mobile imaging devices and rapid development
of communication technology, VSR is attracting more and
more attention for its great potentials in HR video generation and enhancement.
The recent progress in VSR research largely attributes
to the rapid development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [3, 31, 14, 20, 25, 27, 11], which set new
state-of-the-arts on several benchmarking VSR datasets
[31, 23]. Those datasets, however, are mostly synthetic ones
because it was difficult to collect real-world LR-HR video
pairs. Specifically, the LR videos are obtained by uniformly
downsampling their HR counterparts using some simple
operators, e.g., bicubic downsampling or direct downsampling after Gaussian smoothing. Unfortunately, such simple
degradation models could not faithfully describe the complex degradation processes in real-world LR videos. As a

4781

