Fast Light-field Disparity Estimation with Multi-disparity-scale Cost
Aggregation

1

Zhicong Huang1,2 , Xuemei Hu1 , Zhou Xue2 , Weizhu Xu1 , Tao Yue1
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
ByteDance Inc.

zcong17huang@smail.nju.edu.cn, xuemeihu@nju.edu.cn, xuezhou@bytedance.com
weizhuxunju@smail.nju.edu.cn, yuetao@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

LF

Light field images contain both angular and spatial information of captured light rays. The rich information of
light fields enables straightforward disparity recovery capability but demands high computational cost as well. In this
paper, we design a lightweight disparity estimation model
with physical-based multi-disparity-scale cost volume aggregation for fast disparity estimation. By introducing a
sub-network of edge guidance, we significantly improve the
recovery of geometric details near edges and improve the
overall performance. We test the proposed model extensively on both synthetic and real-captured datasets, which
provide both densely and sparsely sampled light fields. Finally, we significantly reduce computation cost and GPU
memory consumption, while achieving comparable performance with state-of-the-art disparity estimation methods
for light fields. Our source code is available at https:
//github.com/zcong17huang/FastLFnet.

1. Introduction
Disparity estimation from light fields has become a
promising way to derive disparity information with the arise
of consumer-level light field cameras [20, 24]. Many algorithms have been proposed to estimate disparity maps from
the light field images [25, 12, 9, 29].
With the progress of the artificial neural network, the
learning-based algorithms are proposed [14, 3, 33, 28, 29,
26] and greatly improve the performance of disparity estimation. Considering the high-dimensional essence of
this problem, 3D CNN architecture is widely used to handle the space-disparity representation for higher accuracy
[14, 3, 29]. However, the extremely high computational cost
and huge GPU memory consumption bring lots of difficulties to train and deploy the model in practice. Although
several fast disparity estimation methods [28, 8, 31] have
been proposed, they suffer from the loss of accuracy.

Mean Square Error

8

DslfNet
EPI2

6

FSL

4

2

LF-OCC

RPRF-5

EPI1

FDE

PS-RF
SPO
CAE

EpiNet
EpiNet-7
LFattNet

Ours
0

100

102
Running time (s)

104

Figure 1. Comparison in performance and efficiency of light field
disparity estimation algorithms.

In this work, we propose a fast and lightweight end-toend deep architecture without using any 3D CNN modules
for estimating disparity maps from light field images. Taking into account that different views of light fields have different disparity scales, we design a physical-based multidisparity-scale cost aggregation module for efficient cost
regularization. The proposed method can save computation
and memory cost while providing pyramidal disparity information for better accuracy and robustness.
Abandoning the 3D CNN architecture may deteriorate
the results in challenging regions with fine structures and
detailed textures, thus an edge guidance sub-network is proposed to preserve subtle details by integrating edge information into the main network. The edge maps can highlight the
regions where fine structures and detailed textures should
be given more attention to, and guide the network handling
these regions specially to achieve better results. Based on
the edge-guided multi-disparity-scale cost aggregation, the
proposed network could achieve competitive performance
with the state-of-the-art methods with much faster computing speed and lower GPU memory consumption, as shown

6320

