Motion-Augmented Self-Training for Video Recognition at Smaller Scale
Kirill Gavrilyuk1

Mihir Jain2

Ilia Karmanov2

Cees G. M. Snoek1

University of Amsterdam 2 Qualcomm AI Research∗
{kgavrilyuk,cgmsnoek}@uva.nl
{mijain,ikarmano}@qti.qualcomm.com
1

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to self-train a 3D convolutional
neural network on an unlabeled video collection for deployment on small-scale video collections. As smaller video
datasets benefit more from motion than appearance, we
strive to train our network using optical flow, but avoid its
computation during inference. We propose the first motionaugmented self-training regime, we call MotionFit. We start
with supervised training of a motion model on a small, and
labeled, video collection. With the motion model we generate
pseudo-labels for a large unlabeled video collection, which
enables us to transfer knowledge by learning to predict these
pseudo-labels with an appearance model. Moreover, we
introduce a multi-clip loss as a simple yet efficient way to
improve the quality of the pseudo-labeling, even without
additional auxiliary tasks. We also take into consideration
the temporal granularity of videos during self-training of
the appearance model, which was missed in previous works.
As a result we obtain a strong motion-augmented representation model suited for video downstream tasks like action
recognition and clip retrieval. On small-scale video datasets,
MotionFit outperforms alternatives for knowledge transfer
by 5%-8%, video-only self-supervision by 1%-7% and semisupervised learning by 9%-18% using the same amount of
class labels.

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to self-train a 3D convolutional neural network on an unlabeled video collection, such
that it can be effectively fine-tuned on small scale datasets.
This is of interest for applications in small-sized companies, a household, or search and rescue robotics where large
amounts of labeled video are often unavailable and the deployment in compute-efficient scenarios is preferred. The
common self-training approach is to transfer knowledge
from pre-trained appearance models by pseudo-label predic∗ Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

Inc.

MMPLG
Small labeled
motion dataset
pseudolabels

MRGB
Large unlabeled
appearance dataset

Downstream
tasks

self-training

Figure 1: Motion-augmented self-training utilizes pseudolabels obtained by a motion model trained on a small labeled
video dataset. We transfer knowledge from the motion model
to the appearance model which is suitable for downstream
video tasks without the need for optical flow computation.

tion, e.g. [41, 46, 60]. Yan et al. [60], for example, cluster
a pre-learned appearance space before training a new network from scratch using cluster membership as pseudo-label.
They transfer knowledge from 19 million weakly-labeled
videos and use Kinetics [9] as their target with around 250k
videos to fine-tune their model. Unlike them, we aim to selftrain a model that can be effectively fine-tuned on small-scale
datasets with around 10k videos. Such small video datasets
benefit more from motion information than appearance [48],
but the added flow computation affects the efficiency. Other
semi-supervised [27, 46] and self-supervised [21, 22] alternatives suitable for small-scale datasets either do not use
motion [27, 46] or use it at inference time also [21, 22]. So,
we strive to train a convolutional neural network using optical flow, but avoid its computation during inference. We
propose to transfer knowledge from the motion representation through self-training, to enable effective fine-tuning
even on small-scale video collections.
We are inspired by generalized distillation [35]. During
training it combines knowledge distillation [23] with privileged information [53]. For example, to transfer knowledge

10429

