Multi-Echo LiDAR for 3D Object Detection
Yunze Man1 , Xinshuo Weng1 , Prasanna Kumar Sivakumar2 , Matthew O’Toole1 , Kris Kitani1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 DENSO
{yman, xinshuow, mpotoole, kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu,

prasanna.kumar.sivakumar@na.denso.com

Abstract
LiDAR sensors can be used to obtain a wide range of
measurement signals other than a simple 3D point cloud,
and those signals can be leveraged to improve perception
tasks like 3D object detection. A single laser pulse can be
partially reflected by multiple objects along its path, resulting in multiple measurements called echoes. Multi-echo
measurement can provide information about object contours and semi-transparent surfaces which can be used to
better identify and locate objects. LiDAR can also measure
surface reflectance (intensity of laser pulse return), as well
as ambient light of the scene (sunlight reflected by objects).
These signals are already available in commercial LiDAR
devices but have not been used in most LiDAR-based detection models. We present a 3D object detection model
which leverages the full spectrum of measurement signals
provided by LiDAR. First, we propose a multi-signal fusion
(MSF) module to combine (1) the reflectance and ambient
features extracted with a 2D CNN, and (2) point cloud features extracted using a 3D graph neural network (GNN).
Second, we propose a multi-echo aggregation (MEA) module to combine the information encoded in different sets of
echo points. Compared with traditional single echo point
cloud methods, our proposed Multi-Signal LiDAR Detector
(MSLiD) extracts richer context information from a wider
range of sensing measurements and achieves more accurate
3D object detection. Experiments show that by incorporating the multi-modality of LiDAR, our method outperforms
the state-of-the-art by up to relatively 9.1%.

1. Introduction
LiDAR is a powerful sensor that has the ability to capture a wide range of measurements for perception tasks including object detection. The most commonly used LiDAR
measurement type is a set of 3D points (a point cloud) and
their reflectance values, which provides accurate 3D shape
information of objects in the scene. State-of-the-art object detection methods have made great breakthroughs by
leveraging 3D point cloud data. However, despite such success, there are several types of LiDAR measurements that

Horizontal

Horizontal
Detections

LiDAR
Sensor
photon
detector
array

Echo Group

Vertical

LiDAR Image
𝒛

Vertical
Detections

𝒚

𝒙

Multi-echo Point Cloud

Figure 1. Illustration of multi-signal measurements from LiDAR sensor. Each photon detector on the sensor collects a group
of signals and forms an ”Echo Group”, which is converted into a
2D LiDAR image and a multi-echo point cloud representation.

are largely ignored in modern-day LiDAR perception algorithms. In the following, we describe three unique features
of the LiDAR sensor, which are available in standard LiDAR sensors, but surprisingly have rarely been used in published LiDAR-based object detection algorithms. We show
that by leveraging these features, one can greatly improve
3D object detection performance.
The first important feature of LiDAR is its ability to obtain multiple return signals with a single laser pulse, called
echoes. LiDAR is a time-of-flight measurement system
which measures the time it takes for a laser pulse to hit
an object and return to the sensor. More specifically, the
laser emits a short pulse, and a photodetector timestamps
the arrival of photons reflected back by object surfaces. It is
possible for a photodetector to acquire multiple return signals (echoes) if the laser is partially reflected by multiple
objects along its path of propagation. We call the multiple returned signals generated from the same laser beam
an ‘echo group.’ Points in the same echo group lie on one
line in 3D space, and they are typically ordered according
to their signal strength. In addition to the direct benefit of
increasing the number of points available, multiple echoes
also imply that high-order echo points are likely on the contour of an object (objects obstruct only a part of the laser) or
on a semi-transparent surface (a portion of the laser propagates through the surface). In either case, we hypothesize
that echoes encode meaningful features that can help locate

3763

