Disentangled Representation for Age-Invariant Face Recognition:
A Mutual Information Minimization Perspective
Xuege Hou
Yali Li
Shengjin Wang*
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
hxg19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
General face recognition has seen remarkable progress
in recent years. However, large age gap still remains a
big challenge due to significant alterations in facial appearance and bone structure. Disentanglement plays a key role
in partitioning face representations into identity-dependent
and age-dependent components for age-invariant face
recognition (AIFR). In this paper we propose a multi-task
learning framework based on mutual information minimization (MT-MIM), which casts the disentangled representation learning as an objective of information constraints.
The method trains a disentanglement network to minimize
mutual information between the identity component and age
component of the face image from the same person, and reduce the effect of age variations during the identification
process. For quantitative measure of the degree of disentanglement, we verify that mutual information can represent as metric. The resulting identity-dependent representations are used for age-invariant face recognition. We evaluate MT-MIM on popular public-domain face aging datasets
(FG-NET, MORPH Album 2, CACD and AgeDB) and obtained significant improvements over previous state-of-theart methods. Specifically, our method exceeds the baseline
models by over 0.4% on MORPH Album 2, and over 0.7%
on CACD subsets, which are impressive improvements at
the high accuracy levels of above 99% and an average of
94%.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is one of the most widely and thoroughly studied topics in computer vision. From traditional
methods [45, 36, 33, 28, 15, 49] to the more recent deep
learning based algorithms [15, 51, 50, 47, 10, 59], it has
achieved excellent performance, even surpassing humans in
various scenarios.
Among all the face recognition systems, age-invariant
* Corresponding author

Age 6

4

4

3

4

19

21

17

14

32

Figure 1. Example images for AIFR. The two ends of a line are
the same person. It is common in AIFR where intra-class variations are greater than inter-class for large age gaps. Consequently,
not only human get confused, but most general face recognition
models also degrade by a scale of over 13% [5].

face recognition has a wide range of application scenarios that are of great significance, including finding missing children after years, fugitive identification and passport
verification. However, despite the exciting progress in face
recognition, aging variation in these practical applications
remains under-explored during the design and testing of
face recognition systems. There are three challenging aspects for age-invariant face recognition (AIFR): 1) Aging
related alterations in face appearance and anatomy result in
significant intra-class variations, which increase as the age
gaps get lager. 2) Face aging is a complex process affected
dramatically by intrinsic and extrinsic factors (i.e. heredity,
gender, environment). It has a compound impact on facial
shapes and textures simultaneously, making age-invariant
patterns learning difficult. 3) Current cross-age databases
are insufficient for training with unbalanced distributions of
age and gender, which limits the performance of AIFR.
Figure 1 shows a typical scene of different individuals at
the same age looking more similar than the same person at
different age, for the reason that age-related information is
shared among different identities, revealing the necessity of
age variations disentanglement.

3692

