2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)

FREE: Feature Refinement for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
∗

Shiming Chen1 , Wenjie Wang1 , Beihao Xia1 , Qinmu Peng1 , Xinge You1 , Feng Zheng2 , Ling Shao3
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), China
2
Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), China
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), UAE
{shimingchen,pengqinmu,youxg}@hust.edu.cn

zfeng02@gmail.com

ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) has achieved
significant progress, with many efforts dedicated to overcoming the problems of visual-semantic domain gap and
seen-unseen bias. However, most existing methods directly use feature extraction models trained on ImageNet
alone, ignoring the cross-dataset bias between ImageNet
and GZSL benchmarks. Such a bias inevitably results in
poor-quality visual features for GZSL tasks, which potentially limits the recognition performance on both seen and
unseen classes. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective GZSL method, termed feature refinement for generalized
zero-shot learning (FREE), to tackle the above problem.
FREE employs a feature refinement (FR) module that incorporates semantic→visual mapping into a unified generative model to refine the visual features of seen and unseen
class samples. Furthermore, we propose a self-adaptive
margin center loss (SAMC-loss) that cooperates with a semantic cycle-consistency loss to guide FR to learn class- and
semantically-relevant representations, and concatenate the
features in FR to extract the fully refined features. Extensive experiments on five benchmark datasets demonstrate the
significant performance gain of FREE over its baseline and
current state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/shiming-chen/FREE .

1. Introduction
A key challenge of artificial intelligence is to generalize
machine learning models from seen data to unseen scenarios.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a typical research topic targeting
this goal [25, 27, 41]. ZSL aims to classify the images of
unseen classes by constructing a mapping relationship between the semantic and visual domains. It is usually based
on the assumption that both seen and unseen classes can be
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. The core idea of our FREE. The cross-dataset bias between ImageNet and GZSL benchmarks (e.g., CUB) is harmful for
feature extraction from GZSL benchmarks, which results in poorquality visual features for unsatisfying performance in GZSL. Our
FREE refines the visual features and improves the semantic→visual
mapping using feature refinement (FR) in a unified network for
GZSL classification.

described through a set of semantic vectors, e.g., sentence
embeddings [45], and attribute vectors [26], in the same semantic space. According to their classification range, ZSL
methods can be categorized into conventional ZSL (CZSL)
and generalized ZSL (GZSL) [58]. CZSL aims to predict unseen classes, while GZSL can predict both seen and unseen
classes. Recently, GZSL has attracted more attention as it is
more realistic and challenging. We are thus also interested
in the GZSL setting in this paper.
GZSL has achieved significant progress, with many
efforts focused on the problems of visual-semantic domain gaps [26, 1, 2, 52, 51, 61] and seen-unseen bias
[57, 37, 66, 64, 49, 38, 36, 19]. Semantic embedding
[33, 8, 31, 66, 34] or generative methods (e.g., variational
autoencoders (VAEs) [3, 47], generative adversarial nets
(GANs) [57, 31, 60, 65, 21, 51], and generative flows [49])

122

