Lipschitz Continuity Guided Knowledge Distillation
Yuzhang Shang1 ,* Bin Duan1 ,* Ziliang Zong2 , Liqiang Nie3 , Yan Yan1†
1
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Texas State University, USA
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, China
{yshang4, bduan2}@hawk.iit.edu, ziliang@txstate.edu
nieliqiang@gmail.com, yyan34@iit.edu

Abstract
Knowledge distillation has become one of the most important model compression techniques by distilling knowledge from larger teacher networks to smaller student ones.
Although great success has been achieved by prior distillation methods via delicately designing various types of
knowledge, they overlook the functional properties of neural networks, which makes the process of applying those
techniques to new tasks unreliable and non-trivial. To alleviate such problem, in this paper, we initially leverage
Lipschitz continuity to better represent the functional characteristic of neural networks and guide the knowledge distillation process. In particular, we propose a novel Lipschitz Continuity Guided Knowledge Distillation framework
to faithfully distill knowledge by minimizing the distance
between two neural networks’ Lipschitz constants, which
enables teacher networks to better regularize student networks and improve the corresponding performance. We derive an explainable approximation algorithm with an explicit theoretical derivation to address the NP-hard problem of calculating the Lipschitz constant. Experimental results have shown that our method outperforms other benchmarks over several knowledge distillation tasks (e.g., classification, segmentation and object detection) on CIFAR-100,
ImageNet, and PASCAL VOC datasets. Our code is available at https://github.com/42Shawn/LONDON/
tree/master.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning models have driven great advances in computer vision [13, 8], natural language process [36, 33], information retrieval [42, 43] and multimodal modelling [19, 18]. To meet the buoyant demand of equipping those cumbersome models in resource* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

constrained edge devices, researchers have proposed several network compression paradigms, such as network pruning [24, 12], network quantization [20] and knowledge distillation (KD) [16]. Among these compression methods,
KD helps the training process of a smaller network (student)
by transferring knowledge from a larger one (teacher). As
one of the first innovators, Hinton et al. [16] proposed using
soft labels of the larger networks to supervise the training
process of the smaller ones. These soft labels are usually
interpreted as a form of unseen knowledge distilled from
teachers.
Apart from treating soft labels as distilled knowledge,
various kinds of knowledge are designed in [45, 14, 38, 41].
For example, Romero et al. [34] presented to train intermediate layers of students with guidance of the corresponding
layers of teachers, which initiates the subsequent flourishing studies on feature-based knowledge distillation. Researchers [45, 25, 39] also modulated the relations among
adjacent feature maps as additional knowledge to assist
the training of student networks. Unfortunately, most of
these feature-based KD methods solely focus on aligning
the shallow information but overlook the high-level information of both networks, i.e., the students mechanically
mimicking teachers’ actions while neglecting their interior
qualities. Thereby, previous studies consider networks as
black-boxes and heuristically select features without any
functional properties [38, 41, 48], which impedes a universal representative of knowledge to be distilled. To address
this problem, we argue that leveraging networks’ functional properties to derive high-level knowledge is able to
strengthen the performance of KD.
In this paper, we incorporate Lipschitz continuity into
KD, considering neural networks as functions rather than
black-boxes. By definition in Eq. 4, Lipschitz constant1 is
the upper bound of the relationship between input pertur1 The Lipschitz constant of a function ∥f ∥
Lip is the maximum norm
of its gradient in the domain set, which reflects Lipschitz continuity of the
function.

10675

