Learning Latent Architectural Distribution in Differentiable Neural
Architecture Search via Variational Information Maximization
Yaoming Wang1† , Yuchen Liu1† , Wenrui Dai2 *, Chenglin Li1 , Junni Zou2 , and Hongkai Xiong1
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{wang yaoming, liuyuchen6666, daiwenrui, lcl1985, zoujunni, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing differentiable neural architecture search approaches simply assume the architectural distribution on
each edge is independent of each other, which conflicts with
the intrinsic properties of architecture. In this paper, we
view the architectural distribution as the latent representation of specific data points. Then we propose Variational Information Maximization Neural Architecture Search (VIMNAS) to leverage a simple yet effective convolutional neural network to model the latent representation, and optimize for a tractable variational lower bound to the mutual
information between the data points and the latent representations. VIM-NAS automatically learns a nearly one-hot
distribution from a continuous distribution with extremely
fast convergence speed, e.g., converging with one epoch.
Experimental results demonstrate VIM-NAS achieves stateof-the-art performance on various search spaces, including
DARTS search space, NAS-Bench-1shot1, NAS-Bench-201,
and simplified search spaces S1-S4. Specifically, VIM-NAS
achieves a top-1 error rate of 2.45% and 15.80% within 10
minutes on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, respectively, and a
top-1 error rate of 24.0% when transferred to ImageNet.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep learning, various neural architectures are needed for specific tasks. Given a
specific dataset, neural architecture search (NAS) frees researchers from cumbersome architecture design by exploring the search space automatically to search for the optimal network architecture. Since different datasets have their
own preference for the architecture, for instance, biomedical images favor U-Net alike architectures with fully convolutional operations and symmetrical structure. NAS can be
deemed as searching for the preference of a given dataset.
* Corresponding author: Wenrui Dai. † Equal contribution.

Thus, the architectural parameters can be viewed as the latent representation of specific data points.
In the sense of methodology, NAS can be divided into
three parts, i.e., search space, search strategy, and performance estimation strategy [17, 38]. One-shot approaches
[3, 4, 34] have been developed as a promising alternative to
reduce the search time by finding the best sub-network in
a super network through parameter sharing. Gradient-based
approaches [51, 29, 37, 41], aka Differentiable NAS, further
treat the super network as the whole search space, introduce architectural parameters, and obtain the sub-network
by optimizing the architectural parameters and super network weights in a differentiable manner.
Despite the remarkable performance, existing differentiable NAS approaches make improper assumptions that the
predefined architectural distribution on each edge is independent of each other, conflicting with intrinsic properties
of architecture. Specifically, SNAS [41] and FBNet [39]
utilize the Concrete distribution [22, 30] to approximate the
discrete categorical distribution on architectural parameters.
DATA [51] performs multiple sampling with replacement
from the same Concrete distribution to expand the search
space. SI-VDNAS [37] introduces Gaussian noise for variational dropout and samples the super network through
the learned dropout rate. Isotropic Gaussian noise in SIVDNAS as well as the factorizable distribution in SNAS,
FBNet and DATA ignores the dependencies between architectural parameters.
In addition to the above improper assumptions, the
search cost for differentiable NAS approaches is also prohibitive due to the numerous search spaces and tasks. Twostage approaches [47, 36] decouple the model training and
searching process for amortizing the training cost, but are
still restricted by numerous search spaces. Therefore, an
efficient search strategy with fast convergence speed is desirable for differentiable NAS.
In this paper, we propose a novel search strategy, namely
Variational Information Maximization Neural Architecture
Search (VIM-NAS), to maximize the mutual information

12312

