GTT-Net: Learned Generalized Trajectory Triangulation
Xiangyu Xu
Enrique Dunn
Stevens Institute of Technology
{xxu24, edunn}@stevens.edu

Abstract
We present GTT-Net, a supervised learning framework
for the reconstruction of sparse dynamic 3D geometry. We
build on a graph-theoretic formulation of the generalized
trajectory triangulation problem, where non-concurrent
multi-view imaging geometry is known but global image sequencing is not provided. GTT-Net learns pairwise affinities modeling the spatio-temporal relationships among our
input observations and leverages them to determine 3D geometry estimates. Experiments reconstructing 3D motioncapture sequences show GTT-Net outperforms the state of
the art in terms of accuracy and robustness. Within the
context of articulated motion reconstruction, our proposed
architecture is 1) able to learn and enforce semantic 3D
motion priors for shared training and test domains, while
being 2) able to generalize its performance across different
training and test domains. Moreover, GTT-Net provides a
computationally streamlined framework for trajectory triangulation with applications to multi-instance reconstruction and event segmentation.

Unorganized images

Input
data

Imaging geometry

mini-net
mini-net

PointNet

shared

P
×
3

U-Net

shared

mini-net

Output
data

DLOE

z

y

Image affinity

1. Introduction
Trajectory triangulation aims to estimate multi-view
sparse dynamic 3D geometry in the absence of concurrent
observations. Recent advances in modeling and estimating
the spatio-temporal relationships among 2D observations
have yielded solutions with increasing generality and effectiveness. However, such research efforts have focused
on developing and exploiting geometric insights and formulations, relegating the analysis of higher-order semantic
relationships among the geometric entities being estimated.
This work addresses the data-driven explicit characterization and modeling of these properties within the context of
generalized trajectory triangulation.
Learning to encode generic spatio-temporal relationships
hinges on the geometric reference being used and the scope
of the analysis. The choice of geometric reference typically
poses a dichotomy between Eulerian (e.g. field approach)
vs. Lagrangian (e.g. particle approach) representations,

x

3D Structure

Figure 1: GTT-Net Workflow. Input camera poses and 2D
features are mapped to a latent space encoding a pairwise
affinity matrix leveraged to estimate 3D geometry.

where the former defines interactions among rigidly structured adjacency-based neighborhoods (e.g. voxel laticces),
the latter defines interactions based on generic notions of
proximity (e.g. nearest-neighbor graphs). Although scope
is tightly coupled to these interaction mechanisms, the efficiency vs. comprehensiveness trade-offs between local and
global analysis, determine the efficacy of the learned models and representations. We target a discrete-continuous
local-global middle ground by 1) learning to approximate
pairwise affinities over all estimated geometric elements,
through 2) the use of sparse continuous convolutions.
Along these lines, the recent framework for generalized
trajectory triangulation (GTT) described in [40], poses the

5795

