Self Supervision to Distillation for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
Tianhao Li
Limin WangB
Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved remarkable progress for visual recognition on large-scale balanced datasets but still
performs poorly on real-world long-tailed data. Previous
methods often adopt class re-balanced training strategies to
effectively alleviate the imbalance issue, but might be a risk
of over-fitting tail classes. The recent decoupling method
overcomes over-fitting issues by using a multi-stage training scheme, yet, it is still incapable of capturing tail class
information in the feature learning stage. In this paper,
we show that soft label can serve as a powerful solution
to incorporate label correlation into a multi-stage training
scheme for long-tailed recognition. The intrinsic relation
between classes embodied by soft labels turns out to be
helpful for long-tailed recognition by transferring knowledge from head to tail classes.
Specifically, we propose a conceptually simple yet particularly effective multi-stage training scheme, termed as
Self Supervised to Distillation (SSD). This scheme is composed of two parts. First, we introduce a self-distillation
framework for long-tailed recognition, which can mine
the label relation automatically. Second, we present a
new distillation label generation module guided by selfsupervision. The distilled labels integrate information from
both label and data domains that can model long-tailed
distribution effectively. We conduct extensive experiments
and our method achieves the state-of-the-art results on
three long-tailed recognition benchmarks: ImageNet-LT,
CIFAR100-LT and iNaturalist 2018. Our SSD outperforms
the strong LWS baseline by from 2.7% to 4.5% on various
datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable progress for visual recognition in both image and video domains by training powerful neural networks on large-scale balanced and
curated datasets (e.g., ImageNet [8] and Kinetics [21]). Distinct from these artificially balanced datasets, real-world
data always follows long-tailed distribution [30, 29], which

makes collecting balanced datasets more challenging, especially for classes naturally with rare samples. However,
learning directly from long-tailed data induces significant
performance degeneration due to the highly imbalanced
data distribution.
A common series of approaches to alleviate the deterioration caused by long-tailed training data is based on
class re-balanced strategies [13, 22, 2, 10, 33], including
re-sampling training data [13, 10, 6, 33] and designing costsensitive re-weighting loss functions [22, 39]. These methods can effectively diminish the domination of head classes
during the training procedure, and thus can yield more precise classification decision boundaries. However, they are
often confronted with the risk of over-fitting tail classes
since the original data distribution is distorted and overparameterized deep networks easily fit this synthetic distribution. To overcome these issues, the recent work [20, 48]
decouples the tasks of representation learning and classifier training. This two-stage training scheme first learns
visual representation under the original data distribution,
and then trains a linear classifier on frozen features under
class-balanced sampling. This simple two-stage training
scheme turns out to be able to handle the over-fitting issue
and sets new state-of-the-art performance on the standard
long-tailed benchmarks. Nevertheless, this two-stage training scheme fails to deal with imbalance label distribution
issues well, particularly for representation learning stage.
In this paper, our objective is to design a new learning
paradigm for long-tailed visual recognition, with the hope
of sharing the merits of both types of long-tailed recognition
methods, i.e., robust to the over-fitting issue, and effectively
handling imbalance label issue. To meet this objective, our
idea is to study how to incorporate the label correlation
into a multi-stage training scheme? Inspired by the work
of knowledge distillation [16] in model compression, we
observe that soft labels produced by a teacher network are
able to capture the inherent relation between classes, which
might be helpful for long-tailed recognition by transferring
knowledge from head classes to tail classes, as shown in
Figure 1. Thus, soft labels provide a practical solution for
the multi-stage training strategy with label modeling.
Based on the above analysis, we present a conceptu-

B: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

630

