Deep Virtual Markers for Articulated 3D Shapes
Hyomin Kim

Jungeon Kim

Jaewon Kam

Jaesik Park∗

Seungyong Lee∗

POSTECH

Abstract
We propose deep virtual markers, a framework for estimating dense and accurate positional information for various
types of 3D data. We design a concept and construct a
framework that maps 3D points of 3D articulated models,
like humans, into virtual marker labels. To realize the
framework, we adopt a sparse convolutional neural network and classify 3D points of an articulated model into
virtual marker labels. We propose to use soft labels for the
classifier to learn rich and dense interclass relationships
based on geodesic distance. To measure the localization
accuracy of the virtual markers, we test FAUST challenge,
and our result outperforms the state-of-the-art. We also
observe outstanding performance on the generalizability
test, unseen data evaluation, and different 3D data types
(meshes and depth maps). We show additional applications
using the estimated virtual markers, such as non-rigid
registration, texture transfer, and realtime dense marker
prediction from depth maps.

1. Introduction
Estimating positional information of surface points on
articulated objects (such as humans and animals) is crucial
for various applications such as virtual/augmented reality,
movie industries, and entertainments [47, 11, 48, 13]. One
common way to capture such information is that actors wear
special suits with beacons that are tracked by a special optical system equipped with multiple cameras. Markerless approaches [29, 62, 30] have also been developed, but they
are not as robust as using markers and more error-prone in
difficult situations like fast motions.
We introduce deep virtual markers, a framework that
can instantly produce dense and accurate positional annotations for a 3D observation of an articulated object, such
as a depth map of the object captured by a depth camera
or a 3D point set sampled from the object. In contrast to
prior works that predict 3D skeletons [51, 71, 66] or pose
parameters of parametric models [8, 34], our approach di∗ Joint corresponding authors.

Motion Tracking

Deep
Virtual
Marker
Texture Transfer

Non-rigid Registration

Figure 1. Deep virtual markers instantly produce dense and accurate positional annotations from a mesh or depth map. Applications of deep virtual markers include motion analysis/tracking,
texture transfer, and non-rigid registration.

rectly maps any observed 3D points to the canonical locations, providing much richer information. As a result, our
approach predicts dense and reliable makers that can be a
useful tool for various applications, such as 3D motion analysis, texture transfer, and non-rigid registration of human
scans. Examples of the applications are shown in Figure 1.
Our approach for dense marker prediction is learningbased, and it is built upon 3D sparse convolution [15]. Due
to the fully convolutional nature of the neural network,
the shape can be understood well in the cluttered or occluded cases. The proposed framework accurately determines dense marker positions via single feed-forward pass
of the neural network. Therefore, our approach runs in realtime and it does not involve heuristic modules.
To train the network, we propose a new dataset that consists of realistic depth renderings of template models. To
11615

