Unshuffling Data for Improved Generalization in Visual Question Answering
Damien Teney
Ehsan Abbasnejad
Anton van den Hengel
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
The University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia
{damien.teney,ehsan.abbasnejad,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
What sport...

Generalization beyond the training distribution is a core
challenge in machine learning. The common practice of
mixing and shuffling examples when training neural networks may not be optimal in this regard. We show that partitioning the data into well-chosen, non-i.i.d. subsets treated
as multiple training environments can guide the learning of
models with better out-of-distribution generalization. We
describe a training procedure to capture the patterns that
are stable across environments while discarding spurious
ones. The method makes a step beyond correlation-based
learning: the choice of the partitioning allows injecting information about the task that cannot be otherwise recovered
from the joint distribution of the training data.
We demonstrate multiple use cases with the task of visual
question answering, which is notorious for dataset biases.
We obtain significant improvements on VQA-CP, using environments built from prior knowledge, existing meta data, or
unsupervised clustering. We also get improvements on GQA
using annotations of “equivalent questions”, and on multidataset training (VQA v2 / Visual Genome) by treating them
as distinct environments.

1. Introduction
The best of machine learning models can sometimes be
right for the wrong reasons [2, 21, 26, 69]. The ubiquitous paradigm of empirical risk minimization (ERM) produces models that capture all statistical patterns present in
the training data1 . However, not all of these patterns are reliable and reflective of the task of interest. Some of them
result from confounding factors, sampling biases, and other
annotation artifacts specific to a given dataset. We call these
patterns spurious2 and a model that relies on them will gen1 We use patterns and correlations interchangeably to refer to statistical relationships between observed random variables, typically the input(s)
and output(s) of a supervised learning task.
2 The literature also uses dataset biases to refer to spurious correlations
between inputs and outputs that are dataset-specific [69].

is the man playing ?
is being watched ?
...
What is the color...
of the tablecloth ?
of the sky ?
...

Full
Training
Training
training set environment1 environment2
Tennis
Baseball
Skiing
Soccer
Blue
White
Red
Orange

Figure 1. Datasets for visual question answering contain biases
and spurious correlations: the first few words of a question are associated with a peaky distribution over answers (blue histograms).
Models that guess their answers using these correlations generalize poorly. We improve by partitioning the data into multiple training environments across which the spurious correlations
vary (green histograms) while reliable correlations are stable. Our
training procedure produces a model that relies on these stable correlations such that it generalizes much better at test time.

eralize poorly to test data obtained in different conditions
(i.e. out-of-distribution or OOD data).
The limits of ERM on OOD data are oftentimes overlooked and eclipsed by the common practice of evaluating
on test data i.i.d. to the training data – a central assumption
of classical learning theory [70]. The awareness of these
limits has grown with that of their practical implications,
from poor transfer across datasets [69] to biases and fairness issues [1] and vulnerability to adversarial inputs [27].
As a result, benchmarks with OOD test sets are becoming
increasingly common in vision and NLP [2, 4, 9, 29, 37, 44].
This paper presents a training paradigm to improve OOD
generalization.
The study of generalization in computer vision has a
long history [20, 41, 48]. The rise in popularity of highlevel tasks like visual question answering (VQA) [7], visual dialogue [19], or vision-and-language navigation [6]
has made the topic even more important. The complexity of these tasks and the combinatorial explosion of the
size of their input domain make it impossible to process

1417

