Fast and Efficient DNN Deployment via Deep Gaussian Transfer Learning
Qi Sun1 , Chen Bai1 , Tinghuan Chen1 , Hao Geng1 , Xinyun Zhang2 , Yang Bai1 , Bei Yu1
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SmartMore
{qsun,cbai,thchen,hgeng,ybai,byu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, xinyun.zhang@smartmore.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely used recently while their hardware deployment optimizations are
very time-consuming and the historical deployment knowledge is not utilized efficiently. In this paper, to accelerate
the optimization process and find better deployment configurations, we propose a novel transfer learning method
based on deep Gaussian processes (DGPs). Firstly, a deep
Gaussian process (DGP) model is built on the historical
data to learn empirical knowledge. Secondly, to transfer
knowledge to a new task, a tuning set is sampled for the new
task under the guidance of the DGP model. Then DGP is
tuned according to the tuning set via maximum-a-posteriori
(MAP) estimation to accommodate for the new task and finally used to guide the deployments of the task. The experiments show that our method achieves the best inference latencies of convolutions while accelerating the optimization
process significantly, compared with previous arts.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown great successes in various application scenarios [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, the enormous computational intensities and heavy data
communications result in great challenges to inference. In
recent years, great efforts have been made to accelerate the
inference from various perspectives, including quantization
[5, 6, 7], pruning [8, 9, 10, 11], optimization of deployment
configurations [12, 13, 14, 15, 16], hardware-guided model
training [17, 18], neural architecture search [19, 20], and
etc. Many different platforms have been tested, e.g., mobile
devices [21, 22], FPGAs [23, 24], and GPUs [16, 25].
In this paper, we focus on the optimization of deployment configurations. Configurations represent the resource
allocations, scheduling, binding of DNN models on hardware platforms, and etc. Traditionally, these optimization
methods are tightly coupled with hardware architectures
and model structures [26, 27, 28]. These methods usually
propose some analytical formulations to model the latencies, and characterize the target DNN models and hardware

platforms with respect to some properties, e.g., the sizes of
layers, and the capacities of buffers. Therefore, these methods cannot be flexibly adapted to different models. Further,
some general deployment frameworks are developed, e.g.,
Halide [12] and TVM [13], which use some auto-tuning algorithms to automatically find the optimal deployment configuration for any given model and hardware platform. For
example, XGBoost [29] is used to build a boosted decision tree to predict the deployment performance of configurations. Simulated annealing (SA) is used as the solution searching algorithm. AutoTVM [14], which integrates the above algorithms, is an automatic optimization
framework in TVM [13] and achieves outstanding performance. GGA [16] takes advantage of a guided genetic algorithm (GGA) to explore the candidate configurations, under
the guidance of an artificially designed scoring calculator.
CHAMELEON [15] proposes to use a proximal policy reinforcement learning algorithm to learn the actions to search
the configuration space progressively.
However, these automatic frameworks are still unsatisfying. Firstly, the optimization process is slow, resulting from
the large configuration space and the time-consuming compilation process. Usually, the configuration space contains
more than millions of configurations, e.g., more than 200
million in the first layer of VGG-16. It is inevitable to traverse lots of configurations to guarantee the performance of
the searching algorithm. It also takes a long time to compile a configuration and do the inference to get the real onboard latency. Therefore, the overall optimization process
is very slow, e.g., longer than a whole day. Secondly, although lots of efforts are required to optimize the deployments of various DNN models, explicit empirics have seldom been drawn from the historical data. Despite that many
duplicated works have been done to deploy some models,
we usually start from scratch to optimize new models even
though they are very similar to what has been deployed before. It is believed that with prior empirics, we can further improve the inference performance. CHAMELEON
[15] leverages reinforcement learning to learn the evolution
rules of the deployment configurations from the historical
data. However, the experimental results show that the per15380

