TransView: Inside, Outside, and Across the Cropping View Boundaries
Zhiyu Pan1 Zhiguo Cao1 Kewei Wang1 Hao Lu1, * Weicai Zhong2
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Huawei CBG Consumer Cloud Service Search Product & Big Data Platform Department
{zhiyupan, hlu}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
We show that relation modeling between visual elements
matters in cropping view recommendation. Cropping view
recommendation addresses the problem of image recomposition conditioned on the composition quality and the ranking of views (cropped sub-regions). This task is challenging because the visual difference is subtle when a visual
element is reserved or removed. Existing methods represent visual elements by extracting region-based convolutional features inside and outside the cropping view boundaries, without probing a fundamental question: why some
visual elements are of interest or of discard? In this work,
we observe that the relation between different visual elements significantly affects their relative positions to the desired cropping view, and such relation can be characterized
by the attraction inside/outside the cropping view boundaries and the repulsion across the boundaries. By instantiating a transformer-based solution that represents visual
elements as visual words and that models the dependencies between visual words, we report not only state-of-theart performance on public benchmarks, but also interesting
visualizations that depict the attraction and repulsion between visual elements, which may shed light on what makes
for effective cropping view recommendation.

1. Introduction
Image composition is one of key factors in professional
photography. The term ‘composition’ can be considered
‘the organization of the elements of art’ [49]. Sad to say,
the skills and tricks for organizing visual elements are the
main barrier that prevents ordinary people from taking professional photos. Nonetheless, many amateurs are still eager to compose photos like a photographer, even without expertise and training. The demand for automatic composition
has thus come into the eye of computer vision community,
* Corresponding author

+
Candidate View

External Region

Internal Region

(a) Ranking Informed by Region Delineation

+
Candidate View

Attraction Between
Internal Visual Words

Repulsion Between Internal
and External Words

(b) Ranking Guided by Attraction and Repulsion Dependencies

Figure 1. Conceptual difference between prior arts and ours.
(a) Predecessors recompose images with region-of-interest (RoI)
and region-of-discard (RoD) features [51] which depict the presence of visual components rather than the organization. (b) Our
insight is to model the organization of visual elements (image
patches) using attraction and repulsion dependencies.

and much effort has been made to solve image recomposition [8, 18, 27, 38, 48, 51].
One of off-the-shelf and low-end technologies for image recomposition [20] is image cropping. It aims to find
the most aesthetic view (a sub-region defined by the cropping box) in an image. The typical paradigm of image
cropping is to rank candidate views and to retrieve appropriate ones. This task is also given the name of cropping
view recommendation. A straightforward idea is to score
and rank candidate views by artificially designed evaluation criteria. However, such criteria cannot cover the principles of art and align poorly with the actual preference of
users. Recently another promising way is to learn directly
from data [31, 48, 51]. In particular, convolutional models
are developed as possible solutions to the dilemma above.
These data-driven methods predict scores conditioned on
region-aware features that delineate the presence of visual
elements (Fig. 1(a)). In this way, these methods can be
viewed as finding connections between the presence of vi-

4218

