VideoLT: Large-scale Long-tailed Video Recognition
Xing Zhang1∗ Zuxuan Wu2,3∗ Zejia Weng2 Huazhu Fu4
Jingjing Chen2,3 Yu-Gang Jiang2,3† Larry Davis5
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University,
2
Shanghai Key Lab of Intel. Info. Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University,
3
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing,
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, 5 University of Maryland

Abstract
Label distributions in real-world are oftentimes longtailed and imbalanced, resulting in biased models towards
dominant labels. While long-tailed recognition has been
extensively studied for image classification tasks, limited effort has been made for the video domain. In this paper, we
introduce VideoLT, a large-scale long-tailed video recognition dataset, as a step toward real-world video recognition. VideoLT contains 256,218 untrimmed videos, annotated into 1,004 classes with a long-tailed distribution.
Through extensive studies, we demonstrate that state-ofthe-art methods used for long-tailed image recognition do
not perform well in the video domain due to the additional
temporal dimension in videos. This motivates us to propose FrameStack, a simple yet effective method for longtailed video recognition. In particular, FrameStack performs sampling at the frame-level in order to balance class
distributions, and the sampling ratio is dynamically determined using knowledge derived from the network during
training. Experimental results demonstrate that FrameStack can improve classification performance without sacrificing the overall accuracy. Code and dataset are available
at: https://github.com/17Skye17/VideoLT.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved astounding success
in a wide range of computer vision tasks like image classification [18, 19, 39, 41], object detection [14, 28, 34, 35], etc.
Training these networks requires carefully curated datasets
like ImageNet and COCO, where object classes are uniformly distributed. However, real-world data often have a
long tail of categories with very few training samples, posing significant challenges for network training. This results
in biased models that perform exceptionally well on head
classes (categories with a large number of training samples)
∗ Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

Long-tailed Video Recognition
General Video Recognition

Figure 1. Long-tailed video recognition. General video recognition methods are overfitted on head classes, while long-tailed
video recognition focuses on the performance of both head and
tail classes, especially on tail classes. (Blue box is the head class
region, red box is the region of medium and tail classes.)

but poorly on tail classes that contain a limited number of
samples (see Figure 1).
Recently, there is a growing interest in learning from
long-tailed data for image tasks [4, 10, 22, 29, 40, 42, 47,
49, 53]. Two popular directions to balance class distributions are re-sampling and re-weighting. Re-sampling [8,
11, 16, 22, 53] methods up-sample tail classes and downsample head classes to acquire a balanced data distribution
from the original data. On the other hand, re-weighting
methods [4, 10, 27, 40, 47, 52] focus on designing weights
to balance the loss functions of head and tail classes. While
extensive studies have been done for long-tailed image classification tasks, limited effort has been made for video classification.
While it is appealing to directly generalize these methods
from images to videos, it is also challenging since for classification tasks, videos are usually weakly labeled—only
17960

