Embedding Novel Views in a Single JPEG Image
Yue Wu∗
Guotao Meng*
Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
View in 2D

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for embedding novel views
in a single JPEG image while preserving the perceptual fidelity of the modified JPEG image and the restored novel
views. We adopt the popular novel view synthesis representation of multiplane images (MPIs). Our model first encodes 32 MPI layers (totally 128 channels) into a 3-channel
JPEG image that can be decoded for MPIs to render novel
views, with an embedding capacity of 1024 bits per pixel.
We conducted experiments on public datasets with different
novel view synthesis methods, and the results show that the
proposed method can restore high-fidelity novel views from
a slightly modified JPEG image. Furthermore, our method
is robust to JPEG compression, color adjusting, and cropping. Our source code will be publicly available.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis allows users to view a photograph
in 3D from different viewpoints, which creates a more immersive experience than a 2D image. While the performance of novel view synthesis models has improved significantly in recent years, sharing the 3D photo rendered by
novel view synthesis on social networks remains unsolved
yet. As shown in Fig. 1, how can User A share a novel view
synthesis model with others on social networks? One plausible strategy is to embed the novel synthesis model (MPI
model) into a single embedding image (in JPEG format) that
looks like an ordinary image. When User B receives the embedding image shared by User A, User B can view it as an
ordinary 2D image; on the other hand, User C with a plugin
(a restoration network) can see this image in 3D from the
restored novel view synthesis model from the embedding
image.
To enable such user-friendly applications, we propose a
novel approach that embeds an MPI into a single embedding image that can be converted back to MPI. In this work,
we mainly focus on MPI because it is a popular representation in several state-of-the-art novel view synthesis frameworks [6, 7, 11, 21, 24, 32]. With our proposed approach,
* Joint first authors

User B

Social
media
User A

View in 3D

Embedding JPEG
Embedding Net
MPI Model

View from
different angles

Embedding process
Restoration process

Restoration Net

User C

Figure 1. An application of our method. Our approach can embed
an MPI into a JPEG image, and then share it on social networks.
With our restoration network (as a plugin), users can view this
image in 3D from different viewpoints. Meanwhile, users without
our restoration network can still view this image as an ordinary 2D
image.

users can easily share a 3D photograph via a 2D embedding
image on social media (e.g., Facebook and Twitter). The
embedding image is simply a standard JPEG image, which
is a compressed image format widely adopted in social media or websites. Our proposed method can be implemented
as an extension of web browsers or a lightweight plugin of
apps. Users without the plugin can see the scene as a JPEG
image, while users with the plugin can view this scene from
different viewpoints. Our method saves network traffic and
storage space benefited from the small file size of the JPEG
format with a high compression rate.
Embedding a novel view synthesis model in a single
image is a novel and research-worthy task. Compared to
steganography, this problem has different objectives and is
arguably more challenging. Our objective is not to keep
the hidden information undetected. Instead, our objective
is to make the embedding image visually pleasing without
evident artifacts while the restored novel views are nearly
perfect. Existing steganography models commonly hide a
short message (a hyperlink [22], light field information [27],

14519

