Distilling Virtual Examples for Long-tailed Recognition
Yin-Yin He1 , Jianxin Wu1 ,* Xiu-Shen Wei2,1
1
2

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
heyy@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {wujx2001, weixs.gm}@gmail.com

Abstract
We tackle the long-tailed visual recognition problem
from the knowledge distillation perspective by proposing a
Distill the Virtual Examples (DiVE) method. Specifically, by
treating the predictions of a teacher model as virtual examples, we prove that distilling from these virtual examples is
equivalent to label distribution learning under certain constraints. We show that when the virtual example distribution becomes flatter than the original input distribution, the
under-represented tail classes will receive significant improvements, which is crucial in long-tailed recognition. The
proposed DiVE method can explicitly tune the virtual example distribution to become flat. Extensive experiments on
three benchmark datasets, including the large-scale iNaturalist ones, justify that the proposed DiVE method can
significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, additional analyses and experiments verify the virtual
example interpretation, and demonstrate the effectiveness of
tailored designs in DiVE for long-tailed problems.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved remarkable success in various fields of computer vision, part
of which should be attributed to rich and representative
datasets. Manually-built datasets are often well-designed
and roughly balanced, with sufficient samples for every category, e.g., ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 [22]. In the real world,
however, image data are often inherently long-tailed. A few
categories (the “head” categories) contain most training images, while most categories (the “tail” ones) have only few
samples. Some recently released datasets start to draw our
attention to this practical setting, e.g., iNaturalist [4] and
LVIS [8]. These datasets show a naturally long-tailed dis* J. Wu is the corresponding author and supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61772256 and 61921006). X.-S.
Wei was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities (No. 30920041111) and CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open Fund
(CAAIXSJLJJ-2020-022A).

tribution. Models trained on them are easily biased towards
the head classes, while the tail categories often have much
lower accuracy rates compared to the head ones. This bias
is, of course, not welcome by researchers or practitioners.
Many attempts have been made to deal with long-tailed
recognition [16, 3, 1, 34, 15, 14]. In particular, resampling makes a more balanced distribution through undersampling [10, 5] the head classes or oversampling the tail
classes [2, 9, 23]. Another direction, reweighting, is to
assign higher costs for tail categories in novel loss functions [3, 25, 16]. Recent methods [34, 15] also decouple
the training of the backbone network and the classifier part.
These methods, however, never cross the category boundary. That is, resampling, reweighting, and decoupling all
happen independently inside each category, and there is no
interaction among different categories.
A simple but interesting experiment motivated us to utilize cross-category interactions for long-tailed recognition.
The complete CIFAR-100 dataset is balanced, and a highly
imbalanced subset of it (i.e., CIFAR-100-LT) is a widely
used benchmark for long-tailed recognition [34]. We use
the entire CIFAR-100 training set to train a (teacher) network, and then use knowledge distillation [12] to distill a
student network on the long-tailed CIFAR-100-LT with imbalance factor 100. The student’s test accuracy is 61.58%,
which is significantly (more than 10 percentage points)
higher than existing long-tail recognition methods (c.f . Table 1)! Then, what makes its accuracy so high aside from
the teacher being trained using the entire training set (which
is not available in our long-tailed setting for the student)?
Our answer to this question is two-fold: virtual examples
& knowledge distillation, or in short, distilling the virtual
examples.
In a dog vs. cat binary recognition problem, if the prediction for a dog image is (0.7, 0.3), we interpret this prediction as two virtual examples: 0.7 dog virtual example, plus
0.3 cat virtual example. This interpretation extends naturally to the multiclass case. If dog is a head category and
cat is a tail category, the 0.3 cat virtual example will help
recognize cats, even if the input image is in fact a dog.

235

