Describing and Localizing Multiple Changes with Transformers
Yue Qiu1 ,* Shintaro Yamamoto1,2 * , Kodai Nakashima1 , Ryota Suzuki1 ,
Kenji Iwata1 , Hirokatsu Kataoka1 , Yutaka Satoh1
1
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 2 Waseda University
{qiu.yue, yamamoto.shintaro, nakashima.kodai, ryota.suzuki,
kenji.iwata, hirokatsu.kataoka, yu.satou}@aist.go.jp

Abstract
Change captioning tasks aim to detect changes in image pairs observed before and after a scene change and
generate a natural language description of the changes.
Existing change captioning studies have mainly focused
on a single change. However, detecting and describing
multiple changed parts in image pairs is essential for enhancing adaptability to complex scenarios. We solve the
above issues from three aspects: (i) We propose a simulation-based multi-change captioning dataset; (ii) We benchmark existing state-of-the-art methods of single change captioning on multi-change captioning; (iii) We further propose Multi-Change Captioning transformers (MCCFormers) that identify change regions by densely correlating different regions in image pairs and dynamically determines
the related change regions with words in sentences. The
proposed method obtained the highest scores on four conventional change captioning evaluation metrics for multichange captioning. Additionally, our proposed method can
separate attention maps for each change and performs well
with respect to change localization. Moreover, the proposed
framework outperformed the previous state-of-the-art methods on an existing change captioning benchmark, CLEVRChange, by a large margin (+6.1 on BLEU-4 and +9.7 on
CIDEr scores), indicating its general ability in change captioning tasks. The code and dataset are available at the
project page 1 .

1. Introduction
Detecting and describing the changed parts in scenes
at different times is essential in various scenarios, such
as urbanization analysis [1, 2, 3], resource management
[4, 5, 6, 7, 8], updating street-view maps for navigation
[9, 10], damage detection [11, 12], video surveillance [13],
* equal contribution
1 https://cvpaperchallenge.github.io/Describing-

and-Localizing-Multiple-Change-with-Transformers

Before

Before

After

Change captions
The small green rubber sphere
changed its location.
The large purple metal sphere
gave up its position to a large
brown metal sphere.

After
The large red metal cube is no
longer there.
A small yellow rubber cube
replaced the large purple metal
cube.

Figure 1. Given two images of a scene observed before and after
multiple changes (the first column), we generate change captioning for each scene change along with attention maps (the second
and third columns) indicating the region of changed objects.

and robotic applications [14, 15]. Recently, Jhamtani and
Berg-Kirkpatrick [13] proposed the change captioning task
to describe changes from image pairs of before and after
scene changes. Describing change is useful for extracting
semantic contents and conveying information to humans.
Several methods have been proposed for the change captioning [13, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Most existing works focus on
describing a single change. As a practical matter, multiple
changes could be manifested within an image pair. Jhamtani and Berg-Kirkpatrick [13] studied scene change captioning with multiple changes; however, they addressed the
problem with a known number of changes which is not provided in real-world problems. Practically, detecting and
describing scene changes without prior information regarding changes is more useful in terms of providing information to users. We address multi-change captioning, where
changed regions are localized and language descriptions of
scene changes are generated from pair of images with an
unknown number of changes, as shown in Figure 1.
Change captioning requires capturing relationships between image pairs, localizing changed regions, and gen-

1971

