TransferI2I: Transfer Learning for Image-to-Image Translation from Small
Datasets
Yaxing Wang1,2 , Héctor Laria2 Joost van de Weijer2 , Laura Lopez-Fuentes3 , Bogdan Raducanu2
1
PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
3
Universitat de les Illes Balears, Spain
{yaxing,hlaria,joost,bogdan}@cvc.uab.es, l.lopez@uib.es

Abstract
Image-to-image (I2I) translation has matured in recent
years and is able to generate high-quality realistic images. However, despite current success, it still faces important challenges when applied to small domains. Existing methods use transfer learning for I2I translation,
but they still require the learning of millions of parameters from scratch. This drawback severely limits its application on small domains. In this paper, we propose a
new transfer learning for I2I translation (TransferI2I). We
decouple our learning process into the image generation
step and the I2I translation step. In the first step we propose two novel techniques: source-target initialization and
self-initialization of the adaptor layer. The former finetunes the pretrained generative model (e.g., StyleGAN) on
source and target data. The latter allows to initialize all
non-pretrained network parameters without the need of any
data. These techniques provide a better initialization for
the I2I translation step. In addition, we introduce an auxiliary GAN that further facilitates the training of deep I2I systems even from small datasets. In extensive experiments on
three datasets, (Animal faces, Birds, and Foods), we show
that we outperform existing methods and that mFID improves on several datasets with over 25 points. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/yaxingwang/
TransferI2I.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image (I2I) translation aims to map an image
from a source to a target domain. Several methods obtain outstanding results on paired data [21, 61], unpaired
data [30, 56, 60], scalable I2I translation [11, 36, 45] and
diverse I2I translation [11, 20, 32]. Scalable I2I translation
aims to translate images between multiple domains. For example, a cat face is mapped onto other animal faces (i.e.

dog, tiger, bear, etc.). The goal of diverse I2I translation
is to synthesize multiple plausible outputs of the target domain from a single input image (i.e. translating a dog face
to various plausible cat faces). Despite impressive leaps forward with paired, unpaired, scalable and diverse I2I translation, there are still important challenges. Specifically, to obtain good results existing works rely on large labelled data.
When given small datasets (e.g., 10 images per domain)
current algorithms suffer from inferior performance. Also,
labeling large-scale datasets is costly and time-consuming,
making those methods less applicable in practice.
Several works [5, 6, 12, 35, 38] have studied oneshot and few-shot I2I translation. One-shot I2I translation [5, 6, 12, 35] refers to the case where only one source
image and one or few target images are available. These
works fail to perform multiclass I2I translation. FUNIT [38]
conducts few-shot I2I translation, but still requires large
datasets at the training stage. In this paper, we focus on
transfer learning for I2I translation with limited data.
Recent work [48, 54] leverages transfer learning for I2I
translation. SGP [48] utilizes a pretrained classifier (e.g,
VGG [50]) to initialize the encoder of an I2I model. However, the remaining networks (i.e., decoder, discriminator and adaptor layers1 ) need to be trained from scratch,
which still requires a large dataset to train the I2I translation model. DeepI2I [54] uses a pretrained GAN (e.g.,
StyleGAN [26] and BigGAN [8]) to initialize the I2I model.
However, it still requires to train the adaptor layers from
scratch. The adaptor layers contains over 85M parameters
(using the pretrained BigGAN) which makes their training
on translation between small domains prone to overfitting.
Since both SGP and DeepI2I leverage the adaptor between
the encoder and the generator, one potential problem is that
the generator easily uses the information from the highresolution skip connections (connecting to the upper layers
1 We follow [54] and call the layers which connect encoder and decoder
at several levels adaptor layers.

14010

