Weakly-supervised Video Anomaly Detection with Robust Temporal Feature
Magnitude Learning
Yu Tian1,3
Guansong Pang1
Yuanhong Chen1
Rajvinder Singh3
Johan W. Verjans1,2,3
Gustavo Carneiro1
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
2
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide
3
South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute
Abstract
Anomaly detection with weakly supervised video-level
labels is typically formulated as a multiple instance learning (MIL) problem, in which we aim to identify snippets containing abnormal events, with each video represented as a
bag of video snippets. Although current methods show effective detection performance, their recognition of the positive instances, i.e., rare abnormal snippets in the abnormal videos, is largely biased by the dominant negative instances, especially when the abnormal events are subtle
anomalies that exhibit only small differences compared with
normal events. This issue is exacerbated in many methods that ignore important video temporal dependencies. To
address this issue, we introduce a novel and theoretically
sound method, named Robust Temporal Feature Magnitude
learning (RTFM), which trains a feature magnitude learning function to effectively recognise the positive instances,
substantially improving the robustness of the MIL approach
to the negative instances from abnormal videos. RTFM also
adapts dilated convolutions and self-attention mechanisms
to capture long- and short-range temporal dependencies to
learn the feature magnitude more faithfully. Extensive experiments show that the RTFM-enabled MIL model (i) outperforms several state-of-the-art methods by a large margin
on four benchmark data sets (ShanghaiTech, UCF-Crime,
XD-Violence and UCSD-Peds) and (ii) achieves significantly improved subtle anomaly discriminability and sample efficiency.

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection has been intensively studied
because of its potential to be used in autonomous surveillance systems [15, 56, 66, 78]. The goal of video anomaly
detection is to identify the time window when an anomalous event happened – in the context of surveillance, examples of anomaly are bullying, shoplifting, violence, etc.

𝚫score(𝑿+ , 𝑿− )

Video Score

𝑿+ :

𝒙−

𝒙+

𝒙−

𝒙+

𝒙+

𝒙−

Top-3 (𝑿+ )

𝑿− : 𝒙−

𝒙−

𝒙−

𝒙−

𝒙−

Top-3 (𝑿− )
Feature Magnitude

Figure 1. RTFM trains a feature magnitude learning function to
improve the robustness of MIL approaches to normal snippets
from abnormal videos, and detect abnormal snippets more effectively. Left: temporal feature magnitudes of abnormal and
normal snippets (kx+ k and kx− k), from abnormal and normal
videos (X+ and X− ). Assuming that µ = 3 denotes the number of abnormal snippets in the anomaly video, we can maximise
the ∆score(X+ , X− ), which measures the difference between the
scores of abnormal and normal videos, by selecting the top k ≤ µ
snippets with the largest temporal feature magnitude (the scores
are computed with the mean of magnitudes of the top k snippets).
Right: the ∆score(X+ , X− ) increases with k ∈ [1, µ] and then
decreases for k > µ, showing evidence that our proposed RTFMenabled MIL model provides a better separation between abnormal
and normal videos when k ≈ µ, even if there are a few normal
snippets with large feature magnitudes.

Although one-class classifiers (OCCs, also called unsupervised anomaly detection) trained exclusively with normal
videos have been explored in this context [15, 17, 27, 30, 46,
47, 76], the best performing approaches explore a weaklysupervised setup using training samples with video-level label annotations of normal or abnormal [56, 66, 78]. This
weakly-supervised setup targets a better anomaly classification accuracy at the expense of a relatively small human
annotation effort, compared with OCC approaches.
One of the major challenges of weakly supervised
anomaly detection is how to identify anomalous snippets
from a whole video labelled as abnormal. This is due to two
reasons, namely: 1) the majority of snippets from an abnormal video consist of normal events, which can overwhelm

4975

