Looking here or there? Gaze Following in 360-Degree Images
Yunhao Li1 Wei Shen2 * Zhongpai Gao2 Yucheng Zhu1 Guangtao Zhai1∗ Guodong Guo3
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Baidu
{lyhsjtu, wei.shen, gaozhongpai, zyc420, zhaiguangtao}@sjtu.edu.cn; guoguodong01@baidu.com

Abstract
Gaze following, i.e., detecting the gaze target of a human subject, in 2D images has become an active topic in
computer vision. However, it usually suffers from the out of
frame issue due to the limited field-of-view (FoV) of 2D images. In this paper, we introduce a novel task, gaze following in 360-degree images which provide an omnidirectional
FoV and can alleviate the out of frame issue. We collect
the first dataset, “GazeFollow360”1 , for this task, containing around 10,000 360-degree images with complex gaze
behaviors under various scenes. Existing 2D gaze following methods suffer from performance degradation in 360degree images since they may use the assumption that a
gaze target is in the 2D gaze sight line. However, this assumption is no longer true for long-distance gaze behaviors in 360-degree images, due to the distortion brought by
sphere-to-plane projection. To address this challenge, we
propose a 3D sight line guided dual-pathway framework,
to detect the gaze target within a local region (here) and
from a distant region (there), parallelly. Specifically, the local region is obtained as a 2D cone-shaped field along the
2D projection of the sight line starting at the human subject’s head position, and the distant region is obtained by
searching along the sight line in 3D sphere space. Finally,
the location of the gaze target is determined by fusing the
estimations from both the local region and the distant region. Experimental results show that our method achieves
significant improvements over previous 2D gaze following
methods on our GazeFollow360 dataset.

1. Introduction
Gaze behavior is an essential part of human behavior,
which is significant in studying human social behavior,
human-object interaction [23, 22, 10, 40, 27, 32, 11, 9, 44,
2, 13]. Gaze following [36], has been an active topic in the
computer vision community, whose purpose is to predict the
* Corresponding author: Guangtao Zhai, Wei Shen
1 The dataset is at https://michaelliyunhao.github.io/here-or-there

location where each human subject in a scene is looking at,
given a 2D image containing one or more human subjects.
Rapid developments have been witnessed for gaze following methods [7, 26, 47, 8, 14], but they are restricted in
2D images or 2D videos, which easily suffer from the situation that gaze targets are out of frame, due to the limited
field-of-view (FoV), as shown in Fig. 1(left). It is hard to
perceive a whole surrounding scene in a 2D image. Unlike
2D images, 360-degree images capture the entire viewing
sphere surrounding the optical center of a camera, which
alleviates this issue. In addition, 360-degree images have
gradually been utilized in various scenes. For instance, autonomous driving systems take 360-degree images as the
input, and thus gaze following in 360-degree images can be
used for human behavior understanding, such as human motion prediction, which can help detect the human attention
to avoid traffic crash. Together with the fact that the prices
of 360-degree cameras (e.g., Ricoh Theta S, Samsung Gear
360) have been reduced, it becomes promising to conduct
gaze following research in 360-degree images.
In light of these facts, in this paper, we propose a new
task: gaze following in 360-degree images. Compared with
gaze following in 2D images, two challenges are encountered in this task: (1) Current gaze following approaches
are deep learning based which are data driven, but there is
no public available large dataset for gaze following in 360degree images. (2) Previous 2D gaze following methods
are built upon the assumption that a gaze target should be
in the 2D sight line of the human subject in the 2D image
plane coordinate, as shown in Fig. 1(middle), while this assumption is no longer true for long-distance gaze behaviors
in 360-degree images, due to sphere-to-plane projection, as
shown in Fig. 1(right).
To deal with the first challenge, we establish the first
large scale dataset “GazeFollow360” for gaze following in
360-degree images by collecting 360-degree images from
real world scenes, including various indoor and outdoor
scenes. Our dataset contains around 10,000 high quality
human-gazing target annotation pairs. Each gaze target lo-

3742

