Multi-Scale Vision Longformer:
A New Vision Transformer for High-Resolution Image Encoding
Pengchuan Zhang1

Xiyang Dai1†
Lei Zhang2

1

Jianwei Yang1†

Bin Xiao1

Lu Yuan1

Jianfeng Gao1

Microsoft Corporation {penzhan,xidai,jianwei.yang,bin.xiao,luyuan,jfgao}@microsoft.com
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA) leizhang@idea.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a new Vision Transformer (ViT)
architecture Multi-Scale Vision Longformer, which significantly enhances the ViT of [12] for encoding highresolution images using two techniques. The first is the
multi-scale model structure, which provides image encodings at multiple scales with manageable computational
cost. The second is the attention mechanism of Vision Longformer, which is a variant of Longformer [3], originally
developed for natural language processing, and achieves a
linear complexity w.r.t. the number of input tokens. A comprehensive empirical study shows that the new ViT significantly outperforms several strong baselines, including the
existing ViT models and their ResNet counterparts, and the
Pyramid Vision Transformer from a concurrent work [47],
on a range of vision tasks, including image classification,
object detection, and segmentation. The models and source
code are released at https://github.com/microsoft/visionlongformer.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformer (ViT) [12] has shown promising results on image classification tasks for its strong capability of long range context modeling. But its quadratic increase of both computational and memory complexity hinders its application on many vision tasks that require highresolution feature maps computed on high-resolution images1 , like object detection [34, 24], segmentation [27, 6],
and human pose estimation [49, 37]. Vision-language tasks,
like VQA, image captioning, and image-text retrieval, also
benefit from high-resolution feature maps [16, 53], which
are extracted with pre-trained CNN models. Developing a
† indicates equal contributions.
1 In this paper, encoding a high-resolution image means generating

high-resolution feature maps for high-resolution images.

vision Transformer that can process high-resolution feature
maps is a critical step toward the goal of unifying the model
architecture of vision and language modalities and improving multi-modal representation learning. In this paper, we
propose a new vision Transformer architecture Multi-Scale
Vision Longformer, which significantly enhances the baseline ViT [12] for encoding high-resolution images using two
techniques: (1) the multi-scale model structure, and (2) the
attention mechanism of Vision Longformer.
Models with multi-scale (pyramid, hierarchical) structure provide a comprehensive encoding of an image at
multiple scales, while keeping the computation and memory complexity manageable. Deep convolutional networks
are born with such multi-scale structure, which however is
not true for the conventional ViT architecture. To obtain
a multi-scale vision Transformer, we stack multiple (e.g.,
four) vision Transformers (ViT stages) sequentially. The
first ViT stage operates on a high-resolution feature map
but has a small hidden dimension. As we go to later ViT
stages, the feature map resolution reduces while the hidden
dimension increases. The resolution reduction is achieved
by performing patching embedding at each ViT stage. In
our experiments, we find that with the same number of
model parameters and the same model FLOPs, the multiscale ViT achieves a significantly better accuracy than the
vanilla ViT on image classification task. The results show
that the multi-scale structure not only improves the computation and memory efficiency, but also boosts the classification performance. The proposed multi-scale ViT has the
same network structure as conventional (multi-scale) CNN
models such as ResNet [14], and can serve as a replaceand-plug-in choice for almost all ResNet applications. In
this paper, we demonstrate this plausible property in image
classification, object detection and instance segmentation.
The multi-scale structure alone is not sufficient to scale
up ViT to process high-resolution images and feature maps,
due to the quadratic increase of the computation and memory complexity with respect to the number of tokens in the
12998

