Coarsely-labeled Data for Better Few-shot Transfer
Cheng Perng Phoo, Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University
{cpphoo, bharathh}@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Few-shot learning is based on the premise that labels
are expensive, especially when they are fine-grained and
require expertise. But coarse labels might be easy to acquire and thus abundant. We present a representation learning approach - PAS that allows few-shot learners to leverage coarsely-labeled data available before evaluation. Inspired by self-training, we label the additional data using a teacher trained on the base dataset and filter the
teacher’s prediction based on the coarse labels; a new student representation is then trained on the base dataset and
the pseudo-labeled dataset. PAS is able to produce a representation that consistently and significantly outperforms
the baselines in 3 different datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/cpphoo/PAS

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The top row represents 6 different fine-grained classes
in iNat2019 and the bottom row consists of 6 fine-grained classes
from tieredImagenet. Without domain expertise, one might find
it challenging to distinguish the 6 different classes (orange) but
identifying them based on their coarse labels (green) is intuitive.

Large annotated datasets [4, 8, 19] have empowered the
progress of visual recognition systems over the last decade.
However, for many practically important recognition problems, annotations might require expertise and thus might be
difficult to acquire. For example, to build a recognition system that identifies insect species, one would have to hire an
entomologist to label hundreds of thousands of images from
hundreds of species: an expensive, time-consuming affair.
This concern has sparked research in few-shot learning
(FSL), which aims to train domain-specific learners that
can learn new classes from very few examples. These learners are “meta-trained” on a large labeled dataset of “base”
classes from the same domain. The hope is that this base
dataset provides the learner with the right inductive biases for the domain of interest so that recognizing “novel”
classes does not require quite as much labeled data. FSL is
now an extremely active research area with a veritable array
of recent results [33, 6, 12, 10, 16, 44, 38, 47, 30, 23]. Yet,
existing FSL systems still lag far behind systems trained
with large quantities of labeled training data. One might
conjecture that the base dataset does not provide sufficient
information about the novel classes.

One possible approach to address this issue is to leverage some auxilliary information about novel classes that
might be more readily available. For example, recent work
[26, 9, 35] uses unlabeled data from the novel classes: it is,
after all, the labels that are expensive; data is often cheap.
While such unlabeled data can inform the learner about the
data distribution of the novel classes, they contain no information about the semantics of the class distinctions.
A potential source of auxiliary information about semantics is labeling at a coarser granularity, which might be easier to obtain than the actual labels of interest. Consider
again the problem of insect classification. It is true that one
would have to hire an entomologist or even a lepidopterist to
help distinguish between the 3 species of butterflies in figure
1; these labels are therefore difficult to acquire. But a layperson would be able to distinguish between butterflies and
bees. Labels at that coarse granularity can thus be crowdsourced quite easily. This leads us to the following question:
what if we had access to data from the novel classes that
were weakly labeled with easy-to-acquire coarse labels?
Although such coarsely-labeled data are both readily
available and potentially informative, no current FSL tech-

9052

