DepthInSpace: Exploitation and Fusion of Multiple Video Frames for
Structured-Light Depth Estimation
Mohammad Mahdi Johari
Idiap Reserach Institute, EPFL

Camilla Carta
ams OSRAM

François Fleuret
University of Geneva, EPFL

mohammad.johari@idiap.ch

camilla.carta@ams.com

francois.fleuret@unige.ch

Abstract
We present DepthInSpace, a self-supervised deeplearning method for depth estimation using a structuredlight camera. The design of this method is motivated by
the commercial use case of embedded depth sensors in
nowadays smartphones. We first propose to use estimated
optical flow from ambient information of multiple video
frames as a complementary guide for training a singleframe depth estimation network, helping to preserve edges
and reduce over-smoothing issues. Utilizing optical flow,
we also propose to fuse the data of multiple video frames
to get a more accurate depth map. In particular, fused
depth maps are more robust in occluded areas and incur
less in flying pixels artifacts. We finally demonstrate that
these more precise fused depth maps can be used as selfsupervision for fine-tuning a single-frame depth estimation
network to improve its performance. Our models’ effectiveness is evaluated and compared with state-of-the-art
models on both synthetic and our newly introduced real
datasets. The implementation code, training procedure, and
both synthetic and captured real datasets are available at
https://www.idiap.ch/paper/depthinspace.

availability of ground-truth labels either from high-accuracy
sensors or exhaustive stereo-matching search algorithms.
Due to the lack of large-scale, precise ground-truth data,
an end-to-end training of a deep neural network in a selfsupervised manner has been at the center of attention recently. ActiveStereoNet [49] uses Siamese networks for
predicting disparity and proposes a novel photometric loss
function based on a Local Contrast Normalization (LCN)
scheme for training. A separate color sensor is used in [24]
to enhance the performance of [49]. Riegler et al. [33] exploit the photometric loss function of [49] and propose an
edge-detection network along with an edge-aware smoothness loss function to overcome the issue of edge fattening.
They also introduce another loss function that leverages the
information of other video frames to supervise the disparity
estimation network’s training. To do so, they use the estimated disparity and camera pose parameters to transform
pixels into a 3D point cloud and apply the consistency of
predicted depth of matched pixels across multiple frames.
We take the work in [33] as the baseline, and our contributions in this article are as follows:
• We propose a novel training scheme that uses optical flow predictions from ambient images to find
matched pixels independently of the estimated disparities, which stabilizes the training and enhances accuracy. Our sensor can capture ambient images conveniently, and we exploit this feature in this regard.

1. Introduction
With the advent of structured-light cameras, depthsensing became conceivable with basic algorithms implementable on devices with computational constraints in realtime. For instance, Kinect V1 uses a correlation-based
block matching technique [36], and Intel RealSense [22]
employs a semi-global matching scheme [16]. However,
learning-based approaches in this field are relatively limited. Fanello et al. [35] propose a computationally efficient
feature matching method. Projecting image patches to compact binary representation is proposed in UltraStereo [10] to
achieve a low complex matching scheme. HyperDepth [34]
casts the problem of depth estimation as a classificationregression task, which it solves using an ensemble of cascaded random forests. However, HyperDepth assumes the

• We extend this model to fuse information from multiple video frames to obtain more precise disparity maps
with sharper edges and fewer artifacts.
• We finally propose to exploit the resulting fused disparity maps to fine-tune a single-frame disparity estimation network.

2. Related Works
Active Depth Estimation: The setup usually consists of a
camera and a projector which projects a random but known
pattern of dots into the scene. Dependent on the depth

6039

