TGRNet: A Table Graph Reconstruction Network
for Table Structure Recognition
Wenyuan Xue∗ , Baosheng Yu† , Wen Wang∗ , Dacheng Tao‡† , Qingyong Li∗
*Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
†
The University of Sydney, Australia
‡
JD Explore Academy, China
{wyxue17,wangwen,liqy}@bjtu.edu.cn, baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
A table arranging data in rows and columns is a very effective data structure, which has been widely used in business and scientific research. Considering large-scale tabular data in online and offline documents, automatic table
recognition has attracted increasing attention from the document analysis community. Though human can easily understand the structure of tables, it remains a challenge for
machines to understand that, especially due to a variety of
different table layouts and styles. Existing methods usually
model a table as either the markup sequence or the adjacency matrix between different table cells, failing to address
the importance of the logical location of table cells, e.g., a
cell is located in the first row and the second column of
the table. In this paper, we reformulate the problem of table structure recognition as the table graph reconstruction,
and propose an end-to-end trainable table graph reconstruction network (TGRNet) for table structure recognition.
Specifically, the proposed method has two main branches, a
cell detection branch and a cell logical location branch, to
jointly predict the spatial location and the logical location
of different cells. Experimental results on three popular table recognition datasets and a new dataset with table graph
annotations (TableGraph-350K) demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed TGRNet for table structure recognition. Code and annotations will be made publicly available
at https://github.com/xuewenyuan/TGRNet.

1. Introduction
Tabular data have been widely used to help people manage and extract important information in many real-world
scenarios, including the analysis of financial documents, air
pollution indices, and electronic medical records [19, 33].
Though human can easily understand tables with different
* Qingyong Li and Wen Wang are the corresponding authors.

ICCV 2017 Tutorials
Title
Organizers
Mathematics of Deep Learning
Vidal et al.
Adversarial Pattern Recognition
Roli et al.

Date Schedule
22-Oct Half-day
22-Oct Half-day

A question (e.g., which tutorial was presented by Roli et al.?)
A semi-structured table
（e.g., a CSV file）

An unstructured table
(e.g., an image file)
Table Recognizer (e.g., TGRNet)

Tokens (words, column indices, row indices, ...)
Table Parser (e.g., TAPAS)
Output: An answer (e.g., "Adversarial Pattern Recognition")

Figure 1. A table parsing example shows the main concern of this
paper. Before applying a table parser (e.g., TAPAS [7]) to answer
a question over the above table, both the table and the question
are represented as a sequence of tokens, in which the cell logical
location (i.e., the index of column/row) provides the table structure information. Though the cell logical location can be directly
acquired from the semi-structured table (e.g., a CSV file), a table
structure recognizer is required to obtain such important information from the unstructured table (e.g., an image file).

layouts and styles, it remains a great challenge for machines
to automatically recognize the structure of various tables.
Considering the massive amount of tabular data presented
in unstructured formats (e.g., image and PDF files) and that
most table analysis methods focus on semi-structured tables
(e.g., CSV files) [7, 33, 19, 32], the community will significantly benefit from an automatic table recognition system,
facilitating large-scale tabular data analysis such as table
parsing [7, 32], patient treatment prediction [33, 34], and
credit card fraud detection [19].
To understand the structure of different tables, both the
cell spatial and logical locations are of great importance

1295

