Emerging Properties in Self-Supervised Vision Transformers
Mathilde Caron1,2
Hugo Touvron1,3
Ishan Misra1
Hervé Jegou1
Julien Mairal2
Piotr Bojanowski1
Armand Joulin1
1

Facebook AI Research

2

Inria∗

3

Sorbonne University

Figure 1: Self-attention from a Vision Transformer with 8 × 8 patches trained with no supervision. We look at the self-attention of
the [CLS] token on the heads of the last layer. This token is not attached to any label nor supervision. These maps show that the model
automatically learns class-specific features leading to unsupervised object segmentations.

Abstract
In this paper, we question if self-supervised learning provides new properties to Vision Transformer (ViT) [16] that
stand out compared to convolutional networks (convnets).
Beyond the fact that adapting self-supervised methods to this
architecture works particularly well, we make the following observations: first, self-supervised ViT features contain
explicit information about the semantic segmentation of an
image, which does not emerge as clearly with supervised
ViTs, nor with convnets. Second, these features are also excellent k-NN classifiers, reaching 78.3% top-1 on ImageNet
with a small ViT. Our study also underlines the importance
of momentum encoder [26], multi-crop training [9], and the
use of small patches with ViTs. We implement our findings
into a simple self-supervised method, called DINO, which
we interpret as a form of self-distillation with no labels.
We show the synergy between DINO and ViTs by achieving
80.1% top-1 on ImageNet in linear evaluation with ViT-Base.

∗ Univ.

Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France.
Correspondence: mathilde@fb.com
Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/dino

1. Introduction
Transformers [57] have recently emerged as an alternative
to convolutional neural networks (convnets) for visual recognition [16, 56, 68]. Their adoption has been coupled with
a training strategy inspired by natural language processing
(NLP), that is, pretraining on large quantities of data and
finetuning on the target dataset [15, 45]. The resulting Vision
Transformers (ViT) [16] are competitive with convnets but,
they have not yet delivered clear benefits over them: they
are computationally more demanding, require more training
data, and their features do not exhibit unique properties.
In this paper, we question whether the muted success of
Transformers in vision can be explained by the use of supervision in their pretraining. Our motivation is that one of the
main ingredients for the success of Transformers in NLP was
the use of self-supervised pretraining, in the form of close
procedure in BERT [15] or language modeling in GPT [45].
These self-supervised pretraining objectives use the words
in a sentence to create pretext tasks that provide a richer
learning signal than the supervised objective of predicting
a single label per sentence. Similarly, in images, imagelevel supervision often reduces the rich visual information
contained in an image to a single concept selected from a
predefined set of a few thousand categories of objects [49].
While the self-supervised pretext tasks used in NLP are
19650

