Towards Interpretable Deep Networks for Monocular Depth Estimation
Zunzhi You
Sun Yat-sen University

Yi-Hsuan Tsai
NEC Laboratories America

Wei-Chen Chiu
National Chiao Tung University

youzunzhi@gmail.com

ytsai@nec-labs.com

walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Guanbin Li*
Sun Yat-sen University
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep networks for Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE)
have achieved promising performance recently and it is of
great importance to further understand the interpretability
of these networks. Existing methods attempt to provide posthoc explanations by investigating visual cues, which may
not explore the internal representations learned by deep
networks. In this paper, we find that some hidden units of the
network are selective to certain ranges of depth, and thus
such behavior can be served as a way to interpret the internal representations. Based on our observations, we quantify the interpretability of a deep MDE network by the depth
selectivity of its hidden units. Moreover, we then propose a
method to train interpretable MDE deep networks without
changing their original architectures, by assigning a depth
range for each unit to select. Experimental results demonstrate that our method is able to enhance the interpretability
of deep MDE networks by largely improving the depth selectivity of their units, while not harming or even improving
the depth estimation accuracy. We further provide comprehensive analysis to show the reliability of selective units,
the applicability of our method on different layers, models,
and datasets, and a demonstration on analysis of model error. Source code and models are available at https://
github.com/youzunzhi/InterpretableMDE.

1. Introduction
Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) has drawn a lot of
attention since it is critical for further applications like 3D
scene understanding or autonomous driving, due to the less
requirement and cost compared to depth estimation using
stereo image pairs. Eigen et al. [10] first utilize convolu* Corresponding author is Guanbin Li.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Visualization of feature maps. (a) and (b) refer to the
feature map visualization of Unit 5 in layer MFF and Unit 26 in
layer D (cf. Section 5) of [18] (ResNet-50), respectively. (c) and
(d) refer to Unit 63 in layer D and Unit 0 in layer MFF of the
interpretable counterpart trained by our method, respectively (best
viewed in color). We show that (b) has activations over different
depth ranges, while our results in (c) and (d) focus on distant or
close depth, which allows more interpretability of the model.

tional neural networks to perform MDE; since then numerous approaches based on deep neural networks have been
proposed and significantly improve state-of-the-art performance [13, 18, 42, 26]. However, only few studies focus on the interpretability of these MDE networks [46].
Since depth estimation can be closely related to downstream
tasks like autonomous driving, the lack of interpretability on
MDE models could potentially cause critical consequences.

12879

