Learn-to-Race: A Multimodal Control Environment for Autonomous Racing
James Herman1 * Jonathan Francis1,2∗ Siddha Ganju3 Bingqing Chen1 Anirudh Koul4
Abhinav Gupta1 Alexey Skabelkin5 Ivan Zhukov5 Max Kumskoy5 Eric Nyberg1
1
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
Human-Machine Collaboration, Bosch Research, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3
NVIDIA, Santa Clara, CA, USA
4
Pinterest, San Francisco, CA, USA
5
Autonomous Driving, Arrival, London, UK
{jamesher, jmf1, bingqinc, agupta6, ehn}@cs.cmu.edu, {sganju1, akoul}@alumni.cmu.edu,
{skabelkin, zhukov, kumskoy}@arrival.com

Abstract
Existing research on autonomous driving primarily focuses on urban driving, which is insufficient for characterising the complex driving behaviour underlying highspeed racing. At the same time, existing racing simulation frameworks struggle in capturing realism, with respect
to visual rendering, vehicular dynamics, and task objectives, inhibiting the transfer of learning agents to realworld contexts. We introduce a new environment, where
agents Learn-to-Race (L2R) in simulated competitionstyle racing, using multimodal information—from virtual
cameras to a comprehensive array of inertial measurement sensors. Our environment, which includes a simulator and an interfacing training framework, accurately
models vehicle dynamics and racing conditions. In this
paper, we release the Arrival simulator for autonomous
racing. Next, we propose the L2R task with challenging
metrics, inspired by learning-to-drive challenges, Formulastyle racing, and multimodal trajectory prediction for autonomous driving. Additionally, we provide the L2R framework suite, facilitating simulated racing on high-precision
models of real-world tracks. Finally, we provide an official L2R task dataset of expert demonstrations, as well as
a series of baseline experiments and reference implementations. We make all code available: https://github.
com/learn-to-race/l2r.

Figure 1: Learn-to-Race interfaces with a racing simulator,
which features numerous real-world racetracks such as the Thruxton Circuit (top-left) and Las Vegas Motor Speedway (top-right).
Simulated race cars (bottom) are empowered with learning agents,
tasked with the challenge of learning to race for the fastest laptimes and best metrics.

1. Introduction
Progress in the field of autonomous driving relies on
the existence of challenging tasks and well-defined evalua* Equal contribution.

tion metrics, which enable researchers to effectively assess
and improve algorithms. Models developed in learning-todrive settings continue to struggle with issues in samplecomplexity, safety, and unseen generalisation, calling for

9793

