Domain-Invariant Disentangled Network for Generalizable Object Detection
Chuang Lin1 *

Zehuan Yuan2
Sicheng Zhao3
Peize Sun4
Changhu Wang2
1
2
Dept of Data Science and AI, Monash University
ByteDance AI Lab
3
4
Columbia University
The University of Hong Kong

Jianfei Cai1

Abstract
We address the problem of domain generalizable object
detection, which aims to learn a domain-invariant detector from multiple “seen” domains so that it can generalize
well to other “unseen” domains. The generalization ability is crucial in practical scenarios especially when it is
difficult to collect data. Compared to image classification,
domain generalization in object detection has seldom been
explored with more challenges brought by domain gaps on
both image and instance levels. In this paper, we propose a novel generalizable object detection model, termed
Domain-Invariant Disentangled Network (DIDN). In contrast to directly aligning multiple sources, we integrate a
disentangled network into Faster R-CNN. By disentangling
representations on both image and instance levels, DIDN
is able to learn domain-invariant representations that are
suitable for generalized object detection. Furthermore, we
design a cross-level representation reconstruction to complement this two-level disentanglement so that informative
object representations could be preserved. Extensive experiments are conducted on five benchmark datasets and the
results demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-theart performances on domain generalization for object detection.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental yet challenging problem in computer vision. It aims to identify and localize all
object instances of certain categories in an image. In the
past few years, we have witnessed significant breakthroughs
of supervised object detection [9, 2, 30, 24, 10, 3] on various
benchmark datasets [17, 33, 8, 42]. Nonetheless, performing object detection in practice remains challenging due to
the complexity and diversity of natural scenes. Learning a
general object detector requires collecting a large amount
data, which is highly expensive in real word scenarios with
various domains. An alternative is to transfer the learned
* This work was performed while Chuang Lin worked as an intern at
ByteDance.

Directly Align

Our Approach
Source Domain 1
Source Domain 2
Unseen Target Domain
Training Process
Inference Process
Domain-independent Content

Figure 1. An illustration of our approach for domain generalizable object detection. If directly extending prior domain adaptation methods [12, 46, 40, 32, 47, 1] to the unseen domain, it will
fail to generalize to the unseen domain since there is no data available in training. Our method first extracts the domain-independent
object content to avoid fully matching all source domains. Further, we learn a shared feature space for domain generalization
with preserved informative object representation.

knowledge from labeled source domains to another different but related target domain. However, because of the presence of dataset bias or domain shift [35], i.e. the joint probability distributions of observed data and labels are different
in different domains, direct transfer may not perform well.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is one of the
most popular attempts to remedy this problem and considerable efforts have been made [12, 46, 40, 32, 47, 1, 15].
Given the well labeled source data and the known target
data without labels, the idea of UDA is to align the data
distribution between the source and target domains so that
the trained model on the source can well generalize to
the target [45]. However, these methods still require precollecting target data and retraining the model for different
target domains. Therefore, it is difficult to extend domain
adaptation methods to the scenarios where target data is unavailable.
In this paper, we focus on domain generalizable object

8771

