TravelNet: Self-supervised Physically Plausible Hand Motion Learning from
Monocular Color Images
Zimeng Zhao

Xi Zhao

Yangang Wang∗

Southeast University, China

Figure 1. Physically plausible hand motion learning. From a series of monocular color images (row 1), adapting our physical pose
representation to the hand pose estimator can get fewer penetrations and higher accuracy (row 2 and 3). TravelNet learns to travel in this
physical pose manifold from given key pose states (row 4). It can not only reconstruct the original motion (row 5) but also generate various
montages based on it (row 6). Due to the lack of RGB sequence data and key pose state annotations, a self-supervised learning paradigm
is adopted, and its training motion data is generated by a physics engine with our pose state archive.

Abstract
This paper aims to reconstruct physically plausible hand
motion from monocular color images. Existing frame-byframe estimating approaches can not guarantee the physical plausibility (e.g. penetration, jittering) directly. In this
paper, we embed physical constraints on the per-frame estimated motions in both spatial and temporal space. Our key
idea is to adopt a self-supervised learning strategy to train
a novel encoder-decoder, named TravelNet, whose training
motion data is prepared by the physics engine using discrete
pose states. TravelNet captures key pose states from hand
motion sequences as compact motion descriptors, inspired
by the concept of keyframes in animation. Finally, it manages to extract those key states out of perturbations without
manual annotations, and reconstruct the motions preserving details and physical plausibility. In the experiments,

we show that the outputs of the TravelNet contain both finger synergism and time consistency. Through the proposed
framework, hand motions can be accurately reconstructed
and flexibly re-edited, which is superior to the state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Plausible human hand motions are of paramount importance in many applications. In VR/AR, reconstructing plausible hand motion facilitates closer interaction. In manipulation planning, designing a plausible hand motion makes
a bionic hand more intelligent to assist the disabled. Con∗ Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. All the
authors from Southeast University are affiliated with the Key Laboratory of
Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry
of Education, Nanjing, China.

11666

