Augmenting Depth Estimation with Geospatial Context
Scott Workman

Hunter Blanton

DZYNE Technologies

University of Kentucky

Abstract
Modern cameras are equipped with a wide array of sensors that enable recording the geospatial context of an image. Taking advantage of this, we explore depth estimation
under the assumption that the camera is geocalibrated, a
problem we refer to as geo-enabled depth estimation. Our
key insight is that if capture location is known, the corresponding overhead viewpoint offers a valuable resource for
understanding the scale of the scene. We propose an endto-end architecture for depth estimation that uses geospatial
context to infer a synthetic ground-level depth map from a
co-located overhead image, then fuses it inside of an encoder/decoder style segmentation network. To support evaluation of our methods, we extend a recently released dataset
with overhead imagery and corresponding height maps. Results demonstrate that integrating geospatial context significantly reduces error compared to baselines, both at close
ranges and when evaluating at much larger distances than
existing benchmarks consider.

1. Introduction
Accurately estimating depth is important for applications
that seek to interpret the 3D environment, such as augmented reality and autonomous driving. The traditional geometric approach for solving this problem requires multiple
views and infers depth by triangulating image correspondences. Lately, more attention has been paid to the singleimage variant, which has great potential value but is known
to be ill-posed. Ranftl et al. [29] point out that to solve this
problem “one must exploit many, sometimes subtle, visual
cues, as well as long-range context and prior knowledge.”
One of the primary difficulties with inferring depth from
a single image is that there is an inherent scale ambiguity.
In other words, different sized objects in the world can have
the same projection on the image plane (simply by adjusting
the focal length or position in space). Despite this, methods that take advantage of convolution neural networks have
shown promise due to their ability to capture prior information about the appearance and shape of objects in the world.
There are broadly two classes of methods in this space.

Figure 1: We explore a new problem, geo-enabled depth
estimation, in which the geospatial context of a query image
is exploited during the depth estimation process.

Supervised approaches assume a ground-truth labeling is
provided during training, often obtained from another sensor such as LiDAR. This labeling could be absolute (metric values) or have an unknown scale. Self-supervised approaches, on the other hand, do not require ground-truth
depth. Instead, the consistency of multiple inputs (e.g., sequences of images from a video, or a stereo pair) are used
to derive depth up to a scaling factor, often by formulating the problem as a novel view synthesis task. For both
of these classes of methods, it is common to make strong
assumptions about the scale of the scene during training, or
to require computation of a scaling factor at inference time
in order to interpret the predicted depths.
For example, supervised methods often presume to know
the maximum observed depth of the scene, by constraining the output of the network using a sigmoid activation
and scaling by the maximum depth [9, 19]. If the scale is
unknown, i.e., a scale-invariant loss was used during training, then a scaling factor must be computed at inference
to interpret the predictions relative to the world. Such objective functions have been proposed when metric depth is
not available or for combining training datasets with different properties. For example, Ranftl et al. [29] align their
predictions with the ground-truth via a least squares criterion before computing error metrics. These caveats limit

4562

