TS-CAM: Token Semantic Coupled Attention Map for Weakly Supervised
Object Localization
Wei Gao1

Fang Wan1 * Xingjia Pan2,3 Zhiliang Peng1 Qi Tian4
Zhenjun Han1 Bolei Zhou5 Qixiang Ye1 *
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent
3
NLPR, Institute of Automation, CAS 4 Huawei Cloud AI
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{vasgaowei, xjia.pan}@gmail.com, {wanfang, hanzhj, qxye}@ucas.ac.cn
tian.qi1@huawei.com, bzhou@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) is a
challenging problem when given image category labels but
requires to learn object localization models. Optimizing
a convolutional neural network (CNN) for classification
tends to activate local discriminative regions while ignoring
complete object extent, causing the partial activation issue.
In this paper, we argue that partial activation is caused by
the intrinsic characteristics of CNN, where the convolution
operations produce local receptive fields and experience
difficulty to capture long-range feature dependency among
pixels. We introduce the token semantic coupled attention
map (TS-CAM) to take full advantage of the self-attention
mechanism in visual transformer for long-range dependency
extraction. TS-CAM first splits an image into a sequence
of patch tokens for spatial embedding, which produce
attention maps of long-range visual dependency to avoid
partial activation. TS-CAM then re-allocates categoryrelated semantics for patch tokens, enabling each of them
to be aware of object categories. TS-CAM finally couples
the patch tokens with the semantic-agnostic attention map
to achieve semantic-aware localization. Experiments on
the ILSVRC/CUB-200-2011 datasets show that TS-CAM
outperforms its CNN-CAM counterparts by 7.1%/27.1%
for WSOL, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Code is
available at https://github.com/vasgaowei/TS-CAM

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised learning refers to methods that utilize
training data with incomplete annotations to learn recognition models. Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL)
* Corresponding authors

(a) Image

(b) CAM

(c) TransAttention

(d) TS-CAM (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of weakly supervised object localization
results. (a) Input Image. (b) Class Activation Map (CAM). (c)
TransAttention: Transformer-based Attention. (d) TS-CAM. Object
localization boxes are in red. (Best viewed in color)

solely requires the image-level annotations indicating the
presence or absence of a class of objects in images to learn
localization models [23, 24, 28, 46]. WSOL has attracted
increasing attention as it can leverage the rich Web images
with tags to learn object-level models [46].
As the cornerstone of WSOL [7], the Class Activation
Mapping (CAM) [55] utilizes the activation map from the
last convolution layer to generate semantic-aware localization maps for object bounding-box estimation. However,
CAM suffers from severe underestimation of object regions
because the discriminative regions activated through the
classification models are often much smaller than objects’
actual extent [2]. Local discriminative regions are capable
of minimizing image classification loss, but experience

2886

