SmartShadow: Artistic Shadow Drawing Tool for Line Drawings
Lvmin Zhang
Soochow University / Style2Paints Research

Jinyue Jiang
Style2Paints Research

Yi Ji
Soochow University

lvminzhang@acm.org

jinyuejiang@outlook.com

jiyi@suda.edu.cn

Chunping Liu
Soochow University
cpliu@suda.edu.cn

Abstract
SmartShadow is a deep learning application for digital
painting artists to draw shadows on line drawings, with
three proposed tools. (1) Shadow brush: artists can draw
scribbles to coarsely indicate the areas inside or outside
their wanted shadows, and the application will generate the
shadows in real-time. (2) Shadow boundary brush: this
brush can precisely control the boundary of any specific
shadow. (3) Global shadow generator: this tool can estimate the global shadow direction from input brush scribbles,
and then consistently propagate local shadows to the entire image. These three tools can not only speed up the
shadow drawing process (by 3.1× as experiments validate),
but also allow for the flexibility to achieve various shadow
effects and facilitate richer artistic creations. To this end,
we train Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with a collected large-scale dataset of both real and synthesized data,
and especially, we collect 1670 shadow samples drawn by
real artists. Both qualitative analysis and user study show
that our approach can generate high-quality shadows that
are practically usable in the daily works of digital painting artists. We present 30 additional results and 15 visual
comparisons in the supplementary materiel.

1. Introduction
Shadows in artworks are essentially different from that
in photography or photorealistic fields of computer vision:
the artwork shadows are drawn by artists. These shadows
depicts the mood of characters and express the emotion of
artists, without being constrained by physically correct light
transmission laws or geometrically precise object structures.
Artists adjust the location, scale, shape, density, and many
other features of shadows to achieve diverse artistic purposes,
e.g., amplification, exaggeration, antithesis, silhouette, etc.
An application that can assist artists in drawing shadows

Figure 1. Screenshot of the SmartShadow. The user gives scribbles as shadow indications (on the left) to obtain the high-quality
shadow (on the right). Smiling boy, used with artist permission.

for line drawings is highly desired. This is not only because
creating shadows on line drawings is one of the most frequent
and time-consuming tasks in the daily work of many digital
painting artists, but also because shadow drawing is the
foundation of a wide variety of further artistic creations,
e.g., hard shadows can be smoothed into soft shadings (with
techniques like joint anisotropic diffusion [46]), shadows
can be stylized with hatching or drafting effects [55], sharp
shadows can be used in cel-shading (see also the YouTube
tutorial [27]), etc.
Might we be able to achieve a deep learning approach
that can quickly produce visually satisfying shadows given
only a few user indications, saving the time and effort of
digital painting artists, and simultaneously, facilitating more
plentiful artistic creations? We present an interactive shadow
drawing application (Fig. 1) to achieve these goals. This
application consists of the following three proposed tools:
The first tool is the shadow brush. Users can draw blue
or red scribbles (e.g., Fig. 2-(a)) to coarsely indicate the
areas inside or outside the shadows they want. This tool
does not require users to have professional drawing skills,
as it can “smartly” generate shadow shapes learned from

5391

