TOOD: Task-aligned One-stage Object Detection
Chengjian Feng∗
Intellifusion Inc.

Yujie Zhong∗
Meituan Inc.

Yu Gao
ByteDance Inc.

feng.chengjian@intellif.com

zhongyujie@meituan.com

gaoyu.1520@bytedance.com

Matthew R. Scott
Malong LLC

Weilin Huang†
Alibaba Group

mscott@malongtech.com

weilin.hwl@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
One-stage object detection is commonly implemented by
optimizing two sub-tasks: object classification and localization, using heads with two parallel branches, which might
lead to a certain level of spatial misalignment in predictions between the two tasks. In this work, we propose a
Task-aligned One-stage Object Detection (TOOD) that explicitly aligns the two tasks in a learning-based manner.
First, we design a novel Task-aligned Head (T-Head) which
offers a better balance between learning task-interactive
and task-specific features, as well as a greater flexibility to
learn the alignment via a task-aligned predictor. Second,
we propose Task Alignment Learning (TAL) to explicitly pull
closer (or even unify) the optimal anchors for the two tasks
during training via a designed sample assignment scheme
and a task-aligned loss. Extensive experiments are conducted on MS-COCO, where TOOD achieves a 51.1 AP at
single-model single-scale testing. This surpasses the recent
one-stage detectors by a large margin, such as ATSS [30]
(47.7 AP), GFL [14] (48.2 AP), and PAA [9] (49.0 AP),
with fewer parameters and FLOPs. Qualitative results also
demonstrate the effectiveness of TOOD for better aligning
the tasks of object classification and localization. Code is
available at https://github.com/fcjian/TOOD.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims to localize and recognize objects
of interest from natural images, and is a fundamental yet
challenging task in computer vision. It is commonly formulated as a multi-task learning problem by jointly optimizing
object classification and localization [4, 6, 7, 16, 22, 32].
The classification task is designed to learn discriminative
features that focus on the key or salient part of an object,
∗ Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.

Result
Score
IoU
Figure 1. Illustration of detection results (‘Result’) and spatial
distributions of classification scores (‘Score’) and localization
scores (‘IoU’) predicted by ATSS [30] (top row) and the proposed
TOOD (bottom row). Ground-truth is indicated by yellow boxes,
and a white arrow means the main direction of the best anchor
away from the center of an object. In the ‘Result’ column, a
red/green patch is the location of the best anchor for classification/localization, while a red/green box means an object bounding
box predicted from the anchor in the red/green patch (if they coincide, we only show the red patches and boxes).

while the localization task works on precisely locating the
whole object with its boundaries. Due to the divergence
of learning mechanisms for classification and localization,
spatial distributions of the learned features by the two tasks
can be different, causing a certain level of misalignment
when predictions are made by using two separate branches.
Recent one-stage object detectors attempted to predict
consistent outputs of the two separate tasks, by focusing on
the center of an object [3, 10, 27, 30]. They assume that
an anchor (i.e., an anchor-point for an anchor-free detector,
or an anchor-box for an anchor-based detector) at the center of the object is likely to give more accurate predictions
for both classification and localization. For example, recent FCOS [27] and ATSS [30] both use a centerness branch

3510

