LeViT: a Vision Transformer in ConvNet’s Clothing for Faster Inference
Ben Graham

Alaaeldin El-Nouby
Hugo Touvron
Pierre Stock
Hervé Jégou
Matthijs Douze

Abstract
B4

We design a family of image classification architectures
that optimize the trade-off between accuracy and efficiency
in a high-speed regime. Our work exploits recent findings
in attention-based architectures, which are competitive on
highly parallel processing hardware. We revisit principles
from the extensive literature on convolutional neural networks to apply them to transformers, in particular activation maps with decreasing resolutions. We also introduce
the attention bias, a new way to integrate positional information in vision transformers.
As a result, we propose LeViT: a hybrid neural network
for fast inference image classification. We consider different measures of efficiency on different hardware platforms,
so as to best reflect a wide range of application scenarios. Our extensive experiments empirically validate our
technical choices and show they are suitable to most architectures. Overall, LeViT significantly outperforms existing convnets and vision transformers with respect to the
speed/accuracy tradeoff. For example, at 80% ImageNet
top-1 accuracy, LeViT is 5 times faster than EfficientNet on
CPU. We release the code at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/LeViT.

1. Introduction
Transformer neural networks were initially introduced
for Natural Language Processing applications [1]. They
now dominate in most applications of this field. They manipulate variable-size sequences of token embeddings that
are fed to a residual architecture. The model comprises two
sorts for residual blocks: Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
and an original type of layer: the self-attention, which allows all pairs of tokens in the input to be combined via a
bilinear function. This is in contrast to 1D convolutional
approaches that are limited to a fixed-size neighborhood.
Recently, the vision transformer (ViT) architecture [2]
obtained state-of-the-art results for image classification in
the speed-accuracy tradeoff with pre-training on large scale
dataset. The Data-efficient Image Transformer [3] obtains
competitive performance when training the ViT models
only on ImageNet [4]. It also introduces smaller models

Imagenet top-1 accuracy (%)

83

Armand Joulin

1 CPU thread

82

1 GPU
B4

LeViT-384

DeiTSmall
B3

LeViT-256

LeViT-384

DeiTSmall

LeViT-256

B3

81
B2

80

B2

LeViT-192
B1

79

LeViT-192

B1
LeViT-128

LeViT-128

78

EfficientNet
DeiT
LeViT

77
1

2

5

10

B0

20

B0

LeViTDeiT-Tiny 128S
50

100 200
images/s

LeViT-128S
500

1k

2k

5k

10k

20k

Figure 1. Speed-accuracy operating points for convolutional and
visual transformers. Left plots: on 1 CPU core, Right: on 1 GPU.
LeViT is a stack of transformer blocks, with pooling steps to reduce the resolution of the activation maps as in classical convolutional architectures.

adapted for high-throughput inference.
In this paper, we explore the design space to offer even
better trade-offs than ViT/DeiT models in the regime of
small and medium-sized architectures. We are especially
interested in optimizing the performance–accuracy tradeoff, such as the throughput (images/second) performance
depicted in Figure 1 for Imagenet-1k-val [5].
While many works [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] aim at reducing the
memory footprint of classifiers and feature extractors, inference speed is equally important, with high throughput
corresponding to better energy efficiency. In this work, our
goal is to develop a Vision Transformer-based family of
models with better inference speed on both highly-parallel
architectures like GPU, regular Intel CPUs, and ARM hardware commonly found in mobile devices. Our solution
re-introduces convolutional components in place of transformer components that learn convolutional-like features.
In particular, we replace the uniform structure of a Transformer by a pyramid with pooling, similar to the LeNet [11]
architecture. Hence we call it LeViT.
There are compelling reasons why transformers are
faster than convolutional architectures for a given computational complexity. Most hardware accelerators (GPUs,
TPUs) are optimized to perform large matrix multiplica-

12259

