UltraPose: Synthesizing Dense Pose with 1 Billion Points by Human-body
Decoupling 3D Model
Haonan Yan1∗ , Jiaqi Chen2 *, Xujie Zhang2 , Shengkai Zhang1 ,
Nianhong Jiao1 , Xiaodan Liang2† , Tianxiang Zheng1†
1
Beijing Momo Technology Co., Ltd. 2 Sun Yat-sen University
yan.haonan@immomo.com, {jadgechen,xdliang328,zhengtianxiang1128}@gmail.com,
zhangxj59@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, songkey@pku.edu.cn, jnhrhythm@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recovering dense human poses from images plays a critical role in establishing an image-to-surface correspondence between RGB images and the 3D surface of the human body, serving the foundation of rich real-world applications, such as virtual humans, monocular-to-3d reconstruction. However, the popular DensePose-COCO dataset
relies on a sophisticated manual annotation system, leading to severe limitations in acquiring the denser and more
accurate annotated pose resources. In this work, we introduce a new 3D human-body model with a series of decoupled parameters that could freely control the generation of the body. Furthermore, we build a data generation
system based on this decoupling 3D model, and construct
an ultra dense synthetic benchmark UltraPose, containing
around 1.3 billion corresponding points. Compared to the
existing manually annotated DensePose-COCO dataset, the
synthetic UltraPose has ultra dense image-to-surface correspondences without annotation cost and error. Our proposed UltraPose provides the largest benchmark and data
resources for lifting the model capability in predicting more
accurate dense poses. To promote future researches in this
field, we also propose a transformer-based method to model
the dense correspondence between 2D and 3D worlds. The
proposed model trained on synthetic UltraPose can be applied to real-world scenarios, indicating the effectiveness of
our benchmark and model.1

1. Introduction
In computer vision, establishing correspondences from
2D images to 3D human body models is a fundamental
task for analyzing human action, which facilitates several
application scenarios, such as texture transfer [7, 20, 25],

virtual try-on [15, 19, 33, 34], and 3D human reconstruction [8, 32]. Based on the Skinned Multi-Person Linear
(SMPL) model [18], DensePose [9] takes a single RGB
image as input and maps pixels to corresponding surface points on the SMPL model, obtaining more accurate
instance-level human analysis with these predicted denser
relationships. Recently, several methods [22, 23, 35] have
been proposed for dense pose estimation, while the results
show that it is still a very challenging problem.
One of the limitations of the current DensePose system
is that the SMPL is a model for academic research and is not
widely recognized in the industry, which limits its application value in real-world scenarios. As a skinned model that
can represent a wide variety of body shapes, SMPL has only
10 blend shapes that do not have a clear physical meaning
and may affect each other. Therefore, some problems arise
when applying SMPL model, such as poor controllability
which makes it difficult to adjust the human body into the
targeted shape.
There are also some limitations in the popular
DensePose-COCO dataset [9]. On the one hand, it only collects 50K persons, not covering various poses and shapes,
which makes the model perform poorly in situations such
as sideways and occlusion. On the other hand, the quality
of manual annotations is intrinsically limited as described
in [22]. Under some ambiguity and self-occlusion conditions, the annotators need to mark the exact point correspondences, resulting in huge annotation errors.
In this work, to address the limitations of SMPL, we
adopt an industry-recognized Daz2 model as the base human body model. Then, we propose a new 3D model,
DeepDaz, containing a group of well-designed decoupling
parameters that can control the generation of a variety of
human bodies. These parameters have a specific physical
meaning and are decoupled with each other, enabling humans to adjust the human body freely rather than relying

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.
1 Dataset and code: https://github.com/MomoAILab/ultrapose

2 Daz: https://www.daz3d.com/

10891

