Learning an Augmented RGB Representation with Cross-Modal
Knowledge Distillation for Action Detection
Rui Dai1,2 , Srijan Das3 , François Bremond1,2
1
Inria 2 Université Côte d’Azur 3 Stony Brook University
1,2

{name.surname}@inria.fr

3

{name.surname}@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
In video understanding, most cross-modal knowledge
distillation (KD) methods are tailored for classification
tasks, focusing on the discriminative representation of
the trimmed videos. However, action detection requires
not only categorizing actions, but also localizing them in
untrimmed videos. Therefore, transferring knowledge pertaining to temporal relations is critical for this task which is
missing in the previous cross-modal KD frameworks. To this
end, we aim at learning an augmented RGB representation
for action detection, taking advantage of additional modalities at training time through KD. We propose a KD framework consisting of two levels of distillation. On one hand,
atomic-level distillation encourages the RGB student to
learn the sub-representation of the actions from the teacher
in a contrastive manner. On the other hand, sequence-level
distillation encourages the student to learn the temporal
knowledge from the teacher, which consists of transferring
the Global Contextual Relations and the Action Boundary
Saliency. The result is an Augmented-RGB stream that can
achieve competitive performance as the two-stream network
while using only RGB at inference time. Extensive experimental analysis shows that our proposed distillation framework is generic and outperforms other popular cross-modal
distillation methods in action detection task.

1. Introduction
Learning representation from untrimmed videos for action detection is a challenging vision task. Action detection aims at categorizing all the frames corresponding to
every action occurring in an untrimmed video. The two
main challenges for action detection are to tackle composite action patterns and fine-grained details [47]. These challenges are especially difficult in cases of real-world scenarios, where actions are densely distributed and overlapping
each other [63]. To address these challenges, a typical setting, called two-stream network [49], consists in combining
RGB with additional modalities like optical flow [41, 62],

Figure 1. Proposed cross-modal distillation framework for action
detection. Our distillation framework is composed of three loss
terms corresponding to different types of knowledge to transfer
across modalities. LAtomic : Atomic KD loss; LGlobal : Global
Contextual Relation loss; LBoundary : Boundary Saliency loss.

3D poses [68, 11] to take into account the complementary
nature of each modality. However, using such setting is
contingent upon the availability of multiple modalities and
of expensive processing resources. The cost of computing
additional modalities could be prohibitive, especially for
long untrimmed videos. These constraints limit the usage
of multi-modal action detection methods for real-world applications.
Previous studies [20, 21] have shown that cross-modal
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is an effective mechanism to
avoid the computation of the additional modalities during
test time, while preserving the complementary information from the additional modalities. However, most previous works [6, 18, 17] in the video understanding domain
have investigated solely the classification of short trimmed
videos [28, 50, 30]. In these works, each video corresponds to a single action and the distillation framework infuses the aggregated knowledge of an action instance from
one modality into another. In contrast to trimmed videos,
untrimmed videos contain rich sequential knowledge with
complex temporal relations. Untrimmed videos in realworld scenarios tend to have cluttered background and mul-

13053

