FOVEA: Foveated Image Magnification for Autonomous Navigation
Nicolas Cebron2
Mengtian Li1 *
Chittesh Thavamani1 *
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Argo AI

Abstract
Uniform
Scale 1.0

Efficient processing of high-resolution video streams is
safety-critical for many robotics applications such as autonomous driving. Image downsampling is a commonly
adopted technique to ensure the latency constraint is met.
However, this naive approach greatly restricts an object detector’s capability to identify small objects. In this paper,
we propose an attentional approach that elastically magnifies certain regions while maintaining a small input canvas. The magnified regions are those that are believed to
have a high probability of containing an object, whose signal can come from a dataset-wide prior or frame-level prior
computed from recent object predictions. The magnification
is implemented by a KDE-based mapping to transform the
bounding boxes into warping parameters, which are then
fed into an image sampler with anti-cropping regularization. The detector is then fed with the warped image and we
apply a differentiable backward mapping to get bounding
box outputs in the original space. Our regional magnification allows algorithms to make better use of high-resolution
input without incurring the cost of high-resolution processing. On the autonomous driving datasets Argoverse-HD
and BDD100K, we show our proposed method boosts the
detection AP over standard Faster R-CNN, with and without finetuning. Additionally, building on top of the previous
state-of-the-art in streaming detection, our method sets a
new record for streaming AP on Argoverse-HD (from 17.8
to 23.0 on a GTX 1080 Ti GPU), suggesting that it has
achieved a superior accuracy-latency tradeoff.

1. Introduction
Safety-critical robotic agents such as self-driving cars
make use of an enormous suite of high-resolution perceptual sensors, with the goal of minimizing blind spots, maximizing perception range, and ensuring redundancy [5, 4,
37]. We argue that “over-sensed” perception platforms provide unique challenges for vision algorithms since those
visual sensors must rapidly consume sensor streams while
continuously reporting back the state of the world. While
* denotes equal contribution.

Standard
Subsampling

Deva Ramanan1,2

Uniform
Scale 0.5

Local
Scale 1.6

Non-Uniform
Subsampling

Local
Scale 0.4

Figure 1: Standard image downsampling (top right) limits
the capability of the object detector to find small objects. In
this paper, we propose an attentional warping method (bottom right) that enlarges salient objects in the image while
maintaining a small input resolution. Challenges arise when
warping also alters the output labels (e.g., bounding boxes).
numerous techniques exist to make a particular model run
fast, such as quantization [40], model compression [8], and
inference optimization [30], at the end of the day, simple
approaches that subsample sensor data (both spatially by
frame downsampling and temporally by frame dropping)
are still most effective for meeting latency constraints [19].
However, subsampling clearly throws away information,
negating the goals of high-resolution sensing in the first
place! This status quo calls for novel vision algorithms.
To address this challenge, we take inspiration from the
human visual system; biological vision makes fundamental
use of attentional processing. While current sensing stacks
make use of regular grid sampling, the human vision system
in the periphery has a much lower resolution than in the center (fovea), due to the pooling of information from retinal
receptors by retinal ganglion cells. Such variable resolution
is commonly known as foveal vision [18].
In this paper, we propose FOVEAted image magnification (FOVEA) for object detection, which retains high resolution for objects of interest while maintaining a small canvas size. We exploit the sparsity in detection datasets –
objects of interest usually only cover a portion of the image. The key idea is to resample such that background pixels can make room for objects of interest. The input images
are downsampled and warped such that salient areas in the
warped image have higher resolutions. While image warp-

15539

