Calibrating Concepts and Operations:
Towards Symbolic Reasoning on Real Images
Zhuowan Li1 Elias Stengel-Eskin1 Yixiao Zhang1 Cihang Xie2
Quan Tran3 Benjamin Van Durme1 Alan Yuille1
1
2
3
Johns Hopkins University
University of California, Santa Cruz
Adobe Research
Synthetic CLEVR dataset

Real GQA dataset
Q: The cylinder that is the same size as
the metallic sphere is what color?
A: Purple
Prog: select(sphere) filter(metallic)
samesize() filter(cylinder) querycolor()
(a) Long-tail Concept Distribution of Real Dataset

Q: What does the little boy in front of the
table hold?
A: Toothbrush
Prog: select(boy) filter(little)
relate_s(table, front) query_rel_o(hold)

(b) Unequal Importance of Reasoning Steps

Figure 1: Statistics and examples from the synthetic CLEVR dataset and the real GQA dataset. Compared to the synthetic
dataset, VQA on real data needs to deal with long-tail concept distribution and uneven importance of reasoning steps.

Abstract
While neural symbolic methods demonstrate impressive
performance in visual question answering on synthetic images, their performance suffers on real images. We identify that the long-tail distribution of visual concepts and unequal importance of reasoning steps in real data are the two
key obstacles that limit the models’ real-world potentials.
To address these challenges, we propose a new paradigm,
Calibrating Concepts and Operations (CCO), which enables neural symbolic models to capture underlying data
characteristics and to reason with hierarchical importance.
Specifically, we introduce an executor with learnable concept embedding magnitudes for handling distribution imbalance, and an operation calibrator for highlighting important operations and suppressing redundant ones.
Our experiments show CCO substantially boosts the performance of neural symbolic methods on real images. By
evaluating models on the real world dataset GQA, CCO
helps the neural symbolic method NSCL outperforms its
vanilla counterpart by 9.1% (from 47.0% to 56.1%); this result also largely reduces the performance gap between symbolic and non-symbolic methods. Additionally, we create a
perturbed test set for better understanding and analyzing
model performance on real images. Code is available at
https://lizw14.github.io/project/ccosr.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) aims to develop a
model that can answer open-ended questions from images.
Currently, end-to-end methods, which directly make predictions over dense visual and textual features [37, 19], represent the most effective class of models for VQA. Nonetheless, such methods have been criticized for exploiting shortcuts (e.g., statistical dataset bias [1, 11], question prior [2]
or isolated text and image elements [25]) to answer questions; these shortcuts often make them unable to generalize
well on out-of-domain data.
In contrast, neural symbolic methods [5, 18, 38, 26] are
equipped with strong reasoning ability, enabling them to answer multi-hop and complex questions in a compositional
and transparent manner—they first parse each question into
a program with a series of reasoning steps, and then compose neural modules on the fly to execute the program on
the image. While symbolic methods achieve nearly perfect
performance on synthetic dataset, they perform poorly on
real-world datasets. For instance, neural symbolic concept
learner (NSCL) [26] achieves 98.9% accuracy on the synthetic CLEVR dataset [17], but only 47.0% accuracy on the
real-world GQA dataset [15]. Note the original NSCL cannot be directly applied to GQA; this 47.0% accuracy is obtained from our own re-implementation, where minimal but

14910

