Inference of Black Hole Fluid-Dynamics from
Sparse Interferometric Measurements
Aviad Levis1∗ ,

Daeyoung Lee2 , Joel A. Tropp1 , Charles F. Gammie2 , Katherine L. Bouman1
1
California Institute of Technology, 2 University of Illinois
∗

alevis@caltech.edu

Abstract
We develop an approach to recover the underlying properties of fluid-dynamical processes from sparse measurements. We are motivated by the task of imaging the stochastically evolving environment surrounding black holes, and
demonstrate how flow parameters can be estimated from
sparse interferometric measurements used in radio astronomical imaging. To model the stochastic flow we use
spatio-temporal Gaussian Random Fields (GRFs). The high
dimensionality of the underlying source video makes direct representation via a GRF’s full covariance matrix intractable. In contrast, stochastic partial differential equations are able to capture correlations at multiple scales by
specifying only local interaction coefficients. Our approach
estimates the coefficients of a space-time diffusion equation
that dictates the stationary statistics of the dynamical process. We analyze our approach on realistic simulations of
black hole evolution and demonstrate its advantage over
state-of-the-art dynamic black hole imaging techniques.

1. Introduction
The first-ever black hole image was produced by the
Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) collaboration in 2019 [35].
This image, of the black hole in the center of the M87
galaxy was computationally constructed from radio measurements collected over an entire night [2]. The massive
size of the M87 black hole gives rise to evolution timescales
greater than acquisition length, thus, the image could be reconstructed assuming a static source [8]. In contrast, the
Milky Way’s galactic center hosts a smaller [18] more dynamic [15, 23] black hole: Sgr A*.
While black holes are not directly observable by radio
telescopes, it is their imprint on the fluid-dynamic backdrop
that can be observed. In this work, our goal is to recover
the fluid-dynamics of quickly evolving phenomena, such
as Sgr A*, from sparse remote sensing data. Recovering
these dynamic properties could reveal information about the
spin and mass of Sgr A* and pose a stronger test [11] to
General Relativity than M87 (due to the tighter mass con-

straints). While motivated by the evolving plasma surrounding a black hole, our approach is also applicable to other
inference problems with fluid-dynamics at their core.
Inference of dynamics from sparse measurements can be
placed on a spectrum of approaches ranging from modelfree, with many degrees of freedom (DOFs), to fully
physics-based, with only a handful of DOFs. On the modelfree end of the spectrum are approaches that first recover
an entire video sequence from the sparse observations [7].
In theory, video estimation is extremely flexible and could
capture any evolution. In practice, to estimate many DOFs
(every pixel in the video) strong inter-frame regularization
is imposed and much of the dynamic information is lost.
On the other end of the spectrum, are approaches that
seek to infer parameters of high fidelity physics-based models [36]. While advantageously characterized by a small
number of parameters, these models lack the flexibility for
novel scientific discovery. For instance, it is crucial to avoid
a model that assumes the presence of a black hole obeying
our current numerical models of physics, as this could skew
the results and interpretation. Furthermore, in many scenarios physics-based models are complex and non-linear,
resulting in computationally intensive simulations that are
intractable for use in an inverse problem. For instance, highfidelity models used for black hole require thousands of core
hours for a single simulation1 .
We instead seek to find a middle ground between these
two ends of the spectrum, using a physics-motivated surrogate model that is able to capture key features of the
fluid-dynamical process. In particular, we model the spatiotemporal flow surrounding a black hole as an output of a
stochastic partial differential equation (SPDE). This model
enables the efficient drawing of video samples with spatiotemporal correlation at multiple scales (Fig. 1), and was previously shown to capture the spatio-temporal variability of
astrophysical disks [24]. The inference task we propose is
to recover the SPDE coefficients, which characterize pixel
interactions. These coefficients are interpretable and can be
related back to the local correlations of physics-based simulations [19].
1 General relativistic magneto-hydrodynamics (GRMHD) [31]

2340

