BlockCopy: High-Resolution Video Processing with
Block-Sparse Feature Propagation and Online Policies
Thomas Verelst Tinne Tuytelaars
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven
Leuven, Belgium
{thomas.verelst, tinne.tuytelaars}@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract

Sparse execution +
feature copy (ours)
processed

copied

all pixels executed

Time

In this paper we propose BlockCopy, a scheme that accelerates pretrained frame-based CNNs to process video
more efficiently, compared to standard frame-by-frame processing. To this end, a lightweight policy network determines important regions in an image, and operations are
applied on selected regions only, using custom block-sparse
convolutions. Features of non-selected regions are simply
copied from the preceding frame, reducing the number of
computations and latency. The execution policy is trained
using reinforcement learning in an online fashion without
requiring ground truth annotations. Our universal framework is demonstrated on dense prediction tasks such as
pedestrian detection, instance segmentation and semantic
segmentation, using both state of the art (Center and Scale
Predictor, MGAN, SwiftNet) and standard baseline networks (Mask-RCNN, DeepLabV3+). BlockCopy achieves
significant FLOPS savings and inference speedup with minimal impact on accuracy.

Standard dense
execution

1. Introduction
Most contemporary convolutional neural networks
(CNN) are trained on images and process video frame-byframe, for simplicity or due to the lack of large annotated
video datasets. For instance, the popular COCO dataset [21]
for large-scale object detection does not include video sequences. However, video typically contains a considerable
amount of redundancy in the temporal domain, with some
image regions being almost static. Image-based convolutional neural networks do not take advantage of temporal
and spatial redundancies to improve efficiency: they apply the same operations on every pixel and every frame.
Representation warping has been proposed to save computations [8, 51, 17], but optical flow is expensive and warping
cannot cope with large changes such as newly appearing objects. Other video processing methods, e.g. using 3D con-

Figure 1: BlockCopy accelerates existing CNNs by sparsely
executing convolutions, while copying features from previous executions in non-important regions. In this example on
pedestrian detection, inference speed is more than doubled
with negligible increase in detection miss rate.
volutions or recurrent neural networks [18, 28, 22], focus on
improving accuracy by using temporal information, instead
of reducing computations by exploiting redundancies.
In this work, we propose a method to improve the efficiency and inference speed of convolutional neural networks for dense prediction tasks, by combining temporal feature propagation with sparse convolutions as illus-

5158

