Time-Equivariant Contrastive Video Representation Learning
Simon Jenni
Hailin Jin
Adobe Research
{jenni,hljin}@adobe.com

Abstract
We introduce a novel self-supervised contrastive learning method to learn representations from unlabelled videos.
Existing approaches ignore the specifics of input distortions, e.g., by learning invariance to temporal transformations. Instead, we argue that video representation should
preserve video dynamics and reflect temporal manipulations of the input. Therefore, we exploit novel constraints
to build representations that are equivariant to temporal
transformations and better capture video dynamics. In our
method, relative temporal transformations between augmented clips of a video are encoded in a vector and contrasted with other transformation vectors. To support temporal equivariance learning, we additionally propose the
self-supervised classification of two clips of a video into 1.
overlapping 2. ordered, or 3. unordered. Our experiments
show that time-equivariant representations achieve stateof-the-art results in video retrieval and action recognition
benchmarks on UCF101, HMDB51, and Diving48.

1. Introduction
A general video representation should accurately capture both scene appearance and dynamics to perform well
on various video understanding tasks, e.g., action recognition or video retrieval. While large annotated video datasets
[75, 1] advanced the state-of-the-art in video understanding,
such annotations are costly. Furthermore, supervised learning from sparse action labels can introduce biases towards
appearance and neglect features related to motion when actions are recognizable from static frames [42, 53]. We consider self-supervised learning (SSL) [18] as a possible solution, enabling both the training on abundant unlabelled
videos and biasing learning towards video dynamics.
In SSL, learning tasks are created for which supervision
does not require human labor. On images, state-of-the-art
SSL approaches based on contrastive learning are approaching or exceeding supervised pre-training. Fundamentally,
the task in these methods is to discriminate different training examples while simultaneously learning invariance to a

Figure 1. The importance of motion for video understanding.
We show four clips from two videos of the Diving48 dataset [42].
Different classes in this dataset are defined primarily by different motion patterns. How should these examples be used for contrastive representation learning? Besides recognizing the clips as
distinct, our method exploits that the relative temporal shifts between the top two clips and the bottom two clips are identical to
learn a temporally equivariant representation. This promotes detailed learning of motion patterns.

set of input transformations, e.g., of the spatial domain via
random cropping and horizontal flipping. How should the
additional temporal domain in videos be used for SSL?
A straightforward approach would be to learn invariance
to temporal input transformations. Since such invariance
could encourage the representation to disregard video dynamics, prior works proposed learning distinctiveness instead [51, 15], i.e., treating different temporal crops from
the same video as distinct examples. In contrast, rather than
merely learning to recognize two temporal augmentations
as different, our main idea is to learn precisely how they
differ. We, therefore, propose to exploit additional free supervision in the form of the known temporal transformations. Besides learning that two clips show different moments in time, the model will also learn the clips’ temporal order and even the temporal shift between them. This

9970

