Zero-Shot Day-Night Domain Adaptation with a Physics Prior
Attila Lengyel1 Sourav Garg2 Michael Milford2 Jan C. van Gemert1
Delft University of Technology1 QUT Centre for Robotics2
{a.lengyel, j.c.vangemert}@tudelft.nl

{s.garg, michael.milford}@qut.edu.au

Abstract
We explore the zero-shot setting for day-night domain
adaptation. The traditional domain adaptation setting is to
train on one domain and adapt to the target domain by exploiting unlabeled data samples from the test set. As gathering relevant test data is expensive and sometimes even
impossible, we remove any reliance on test data imagery
and instead exploit a visual inductive prior derived from
physics-based reflection models for domain adaptation. We
cast a number of color invariant edge detectors as trainable layers in a convolutional neural network and evaluate their robustness to illumination changes. We show that
the color invariant layer reduces the day-night distribution shift in feature map activations throughout the network.
We demonstrate improved performance for zero-shot day to
night domain adaptation on both synthetic as well as natural datasets in various tasks, including classification, segmentation and place recognition.

1. Introduction
Deep image recognition methods are sensitive to illumination shifts caused by accidental recording conditions such
as camera viewpoint, light color, and illumination changes
caused by time of day or weather [1, 16, 78], as for example
a model trained with daylight will not generalize to night
time. Robustness to such recording conditions is essential for autonomous driving and other safety-critical computer vision applications. An illumination shift between
train and test data is typically addressed by unsupervised
domain adaptation [55, 57, 76] where the labeled training
set is from one domain and the test set is from a different
domain. The main assumption is that the test data is readily
available and the challenge is how to make use of the unlabeled test data in an unsupervised setting to address the
domain shift. However, adding test data is often non-trivial
as it may be expensive and time consuming to obtain and
due to the long tail of the real world is impossible to collect
for all possible scenarios in advance.
Instead of adding more data, prior knowledge can be

Figure 1: Feature map activations in various layers of a
baseline ResNet-18 and a color invariant W -ResNet-18, averaged over all samples in a ‘Normal’ and ‘Darker’ test set
(samples on right). The intensity change between the test
sets causes an internal distribution shift throughout all layers of the baseline model. W normalizes the input resulting
in more domain invariant features.

built-in as a visual inductive bias. The champion of such
a bias is the convolution operator added to a deep network which yields a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN).
The CNN is translation invariant, and thus saves a massive
amount of data as the deep network no longer needs training samples at all possible locations. Here, we replace data
by an inductive photometric bias. We introduce a novel
zero-shot domain adaptation method for addressing daynight domain shifts exploiting learnable photometric invariant features as a physics-based visual inductive prior. In
contrast to unsupervised domain adaptation, our zero-shot
method reduces the data dependency by removing any reliance on the availability of test data.
Illumination changes to the source domain induce a distribution shift of feature map activations throughout all layers of a CNN. This is shown as the baseline in the top row
of Fig. 1, where the activations of a CNN trained on daytime data are shown for a ‘Normal’ (source) and ‘Darker’
(target) test set. Such a distribution shift, in turn, has a severe detrimental effect on the accuracy of the CNN [39].
Because the distribution shift is between the training data
and unavailable test data, this shift cannot be addressed in
a data-driven manner using, for example, variants of Batch
Normalization [29, 39]. Instead, we normalize feature map
14399

