VariTex: Variational Neural Face Textures
Marcel C. Bühler1

Abhimitra Meka2 Gengyan Li1,2 Thabo Beeler2
1
ETH Zurich 2 Google

Otmar Hilliges1

https://mcbuehler.github.io/VariTex

Figure 1. VariTex generalizes person-specific neural textures to variational textures. This allows to control both pose and expressions via
explicit 3D geometries (Fig. 3) and to sample novel identities (Fig. 5). Our method generates images under fine head pose and expression
control, while maintaining geometric consistency over a large range of these parameters (Fig. 4 and Tbl. 2).

Abstract
Deep generative models can synthesize photorealistic
images of human faces with novel identities. However, a
key challenge to the wide applicability of such techniques is
to provide independent control over semantically meaningful parameters: appearance, head pose, face shape, and facial expressions. In this paper, we propose VariTex - to the
best of our knowledge the first method that learns a variational latent feature space of neural face textures, which
allows sampling of novel identities. We combine this generative model with a parametric face model and gain explicit control over head pose and facial expressions. To
generate complete images of human heads, we propose an
additive decoder that adds plausible details such as hair.
A novel training scheme enforces a pose-independent latent space and in consequence, allows learning a one-tomany mapping between latent codes and pose-conditioned
exterior regions. The resulting method can generate geometrically consistent images of novel identities under finegrained control over head pose, face shape, and facial expressions. This facilitates a broad range of downstream
tasks, like sampling novel identities, changing the head
pose, expression transfer, and more.

1. Introduction
The ability to generate images with user-controlled parameters, such as identity-specific appearance, pose, and expressions would have many applications in computer graphics and vision. Synthesizing photorealistic images of novel
human faces has recently been made possible through deep
generative adversarial networks [17, 23, 24] or variational
auto encoders [26], that learn the distribution of real faces
to generate new identities. However, such methods typically
do not provide semantic control over shape, pose, and facial
expressions. This results in undesired global appearance
changes across different generated images, for example, a
change in identity when viewing from a different angle.
In order to gain more control over the generated images, recent work conditions neural networks on explicit
3D geometries [12, 16, 25, 27, 41, 42, 43]. Promising results have been shown by first generating the 2D face image from a learned latent space, and then attempting to rig
it using graphics techniques in a geometrically consistent
manner [41, 42]. This approach suffers from an inherent
disadvantage: since the image synthesis is performed in
2D space only, it is hard to enforce consistency under 3D
manipulation. Strong supervision via multi-view images or
multi-pose data from monocular videos at training time can
alleviate this to some degree. However, the inherent 2D na-

13890

