Learning Multiple Pixelwise Tasks Based on Loss Scale Balancing
Jae-Han Lee
Korea University

Chul Lee
Dongguk University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

jaehanlee@mcl.korea.ac.kr

chullee@dongguk.edu

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel loss weighting algorithm, called loss
scale balancing (LSB), for multi-task learning (MTL) of pixelwise vision tasks. An MTL model is trained to estimate
multiple pixelwise predictions using an overall loss, which
is a linear combination of individual task losses. The proposed algorithm dynamically adjusts the linear weights to
learn all tasks effectively. Instead of controlling the trend
of each loss value directly, we balance the loss scale —
the product of the loss value and its weight — periodically.
In addition, by evaluating the difficulty of each task based
on the previous loss record, the proposed algorithm focuses
more on difficult tasks during training. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm outperforms conventional weighting algorithms for MTL of various pixelwise
tasks. Codes are available at https://github.com/jaehanleemcl/LSB-MTL.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a machine learning technique to solve multiple learning tasks simultaneously while
exploiting commonalities and differences across tasks.
MTL can improve the learning efficiency and prediction accuracy for related tasks using an integrated model, as compared to separate models trained for the multiple tasks independently. The effectiveness of MTL has been proven both
theoretically and experimentally [1–4, 11]. With the advances in deep learning, MTL has been employed in a wide
range of applications, such as computer vision [14, 19, 32],
natural language processing (NLP) [7, 10, 28], reinforcement learning [12,17,35], and speech recognition [8,16,39].
In computer vision, MTL models using convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have been proposed mainly. For
example, MTL models have been developed to jointly perform three pixelwise tasks of depth estimation, surface normal estimation, and semantic segmentation from an input
image [25, 46]. Also, the joint depth and motion estimation from a video [6, 44] and the classification of an image
for multiple attributes [30, 37] have been studied. These re-

searches have advanced the learning of closely related tasks
using a single MTL model. Since a large part of the network
is shared between tasks, an MTL model is advantageous in
terms of complexity, inference time, and learning efficiency.
To develop an effective deep MTL algorithm, two factors should be considered: architecture and training scheme.
First, the architecture should be designed to learn both taskacross and task-specific representations by allocating network parameters appropriately for shared and task-specific
purposes. Many architectures have been developed by considering various factors, such as the CNN capacity, data
type, and relationship between tasks [12, 29, 34]. Second,
a training scheme should discourage any bias toward a specific task [6,18,25]. Because an MTL model generates multiple estimates, the corresponding losses should be defined
and then combined to form an overall loss. Since each loss
has a different scale during training, the overall loss may
be dominated by a specific loss. Moreover, the losses may
vary in different directions or even fluctuate during training.
It is hence important to balance loss contributions and thus
enforce that MTL learns all tasks effectively.
In this paper, we propose a novel loss weighting algorithm, called loss scale balancing (LSB), for MTL of
pixelwise computer vision tasks (e.g. depth estimation
and semantic segmentation), which can dynamically adjust
weights to learn all tasks effectively. Based on the observation that balancing the loss scale, which is the product of
a loss value and its weight, is more efficient than controlling the trend of each loss value directly, we adjust the loss
scales to be balanced periodically. Besides, by evaluating
the difficulty of each task using the previous loss record, the
proposed algorithm can focus more on difficult tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm
can successfully balance loss scales to improve the performance of each task. The proposed LSB algorithm outperforms conventional weighting algorithms.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose balancing loss scales, instead of losses
themselves, to improve the performance of MTL of
pixelwise vision tasks.
• We further improve the performance by tuning loss

5107

