SynFace: Face Recognition with Synthetic Data
Haibo Qiu1 ,* Baosheng Yu2 ,* Dihong Gong3 , Zhifeng Li3 , Wei Liu3 , Dacheng Tao1,2
1
JD Explore Academy, China 2 The University of Sydney, Australia
3
Tencent Data Platform, China
qiuhaibo1@jd.com, baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au, gongdihong@gmail.com,
michaelzfli@tencent.com, wl2223@columbia.edu, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
With the recent success of deep neural networks, remarkable progress has been achieved on face recognition. However, collecting large-scale real-world training data for face
recognition has turned out to be challenging, especially due
to the label noise and privacy issues. Meanwhile, existing
face recognition datasets are usually collected from web images, lacking detailed annotations on attributes (e.g., pose
and expression), so the influences of different attributes on
face recognition have been poorly investigated. In this paper, we address the above-mentioned issues in face recognition using synthetic face images, i.e., SynFace. Specifically, we first explore the performance gap between recent
state-of-the-art face recognition models trained with synthetic and real face images. We then analyze the underlying
causes behind the performance gap, e.g., the poor intraclass variations and the domain gap between synthetic and
real face images. Inspired by this, we devise the SynFace
with identity mixup (IM) and domain mixup (DM) to mitigate the above performance gap, demonstrating the great
potentials of synthetic data for face recognition. Furthermore, with the controllable face synthesis model, we can
easily manage different factors of synthetic face generation, including pose, expression, illumination, the number of
identities, and samples per identity. Therefore, we also perform a systematically empirical analysis on synthetic face
images to provide some insights on how to effectively utilize
synthetic data for face recognition.

1. Introduction
In the last few years, face recognition has achieved extraordinary progress in a wide range of challenging problems including pose-robust face recognition [5, 24, 62],
matching faces across ages [15, 17, 55, 59], across modalities [13, 14, 16, 30, 31], and occlusions [40, 48, 70].
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Examples of real/synthetic face images. The first row
indicates real face images from CASIA-WebFace, and the second row shows synthetic face images generated by DiscoFaceGAN [11] with the proposed identity mixup module.

Among these progresses, not only the very deep neural
networks [22, 25, 29, 47] and sophisticated design of loss
functions [10, 23, 32, 56, 60], but also large-scale training
datasets [20, 26, 27] played important roles. However, it
has turned out to be very difficult to further boost the performance of face recognition with the increasing number of
training images collected from the Internet, especially due
to the severe label noise and privacy issues [20, 54, 58]. For
example, several large-scale face recognition datasets are
struggling with the consent of all involved person/identities,
or even have to close the access of face data from the website [20]. Meanwhile, many face training datasets also suffer from the long-tailed problem, i.e., head classes with a
large number of samples and tail classes with a few number
of samples [34, 37, 71]. To utilize these datasets for face
recognition, people need to carefully design the network architectures and/or loss functions to alleviate the degradation
on model generalizability brought by the long-tailed problem. Furthermore, the above-mentioned issues also make
it difficult for people to explore the influences of different
attributes (e.g., expression, pose and illumination).
To address the aforementioned issues, we explore the
potentials of synthetic images for face recognition in this
paper. Recently, face synthesis using GANs [18] and
3DMM [3] have received increasing attention from the
computer vision community, and existing methods usually

10880

