Hand-Object Contact Consistency Reasoning for Human Grasps Generation
Hanwen Jiang*

Input

Output

Shaowei Liu* Jiashun Wang
UC San Diego

Input + Output

Contact

Input

Xiaolong Wang

Output

Input + Output

Contact

Figure 1: Generated human grasp on in-domain and out-of-domain objects. Object and hand contact maps are shown in the last column.
The brighter the region is, the higher the contact values between the hand and object are. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
While predicting robot grasps with parallel jaw grippers
have been well studied and widely applied in robot manipulation tasks, the study on natural human grasp generation with
a multi-ﬁnger hand remains a very challenging problem. In
this paper, we propose to generate human grasps given a 3D
object in the world. Our key observation is that it is crucial
to model the consistency between the hand contact points
and object contact regions. That is, we encourage the prior
hand contact points to be close to the object surface and the
object common contact regions to be touched by the hand at
the same time. Based on the hand-object contact consistency,
we design novel objectives in training the human grasp generation model and also a new self-supervised task which
allows the grasp generation network to be adjusted even during test time. Our experiments show signiﬁcant improvement
in human grasp generation over state-of-the-art approaches
by a large margin. More interestingly, by optimizing the
model during test time with the self-supervised task, it helps
achieve larger gain on unseen and out-of-domain objects.
Project page: https://hwjiang1510.github.io/GraspTTA/.

1. Introduction
Capturing hand-object interactions has been an active
ﬁeld of study [48, 20, 30, 13, 2, 4, 47, 42, 57] and it has
wide applications in virtual reality [21, 55], human-computer
interaction [51] and imitation learning in robotics [59, 49,
39]. In this paper, we study the interactions via generation:
* Equal contribution.

As shown in Fig. 1, given only a 3D object in the world
coordinate, we generate the 3D human hand for grasping it.
Unlike predicting robot grasps with parallel jaw grippers [33,
56, 60, 5], predicting human grasps is substantially more
difﬁcult because: (i) Human hands have a lot more degrees
of freedom, which leads to much more complex contact;
(ii) The generated grasp needs to be not only physically
plausible but also presented in a natural way, consistent with
how objects are usually grasped.
To synthesize physically plausible and natural grasp
poses, recent works propose to use generative models [9,
25, 47] supervised by large-scale datasets [20, 19, 16] with
grasp annotations and contact analysis on hands. Speciﬁcally,
the large-scale dataset allows the model to generate realistic
human grasps and the contact analysis encourages the hand
contact points to be close with the object but without interpenetration. While these methods put a lot of efforts into
modeling the hand and its contact points, they ignore that
the object itself also has more possible contact regions that
need to be reached (see contact map in Fig. 1). In fact, recent
work has studied the common contact regions on objects and
trained neural networks to directly predict the contact map
from the 3D object model [2, 4].
In this paper, we argue that it is critical for the hand
contact points and object contact regions to reach mutual
agreement and consistency for grasp generation. To achieve
this, we propose to unify two separate models for both the
hand grasp synthesis and object contact map estimation. We
show that the consistency constraint between hand contact
points and object contact map is not only useful for optimizing better grasps during training time by designing new

11107

