Generic Attention-model Explainability for Interpreting
Bi-Modal and Encoder-Decoder Transformers

1

Hila Chefer1 Shir Gur1 Lior Wolf1,2
The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
Transformers are increasingly dominating multi-modal
reasoning tasks, such as visual question answering, achieving state-of-the-art results thanks to their ability to contextualize information using the self-attention and coattention mechanisms. These attention modules also play
a role in other computer vision tasks including object
detection and image segmentation. Unlike Transformers that only use self-attention, Transformers with coattention require to consider multiple attention maps in
parallel in order to highlight the information that is relevant to the prediction in the model’s input. In this
work, we propose the first method to explain prediction
by any Transformer-based architecture, including bi-modal
Transformers and Transformers with co-attentions. We
provide generic solutions and apply these to the three
most commonly used of these architectures: (i) pure selfattention, (ii) self-attention combined with co-attention, and
(iii) encoder-decoder attention. We show that our method
is superior to all existing methods which are adapted
from single modality explainability. Our code is available at: https://github.com/hila-chefer/
Transformer-MM-Explainability.

ently. The first encodes the text with a Transformer [40],
the image by either a ResNet [15] or a Transformer, and
then applies a symmetric contrastive loss. The second concatenates the quantized image representation to the text
tokens and then employs a Transformer model. There
are also many other methods of combining text and images [38, 21, 19, 18]. What is common to all of these is
that the mapping from the two inputs to the prediction contains interaction between the two modalities. These interactions often challenge the existing explainability methods
that are aimed at attention-based models, since, as far as we
can ascertain, all existing Transformer explainability methods (e.g., [5, 1]) heavily rely on self-attention, and do not
provide adaptations to any other form of attention, which is
commonly used in multi-modal Transformers.

1. Introduction

Another class of Transformer models that is not restricted to self-attention is that of Transformer encoderdecoders, i.e. generative models, in which the model typically receives an input from a single domain, and produces
output from a different one. These models are used in an
emerging class of object detection [4, 50] and image segmentation [43, 27, 42] methods, and are also widely used
for various NLP tasks, such as machine translation [40, 17].
In these object detection methods, for example, embeddings of the position-specific and class-specific queries are
crossed with the encoded image information.

Multi-modal Transformers may change the way that
computer vision is practiced. While the state of the art computer vision models are often trained as task-specific models that infer a fixed number of labels, Radford et al. [28]
have demonstrated that by training an image-text model that
employs Transformers for encoding each modality, tens of
downstream tasks can be performed, without further training (“zero-shot”), at comparable accuracy to the state of
the art. Subsequently, Ramesh et al. [30] used a bi-modal
Transformer to generate images that match a given description in unseen domains with unprecedented performance.
These two contributions merge text and images differ-

We propose the first explainability method that is applicable to all Transformer architectures, and demonstrate
its effectiveness on the three most commonly used Transformer architectures: (i) pure self-attention, (ii) selfattention combined with co-attention, and (iii) encoderdecoder attention. We use an exemplar model from each
architecture, and prove our method’s superiority over existing Transformer explainability methods, adapted from their
single modality origin. Our explainability prescription is
easier to implement than existing methods, such as [5], and
can be readily applied to any attention-based architecture.

397

