Cross-Sentence Temporal and Semantic Relations in Untitled.drawio
Video Activity Localisation

3/14/2021

Candidate segments in temporal order

Jiabo Huang

Yang Liu2 *

Shaogang Gong1

Hailin Jin3

jiabo.huang@qmul.ac.uk

yangliu@pku.edu.cn

s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

hljin@adobe.com

1*

1

Temporal

Semantic

A man throws Several men run to The man then 2
Queen Mary
University
of London
WICT, Peking University
a javelin.
the landing spot. celebrates.

3

Adobe Research

(c) Weak supervision
Candidate segments in temporal order

Abstract
Video activity localisation has recently attained increasing attention due to its practical values in automatically
localising the most salient visual segments corresponding
to their language descriptions (sentences) from untrimmed
and unstructured videos. For supervised model training, a
temporal annotation of both the start and end time index of
each video segment for a sentence (a video moment) must
be given. This is not only very expensive but also sensitive to ambiguity and subjective annotation bias, a much
harder task than image labelling. In this work, we develop
a more accurate weakly-supervised solution by introducing
Cross-Sentence Relations Mining (CRM) in video moment
proposal generation and matching when only a paragraph
description of activities without per-sentence temporal annotation is available. Specifically, we explore two crosssentence relational constraints: (1) Temporal ordering and
(2) semantic consistency among sentences in a paragraph
description of video activities. Existing weakly-supervised
techniques only consider within-sentence video segment
correlations in training without considering cross-sentence
paragraph context. This can mislead due to ambiguous expressions of individual sentences with visually indiscriminate video moment proposals in isolation. Experiments on
two publicly available activity localisation datasets show
the advantages of our approach over the state-of-the-art
weakly supervised methods, especially so when the video
activity descriptions become more complex.

1. Introduction
Video activity localisation by natural language is an important yet challenging task, which aims to localise temporally a video segment (moment1 ) that best corresponds to
a query sentence in an untrimmed (and often unstructured)
video [21, 8]. Most of the existing methods address this
task in a fully supervised manner [22, 6], i.e. the untrimmed

A man throws a
javelin.
Several men run to
the landing spot.
The man then
celebrates.

Time

(a) Fully-supervised

...

?

?

A man throws a javelin.

(b) Weakly-superivsed
Union

Candidate segments in temporal order

Before

...

...

After

Concat

A man throws Before Several men run to
a javelin.
the landing spot.

A man throws The man then
a javelin.
celebrates.

(c) Temporal consistency

(d) Semantic consistency

Figure 1: Different video activity localisation methods: (a)
Given a paragraph description and the per-sentence temporal annotation (start and end time index), fully-supervised
methods learn to align sentences with ground-truth semantically matching video moments [6, 22]. (b) Without finegrained temporal annotations, weakly-supervised models
often generate proposals of video segments corresponding
to sentences in a paragraph before learning the best visualtext alignment [20, 18]. (c) The CRM model explores the
temporal order of different sentences in a paragraph to minimise the ambiguities in matching the best video moments
to specific sentences in the context of a paragraph. (d) To
deal with ambiguous expressions in descriptions, CRM further explore plausible sentence expansion, e.g. pairing two
sentences (concatenation) as a more complex query to constrain the localisation of pairwise video moment proposals.
This explores cross-sentencing semantic consistency.
video data are annotated by both a paragraph description,
in which each sentence is describing a video moment-ofinterest (MoI), and per-sentence temporal boundaries on the
precise start and end time indices of every MoI. Given such
fine-grained labelling, models can generate MoIs from the
original videos to learn the best alignment of MoIs with
their descriptions (Fig. 1 (a)). To avoid the high annotation
cost and subjective annotation bias2 , recent works focus on

* Corresponding authors.
1 Video segment and moment are used interchangeably in this paper.

2 Different temporal boundaries are marked for the same sentences [1].

7199

