BAPA-Net: Boundary Adaptation and Prototype Alignment for
Cross-domain Semantic Segmentation
Yahao Liu Jinhong Deng Xinchen Gao Wen Li * Lixin Duan
Data Intelligence Group, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{lyhaolive, jhdeng1997, gxc0327, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing cross-domain semantic segmentation methods
usually focus on the overall segmentation results of whole
objects but neglect the importance of object boundaries.
In this work, we find that the segmentation performance
can be considerably boosted if we treat object boundaries
properly. For that, we propose a novel method called
BAPA-Net, which is based on a convolutional neural network via Boundary Adaptation and Prototype Alignment,
under the unsupervised domain adaptation setting. Specifically, we first construct additional images by pasting objects from source images to target images, and we develop a so-called boundary adaptation module to weigh
each pixel based on its distance to the nearest boundary
pixel of those pasted source objects. Moreover, we propose another prototype alignment module to reduce the
domain mismatch by minimizing distances between the
class prototypes of the source and target domains, where
boundaries are removed to avoid domain confusion during prototype calculation. By integrating the boundary
adaptation and prototype alignment, we are able to train
a discriminative and domain-invariant model for crossdomain semantic segmentation. We conduct extensive experiments on the benchmark datasets of urban scenes (i.e.,
GTA5→Cityscapes and SYNTHIA→Cityscapes). And the
promising results clearly show the effectiveness of our
BAPA-Net method over existing state-of-the-art for crossdomain semantic segmentation. Our implementation is
available at https://github.com/manmanjun/BAPA-Net.

1. Introduction
Because of the powerful representation ability of deep
convolutional neural networks [26], it has deeply boosted
the performance of the computer vision tasks including image recognition [45, 21], object detection [16, 32], semantic segmentation [33, 63, 3], etc. They all require plentiful
* The corresponding author

(a)
GT

(b)
UDA

(c)

GT

UDA

(d)

Figure 1. Comparisons between (a) the ground truth annotations
and (b) the segmentation result of an existing unsupervised domain
adaptation method [57] of a sample target image. It is obvious that
the segmentation results of boundary pixels are worse than the inner pixels (e.g., the inner part of the rider in (c) and the vegetation
in (d) are predicted perfectly, while the boundary pixels are not).

images and accurate annotations to train high-performance
models. Compared with image recognition, semantic segmentation is more complex and aims at classifying each
pixel in an image. Therefore, collecting the annotations for
segmentation is an extremely expensive and laborious process (e.g., 90 minutes per image for Cityscapes [7]).
A natural alternative is to collect the well-annotated synthetic data from the simulation platform where it can automatically render the various scenes (e.g., sunny, rain, foggy
street) with a much lower cost. For example, [43] builds
a large-scale urban scene dataset obtained from the GTA5
video game. However, the trained model on such synthetic data will suffer from a significant performance drop
as there exists a considerable domain discrepancy between

8801

