RECALL: Replay-based Continual Learning in Semantic Segmentation
Andrea Maracani∗, Umberto Michieli∗, Marco Toldo∗,†, Pietro Zanuttigh
Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova
andreamaracani@gmail.com, {umberto.michieli,toldomarco,zanuttigh}@dei.unipd.it

Web-crawler

Abstract

A common requirement for many machine learning applications is the ability to learn a sequence of tasks in multiple incremental steps, e.g., progressively introducing novel
classes to be recognized, instead of using a single-shot training procedure on a large dataset [34]. This problem has been
widely studied in image classification and many methods
propose to alleviate the forgetting of previous tasks and intransigence of learning new ones [22, 35, 45]. When the
model is exposed to samples of novel classes and is trained
on them without additional provisions, the optimization leads
to the so-called catastrophic forgetting phenomenon [36, 16],
i.e., knowledge about previously seen classes tends to be lost.
Incremental learning on dense tasks (e.g., semantic segmentation), where pixel-wise predictions are performed, has
∗ These authors share the first authorship.
† Our work was in part supported by the Italian Minister for Education
(MIUR) under the “Departments of Excellence” initiative (Law 232/2016).

…

1. Introduction

Step 0
Replay
labels

…

Deep networks allow to obtain outstanding results in semantic segmentation, however they need to be trained in a
single shot with a large amount of data. Continual learning settings where new classes are learned in incremental
steps and previous training data is no longer available are
challenging due to the catastrophic forgetting phenomenon.
Existing approaches typically fail when several incremental
steps are performed or in presence of a distribution shift of
the background class. We tackle these issues by recreating no
longer available data for the old classes and outlining a content inpainting scheme on the background class. We propose
two sources for replay data. The first resorts to a generative
adversarial network to sample from the class space of past
learning steps. The second relies on web-crawled data to retrieve images containing examples of old classes from online
databases. In both scenarios no samples of past steps are
stored, thus avoiding privacy concerns. Replay data are then
blended with new samples during the incremental steps. Our
approach, RECALL, outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Step 0
Replay
images

Step k-1

Step k-1

Replay
data

GAN
Original
data

…
Steps 0 … k-1 (data unavailable)

Step k

Figure 1: Replay images of previously seen classes are retrieved by a web crawler or a generative network and further
labeled. Then, the network is incrementally trained with a
mixture of new and replay data.
only recently been explored and the first experimental studies show that catastrophic forgetting is even more severe than
on the classification task [29, 31]. Current approaches for
class-incremental semantic segmentation re-frame knowledge distillation strategies inspired by previous works on
image classification [29, 5, 23, 31]. Although they partially
alleviate forgetting, they often fail when multiple incremental steps are performed or when background shift [5] (i.e.,
change of statistics of the background across learning steps,
as it incorporates old or future classes) occurs.
In this paper, we follow a completely different strategy
and, instead of distilling knowledge from a teacher model
(i.e., the old one) to avoid forgetting, we propose to generate
samples of old classes by using replay strategies. We propose
RECALL (REplay in ContinuAL Learning), a method that
re-creates representations of old classes and mixes them with
the available training data, i.e., containing novel classes being learned (see Fig. 1). To reduce background shift we introduce a self-inpainting strategy that re-assigns the background
region according to predictions of the previous model.
To generate representations of past classes we pursue two
possible directions. The first is based on a pre-trained generative model, i.e., a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
[15] conditioned to produce samples of an input class. The
GAN has been trained beforehand on a dataset different than
the target one (we chose ImageNet as it comprehends a wide
variety of classes and domains), thus requiring a Class Mapping Module to perform the translation between the two label

7026

