Learning Frequency-aware Dynamic Network for Efficient Super-Resolution
Wenbin Xie1,2∗ , Dehua Song1∗, Chang Xu3 , Chunjing Xu1 , Hui Zhang2 , Yunhe Wang1
1

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies.

2

School of Software, Tsinghua University.

3

The University of Sydney.

{dehua.song, yunhe.wang, xuchunjing}@huawei.com; xiewb18@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn;

Abstract

2

4

1. Introduction
Single image super resolution (SISR) receives lowresolution images and outputs their high-resolution counterparts, which is widely used in real-world applications such
as mobile phone, surveillance, autonomous driving, etc.
Basically, SISR is an ill-posed reverse problem for recovering more information from the low-resolution versions.
Thanks to the great progress of deep learning, a number
of approaches have been explored using deep convolutional
∗ Equal contribution

1

2

3

3

(a) Natural image.

4

(b) DCT and masked spectrum.

(c) Frequency mask from DCT.

Mini Model

Medium Model

Heavy Model

PSNR

42.26

42.26 (↑0.00)

42.25 (↓0.01)

PSNR

40.01

40.53 (↑0.52)

40.62 (↑0.61)

PSNR

29.38

30.00 (↑0.62)

31.98 (↑2.60)

4

Medium Freq. 3

Low Freq.

2

HR

High Freq.

Deep learning based methods, especially convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied in
the field of single image super-resolution (SISR). To obtain
better fidelity and visual quality, most of existing networks
are of heavy design with massive computation. However,
the computation resources of modern mobile devices are
limited, which cannot easily support the expensive cost. To
this end, this paper explores a novel frequency-aware dynamic network for dividing the input into multiple parts
according to its coefficients in the discrete cosine transform (DCT) domain. In practice, the high-frequency part
will be processed using expensive operations and the lowerfrequency part is assigned with cheap operations to relieve
the computation burden. Since pixels or image patches belong to low-frequency areas contain relatively few textural
details, this dynamic network will not affect the quality of
resulting super-resolution images. In addition, we embed
predictors into the proposed dynamic network to end-to-end
fine-tune the handcrafted frequency-aware masks. Extensive experiments conducted on benchmark SISR models and
datasets show that the frequency-aware dynamic network
can be employed for various SISR neural architectures to
obtain the better tradeoff between visual quality and computational complexity. For instance, we can reduce the FLOPs
of SR models by approximate 50% while preserving stateof-the-art SISR performance.

Figure 1: The motivation of our frequency-aware dynamic
network. We illustrate the performance of SISR networks
with various amounts of computation separately processing
patches with different frequency signals. The profit brought
by heavy computations becomes slighter as the frequency
decreases. For conventional SR models, massive computation redundancy exists in processing low and medium frequency regions. Wherein, ­, ® and ¯ denote low, medium
and high frequency signals/regions, respectively.
neural networks (CNNs) for addressing the SISR problem.
Since neural networks can capture more information from a
large amount of available images thus yield higher performance over conventional image recovery algorithms.
Similar to most computer vision tasks, the design of network architectures is quite important for the performance
of SISR. Dong et al. [8] first employed a network on super-

4308

