Learning with Noisy Labels for Robust Point Cloud Segmentation
Shuquan Ye1 Dongdong Chen2 Songfang Han3 Jing Liao1 *
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Microsoft Cloud AI 3 University of California San Diego
shuquanye2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, cddlyf@gmail.com, s5han@eng.ucsd.edu, jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Point cloud segmentation is a fundamental task in 3D.
Despite recent progress on point cloud segmentation with
the power of deep networks, current deep learning methods based on the clean label assumptions may fail with
noisy labels. Yet, object class labels are often mislabeled
in real-world point cloud datasets. In this work, we take
the lead in solving this issue by proposing a novel Point
Noise-Adaptive Learning (PNAL) framework. Compared
to existing noise-robust methods on image tasks, our PNAL
is noise-rate blind, to cope with the spatially variant noise
rate problem specific to point clouds . Specifically, we propose a novel point-wise confidence selection to obtain reliable labels based on the historical predictions of each point.
A novel cluster-wise label correction is proposed with a voting strategy to generate the best possible label taking the
neighbor point correlations into consideration. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness
of PNAL on both synthetic and real-world noisy datasets. In
particular, even with 60% symmetric noisy labels, our proposed method produces much better results than its baseline
counterpart without PNAL and is comparable to the ideal
upper bound trained on a completely clean dataset. Moreover, we fully re-labeled the validation set of a popular but
noisy real-world scene dataset ScanNetV2 to make it clean,
for rigorous experiment and future research. Our code and
data will be released.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the development of deep neural networks
(DNNs) has led to great success in 3D point cloud segmentation [11, 36, 32]. Thanks to the powerful learning capacity, once high-quality annotations are given, DNNs-based
point segmentation methods can achieve remarkable performance. However, such high learning capacity is a doubleedged sword, i.e., it can also over-fit label noise and incur
performance degradation if there are incorrect annotations.
* Jing Liao is the corresponding author.

In fact, compared to annotating 2D images, clean 3D
data labels are more difficult to obtain. It is mainly because: 1) the point number to annotate is often very massive, e.g., million scale in annotating a typical indoor scene
in ScanNetV2 [6]; 2) the annotating process is inherently
more complex and requires more expertise for the annotators, e.g., constantly changing the view, position and scale
to understand the underlying 3D structure. As a result, even
the commonly used 3D scene dataset ScanNetV2 [6], which
is already a version after refining the label from the ScanNet, has a large portion of label noise, as shown in Figure 1.
Based on the above considerations, there is an urgent
need to study how to learn with noisy labels for robust point
cloud segmentation. However, to the best of our knowledge, most research works about learning with noisy labels focus on image classification, and no previous study
exists for point cloud segmentation. More importantly,
such works designed for image recognition cannot be directly applied to point cloud segmentation. For example,
among the most popular methods, sample selection methods [12, 33, 24, 26, 17] often assume that the noise rate
of all samples is a known constant value. However, the
noise rates are often unknown and variable. Robust loss
function methods [35, 30] cannot achieve consistent noise
robustness to large noise rates. Whereas label correction
methods [23, 26, 1] are designed to correct for image-level
label noise, the point cloud segmentation task requires to
correct point-level noises. Considering that the point labels
within each instance are strongly correlated, directly applying these methods to each point independently without considering the local correlation is suboptimal.
In this paper, we present a novel point noise-adaptive
learning (PNAL) framework, which is the first attempt
to empower the point cloud segmentation model with resistance to annotation noise. Specifically, to cope with
unknown, possibly heavy, and varying noise rates, we
designed a point-level confidence selection mechanism,
which obtains reliable labels based on the historical predictions of each point without requiring a known noise rate.
Next, in order to fully utilize the local correlation among
labels, we propose a label correction process performed at

6443

