WaveFill: A Wavelet-based Generation Network for Image Inpainting
Jianxiong Pan2
Yingchen Yu1,2
Fangneng Zhan1
Shijian Lu1 *
Feiying Ma2
Xuansong Xie2
Chunyan Miao1
1
2
Nanyang Technological University DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
yingchen001@e.ntu.edu.sg, {fnzhan, shijian.lu, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg

1. Introduction
As an ill-posed problem, image inpainting is not to recover the original images for corrupted regions but to synthesize alternative contents that are visually plausible and
semantically reasonable. It has been widely investigated
in various image editing tasks such as object removal, old
photo restoration, movie restoration, and so on. Realistic and high-fidelity image inpainting remains a challenging task especially when the corrupted regions are large and
* Corresponding author

EMD: 22.84

EMD: 22.06

EMD: 17.25

EMD: 80.77

EMD: 105.1

EMD: 50.97

LF

Image inpainting aims to complete the missing or corrupted regions of images with realistic contents. The prevalent approaches adopt a hybrid objective of reconstruction
and perceptual quality by using generative adversarial networks. However, the reconstruction loss and adversarial
loss focus on synthesizing contents of different frequencies
and simply applying them together often leads to interfrequency conflicts and compromised inpainting. This paper presents WaveFill, a wavelet-based inpainting network
that decomposes images into multiple frequency bands and
fills the missing regions in each frequency band separately
and explicitly. WaveFill decomposes images by using discrete wavelet transform (DWT) that preserves spatial information naturally. It applies L1 reconstruction loss to
the decomposed low-frequency bands and adversarial loss
to high-frequency bands, hence effectively mitigate interfrequency conflicts while completing images in spatial domain. To address the inpainting inconsistency in different
frequency bands and fuse features with distinct statistics, we
design a novel normalization scheme that aligns and fuses
the multi-frequency features effectively. Extensive experiments over multiple datasets show that WaveFill achieves
superior image inpainting qualitatively and quantitatively.

HF

Abstract

Inpainting

{jianxiong.pjx, feiying.mfy}@alibaba-inc.com, xingtong.xxs@taobao.com

GMCNN

GC

WaveFill

Ground
Truth

Figure 1. Image inpainting often faces a dilemma of reconstruction and perceptual quality: L1/L2 loss focuses on the reconstruction of global low-frequency structures while adversarial loss focuses on generating high-frequency texture details. State-of-theart approaches implicitly tackle this issue by weighted summing of
the two objectives (e.g. in GMCNN [35]) or employing a Coarseto-Fine strategy (e.g. in GC [40]), but tend to produce inconsistent
distributions with missing details or artifacts. The proposed WaveFill disentangles images into multiple frequency bands and applies
relevant losses to different bands separately, which mitigates interfrequency conflicts and produces more realistic structures and details. The distances between the ground-truth histogram and prediction histograms in both low-frequency (LF) and high-frequency
(HF) are evaluated by Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) [30].

have complex texture and structural patterns.
State-of-the-art image inpainting methods leverage generative adversarial networks (GANs) [10] heavily for generating realistic high-frequency details [28]. But they often
face a dilemma of perceptual quality and reconstruction that
share a perception-distortion trade-off [4]. Specifically, the
adversarial loss in GANs tends to recover high-frequency
texture details and improve the perceptual quality [31, 8],
while the L1/L2 loss in reconstruction focuses more on
recovering low-frequency global structures [28]. Concurrently optimizing the two objectives in spatial domain tends
to introduce inter-frequency conflicts as illustrated in Fig. 1.

14114

