Temporal-wise Attention Spiking Neural Networks for Event Streams
Classification
Man Yao∗1 , Huanhuan Gao∗1 , Guangshe Zhao†1 , Dingheng Wang1 , Yihan Lin2 , Zhaoxu Yang1 , Guoqi Li†2
1
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Tsinghua University
{zhaogs@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, liguoqi@tsinghua.edu.cn}

Abstract
How to effectively and efficiently deal with spatiotemporal event streams, where the events are generally
sparse and non-uniform and have the µs temporal resolution, is of great value and has various real-life applications. Spiking neural network (SNN), as one of the
brain-inspired event-triggered computing models, has the
potential to extract effective spatio-temporal features from
the event streams. However, when aggregating individual
events into frames with a new higher temporal resolution,
existing SNN models do not attach importance to that the serial frames have different signal-to-noise ratios since event
streams are sparse and non-uniform. This situation interferes with the performance of existing SNNs. In this work,
we propose a temporal-wise attention SNN (TA-SNN) model
to learn frame-based representation for processing event
streams. Concretely, we extend the attention concept to
temporal-wise input to judge the significance of frames for
the final decision at the training stage, and discard the irrelevant frames at the inference stage. We demonstrate that
TA-SNN models improve the accuracy of event streams classification tasks. We also study the impact of multiple-scale
temporal resolutions for frame-based representation. Our
approach is tested on three different classification tasks:
gesture recognition, image classification, and spoken digit
recognition. We report the state-of-the-art results on these
tasks, and get the essential improvement of accuracy (almost 19%) for gesture recognition with only 60 ms.

1. Introduction
Dynamic vision sensors (DVS)[20, 28] pose a new
paradigm shift by using sparse and asynchronous events
to represent visual information. Unlike the conventional
cameras, which produce fixed low-rate synchronized frames
(typically less than 60 frames per second), DVS cameras
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

TA
× weighting

0.08

0.12

0.33

0.78

×

×

×

×

0.82

0.86

×

×

0.68

0.22

×

×

Training

Spiking Neural Network

TA

0.08

0.12

0.33

0.78

0.82

Spiking Neural Network

0.86

0.68

0.22

Inference

Figure 1. Our proposed model use the TA to judge the significance
of frames at the training stage and discard the irrelevant frames
at the inference stage. The sample is from the DVS128 Gesture
dataset. The green and cyan colors denote the On and Off channels
which correspond to brightness increase and decrease, respectively
(more details of event streams in section 3.1).

encode the time, location, and polarity of the brightness
changes for each pixel at an extremely high event rate (1M
to 1G events per second ), and exhibit advantages mainly in
three aspects[11, 30]. Firstly, DVS cameras require much
less resource, as the events are sparse and only triggered
when the intensity changes. Secondly, the µs temporal resolution (TR) of DVS can avoid motion blur by producing high-rate events. Thirdly, DVS cameras have a high
dynamic range (140dB vs. 60dB of conventional cameras), which makes them able to acquire information from
challenging illumination conditions. These characteristics
bring superiorities over conventional cameras when orienting to visual tasks which need low latency, low power consumption, and stability for variant illumination, which have
been used in high-speed object tracking[30], autonomous
driving[4], SLAM[7], low-latency interaction[1], etc.
However, we have observed that the event streams

10221

