Attentive and Contrastive Learning for Joint Depth and Motion Field Estimation
Seokju Lee
Francois Rameau
Fei Pan
In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{seokju91,rameau.fr,feipan664}@gmail.com, iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Estimating the motion of the camera together with the 3D
structure of the scene from a monocular vision system is a
complex task that often relies on the so-called scene rigidity
assumption. When observing a dynamic environment, this
assumption is violated which leads to an ambiguity between
the ego-motion of the camera and the motion of the objects.
To solve this problem, we present a self-supervised learning framework for 3D object motion field estimation from
monocular videos. Our contributions are two-fold. First, we
propose a two-stage projection pipeline to explicitly disentangle the camera ego-motion and the object motions with
dynamics attention module, called DAM. Specifically, we
design an integrated motion model that estimates the motion of the camera and object in the first and second warping stages, respectively, controlled by the attention module
through a shared motion encoder. Second, we propose an
object motion field estimation through contrastive sample
consensus, called CSAC, taking advantage of weak semantic
prior (bounding box from an object detector) and geometric constraints (each object respects the rigid body motion
model). Experiments on KITTI, Cityscapes, and Waymo
Open Dataset demonstrate the relevance of our approach
and show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms for the tasks of self-supervised monocular depth
estimation, object motion segmentation, monocular scene
flow estimation, and visual odometry.

1. Introduction
The simultaneous estimation of the camera motion and
scene geometry is a fundamental research topic in 3D computer vision. Traditionally, this problem is tackled by featurebased methods [33], or direct approaches [14] that minimizes the photometric inconsistency among warped adjacent frames. A pioneering work based on deep neural
network (DNN) [44] uses the photometric error map as a
self-supervisory signal to jointly train a depth and a motion
network. Inspired by this baseline structure, self-supervised
depth, and motion learning framework has been widely stud-

Dynamics Attention Module (DAM)
background
shared features
Ego-motion

Motion
Networks
shared features

DAM
Object motion

objectness

Contrastive Sample Consensus (CSAC)
Object motion field

(a) Baseline

(b) Ours

Figure 1. We introduce a unified motion modeling with our dynamics attention module (DAM) and a novel motion learning technique
via contrastive sample consensus (CSAC). The last row shows
synthesized views from the predicted depth and motion field. Compared to the baseline, our model learns the object motion fields in a
more semantically plausible way, which enhances the distinction
between the object and the background area.

ied [44, 30, 40, 32, 41] with an additional self-supervisory
signal such as geometric consistency [32], optical flow [36],
segmentation map [43], edge and normal map [41]. These
photo-consistency-based optimization methods assume a
static scene or require to mask out moving objects to disregard non-rigid motions. Such works aim at predicting the
depth and ego-motion from a camera but are not suitable for

4862

