Structure-Preserving Deraining with Residue Channel Prior Guidance
Qiaosi Yi1 , Juncheng Li1 , Qinyan Dai1 , Faming Fang1 *, Guixu Zhang1 , and Tieyong Zeng2
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing,
and School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Department of Mathematics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
qiaosiyijoyies@gmail.com, cvjunchengli@gmail.com, 649310204@qq.com
fmfang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, gxzhang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, zeng@math.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Single image deraining is important for many high-level
computer vision tasks since the rain streaks can severely degrade the visibility of images, thereby affecting the recognition and analysis of the image. Recently, many CNN-based
methods have been proposed for rain removal. Although
these methods can remove part of the rain streaks, it is
difficult for them to adapt to real-world scenarios and restore high-quality rain-free images with clear and accurate
structures. To solve this problem, we propose a StructurePreserving Deraining Network (SPDNet) with RCP guidance. SPDNet directly generates high-quality rain-free images with clear and accurate structures under the guidance
of RCP but does not rely on any rain-generating assumptions. Specifically, we found that the RCP of images contains more accurate structural information than rainy images. Therefore, we introduced it to our deraining network to protect structure information of the rain-free image.
Meanwhile, a Wavelet-based Multi-Level Module (WMLM)
is proposed as the backbone for learning the background information of rainy images and an Interactive Fusion Module (IFM) is designed to make full use of RCP information. In addition, an iterative guidance strategy is proposed
to gradually improve the accuracy of RCP, refining the result in a progressive path. Extensive experimental results
on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that
the proposed model achieves new state-of-the-art results.
Code: https://github.com/Joyies/SPDNet

1. Introduction
Single image deraining (SID) aims to reconstruct a visually pleasing image from its corresponding rain-streaksdegraded image. In the past years, various methods have
been proposed for SID. For traditional methods, many researchers [11, 1, 3, 4, 41, 24, 27, 12] focused on exploring
the physical properties of the rain and background layers.
* Corresponding author

Rainy Image

DRD-Net

DCSFN

RCDNet

SPDNet (Ours)

GT

Figure 1: An example of image deraining results. Obviously, SPDNet can reconstruct high-quality image with
clear and accurate structure.
Meanwhile, various priors have been proposed to regularize and separate them, such as layer priors with Gaussian
mixture model (GMM) [24], discriminative sparse coding
(DSC) [27], and joint convolutional analysis and synthesis
sparse representation (JCAS) [12]. Although these methods
can effectively remove the rain streaks, they require complex iterative optimization to find the best solution.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNN) have
achieved significant success in many computer vision
tasks [32, 13, 18, 29]. Moreover, many CNN-based methods [7, 8, 43, 23, 49, 15, 38, 50, 31, 45, 6, 37, 16] have
been proposed for rain removal, such as DDN [8], RESCAN [23], PReNet [31], DRDNet [6], and RCDNet [37].
Albeit these methods have brought great performance improvements, they are difficult to remove all rain streaks and
recover the structural information of images in complex scenarios (Fig. 1). This is because: (1). Most of them directly learn the mapping between the rainy image and the
rain streaks layers. In other words, most methods predict

4238

