Exploring Inter-Channel Correlation for Diversity-preserved Knowledge
Distillation
Li Liu1† Qingle Huang1† Sihao Lin2† ‡ Hongwei Xie1 Bing Wang1 Xiaojun Chang3 * Xiaodan Liang4
1
Alibaba Group 2 Monash University 3 RMIT University 4 Sun Yat-sen University
{liuli.ll9412, qingle.hql, linsihao6, hongwei.xie.90, xdliang328}@gmail.com
fengquan.wb@alibaba-inc.com, xiaojun.chang@rmit.edu.au

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation has shown very promising ability in transferring learned representation from the larger
model (teacher) to the smaller one (student). Despite
many efforts, prior methods ignore the important role of
retaining inter-channel correlation of features, leading to
the lack of capturing intrinsic distribution of the feature
space and sufficient diversity properties of features in the
teacher network. To solve the issue, we propose the
novel Inter-Channel Correlation for Knowledge Distillation
(ICKD), with which the diversity and homology of the feature space of the student network can align with that of
the teacher network. The correlation between these two
channels is interpreted as diversity if they are irrelevant
to each other, otherwise homology. Then the student is
required to mimic the correlation within its own embedding space. In addition, we introduce the grid-level interchannel correlation, making it capable of dense prediction
tasks. Extensive experiments on two vision tasks, including ImageNet classification and Pascal VOC segmentation,
demonstrate the superiority of our ICKD, which consistently outperforms many existing methods, advancing the
state-of-the-art in the fields of Knowledge Distillation. To
our knowledge, we are the first method based on knowledge distillation boosts ResNet18 beyond 72% Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet classification. Code is available at:
https://github.com/ADLab-AutoDrive/ICKD.

1. Introduction
It is widely witnessed that larger networks are superior in
learning capacity compared to smaller ones. Nevertheless,
due to the great amount of energy consumption and computation costs, a large network (e.g., ResNet-50 [9]), though
powerful, is difficult to deploy on mobile systems. Hence,
there is a growing interest in reducing the model size while
* Corresponding Author.
† Equal contribution.
‡ Work done when as an intern in DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.

Figure 1: Illustration of inter-channel correlation. The
channels orderly extracted from the second layer of
ResNet18 have been visualized. The channels denoted by
red boxes are homologous both perceptually and mathematically (e.g., inner-product), while the channels denoted by
orange boxes are diverse. We show the inter-channel correlation can effectively measure that each channel is homologous or diverse to others, which further reflects the richness
of the feature spaces. Based on this insightful finding, our
ICKD can enforce the student to mimic this property from
the teacher.
preserving comparable performance, which bridges the gap
between small networks and large networks.
Knowledge distillation is one of the promising methods to this problem. It is acknowledged that Bucila et al.
[1] introduced the idea of knowledge distillation and Hinton et al. [12] further popularized this concept. The key
idea of knowledge distillation is to let the student network
mimic the teacher model. The underlying principle is that
teachers can provide the knowledge that ground truth labels can not tell. Despite its success, this technique, devoted to instance-level classification, may lead the student
to mainly learn the instance-level information but not structural information, which limits its application. Prior works
[19, 20, 21, 27, 28] have been proposed to help the student
network learn the structural representation for better generalization ability. These methods generally utilize the cor-

8271

