Gravity-Aware Monocular 3D Human-Object Reconstruction
Rishabh Dabral1,2
1

Soshi Shimada2
2

IIT Bombay

Arjun Jain3,4

3

MPI for Informatics, SIC

Overview of GraviCap

Christian Theobalt2
IISc Bangalore

Outputs
in Absolute Units [m or m/s]

Vladislav Golyanik2
4

Fast Code AI

GraviCap Dataset

: Initial Object Position
: Initial Object Velocity, m/s
: Focal Length

Initial 3D Pose
Estimation

: Gravity Vector
: Bone Length, m

..
.

: Corrective Root Translation

..

: 3D Object Trajectory

.
..

Applications

.
..

.

.

..
.

..

2D Object Trajectory and
Joint Keypoints

..

Input: 2D Images
(monocular)

: Final Global 3D Pose

2D Object and
Pose Estimation

3D Global Pose Estimation
3D Object Trajectory Estimation
Height Measurement [m]
Floor Normal Estimation
Focal Length Estimation [m]

.

Figure 1. The proposed G RAVI C AP approach captures 3D human motions and 3D object trajectories from monocular RGB videos. (Left:)
Thanks to the physics-based constraints, we can disambiguate the scene’s scale in the monocular setting and recover 3D human poses and
the trajectories in meters. (Right:) We evaluate our method on a new real multi-view dataset with several subjects and activities.

Abstract
This paper proposes GraviCap, i.e., a new approach
for joint markerless 3D human motion capture and object trajectory estimation from monocular RGB videos. We
focus on scenes with objects partially observed during a
free flight. In contrast to existing monocular methods, we
can recover scale, object trajectories as well as human
bone lengths in meters and the ground plane’s orientation, thanks to the awareness of the gravity constraining
object motions. Our objective function is parametrised by
the object’s initial velocity and position, gravity direction
and focal length, and jointly optimised for one or several
free flight episodes. The proposed human-object interaction constraints ensure geometric consistency of the 3D reconstructions and improved physical plausibility of human
poses compared to the unconstrained case. We evaluate
GraviCap on a new dataset with ground-truth annotations
for persons and different objects undergoing free flights. In
the experiments, our approach achieves state-of-the-art accuracy in 3D human motion capture on various metrics. We
urge the reader to watch our supplementary video. Both
the source code and the dataset are released; see http:
//4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/GraviCap/.

1. Introduction
Markerless 3D human motion capture from a single
monocular RGB camera has many open challenges. Although state-of-the-art methods have seen great progress
[21, 24, 33, 14, 39], they still hardly work for scenes showing non-trivial interactions of humans with the environment
as most of them do not model environmental constraints or
physical laws. Further, 3D reconstruction of humans interacting with objects from monocular imagery is scarcely
explored, and only a few works were proposed to date
[19, 50]. Most existing methods that consider interaction
with the environment impose geometric constraints to avoid
incorrect interpenetrations [49, 15, 50]. They often exhibit
strong jitter, implausible posture with unnatural body leaning and depth instabilities. Recent physics-based methods
for monocular 3D human pose estimation [34, 39] showed
that explicit modelling of gravity and ground reaction forces
(or friction) enables monocular reconstruction of humans
of much higher biomechanical plausibility. However, these
methods do not model object interactions, and without a priori information about the human body, they cannot estimate
posture and scene dimensions in absolute metric scale.
In this paper, we make the following observation: Explicitly modelling physics and actively encouraging a spe-

12365

