Active Learning for Lane Detection: A Knowledge Distillation Approach
Fengchao Peng, Chao Wang, Jianzhuang Liu, Zhen Yang
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
{pengfengchao, wangchao165, liu.jianzhuang, yang.zhen}@huawei.com

Abstract
Lane detection is a key task for autonomous driving vehicles. Currently, lane detection relies on a huge amount of
annotated images, which is a heavy burden. Active learning
has been proposed to reduce annotation in many computer
vision tasks, but no effort has been made for lane detection.
Through experiments, we find that existing active learning
methods perform poorly for lane detection, and the reasons
are twofold. On one hand, most methods evaluate data uncertainties based on entropy, which is undesirable in lane
detection because it encourages to select images with very
few lanes or even no lane at all. On the other hand, existing methods are not aware of the noise of lane annotations, which is caused by heavy occlusion and unclear lane
marks. In this paper, we build a novel knowledge distillation
framework and evaluate the uncertainty of images based on
the knowledge learnt by the student model. We show that
the proposed uncertainty metric overcomes the above two
problems. To reduce data redundancy, we explore the influence sets of image samples, and propose a new diversity
metric for data selection. Finally we incorporate the uncertainty and diversity metrics, and develop a greedy algorithm
for data selection. The experiments show that our method
achieves new state-of-the-art on the lane detection benchmarks. In addition, we extend this method to common 2D
object detection and the results show that it is also effective.

1. Introduction
Lane detection is a crucial task for autonomous driving.
Recently, great advances have been made by deep learning
to improve the lane detection performance [33, 31, 8]. However, a deep model requires a huge amount of training data
in order to yield a satisfying result. Due to the large aspect
ratio and the special shape of lanes, it is highly expensive
and cumbersome to annotate a sufficiently large dataset.
Active learning is a well-known technique to reduce the
annotation cost [34, 42, 25]. It is proposed to select the most
informative data items from the unlabeled dataset according

Figure 1: Examples of noisy annotations. All the lanes except the rightmost one are invisible (occluded or unclear) in
the original image. Their locations are annotated by guessing and can be misleading to a lane detection model.
to some policy. The selected data items are then annotated
manually and added to the training set. Various selection
policies have been proposed. Compared to the random selection, these policies manage to reduce the annotation cost
by a large margin, and in the meanwhile, they are able to
achieve a competitive, or even better, training performance.
However, though active learning has been fruitful in image classification [3, 42, 39], object detection [2, 6, 19],
semantic segmentation [38, 41], and other non-computervision areas [30, 15, 32], we find that for the lane detection
task, the existing methods are not so effective. The reasons are twofold. On one hand, entropy is widely used to
estimate the uncertainty of images. The images with highest entropy values are considered informative. But in practice, we observe that entropy-based methods are prone to
selecting images with very few lanes. These images provide less useful information than normal ones, and therefore a model trained using them does not perform well. On
the other hand, lane annotations are often noisy. For example, on the CULane dataset [29], many annotations are
made in regions where there are no visible lane marks at
all. An example image is shown in Fig. 1. In these regions,
annotators decide the location of an invisible lane just by
guessing. The guessed annotations are often incorrect and
can bring heavy noise. Existing methods do not model the
noisy lane annotations, and are therefore easily disturbed.

15152

