Learning Temporal Dynamics from Cycles in Narrated Video
Dave Epstein
UC Berkeley∗

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Cordelia Schmid
Google

Chen Sun
Google, Brown University

Abstract
Learning to model how the world changes as time
elapses has proven a challenging problem for the computer
vision community. We introduce a self-supervised approach
to this problem that solves a multi-modal temporal cycle
consistency objective jointly in vision and language. This
objective requires a model to learn modality-agnostic functions to predict the future and past that undo each other
when composed. We hypothesize that a model trained on
this objective will discover long-term temporal dynamics
in video. We verify this hypothesis by using the resultant
visual representations and predictive models as-is to solve
a variety of downstream tasks. Our method outperforms
state-of-the-art self-supervised video prediction methods on
future action anticipation, temporal image ordering, and
arrow-of-time classification tasks, without training on target datasets or their labels.

1. Introduction
Prediction is a central problem in computer vision which
researchers have been grappling with since the early days of
the field [10, 12, 22, 29, 34, 39, 54]. Previous deep learning methods have largely focused on predicting fixed, small
offsets into the future. To understand why this formulation
is flawed, consider Figure 1. This figure shows a frame (a)
from a video at time t and three frames at times > t. Which
of the three should be the output of a model that predicts the
future? Option (d) is closest to the future that humans are
likely to imagine. By predicting frames such as option (b),
which occur in the immediate future [15, 16, 47, 53], we
limit the scope of temporal transitions that can be learned
by models and hurt downstream performance.
Motivated by this example, we identify three central
challenges in training a model to predict the future. First,
manually annotating videos with temporal relationships between frames is prohibitively expensive, and ground truth
may be difficult to define. Therefore, models should be
∗ Work done as an intern at Google Research.

Figure 1. Predicting the future is challenging. Given a frame (a)
at time t, previous work focuses on predicting frames at a fixed offset, such as (b). However, these frames are often either redundant
or stochastic, motivating the prediction of non-immediate futures.
Predicting such a frame is highly non-trivial, as many are irrelevant, such as (c). Aided by the textual information in narrated
video, we can learn long-term temporal dynamics in video, and
predict (d). We learn these dynamics by solving a multi-modal
temporal cycle consistency problem.

able to learn from large unlabeled datasets of in-the-wild action and discover transitions autonomously, to enable practical applications. Second, modeling the complex long-term
transitions in the real world requires learning high-level
concepts, more naturally found in abstract latent representations than raw pixels. Finally, the duration elapsed by temporal transitions can vary significantly depending on context, and models must be able to make predictions at varied
offsets into the future. To satisfy these desiderata, we introduce a new self-supervised training objective, Multi-Modal
Temporal Cycle Consistency (MMCC), and a model that
learns a representation to solve it.
We show the MMCC objective in Figure 2. Starting from
a sampled frame in a narrated video, our model learns to attend among all narration text to retrieve a relevant utterance.
Combining both modalities, the model learns a function to
predict a latent future, attending over the entire video to retrieve a future frame. This frame’s corresponding utterance
is estimated, and a function to predict a past frame is learned
in a similar way. The cycle constraint requires that the final
model prediction be equal to the starting frame.
MMCC addresses all three challenges discussed above.
In Figure 1, only (d) is a viable solution to our cycle formulation. Selecting (c) as a future would not allow the model
to return to (a), since the two frames have no clear relation-

1480

