Mitigating Intensity Bias in Shadow Detection via Feature Decomposition and
Reweighting
Lei Zhu1
1

Ke Xu2†

Zhanghan Ke1

City University of Hong Kong

2

Rynson W.H. Lau1†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

lzhu68-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, kkangwing@gmail.com, zhanghake2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Although CNNs have achieved remarkable progress on
the shadow detection task, they tend to make mistakes in
dark non-shadow regions and relatively bright shadow regions. They are also susceptible to brightness change.
These two phenomenons reveal that deep shadow detectors heavily depend on the intensity cue, which we refer to
as intensity bias. In this paper, we propose a novel feature decomposition and reweighting scheme to mitigate this
intensity bias, in which multi-level integrated features are
decomposed into intensity-variant and intensity-invariant
components through self-supervision. By reweighting these
two types of features, our method can reallocate the attention to the corresponding latent semantics and achieves balanced exploitation of them. Extensive experiments on three
popular datasets show that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art shadow detectors.

1. Introduction
Shadows may appear when lights cannot directly reach
an object surface. While they provide cues on light source
directions and scene illuminations, which facilitate scene
understanding [20, 22], they may adversely affect the performance of computer vision tasks [7, 28]. Hence, shadow
detection is crucial.
Earlier, many works were proposed to detect shadows
using hand-crafted features. However, these methods are
unreliable and may fail in complex scenes. Recently, deep
learning based shadow detection methods have shown superior performance over traditional methods by a large margin. Being trained in an end-to-end manner, deep shadow
detectors can automatically learn discriminative features for
detection, without the efforts to specify which cues to use
and how they should be represented. However, there is a
cost to this convenience. There are signs that existing deep
shadow detectors heavily rely on the intensity cue. While
they may mis-recognize relatively bright shadow regions
† Ke Xu and Rynson Lau are joint corresponding authors. Rynson Lau
leads this project.

(a) Input Image

(b) DSC [16]

(c) DSD [50]

(d) MTMT [5]

(e) Ours

(f) GT

Figure 1. Intensity bias in shadow detection. Rows 1 and 3 show
two original images, while rows 2 and 4 show the two images with
20% increase in intensity. Existing methods [16, 50, 5] heavily
rely on the intensity cue, and suffer from two problems. On the
one hand, they mis-recognize a relatively brighter region inside
the shadow as non-shadow (e.g., yellow lanes in row 1), and dark
non-shadow region as shadow (e.g., the traffic cone in row 3). On
the other hand, their predictions change significantly due to the
brightness change (rows 2 and 4). Our method mitigates this intensity bias and produces more consistent and accurate results.

as non-shadows (Fig. 1 row 1) or dark non-shadow regions
as shadows (Fig. 1 row 3), with a small shift in brightness
(which should not change the image semantics), the detection results may change significantly (Fig. 1 rows 2 and 4).
Although low intensity is a strong indication of shadows,
other cues such as object-shadow correspondences, shadow
edges, and region connectivity may also contribute to the
shadow detection task [33]. However, deep models tend
to be attracted by some dominant cues while leaving the
less dominant ones underexplored. For example, Geirhos
et al. [12] show that ImageNet-trained classifiers typically
have a bias towards textures, and increasing the attention
to shapes helps improve classification accuracy and robustness. Choi et al. [6] also show that reducing scene bias
improves the generalization of action recognition networks.
To mitigate such a bias towards the intensity cue in
shadow detection, the most straightforward solution is to

4702

