AgentFormer: Agent-Aware Transformers for
Socio-Temporal Multi-Agent Forecasting
Ye Yuan1
Xinshuo Weng1
Yanglan Ou2
Kris Kitani1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Penn State University
https://www.ye-yuan.com/agentformer

Abstract
Predicting accurate future trajectories of multiple agents
is essential for autonomous systems but is challenging due
to the complex interaction between agents and the uncertainty in each agent’s future behavior. Forecasting multiagent trajectories requires modeling two key dimensions:
(1) time dimension, where we model the influence of past
agent states over future states; (2) social dimension, where
we model how the state of each agent affects others. Most
prior methods model these two dimensions separately, e.g.,
first using a temporal model to summarize features over
time for each agent independently and then modeling the
interaction of the summarized features with a social model.
This approach is suboptimal since independent feature encoding over either the time or social dimension can result
in a loss of information. Instead, we would prefer a method
that allows an agent’s state at one time to directly affect
another agent’s state at a future time. To this end, we
propose a new Transformer, termed AgentFormer, that simultaneously models the time and social dimensions. The
model leverages a sequence representation of multi-agent
trajectories by flattening trajectory features across time and
agents. Since standard attention operations disregard the
agent identity of each element in the sequence, AgentFormer
uses a novel agent-aware attention mechanism that preserves agent identities by attending to elements of the same
agent differently than elements of other agents. Based on
AgentFormer, we propose a stochastic multi-agent trajectory prediction model that can attend to features of any
agent at any previous timestep when inferring an agent’s
future position. The latent intent of all agents is also jointly
modeled, allowing the stochasticity in one agent’s behavior
to affect other agents. Extensive experiments show that our
method significantly improves the state of the art on wellestablished pedestrian and autonomous driving datasets.

1. Introduction
The safe planning of autonomous systems such as selfdriving vehicles requires forecasting accurate future trajec-

Social

Agent 3

t=1

t=2

t=3

t=4

t=5

Agent 2
Agent 1

Multi-Agent Trajectories

Time

Trajectory Features

Temporal Models
Temporal Models

Trajectory Features in 2D

+

Temporal Models

Social
Models

Social
Models

Standard Multi-Agent Trajectory Models
Agent-Aware Transformer
(Joint Social & Temporal Modeling +
Preserve Time & Agent Information)

t=1

t=2

t=3

t=4

t=5

Our Multi-Agent Trajectory Model

Figure 1. Different from standard approaches that model multiagent trajectories in the time and social dimensions separately, our
AgentFormer allows for joint modeling of the time and social dimensions while preserving time and agent information.

tories of surrounding agents (e.g., pedestrians, vehicles).
However, multi-agent trajectory forecasting is challenging
since the social interaction between agents, i.e., behavioral
influence of an agent on others, is a complex process. The
problem is further complicated by the uncertainty of each
agent’s future behavior, i.e., each agent has its latent intent
unobserved by the system (e.g., turning left or right) that
governs its future trajectory and in turn affects other agents.
Therefore, a good multi-agent trajectory forecasting method
should effectively model (1) the complex social interaction
between agents and (2) the latent intent of each agent’s future behavior and its social influence on other agents.
Multi-agent social interaction modeling involves two key
dimensions as illustrated in Fig. 1 (Top): (1) time dimension, where we model how past agent states (positions and
velocities) influence future agent states; (2) social dimension, where we model how each agent’s state affects the

9813

