Free-form Description Guided 3D Visual Graph Network for Object Grounding
in Point Cloud
Mingtao Feng1∗ Zhen Li1∗ Qi Li1∗ Liang Zhang1† XiangDong Zhang1 Guangming Zhu1
Hui Zhang2† Yaonan Wang2 Ajmal Mian3
1
Xidian University, 2 Hunan University, 3 The University of Western Australia

Abstract
3D object grounding aims to locate the most relevant
target object in a raw point cloud scene based on a freeform language description. Understanding complex and diverse descriptions, and lifting them directly to a point cloud
is a new and challenging topic due to the irregular and
sparse nature of point clouds. There are three main challenges in 3D object grounding: to find the main focus in the
complex and diverse description; to understand the point
cloud scene; and to locate the target object. In this paper, we address all three challenges. Firstly, we propose
a language scene graph module to capture the rich structure and long-distance phrase correlations. Secondly, we
introduce a multi-level 3D proposal relation graph module
to extract the object-object and object-scene co-occurrence
relationships, and strengthen the visual features of the initial proposals. Lastly, we develop a description guided 3D
visual graph module to encode global contexts of phrases
and proposals by a nodes matching strategy. Extensive
experiments on challenging benchmark datasets (ScanRefer [3] and Nr3D [42]) show that our algorithm outperforms existing state-of-the-art. Our code is available at
https://github.com/PNXD/FFL-3DOG.

1. Introduction
Imagine a scenario where an old person with limited mobility wakes up in the morning, feeling unwell, and instructs
a robot to fetch medicine from a brown table. He/she could
say “A brown table is located in the corner of the room,
it is to the right of a white cabinet and to the left of black
shoes. The front of it is a light blue curtain.” For a human,
finding the table based on the free-form language is an easy
task. However, for assistive robots, parsing the large 3D visual scene, finding the target object and understanding the
global context based on natural language descriptions is a
challenging task. These sentences describe the appearance
of the target object (table), its spatial location relative to
other objects (cabinet, curtain and shoes) and the global
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Proposed model for object grounding in 3D scenes. A
multi-level proposal relation graph G o is formed to strengthen the
visual features of the initial proposals, then the 3D visual graph
G u is constructed under the guidance of the language scene graph
G l which refines the initial coarse proposals. The language scene
graph G l predicts the nodes matching with the 3D visual graph
G u and the matching scores φ1 and φ2 are fused to make the final
grounding predictions.

scene (room), which offer a rich source of information to
localize the target object and guide the robot.
With the widespread availability of LiDARs, depth cameras and light field cameras [13, 12], 3D scene representation in the from of point clouds is becoming increasingly available and affordable in many application domains
such as robotics, autonomous driving etc. Understanding
the free-form descriptions and lifting them to the 3D point
cloud scene is a new topic and challenging in the field of
vision-and-language.
Research on the use of complex descriptions for 3D object grounding in point clouds is still in its infancy and only
a few methods exist in the literature. To advance this line
of research, ScanRefer [3] introduced the first large-scale

3722

