The Functional Correspondence Problem
Zihang Lai∗

Senthil Purushwalkam∗

Abhinav Gupta

Carnegie Mellon University
Website: https://agi-labs.github.io/FuncCorr

Abstract
The ability to find correspondences in visual data is the
essence of most computer vision tasks. But what are the right
correspondences? The task of visual correspondence is well
defined for two different images of same object instance. In
case of two images of objects belonging to same category,
visual correspondence is reasonably well-defined in most
cases. But what about correspondence between two objects
of completely different category – e.g., a shoe and a bottle?
Does there exist any correspondence? Inspired by humans’
ability to: (a) generalize beyond semantic categories and;
(b) infer functional affordances, we introduce the problem
of functional correspondences in this paper. Given images
of two objects, we ask a simple question: what is the set of
correspondences between these two images for a given task?
For example, what are the correspondences between a bottle
and shoe for the task of pounding or the task of pouring.
We introduce a new dataset: FunKPoint that has ground
truth correspondences for 10 tasks and 20 object categories.
We also introduce a modular task-driven representation for
attacking this problem and demonstrate that our learned
representation is effective for this task. But most importantly,
because our supervision signal is not bound by semantics,
we show that our learned representation can generalize
better on few-shot classification problem. We hope this paper
will inspire our community to think beyond semantics and
focus more on cross-category generalization and learning
representations for robotics tasks.

1. Introduction
To perceive an affordance is not to classify an object.
The fact that a stone is a missile does not imply that it
cannot be other things as well. It can be a paperweight,
a bookend, a hammer, or a pendulum bob.
James J. Gibson

Computer vision and visual representation learning has
been bound by shackles of semantic categories. Our training data is built with semantic categories - ImageNet has
* Authors contributed equally

Figure 1: Given a pair of images, functional correspondence establish correspondence between points that are functionally the same. In this example, we hold the
body of the bottle when pouring but the neck when pounding, therefore we can establish correspondence (bottle body, shoe front) for pouring and correspondence (bottle
neck, shoe front) for pounding.

1K categories of breeds of dogs, cats and mushrooms. Our
supervision is semantic categories. And our evaluation tasks
are semantic – image classification, object detection, image
segmentation and list goes on. So it is not surprising that
our approaches are bound by the limits of semantic categories. Our representations are not effective in capturing
affordances for robotics tasks. And our representations fail
to generalize effectively to new object categories due to focus
on learning intra-class invariances. On the other hand, humans have marvelous ability to think beyond categories. We
can use a screwdriver for opening screws but also to clean
printer, hammer nails and what-not. Clearly, our current
semantically-driven computer vision needs rethinking.
In classical computer vision, semantics did not play such
an important role. Instead, correspondence was cited as one
of the most important tasks in the field of computer vision. It
is also the fundamental goal of visual representation learning
– an embedding space where similar objects/parts/pixels have
similar embedding. In an anecdotal conversation about the
three most important problems in computer vision, Takeo
Kanade stated that they are “Correspondence, Correspondence, Correspondence". Yet, this fundamental task of visual
correspondence is ambiguous and ill-defined. What is visual
correspondence? Does there exist correspondence between
any pair of images? The visual correspondence problem is
15772

