InstanceRefer: Cooperative Holistic Understanding for Visual Grounding on
Point Clouds through Instance Multi-level Contextual Referring
Zhihao Yuan1,† , Xu Yan1,† , Yinghong Liao1 , Ruimao Zhang1 , Sheng Wang2 , Zhen Li1, *, Shuguang Cui1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
2
CryoEM Center, Southern University of Science and Technology
{zhihaoyuan@link., xuyan1@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn

Input 3D Scan:

Abstract
Compared with the visual grounding on 2D images, the
natural-language-guided 3D object localization on point
clouds is more challenging. In this paper, we propose a
new model, named InstanceRefer1 , to achieve a superior
3D visual grounding through the grounding-by-matching
strategy. In practice, our model first predicts the target
category from the language descriptions using a simple
language classification model. Then, based on the category, our model sifts out a small number of instance candidates (usually less than 20) from the panoptic segmentation
on point clouds. Thus, the non-trivial 3D visual grounding task has been effectively re-formulated as a simplified instance-matching problem, considering that instancelevel candidates are more rational than the redundant 3D
object proposals. Subsequently, for each candidate, we
perform the multi-level contextual inference, i.e., referring
from instance attribute perception, instance-to-instance relation perception, and instance-to-background global localization perception, respectively. Eventually, the most relevant candidate is selected and localized by ranking confidence scores, which are obtained by the cooperative holistic visual-language feature matching. Experiments confirm
that our method outperforms previous state-of-the-arts on
ScanRefer online benchmark and Nr3D/Sr3D datasets.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding (VG), which aims at localizing the desired objects or areas in an image or a video based on an
object-related linguistic query, has achieved great progress
in the 2D computer vision community [12, 18, 29, 17, 19].
With the rapid development of 3D sensor and 3D representation, the VG task has gradually merged more informative
* Corresponding author: Zhen Li. † Equal first authorship.
1 https://github.com/CurryYuan/InstanceRefer

Instance-level candidate

Input Query:
There is a gray and blue leather chair in the side of the wall. It is one of
three next to each other and it the first on the left.
Candidate and
neighboring instances

Candidate only

+

Localization
prediction

+

Confident
score

= 95%

Attribute
Perception

Relation
Perception

Localization
Perception

gray, blue,
leather?

one of the three,
first on the left?

in the side of
the wall?

Figure 1. Multi-level contextual referring. For each instancelevel candidate, we match it with linguistic query from attribute,
local relation and global localization. The attribute, relation and
localization descriptions are in orange, blue and green boxes.

3D data. Unlike 2D images with regular and well-organized
pixels, 3D data mostly comes in the form of point clouds,
which is sparse, irregular, and unordered. Therefore, previous 2D-based schemes are usually deficient for real 3D
scenarios.
Chen et al. [2] is the pioneer for visual grounding on
point clouds. They propose the first dataset ScanRefer
and solve the problem by extending the 2D grounding-bydetection pipeline to 3D. Specifically, it first uses a 3D object detector [24] to generate hundreds of proposals. Then
the feature of each proposal is merged with a global representation of the linguistic query to predict a matching score.
The proposal with the maximal score is considered as the

1791

