Detecting Invisible People
Tarasha Khurana1
1

Achal Dave1

Carnegie Mellon University

Deva Ramanan1,2
2

Argo AI

{tkhurana, achald, deva}@cs.cmu.edu

t=0

t = 10

t = 15

t = 20

Figure 1: We visualize an online tracking scenario from Argoverse [9] that requires tracking a pedestrian through a complete
occlusion. Such applications cannot wait for objects to re-appear (e.g., as re-identification approaches do): autonomous agents
must properly react during the occlusion. We treat online detection of occluded people as a short-term forecasting challenge.

Abstract
Monocular object detection and tracking have improved
drastically in recent years, but rely on a key assumption: that
objects are visible to the camera. Many offline tracking approaches reason about occluded objects post-hoc, by linking
together tracklets after the object re-appears, making use
of reidentification (ReID). However, online tracking in embodied robotic agents (such as a self-driving vehicle) fundamentally requires object permanence, which is the ability to
reason about occluded objects before they re-appear. In this
work, we re-purpose tracking benchmarks and propose new
metrics for the task of detecting invisible objects, focusing on
the illustrative case of people. We demonstrate that current
detection and tracking systems perform dramatically worse
on this task. We introduce two key innovations to recover
much of this performance drop. We treat occluded object
detection in temporal sequences as a short-term forecasting
challenge, bringing to bear tools from dynamic sequence
prediction. Second, we build dynamic models that explicitly
reason in 3D from monocular videos without calibration,
using observations produced by monocular depth estimators. To our knowledge, ours is the first work to demonstrate
the effectiveness of monocular depth estimation for the task
of tracking and detecting occluded objects. Our approach
strongly improves by 11.4% over the baseline in ablations
and by 5.0% over the state-of-the-art in F1 score.

1. Introduction
Object detection has seen immense progress, albeit under
a seemingly harmless assumption: that objects are visible to
the camera in the image. However, objects that become fully
occluded (and thus, invisible) continue to exist and move
in the world. Indeed, object permanence is a fundamental
visual cue exhibited by infants in as early as 3 months [3, 26].
Practical autonomous systems must similarly reason about
such objects that undergo complete occlusions to ensure safe
operation (Figure 1). Interestingly, existing work on object
detection and tracking tends to de-emphasize this capability, either choosing to completely ignore highly-occluded
instances for evaluation [15, 37, 50, 58], or simply downweighting them because they occur so rarely that they fail to
materially affect overall performance [41]. One reason that
invisible-object detection may have been under-emphasized
in the tracking community is that for offline analysis, one can
post-hoc reason about the presence of an occluded object by
relinking detections after it reappears. This approach has
spawned the large subfield of reidentification (ReID). However, in an online setting (such as an autonomous vehicle
that must make decisions given the available sensor information), intelligent agents must be able to instantaneously
reason about occluded objects before they re-appear.
Problem formulation: We begin by introducing benchmarks and metrics for evaluating the task of detecting and

3174

