SO-Pose: Exploiting Self-Occlusion for Direct 6D Pose Estimation
Yan Di * 1 , Fabian Manhardt2 , Gu Wang3 , Xiangyang Ji3 , Nassir Navab1 and Federico Tombari1,2
1
*

Technical University of Munich, 2 Google, 3 Tsinghua University

shangbuhuan13@gmail.com, fabianmanhardt@google.com, nassir.navab@tum.de,
wangg16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn, tombari@in.tum.de

Abstract
Directly regressing all 6 degrees-of-freedom (6DoF) for
the object pose (i.e. the 3D rotation and translation) in a
cluttered environment from a single RGB image is a challenging problem. While end-to-end methods have recently
demonstrated promising results at high efﬁciency, they are
still inferior when compared with elaborate PnP/RANSACbased approaches in terms of pose accuracy. In this work,
we address this shortcoming by means of a novel reasoning about self-occlusion, in order to establish a two-layer
representation for 3D objects which considerably enhances
the accuracy of end-to-end 6D pose estimation. Our framework, named SO-Pose, takes a single RGB image as input
and respectively generates 2D-3D correspondences as well
as self-occlusion information harnessing a shared encoder
and two separate decoders. Both outputs are then fused to
directly regress the 6DoF pose parameters. Incorporating
cross-layer consistencies that align correspondences, selfocclusion and 6D pose, we can further improve accuracy
and robustness, surpassing or rivaling all other state-ofthe-art approaches on various challenging datasets.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 6D pose has been widely adopted as an
essential cue in high-level computer vision tasks, including
robotic grasping and planning [1], augmented reality [39],
and autonomous driving [25, 29]. Driven by the recent success of deep learning, current methods are capable of estimating the 6D pose in a cluttered environment at impressive accuracy and high efﬁciency [15, 47, 18]. Almost all
current top-performing frameworks adopt a two-stage strategy that resorts to ﬁrst establishing 2D-3D correspondences
and then computing the 6D pose with a RANSAC-based
Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm [47, 20, 9]. Neverthe* Yan Di is sponsored by China CSC program.

Image

CNN

2D-3D Point Matching

6D Pose

(a) Basic structure of baseline methods [12, 43]
2D-3D
Point
Matching
Self-occlusion
Information

Image

CNN

Two-layer Model

6D Pose

(b) Basic structure of our method SO-Pose.

Figure 1. The basic structures of end-to-end 6D pose estimation
methods. Compared to single-layer methods [12, 43] that depend
on 2D-3D point matching as intermediate results, our method SOPose presents a novel two-layer representation that additionally
incorporates self-occlusion information about the object.

less, while achieving great results, these methods cannot be
trained in an end-to-end manner and require extra computation for optimization of pose. Moreover, adopting surrogate
training losses instead of directly predicting 6D poses also
prevents further differentiable processing/learning (e.g. by
means of self-supervised learning [42]) and does not allow
to incorporate other down-stream tasks.
Despite two-stage approaches dominating the ﬁeld, a few
methods conducting end-to-end 6D pose estimation have
been also recently proposed [12, 4, 42, 43]. They typically learn the 6D pose directly from dense correspondencebased intermediate geometric representations, as shown in
Fig. 1(a). Nevertheless, although end-to-end methods keep
constantly improving, they are still far inferior to two-stage
methods harnessing multi-view consistency check [18],
symmetry analysis [9], or disentangled predictions [20].
What limits the accuracy of end-to-end methods? After in-depth investigation in challenging scenes, we observe

12396

