Hierarchical Conditional Flow: A Unified Framework for
Image Super-Resolution and Image Rescaling
Jingyun Liang1 Andreas Lugmayr1 Kai Zhang1, * Martin Danelljan1 Luc Van Gool1,2 Radu Timofte1
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 KU Leuven, Belgium
{jinliang, andreas.lugmayr, kai.zhang, martin.danelljan, vangool, timofter}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

https://github.com/JingyunLiang/HCFlow
y

Abstract
Normalizing flows have recently demonstrated promising results for low-level vision tasks. For image superresolution (SR), it learns to predict diverse photo-realistic
high-resolution (HR) images from the low-resolution (LR)
image rather than learning a deterministic mapping. For
image rescaling, it achieves high accuracy by jointly modelling the downscaling and upscaling processes. While existing approaches employ specialized techniques for these
two tasks, we set out to unify them in a single formulation. In this paper, we propose the hierarchical conditional flow (HCFlow) as a unified framework for image SR
and image rescaling. More specifically, HCFlow learns
a bijective mapping between HR and LR image pairs by
modelling the distribution of the LR image and the rest
high-frequency component simultaneously. In particular,
the high-frequency component is conditional on the LR image in a hierarchical manner. To further enhance the performance, other losses such as perceptual loss and GAN
loss are combined with the commonly used negative loglikelihood loss in training. Extensive experiments on general image SR, face image SR and image rescaling have
demonstrated that the proposed HCFlow achieves state-ofthe-art performance in terms of both quantitative metrics
and visual quality.

1. Introduction
Normalizing flows [7, 8, 22, 12, 16, 36] are powerful
deep generative probabilistic models that allow for efficient
and exact likelihood calculation and sampling. They have
been used in the generation of image [8, 22], blur kernel [28], and audio [20] data. Recently, in the low-level
vision community, normalizing flows have attracted much
interest and have achieved promising progress for image
super-resolution (SR) [32] and image rescaling [47].
* Corresponding author.

z

x

y
z

(a) SRFlow

x
(b) IRN

y
x
z
(c) HCFlow

Figure 1: The comparison between SRFlow [32], IRN [47] and
the proposed HCFlow. x, y and z denote HR image, LR image and the latent variable, respectively. Blue boxes are invertible neural networks, while green ones are non-invertible models (e.g., CNN). Solid bi-directional arrows denote bijective mappings, while dashed arrows represent conditional relations.

SRFlow [32] is a seminal flow-based model for image
SR. Unlike previous CNN-based models that learn a deterministic mapping from the low-resolution (LR) image to the
high-resolution (HR) image, SRFlow learns the distribution
of HR images and is able to generate diverse photo-realistic
HR images. However, as shown in Fig. 1(a), it treats the LR
image as an external conditional prior and thus is not fully
invertible between HR and LR image pairs, making it hard
to be used for image rescaling. Another work IRN [47] employs an invertible neural network to learn downscaling and
upscaling for image rescaling. Since the model is bijective,
it can recover the input HR image with high accuracy after downscaling. Nevertheless, as shown in Fig. 1(b), it assumes the high-frequency and low-frequency components
of the image are independent of each other and thus lacks
the ability to exploit their dependency for image SR.
In this paper, we propose a hierarchical conditional flow
(HCFlow) as a unified framework for both image SR and
rescaling. As shown in Fig. 1(c), HCFlow is an invertible
flow-based model for modelling the HR-LR relationship,

4076

