Self-Regulation for Semantic Segmentation
Dong Zhang1
1
2

Hanwang Zhang2

Jinhui Tang1 * Xian-Sheng Hua3

Qianru Sun4

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Nanyang Technological University

3

Damo Academy, Alibaba Group

4

Singapore Management University

1. Introduction
Semantic Segmentation (SS) aims to label each image
pixel with its corresponding semantic class [37]. It is an
indispensable computer vision building block in the scene
understanding systems, e.g., autonomous driving [49] and
medical imaging [18]. Thanks to the development of deep
convolutional neural networks [20, 52] and the labour input in pixel-level annotations [8, 39], the research for SS
has experienced a great progress, e.g., top-performing models can segment about 85% objects in the complex natural
scenes [33]. Intriguingly, we particularly seek reasons for
the 15% failure cases which generally fall into two categories: 1) missing small objects or minor object parts, e.g.,
the “horse legs” in Figure 1 (d), and 2) mislabeling minor
* Corresponding author.
1 The code is available at: https://github.com/dongzhang89/SR-SS

shallow layer

deep layer

(b)

(c)

(a) Input

DeepLab-v2 (Baseline)
shallow layer

deep layer

(e)

(f)

horse

(d) Prediction

DeepLab-v2 w/ SR

Failure-2

In this paper, we seek reasons for the two major failure
cases in Semantic Segmentation (SS): 1) missing small objects or minor object parts, and 2) mislabeling minor parts
of large objects as wrong classes. We have an interesting
finding that Failure-1 is due to the underuse of detailed features and Failure-2 is due to the underuse of visual contexts.
To help the model learn a better trade-off, we introduce several Self-Regulation (SR) losses for training SS neural networks. By “self”, we mean that the losses are from the
model per se without using any additional data or supervision. By applying the SR losses, the deep layer features
are regulated by the shallow ones to preserve more details;
meanwhile, shallow layer classification logits are regulated
by the deep ones to capture more semantics. We conduct extensive experiments on both weakly and fully supervised SS
tasks, and the results show that our approach consistently
surpasses the baselines. We also validate that SR losses
are easy to implement in various state-of-the-art SS models,
e.g., SPGNet [7] and OCRNet [62], incurring little computational overhead during training and none for testing1 .

Failure-1

Abstract

cow

cow

√

horse

horse

(h) DeepLab-v2

(i) DeepLab-v2 w/ MEA

√

(g) Input

Figure 1. Our inspections on two failure cases of the baseline
method DeepLab-v2 [5] in (d) and (h), for which (a) and (g) are
input images, respectively. The case in (d) has the flaw of missing “horse legs”. The visualization of shallow-layer features in (b)
shows that the model indeed attends to “horse legs” but also to
background noises. Applying our SR, in (e), reduces noises while
maintaining the desirable attention on “horse legs”. In addition,
deep-layer features in (c) and (f) also prove the effectiveness of
SR. The case in (h) confuses between object classes (i.e., “horse”
and “cow”). The revision in (i) is obtained by adding class-level
cross-entropy losses (i.e., using our MEA loss on DeepLab-v2).

parts of large objects as wrong classes, e.g., a part of “cow”
is wrongly marked as “horse” in Figure 1 (h).
To this end, we present our empirical inspections in Figure 1. We find in Figure 1 (b) that the minor object parts are
clearly visible in the shallow-layers of the model, making
use of which could address the issue in Failure-1, as in Figure 1 (e). In the literature, there is indeed a popular solution
— reshaping and then combining feature maps from different layers for prediction, e.g., Hourglass [40], SegNet [2],
U-Net [45] and HRNet [52]. Such implementation typically
relies on one of the three specific operations: pixel-wise addition [2, 36, 45], map-wise concatenation [5, 52, 71] and
16953

