FATNN: Fast and Accurate Ternary Neural Networks*
Peng Chen,
Bohan Zhuang,
Chunhua Shen
Data Science & AI, Monash University, Australia

Abstract
Ternary Neural Networks (TNNs) have received much attention due to being potentially orders of magnitude faster
in inference, as well as more power efficient, than fullprecision counterparts. However, 2 bits are required to
encode the ternary representation with only 3 quantization
levels leveraged. As a result, conventional TNNs have similar memory consumption and speed compared with the standard 2-bit models, but have worse representational capability. Moreover, there is still a significant gap in accuracy between TNNs and full-precision networks, hampering their
deployment to real applications. To tackle these two challenges, in this work, we first show that, under some mild
constraints, computational complexity of the ternary inner
product can be reduced by 2×. Second, to mitigate the performance gap, we elaborately design an implementationdependent ternary quantization algorithm. The proposed
framework is termed Fast and Accurate Ternary Neural
Networks (FATNN). Experiments on image classification
demonstrate that our FATNN surpasses the state-of-the-arts
by a significant margin in accuracy. More importantly,
speedup evaluation compared with various precision is analyzed on several platforms, which serves as a strong benchmark for further research. Source code and models are
available at: https://github.com/MonashAI/QTool

1. Introduction
Equipped with high-performance computing and largescale datasets, deep convolution neural networks (DCNN)
have become a cornerstone for most computer vision
tasks. However, a significant obstacle for deploying DCNN
algorithms to mobile/embedded edge devices with limited computing resources is the ever growing computation
complexity—in order to achieve good accuracy, the models
are becoming very heavy. To tackle this problem, much research effort has been spent on model compression. Representative methods include model quantization [49, 47], net* PC and BZ contributed equally. Part of this work was done when all
authors were with The University of Adelaide. CS is the corresponding
author, email: chunhua@me.com

work pruning [23, 51] and neural architecture search for
lightweight models [52, 27]. In this paper, we focus on
model quantization, which reduces the model complexity
by representing a network with low-precision weights and
activations.
Network quantization aims to map the continuous input values within a quantization interval to the corresponding quantization level, and a low-precision quantized value
is assigned accordingly. TNNs in which both the activations and weights are quantized to ternary, are particularly
of interest because most of the calculations can be realized
with bit operations, thus completely eliminating multiplications. However, there exists two limitations for conventional TNNs. The first limitation is the inefficient implementation of TNNs. Specifically, the ternary representation
of {−1, 0, 1} needs 2 bits to encode with one state wasted.
As a result, with the conventional bitwise implementation of
quantized networks [47, 44], the complexity of ternary inner product is the same with the standard 2-bit counterparts.
Another limitation is the considerable accuracy drop compared with the full-precision counterparts due to the much
more compact capacity.
To handle these drawbacks, we introduce a new framework, termed FATNN, where we co-design the underlying
ternary implementation of computation and the quantization
algorithm. In terms of implementation, we fully leverage
the property of the ternary representation to design a series
of bit operations to accomplish the ternary inner product
with improved efficiency. In particular, FATNN reduces the
computational complexity of TNNs by 2×, which solves
the existing efficiency bottleneck. In contrast to previous
works, nearly no arithmetic operations exist in the proposed
implementation. Also, FATNN works efficiently on almost
all kinds of devices (such as CPU, GPU, DSP, FPGA and
ASIC) with basic bit operation instructions available. Furthermore, we design the compatible ternary quantization algorithm in accordance to the mild constraints derived from
the underlying implementation. Early works with learned
quantizers either propose to learn the quantized values [44]
or seek to learn the quantization intervals [20, 13]. However, most of them assume the uniform quantizer step size,
which might still be non-optimal on optimizing network

5219

