Graph Constrained Data Representation Learning for
Human Motion Segmentation
Mariella Dimiccoli1
1

Lluı́s Garrido2

Guillem Rodriguez-Corominas1

Institut de Robótica i Informática Industrial (CSIC-UPC)
{mdimiccoli,grodriguez}@iri.upc.edu

Abstract
Recently, transfer subspace learning based approaches
have shown to be a valid alternative to unsupervised subspace clustering and temporal data clustering for human
motion segmentation (HMS). These approaches leverage
prior knowledge from a source domain to improve clustering performance on a target domain, and currently they
represent the state of the art in HMS. Bucking this trend,
in this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised model that
learns a representation of the data and digs clustering information from the data itself. Our model is reminiscent
of temporal subspace clustering, but presents two critical
differences. First, we learn an auxiliary data matrix that
can deviate from the initial data, hence confers more degrees of freedom to the coding matrix. Second, we introduce a regularization term for this auxiliary data matrix
that preserves the local geometrical structure present in
the high-dimensional space. The proposed model is efficiently optimized by using an original Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) formulation allowing
to learn jointly the auxiliary data representation, a nonnegative dictionary and a coding matrix. Experimental results on four benchmark datasets for HMS demonstrate that
our approach achieves significantly better clustering performance then state-of-the-art methods, including both unsupervised and more recent semi-supervised transfer learning approaches1 .

1. Introduction
Human-motion segmentation (HMS) aims at breaking a
continuous sequence of data depicting human actions and
activities into a set of internally coherent temporal segments, and has emerged as a suitable first step in early processing of untrimmed videos for human action recognition
[12]. Despite the fact that HMS has been intensively investigated so far [28, 15, 35], performance have not yet reached
the level of accuracy required in real world applications.
Because labelling large amounts of videos for creating a
1 Project page at URL https://github.com/mdimiccoli/GCRL-for-HMS/.

2

Univ. of Barcelona

lluis.garrido@ub.edu

3

Herwig Wendt3

CNRS, IRIT, Univ. of Toulouse
herwig.wendt@irit.fr

training set for HMS is very expensive and time-consuming,
the problem has been traditionally addressed through unsupervised learning techniques [22, 2, 21]. Several approaches cast HMS as a clustering problem by relying on
the framework of subspace clustering [30]. The key idea
of subspace clustering is to learn an effective representation in form of a coding matrix from which it is possible
to construct an affinity matrix that allows to separate data
points according to their underlying low-dimensional subspaces. These subspaces are assumed to correspond with
the different motions. However, these clustering approaches
typically do not take into account temporal continuity and,
moreover, they are sensitive to noise. Some recent subspace
clustering based approaches have focused on dealing with
noise and outliers naturally present in the data, as well as
with its sequential nature [6, 7, 28, 15, 16]. Outside the
subspace clustering framework, other temporal clustering
approaches work directly on the temporal data instead of
on an underlying representation to estimate cluster labels
[27, 36, 13]. Nevertheless, the main challenge of all these
unsupervised approaches remains how to cope with the lack
of prior knowledge, which could easily cause unpredictable
segmentation output. Recently, this problem has been partially addressed by transfer subspace techniques, that leverage prior information from source data to improve clustering accuracy on the target data [31, 32, 40]. These methods
have indeed reported improved performance and currently
represent the state of the art in HMS.
Instead of leveraging information from source annotated data, here we propose to cope with the lack of prior
knowledge in an unsupervised fashion by further exploiting
the local geometric structure present in the original highdimensional space. Our a priori on the data samples is
that they are drawn from an unknown underlying similarity graph, where nodes in the graph correspond to individual frames, edges to connections between nodes, and communities (i.e., groups of nodes that are interconnected by
edges with large weights) roughly correspond to different
motions. Our model aims at jointly learning the subspaces
and a compatible representation for the similarity graph.
Since we are interested in pushing the limits of state-of-

1460

