Efficient Visual Pretraining with Contrastive Detection
Olivier J. Hénaff Skanda Koppula Jean-Baptiste Alayrac
Aaron van den Oord Oriol Vinyals João Carreira
DeepMind, London, UK
Abstract
Self-supervised pretraining has been shown to yield powerful representations for transfer learning. These performance gains come at a large computational cost however,
with state-of-the-art methods requiring an order of magnitude more computation than supervised pretraining. We
tackle this computational bottleneck by introducing a new
self-supervised objective, contrastive detection, which tasks
representations with identifying object-level features across
augmentations. This objective extracts a rich learning signal per image, leading to state-of-the-art transfer accuracy
on a variety of downstream tasks, while requiring up to
10⇥ less pretraining. In particular, our strongest ImageNetpretrained model performs on par with SEER, one of the
largest self-supervised systems to date, which uses 1000⇥
more pretraining data. Finally, our objective seamlessly
handles pretraining on more complex images such as those
in COCO, closing the gap with supervised transfer learning
from COCO to PASCAL.

1. Introduction
Since the AlexNet breakthrough on ImageNet, transfer
learning from large labeled datasets has become the dominant paradigm in computer vision [34, 50]. While recent advances in self-supervised learning have alleviated
the dependency on labels for pretraining, they have done
so at a tremendous computational cost, with state-of-the-art
methods requiring an order of magnitude more computation than supervised pretraining [7, 10, 21]. Yet the promise
of self-supervised learning is to harness massive unlabeled
datasets, making its computational cost a critical bottleneck.
In this work, we aim to alleviate the computational burden of self-supervised pretraining. To that end we introduce contrastive detection, a new objective which maximizes the similarity of object-level features across augmentations. The benefits of this objective are threefold. First,
it extracts separate learning signals from all objects in an
image, enriching the information provided by each training example for free—object-level features are simply ob-

Figure 1. Efficient self-supervised pretraining with DetCon.
Self-supervised pretraining with SimCLR [9] matches the transfer performance of supervised pretraining only when given 10⇥
more training iterations. Our proposed DetCon objective surpasses
both, while requiring 5⇥ less computation than SimCLR. Transfer
performance is measured by fine-tuning the representation on the
COCO dataset for 12 epochs, using a Mask-RCNN.

tained from intermediate feature arrays. Second, it provides
a larger and more diverse set of negative samples to contrast against, which also accelerate learning. Finally, this
objective is well suited to learning from complex scenes
with many objects, a pretraining domain that has proven
challenging for self-supervised methods.
We identify approximate object-based regions in the image through the use of unsupervised segmentation algorithms. Perceptual grouping [32, 41]—the idea that low
and mid-level regularities in the data such as color, orientation and texture allow for approximately parsing a scene
into connected surfaces or object parts—has long been theorized to be a powerful prior for vision [22, 40, 56]. We
leverage these priors by grouping local feature vectors accordingly, and applying our contrastive objective to each
object-level feature separately. We investigate the use of

10086

