Learning Inner-Group Relations on Point Clouds
Haoxi Ran* † Wei Zhuo† Jun Liu† Li Lu*
†
* Sichuan University
Tencent
{ranhaoxi, junsenselee}@gmail.com
weizhuo@tencent.com
luli@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
The prevalence of relation networks in computer vision is
in stark contrast to underexplored point-based methods. In
this paper, we explore the possibilities of local relation operators and survey their feasibility. We propose a scalable
and efficient module, called group relation aggregator. The
module computes a feature of a group based on the aggregation of the features of the inner-group points weighted by
geometric relations and semantic relations. We adopt this
module to design our RPNet. We further verify the expandability of RPNet, in terms of both depth and width, on the
tasks of classification and segmentation. Surprisingly, empirical results show that wider RPNet fits for classification,
while deeper RPNet works better on segmentation. RPNet
achieves state-of-the-art for classification and segmentation
on challenging benchmarks. We also compare our local
aggregator with PointNet++, with around 30% parameters
and 50% computation saving. Finally, we conduct experiments to reveal the robustness of RPNet with regard to rigid
transformation and noises.

1. Introduction
Point cloud processing has attracted considerable attention for its advantages in various applications, including autonomous driving, augmented reality, and robotics. Though
easily accessible, unlike other visual elements (i.e., images),
point clouds can be difficult to learn due to irregularity.
To duplicate the success of convolutional networks on
regular grids [24, 43], some prior works change point clouds
into multi-view images [12, 10] or regular volumes [53, 12]
before convolution. However, image-based projection and
voxelization reduce the resolution of point clouds and result in the damage of internal geometric information. These
explicit transformations also lead to complex preprocessing
and significant computations.
PointNet [38] diverts the attention to the methods of processing raw point clouds. To handle irregular points, it
adopts point-wise multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) to learn

on points independently and utilize a symmetric function to
obtain the global information. For the ignorance of local
structures, PointNet++ [40] further introduces set abstraction (SA) (shown in Fig. 1 left) as the local aggregator to
build the hierarchical networks. However, this aggregator
keeps learning on points independently, losing the sight of
shape awareness.
When a local aggregator independently learns on points,
the shape ambiguity problem has been exposed: since no
points inside the set react with others, the aggregator will
be sensitive to the coordinates S ∈ RN ×3 and be confused
about the outline and the geometric information of the set.
Here N is the number of points inside the set. The shape
ambiguity problem causes the damage to the robustness and
generalization of an aggregator.
In general, an excellent aggregator is underdeveloped for
two reasons: it should discriminatively describe the underlying shape of point sets, and it should be robust to rigid
transformation (i.e., translation, rotation) as well as noises.
For a preliminary exploration, RS-CNN [33] computes a
point feature from the aggregation of features weighted by
predefined geometric relations (low-level relation) between
the point Si and its neighbors N (Si ) (shown in Fig. 1 middle). Based on the low-level relations instead of coordinates
only, RS-CNN is insensitive to coordinates and robust to
rigid transformation. However, RS-CNN is insufficient to
learn semantic relations (high-level relations) for the lack
of interaction between features.
In this case, self-attention [47] (shown in Fig. 1 right)
may be a good instance as the supplement for high-level
relations. Self-attention achieves great success on natural
language processing. Recent work [64, 19] has shown that
self-attention can be a viable alternative for convolution on
images. However, self-attention can be depressing for significant computations as well as a large number of parameters. The goal of this work is to extend grid-based selfattention to irregular points with a high-efficiency strategy.
To this end, we propose group relation aggregator
(GRA) to learn from both low-level and high-level relations.
Compared with self-attention and SA, our designed bottle-

15477

