Stochastic Partial Swap: Enhanced Model Generalization and Interpretability
for Fine-grained Recognition

1

Shaoli Huang1 , Xinchao Wang2 , Dacheng Tao3,1
The University of Sydney, Australia, 2 National University of Singapore,
3
JD Explore Academy, China

shaoli.huang@sydney.edu.au, xinchao@nus.edu.sg, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Total num. of regions: 784

Abstract

Neurons Logits
$. %

Learning mid-level representation for fine-grained
recognition is easily dominated by a limited number of
highly discriminative patterns, degrading its robustness and
generalization capability. To this end, we propose a novel
Stochastic Partial Swap (SPS)1 scheme to address this issue.
Our method performs element-wise swapping for partial
features between samples to inject noise during training.
It equips a regularization effect similar to Dropout, which
promotes more neurons to represent the concepts. Furthermore, it also exhibits other advantages: 1) suppressing over-activation to some part patterns to improve feature
representativeness, and 2) enriching pattern combination
and simulating noisy cases to enhance classifier generalization. We verify the effectiveness of our approach through
comprehensive experiments across four network backbones
and three fine-grained datasets. Moreover, we demonstrate
its ability to complement high-level representations, allowing a simple model to achieve performance comparable
to the top-performing technologies in fine-grained recognition, indoor scene recognition, and material recognition
while improving model interpretability.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained recognition is more challenging than general object recognition, as the discriminative differences
of categories often reside in subtle parts of objects. Conventional methods that succeed in generic object classification, therefore, often fail to deliver gratifying results in finegrained classification, since they mainly focus on learning
high-level features and overlook subtle variations. Existing
works [54, 8, 55, 9, 56, 7, 35, 55, 28, 44, 53, 37, 20] attempt
to complement this capacity by exploring various techniques. Part-based [54, 8, 55, 9] and sampling-based [56, 7]
are the most popular solutions in recent literature. The for1 https://github.com/Shaoli-Huang/SPS.

#. &
$. #

!. #

#. '

$. #

Figure 1. The left column shows the average number of regions
per image contributing to a given predicted value, when using the
baseline model trained on the CUB dataset. A more detailed description of this experiment is given in the Experiment section.
The right column illustrates an issue of adopting deep mid-level
models for fine-grained classification. In training data, the “Redyellow patch” pattern may distinguish the “Red-winged blackbird”
from most bird species. During training, the neural network tends
to associate this part mostly to this label by biasing its weights to
the corresponding region. The resulting mid-level model would
predict whether an object is a “Red-winged blackbird” mainly
based on this pattern while largely ignoring other roles of other
patterns.

mer primarily localize part regions by strongly-supervised
detection pipelines or weakly-supervised learning framework, and then extract the discriminative local features as
complementary to high-level features. The sampling-based
approaches seek to enrich the representation learning by
conducting attention sampling over the input images. Although these two techniques have succeeded in improving
performance, they either require complex training procedures or intense computation in inference, limiting their applicability to real-world situations.
Incorporating deep mid-level models into fine-grained
recognition has demonstrated its potential in recent endeavours [35, 22, 52, 23], due to its unique merits. First,
mid-level models are easy to obtain and flexible to exploit,
thanks to the hierarchical structure of deep neural networks.
Second, they also exhibit a strong capability to capture lo-

620

