TransReID: Transformer-based Object Re-Identification
Shuting He1,2 * Hao Luo2 Pichao Wang2 Fan Wang2 Hao Li2
1
Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Group
{shuting he,jiangwei zju}@zju.edu.cn

Wei Jiang1†

{michuan.lh,pichao.wang,fan.w,lihao.lh}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Extracting robust feature representation is one of the
key challenges in object re-identification (ReID). Although
convolution neural network (CNN)-based methods have
achieved great success, they only process one local
neighborhood at a time and suffer from information loss on
details caused by convolution and downsampling operators
(e.g. pooling and strided convolution). To overcome
these limitations, we propose a pure transformer-based
object ReID framework named TransReID. Specifically,
we first encode an image as a sequence of patches
and build a transformer-based strong baseline with a
few critical improvements, which achieves competitive
results on several ReID benchmarks with CNN-based
methods. To further enhance the robust feature learning
in the context of transformers, two novel modules
are carefully designed. (i) The jigsaw patch module
(JPM) is proposed to rearrange the patch embeddings
via shift and patch shuffle operations which generates
robust features with improved discrimination ability and
more diversified coverage. (ii) The side information
embeddings (SIE) is introduced to mitigate feature bias
towards camera/view variations by plugging in learnable
embeddings to incorporate these non-visual clues. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work to adopt a
pure transformer for ReID research. Experimental results
of TransReID are superior promising, which achieve stateof-the-art performance on both person and vehicle ReID
benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.
com/heshuting555/TransReID.

1. Introduction
Object re-identification (ReID) aims to associate a
particular object across different scenes and camera views,
such as in the applications of person ReID and vehicle
ReID. Extracting robust and discriminative features is a
crucial component of ReID, and has been dominated by
* This work was done when Shuting He was intern at Alibaba
supervised by Hao Luo and Pichao Wang.
† Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Grad-CAM [34] visualization of attention maps: (a)
Original images, (b) CNN-based methods, (c) CNN+attention
methods, (d) Transformer-based methods which captures global
context information and more discriminative parts.

ID: 16

CNN-based
methods

Transformer-based
methods

ID: 443

CNN-based
methods

Transformer-based
methods

Figure 2: Visualization of output feature maps for 2 hard samples
with similar appearances. Transformer-based methods retain
backpack details on output feature maps in contrast to CNN-based
methods, as noted in red boxes. For better visualization, input
images are scaled to size 1024 × 512.

CNN-based methods for a long time [19, 37, 36, 44, 42,
5, 12, 13, 53, 15].
By reviewing CNN-based methods, we find two
important issues which are not well addressed in the field
of object ReID. (1) Exploiting the rich structural patterns
in a global scope is crucial for object ReID [54]. However,
CNN-based methods mainly focus on small discriminative
regions due to a Gaussian distribution of effective receptive
fields [29]. Recently, attention modules [54, 6, 3, 21, 1]
have been introduced to explore long-range dependencies
[45], but most of them are embedded in the deep layers and
do not solve the principle problem of CNN. Thus, attentionbased methods still prefer large continuous areas and are
hard to extract multiple diversified discriminative parts (see
Figure 1). (2) Fine-grained features with detail information
are also important. However, the downsampling operators
(e.g. pooling and strided convolution) of CNN reduce
spatial resolution of output feature maps, which greatly
affect the discrimination ability to distinguish objects with
similar appearances [37, 27]. As shown in Figure 2, the
details of the backpack are lost in CNN-based feature maps,
making it difficult to differentiate the two people.

15013

