Exploring Geometry-aware Contrast and Clustering Harmonization for
Self-supervised 3D Object Detection
∗

Hanxue Liang1 *, Chenhan Jiang2 , Dapeng Feng3 , Xin Chen4 , Hang Xu2 ,
Xiaodan Liang3†, Wei Zhang2 , Zhenguo Li2 , Luc Van Gool1 ,
1
ETH Zurich 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Sun Yat-Sen University 4 The University of Hong Kong
Data-Efficient 3D Object Detection

Abstract

52

62

Waymo

1. Introduction
LiDAR-based 3D object detection has been a longstanding task in visual perceptions systems for autonomous
* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author: xdliang328@gmail.com

48

58

46
56

44

mAP (%)

mAPH (%)

Current 3D object detection paradigms highly rely on
extensive annotation efforts, which makes them not practical in many real-world industrial applications. Inspired
by that a human driver can keep accumulating experiences
from self-exploring the roads without any tutor’s guidance,
we first step forwards to explore a simple yet effective selfsupervised learning framework tailored for LiDAR-based
3D object detection. Although the self-supervised pipeline
has achieved great success in 2D domain, the characteristic challenges (e.g., complex geometry structure and various
3D object views) encountered in the 3D domain hinder the
direct adoption of existing techniques that often contrast the
2D augmented data or cluster single-view features. Here we
present a novel self-supervised 3D Object detection framework that seamlessly integrates the geometry-aware contrast and clustering harmonization to lift the unsupervised
3D representation learning, named GCC-3D. First, GCC3D introduces a Geometric-Aware Contrastive objective to
learn spatial-sensitive local structure representation. This
objective enforces the spatially close voxels to have high
feature similarity. Second, a Pseudo-Instance Clustering
harmonization mechanism is proposed to encourage that
different views of pseudo-instances should have consistent
similarities to clustering prototype centers. This module
endows our model semantic discriminative capacity. Extensive experiments demonstrate our GCC-3D achieves significant performance improvement on data-efficient 3D object
detection benchmarks (nuScenes and Waymo). Moreover,
our GCC-3D framework can achieve state-of-the art performances on all popular 3D object detection benchmarks.

nuScenes

50

60

54

52

42
40
38

50

36

GCC-3D pretrain

48

GCC-3D pretrain

34

Click-supervised Pretrain

46

Click-supervised pretrain

32

Train from scratch
44

Train from scratch

30
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0

Label fractor on finetune task

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Figure 1. We finetune CenterPoint-pp detector from scratch, with
GCC-3D pretrain or with Click-supervised pretrain and report performance on Waymo and nuScenes dataset. Our GCC-3D model
show consistent significant improvements over the scratch model
and learn more robust feature than Click-supervised pre-train

driving, attracting increasing industry and research attention recently due to its great advantage of high 3D localization precision and complementary to the 2D perception
[43, 2, 29, 47, 33]. Different from the 2D detection problem,
3D object detectors transform sparse and unorganized point
clouds into the structured 3D bounding box representations,
including shape, orientation and semantic class. Almost all
recent 3D object detectors are built upon fully supervised
frameworks, while obtaining such large-scale and precise
annotations for numerous instances in diverse self-driving
scenarios is labor-intensive and time-consuming, e.g., it
takes hundreds of hours to annotate just one hour of driving
scene data [31]. This hinders the model improvement and
deployment over ever-changing self-driving environments
for LiDAR-based 3D object detection. Thus, a desirable
self/unsupervised 3d object detection framework that can
effortlessly lift the 3d representation learning purely using
raw data is highly demanded but rarely explored.
Nonetheless, in the area of 2D image recognition [30,
20, 14] and natural language understanding [12], selfsupervised pre-training over unlabeled data has yielded a
significant performance boosting in downstream tasks when
the labeled data is scarce. Thus, it is interesting to ask a

3293

