Generating Masks from Boxes by
Mining Spatio-Temporal Consistencies in Videos
Bin Zhao

Goutam Bhat Martin Danelljan Luc Van Gool Radu Timofte
Computer Vision Lab, D-ITET, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

{bzhao,goutam.bhat,martin.danelljan,vangool,radu.timofte}@ethz.ch

Figure 1. When only using a single frame, predicting object masks from bounding boxes often leads to failures (left), since the outline of
an object is difficult to resolve. By using video, our approach aggregates information across several frames. In this example, it identifies
the car as background through the neighboring frames, while the scooter remains within the box, allowing it to be accurately segmented.

Abstract
Segmenting objects in videos is a fundamental computer
vision task. The current deep learning based paradigm offers a powerful, but data-hungry solution. However, current
datasets are limited by the cost and human effort of annotating object masks in videos. This effectively limits the performance and generalization capabilities of existing video
segmentation methods. To address this issue, we explore
weaker form of bounding box annotations.
We introduce a method for generating segmentation
masks from per-frame bounding box annotations in videos.
To this end, we propose a spatio-temporal aggregation module that effectively mines consistencies in the object and
background appearance across multiple frames. We use our
predicted accurate masks to train video object segmentation (VOS) networks for the tracking domain, where only
manual bounding box annotations are available. The additional data provides substantially better generalization
performance, leading to state-of-the-art results on standard
tracking benchmarks. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/visionml/pytracking.

1. Introduction
Segmenting objects in videos is an important but challenging task with many applications in autonomous driving [51, 55], surveillance [11, 15] and video editing. The
field has been driven by the astonishing performance of
deep learning based approaches [7, 44, 58]. However, these
methods require large amount of training images with pixelwise annotations. Manually annotating segmentation masks
in videos is an extremely time-consuming and costly task.
Existing video datasets with segmentation labels [49, 63]
therefore do not provide the large-scale diversity desired in
deep learning. This effectively limits the potential of current state-of-the-art approaches.
To address this issue, it is tempting to consider weaker
forms of human annotations. In particular, object bounding boxes offer an interesting alternative. Boxes provide
horizontal and vertical constraints on the extent of the segmentation mask, while also being substantially faster to annotate. Hence, a method of effectively leveraging bounding box annotations for training video segmentation models
would greatly simplify the process of deploying these models for novel domains. Ideally, simply converting the video

13556

