Towards Face Encryption by Generating Adversarial Identity Masks
Xiao Yang1 , Yinpeng Dong1,3 , Tianyu Pang1 , Hang Su1,2 ,* Jun Zhu1,2,3 , Yuefeng Chen4 , Hui Xue4
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center
1
THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China 3 RealAI 4 Alibaba Group
{yangxiao19, dyp17, pty17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{suhangss, dcszj}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

{yuefeng.chenyf, hui.xueh}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
As billions of personal data being shared through social media and network, the data privacy and security have
drawn an increasing attention. Several attempts have been
made to alleviate the leakage of identity information from
face photos, with the aid of, e.g., image obfuscation techniques. However, most of the present results are either perceptually unsatisfactory or ineffective against face recognition systems. Our goal in this paper is to develop a technique that can encrypt the personal photos such that they
can protect users from unauthorized face recognition systems but remain visually identical to the original version
for human beings. To achieve this, we propose a targeted
identity-protection iterative method (TIP-IM) to generate
adversarial identity masks which can be overlaid on facial
images, such that the original identities can be concealed
without sacrificing the visual quality. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that TIP-IM provides 95%+ protection success
rate against various state-of-the-art face recognition models under practical test scenarios. Besides, we also show
the practical and effective applicability of our method on a
commercial API service.

1. Introduction
The blooming development of social media and network
has brought a huge amount of personal data (e.g., photos)
shared publicly. With the growing ubiquity of deep neural
networks, these techniques dramatically improve the capabilities for the face recognition systems to deal with personal data [6, 26, 37, 46], but as a byproduct, also increase
the potential risks for privacy leakage of personal information. For example, an unauthorized third party may scrabble
and identify the shared photos on social media (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, etc.) without the permission of
* Corresponding author

and

look the same to me.

Users

Real face

Adversarial Identity Mask

Protected face

Unauthorized Face Recognition System：

But

in Target set

Figure 1. An illustrative example of targeted identity protection.
When users share a photo xr on social media (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, etc.), unauthorized applications could scrabble this identity
y0 based on face recognition systems, resulting in the privacy leakage of personal information. Thus we provide an effective identity
mask tool to generate a protected image xp , which can conceal
the corresponding identity by misleading the malicious systems to
predict it as a wrong target identity yt in an authorized or virtual
target set, which can be provided by the service providers.

their owners, resulting in cybercasing [23]. Therefore, it is
imperative to provide users an effective way to protect their
private information from being unconsciously identified and
exposed by the excessive unauthorized systems, without affecting users’ experience.
The past years have witnessed the progress for face encryption in both the security and computer vision communities. Among the existing techniques, obfuscation-based
methods are widely studied. Conventional obfuscation techniques [48], such as blurring, pixelation, darkening, and occlusion, are maybe either perceptually satisfactory or effective against recognition systems [28, 31, 35]. The recent advance in generative adversarial networks (GANs) [15] provides an appealing way to generate more realistic images for
obfuscation [14, 43, 44, 49, 25]. However, the resultant obfuscated images have significantly different visual appearances compared with the original images due to the exaggeration and suppression of some discriminative features,
and occasionally generate unnatural output images with un-

3897

