GistNet: a Geometric Structure Transfer Network for Long-Tailed Recognition
Bo Liu
UC, San Diego

Haoxiang Li
Wormpex AI Research

Hao Kang
Wormpex AI Research

Gang Hua
Wormpex AI Research

boliu@ucsd.edu

lhxustcer@gmail.com

haokheseri@gmail.com

ganghua@gmail.com

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC, San Diego
nuno@ece.ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of long-tailed recognition, where the number of examples per class is highly unbalanced, is considered. It is hypothesized that the well known tendency of
standard classifier training to overfit to popular classes can
be exploited for effective transfer learning. Rather than
eliminating this overfitting, e.g. by adopting popular classbalanced sampling methods, the learning algorithm should
instead leverage this overfitting to transfer geometric information from popular to low-shot classes. A new classifier architecture, GistNet, is proposed to support this goal,
using constellations of classifier parameters to encode the
class geometry. A new learning algorithm is then proposed
for GeometrIc Structure Transfer (GIST), with resort to a
combination of loss functions that combine class-balanced
and random sampling to guarantee that, while overfitting
to the popular classes is restricted to geometric parameters, it is leveraged to transfer class geometry from popular
to few-shot classes. This enables better generalization for
few-shot classes without the need for the manual specification of class weights, or even the explicit grouping of classes
into different types. Experiments on two popular long-tailed
recognition datasets show that GistNet outperforms existing
solutions to this problem.

1. Introduction
The availability of large-scale datasets, with large numbers of images per class [3], has been a major factor in the
success of deep learning for tasks such as object recognition. However, these datasets are manually curated and artificially balanced. This is unlike most real world applications, where the frequencies of examples from different
classes can be highly unbalanced, leading to skewed distributions with long tails.
This has motivated recent interest in the problem of long-

tailed recognition [13], where the training data is highly unbalanced but the test set is kept balanced, so that equally
good performance on all classes is crucial to achieve high
overall accuracy.
Success in the long-tailed recognition setting requires
specific handling of class imbalance during training, since
a classifier trained with the standard cross-entropy loss will
overfit to highly populated classes and perform poorly on
low-shot classes. This has motivated several works to fight
class overfitting with methods, like data re-sampling [27] or
cost-sensitive losses [10], that place more training emphasis
on the examples of lower populated classes.
It is, however, difficult to design augmentation or
class weighting schemes that do not either under or overemphasize the few-shot classes. In this work, we seek an
approach that is fully data driven and leverages overfitting
to the popular classes, rather than combat it. The idea is
to transfer some properties of these classes, which are well
learned by the standard classifier, to the classes with insufficient data, where this is not possible.
For this, we leverage the interpretation of a deep classifier as the composition of an embedding, or feature extractor, implemented with several neural network layers and
a parametric classifier, implemented with a logistic regression layer, at the top of the network. While the embedding
is shared by all classes, the classifier parameters are classspecific, namely a weight-vector per class, as shown in Figure 1.
We exploit the fact that the configuration of these weight
vectors determines the geometry of the embedding. This
consists of the class-conditional distribution, and associated
metric, of the feature vectors of each class, which define the
class boundaries. For a well learned network, this geometry
is identical for all classes. In the long-tailed setting, the
geometry is usually well learned for many-shot classes, but
not for classes with insufficient training samples, as shown
in the left of Figure 1.

8209

