Improving Neural Network Efﬁciency via Post-training Quantization with
Adaptive Floating-Point
Fangxin Liu1,2 , Wenbo Zhao1,2 , Zhezhi He1 , Yanzhi Wang3 , Zongwu Wang1 , Changzhi Dai4
Xiaoyao Liang1 , and Li Jiang1,2 *
1. Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2. Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
3. Northeastern University
4. DeepBlue Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd.
{liufangxin, zhaowenbo, zhezhi.he, ljiang cs}@sjtu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
The great success of deep learning depends on the availability of data and the continuous growth of deep learning
systems’ computing capability. However, deploying DNN
* Corresponding author: Li Jiang.

Data format
based on FP
Accuracy

Model quantization has emerged as a mandatory technique for efﬁcient inference with advanced Deep Neural
Networks (DNN) by representing model parameters with
fewer bits. Nevertheless, prior model quantization either suffers from the inefﬁcient data encoding method thus
leading to noncompetitive model compression rate, or requires time-consuming quantization aware training process. In this work, we propose a novel Adaptive FloatingPoint (AFP) as a variant of standard IEEE-754 ﬂoatingpoint format, with ﬂexible conﬁguration of exponent and
mantissa segments. Leveraging the AFP for model quantization (i.e., encoding the parameter) could signiﬁcantly enhance the model compression rate without accuracy degradation and model re-training. We also want to highlight
that our proposed AFP could effectively eliminate the computationally intensive de-quantization step existing in the
dynamic quantization technique adopted by the famous machine learning frameworks (e.g., pytorch, tensorRT, etc.).
Moreover, we develop a framework to automatically optimize and choose the adequate AFP conﬁguration for each
layer, thus maximizing the compression efﬁcacy. Our experiments indicate that AFP-encoded ResNet-50/MobileNet-v2
only has ∼0.04/0.6% accuracy degradation w.r.t its fullprecision counterpart. It outperforms the state-of-the-art
works by 1.1% in accuracy using the same bit-width while
reducing the energy consumption by 11.2×, which is quite
impressive for inference. Code is released at: https:
//github.com/MXHX7199/ICCV_2021_AFP

Data format
Fixed-point

High

Abstract

Data format
Floating-point
Kmeans

APT LQ-Net
LSQ

Our Method

ADMM
PACT

Data format
INT

Biscaled-FXP

INT8

Low

Need De-quantization
& Re-quantization
High

Hardware Cost

Figure 1: Hardware cost versus prediction accuracy, using
various DNN quantization methods. The blue [9] and oranges represent quantization methods [8, 17, 4, 13, 14, 35],
using ﬂoating-point format or ﬁxed-point format, though
with high prediction accuracy, have relatively high computation cost. In contrast, the green represents quantization
method [12] using the integer data format, with relatively
low accuracy but low-cost. The square indicates that the
quantization method requires retraining or ﬁne-tune, while
the triangle and ours are not.
on edge devices, such as Internet-of-Things devices or mobile phones, is challenging because of the limited computing and storage resources and the energy budget provided by
these edge devices. These result in the large latency, which
is the main concern during the inference. For instance, it
takes 16 seconds on mobile to complete an image recognition using VGG16 [25], which is intolerable for most applications [18]. Therefore, it is essential to compress the DNN
for lower storage requirements and simpler arithmetic operations to improve hardware efﬁciency.
Among various compression techniques, DNN quantization techniques map the continuous weights into discrete
space. Thus weights can be encoded with lower bit-width

5281

