BEV-Net: Assessing Social Distancing Compliance
by Joint People Localization and Geometric Reasoning
Zhirui Dai1
1

Yuepeng Jiang1

Yi Li1

Bo Liu2

Antoni B. Chan3

Nuno Vasconcelos1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UC San Diego
2
Wormpex AI Research
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong

{zhdai,yuj009,yil898,boliu}@eng.ucsd.edu, abchan@cityu.edu.hk, nvasconcelos@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Social distancing, an essential public health measure to
limit the spread of contagious diseases, has gained significant attention since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. In this work, the problem of visual social distancing compliance assessment in busy public areas, with wide
field-of-view cameras, is considered. A dataset of crowd
scenes with people annotations under a bird’s eye view
(BEV) and ground truth for metric distances is introduced,
and several measures for the evaluation of social distance
detection systems are proposed. A multi-branch network,
BEV-Net, is proposed to localize individuals in world coordinates and identify high-risk regions where social distancing is violated. BEV-Net combines detection of head and
feet locations, camera pose estimation, a differentiable homography module to map image into BEV coordinates, and
geometric reasoning to produce a BEV map of the people
locations in the scene. Experiments on complex crowded
scenes demonstrate the power of the approach and show
superior performance over baselines derived from methods
in the literature. Applications of interest for public health
decision makers are finally discussed. Datasets, code and
pretrained models are publicly available at GitHub1 .

1. Introduction
Social distancing, the strategy of maintaining a safe distance between people in public spaces, has been shown to
be an effective measure against the transmission of contagious pathogens, including influenza virus and coronavirus
[57, 7, 23]. However, the monitoring of social distancing
by human observers is neither practical in many settings nor
scalable. This has motivated an interest in methods to detect
and count social distancing violations automatically. While
1 https://github.com/daizhirui/BEVNet

BEV-Net

θ

h

Figure 1: Set of tasks proposed for social distancing compliance
assessment. Given an input image, models are expected to jointly
predict camera geometry (top left), bird’s eye view heatmap of
person locations (bottom left), local risk map highlighting areas
with high probability of infection (right), as well as individual and
global risk level for the entire scene (annotated over the risk map).

non-vision-based methods are available 2 , they typically require users to install certain applications on their mobile devices, and are limited in precision of distance estimates.
Computer vision offers a viable alternative for the collection of social distance measurements. In particular, it
has several advantages for the monitoring of public spaces.
First, it can leverage surveillance cameras that are already
available in many public locations. No expensive infrastructure changes are required.
Second, anonymization of visual data is straightforward
by removing all facial identities, as the system has no access
to other sensitive information of pedestrians. This makes it
much more privacy preserving than the monitoring of mobile devices, or similar approaches. On the other hand,
2 The DP-3T contact tracing protocol [59], for example, estimates distances using Bluetooth signal on smartphones.

5401

