Orthographic-Perspective Epipolar Geometry
Viktor Larsson1 ,

Marc Pollefeys1,2 ,

Magnus Oskarsson3

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Lab Zurich
3
Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University ∗
2

Abstract
In this paper we consider the epipolar geometry between
orthographic and perspective cameras. We generalize many
of the classical results for the perspective essential matrix
to this setting and derive novel minimal solvers, not only
for the calibrated case, but also for partially calibrated and
non-central camera setups. While orthographic cameras
might seem exotic, they occur naturally in many applications. They can e.g. model 2D maps (such as floor plans),
aerial/satellite photography and even approximate narrow
field-of-view cameras (e.g. from telephoto lenses). In our
experiments we highlight various applications of the developed theory and solvers, including Radar-Camera calibration and aligning Structure-from-Motion models to aerial
or satellite images.

1. Introduction
In this paper we direct our attention at something that, at
first glance, might seem like an exotic creature in the land
of epipolar geometry, namely the essential matrix for mixed
orthographic and perspective cameras. By this we mean
the geometry of a two-view scene, where one camera is a
fully calibrated perspective camera and the other is an orthographic camera. A schematic of the geometry is given in
Figure 1. This case was first considered by Zhang et al. in
[27] where the ortho-perspective essential matrix was derived. In this work we extend their analysis and derive a
parallel theory to the classical results for the perspective essential matrix. Additionally we consider the case where the
perspective camera is only partially calibrated (unknown focal length) or when it is a non-central (generalized) camera.
For each of the cases we derive novel minimal solvers which
allow for robust estimation in RANSAC [3] frameworks.
While optical systems that yield true orthographic projections are not commonplace, the orthographic camera is
∗ Funded by the strategic research projects ELLIIT and eSSENCE, and
the H2020 ECSEL JU project ADACORSA under GA 876019

Figure 1. Orthographic-Perspective Epipolar Geometry

applicable in many other settings. For example, 2D-maps
such as floor plans can be seen as an overhead orthographic
image of the scene. Thus registering a camera to a 2D map
is equivalent to relative pose estimation between an orthographic image and a perspective one. Orthographic projection can also approximate perspective projection in the case
of narrow field-of-view or when the distance to the scene
is large. In the experiments we will show that using this
approximation can even be preferable to the full perspective model when the focal length needs to be estimated as
well. Furthermore, while the camera models used for satellite or aerial photography are often complicated, they are
also well-approximated by the simpler orthographic model.
Related Work on Epipolar Geometry. Epipolar geometry deals with the geometry of two cameras viewing a
scene. Often it is characterized in terms of the bifocal
matching tensor (see Triggs [26]) which relates corresponding image points. For projective cameras this is the fundamental matrix. The matrix has only a single internal
constraint (being rank-2) and can be minimally estimated
from seven point correspondences [6]. For calibrated cameras the corresponding bifocal tensor is the essential matrix.
While the essential matrix was first introduced by LonguetHiggins [12], calibrated epipolar geometry was studied as
early as 1883 by Hauck [7]. The essential matrix can be
minimally estimated from five correspondences and there
have been multiple solvers proposed in the literature (see

5570

