AI Choreographer: Music Conditioned 3D Dance Generation with AIST++
Ruilong Li∗1
Shan Yang∗2
David A. Ross2
1
2
University of Southern California
Google Research

Angjoo Kanazawa2,3
3
University of California, Berkeley

AIST Multi-view Videos

Full-Attention
Cross-modal
Transformer
(FACT)

Generated 3D Dance

AIST++ 3D Dance Dataset

Figure 1: AI Choreographer. We present a new 3D dance dataset, AIST++, which contains 5.2 hours of 3D motion
reconstructed from real dancers paired with music (left) and a novel Full-Attention Cross-modal Transformer (FACT) network
that can generate realistic 3D dance motion with global translation conditioned on music (right). We output our 3D motion
in representations that allow for instant motion retargeting to a novel character. Here we use a character from Mixamo [1]

Abstract
We present AIST++, a new multi-modal dataset of 3D
dance motion and music, along with FACT, a Full-Attention
Cross-modal Transformer network for generating 3D dance
motion conditioned on music. The proposed AIST++
dataset contains 5.2 hours of 3D dance motion in 1408 sequences, covering 10 dance genres with multi-view videos
with known camera poses—the largest dataset of this kind
to our knowledge. We show that naively applying sequence
models such as transformers to this dataset for the task of
music conditioned 3D motion generation does not produce
satisfactory 3D motion that is well correlated with the input
music. We overcome these shortcomings by introducing key
changes in its architecture design and supervision: FACT
model involves a deep cross-modal transformer block with
full-attention that is trained to predict N future motions. We
empirically show that these changes are key factors in generating long sequences of realistic dance motion that are
well-attuned to the input music. We conduct extensive experiments on AIST++ with user studies, where our method
outperforms recent state-of-the-art methods both qualitatively and quantitatively. The code and the dataset can be
found at: https://google.github.io/aichoreographer.
∗ equal contribution. Work performed while Ruilong was an intern at
Google.

1. Introduction
The ability to dance by composing movement patterns
that align to musical beats is a fundamental aspect of human behavior. Dancing is an universal language found in all
cultures [50], and today, many people express themselves
through dance on contemporary online media platforms.
The most watched videos on YouTube are dance-centric
music videos such as “Baby Shark Dance”, and “Gangnam
Style” [75], making dance a more and more powerful tool
to spread messages across the internet. However, dancing is
a form of art that requires practice—even for humans, professional training is required to equip a dancer with a rich
repertoire of dance motions to create an expressive choreography. Computationally, this is even more challenging as
the task requires the ability to generate a continuous motion
with high kinematic complexity that captures the non-linear
relationship with the accompanying music.
In this work, we address these challenges by presenting
a novel Full Attention Cross-modal Transformer (FACT)
network, which can robustly generate realistic 3D dance
motion from music, along with a large-scale multi-modal
3D dance motion dataset, AIST++, to train such a model.
Specifically, given a piece of music and a short (2 seconds)
seed motion, our model is able to generate a long sequence
of realistic 3D dance motions. Our model effectively learns
the music-motion correlation and can generate dance se13401

