Semantically Coherent Out-of-Distribution Detection
Jingkang Yang1 , Haoqi Wang2 , Litong Feng2 , Xiaopeng Yan2 , Huabin Zheng2 ,
Wayne Zhang2,3,4 , Ziwei Liu1B
1
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
SenseTime Research
3
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
jingkang001@ntu.edu.sg, {lastname.firstname}@sensetime.com, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Current out-of-distribution (OOD) detection benchmarks are commonly built by defining one dataset as indistribution (ID) and all others as OOD. However, these
benchmarks unfortunately introduce some unwanted and
impractical goals, e.g., to perfectly distinguish CIFAR dogs
from ImageNet dogs, even though they have the same semantics and negligible covariate shifts. These unrealistic goals will result in an extremely narrow range of
model capabilities, greatly limiting their use in real applications. To overcome these drawbacks, we re-design the
benchmarks and propose the semantically coherent out-ofdistribution detection (SC-OOD). On the SC-OOD benchmarks, existing methods suffer from large performance
degradation, suggesting that they are extremely sensitive
to low-level discrepancy between data sources while ignoring their inherent semantics. To develop an effective
SC-OOD detection approach, we leverage an external unlabeled set and design a concise framework featured by
unsupervised dual grouping (UDG) for the joint modeling of ID and OOD data. The proposed UDG can not
only enrich the semantic knowledge of the model by exploiting unlabeled data in an unsupervised manner, but
also distinguish ID/OOD samples to enhance ID classification and OOD detection tasks simultaneously. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on SC-OOD benchmarks.
Code and benchmarks are provided on our project page:
https://jingkang50.github.io/projects/scood.

1. Introduction
Although dominated on visual recognition [1, 2], deep
learning models are still notorious for the following two
drawbacks: 1) their performance endures a significant drop
when test data distribution has a large covariate shift from

Dataset-Dependent Out-of-Distribution (DD-OOD) Splitting
!! : CIFAR-10

!" : Tiny-ImageNet

Semantically Coherent Out-of-Distribution (SC-OOD) Splitting
!! : CIFAR-10 + Selected Tiny-ImageNet

!" : Remains

Figure 1: Dataset-dependent OOD (DD-OOD) vs. Semantically Coherent OOD (SC-OOD). We notice that a
certain number of DD-OOD samples have the same semantics as ID, with negligible covariate shifts. Here, we redirect
these samples back to ID in the SC-OOD setting.
training [3]; 2) they tend to recklessly classify a test image
into a certain training class, even though it has a semantic
shift from training, that is, it may not belong to any training
class [4]. Those defects seriously reduce the model trustworthiness and hinder their deployment in real, especially
high-risk applications [5, 6]. To solve the problem, out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection aims to distinguish and reject
test samples with either covariate shifts or semantic shifts
or both, so as to prevent models trained on in-distribution
(ID) data from producing unreliable predictions [4].
Existing OOD detection methods mostly focus on calibrating the distribution of the softmax layer [4] through
temperature scaling [7], generative models [8, 9], or ensemble methods [10, 11]. Other solutions collect enormous OOD samples to learn the ID/OOD discrepancy dur-

8301

