Pyramid Vision Transformer: A Versatile Backbone for Dense Prediction
without Convolutions
Wenhai Wang1 , Enze Xie2 , Xiang Li3 , Deng-Ping Fan4B ,
Kaitao Song3 , Ding Liang5 , Tong Lu1B , Ping Luo2 , Ling Shao4
1
Nanjing University 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 4 IIAI 5 SenseTime Research
https://github.com/whai362/PVT

Conv 4
Conv 3
Conv 2

TASK

TASK

1. CLS
2. DET
3. SEG
...

1. CLS
TF-E 3
TF-E 2
!×

TF-E

Conv 1

TF-E 4

Transformer
Block

TF-E 1

TASK
1. CLS
2. DET
3. SEG
...
!! ×
Transformer
Block
Shrink

(a) CNNs: VGG [53], ResNet [21], etc.

(b) Vision Transformer [12]

(c) Pyramid Vision Transformer (ours)

Figure 1: Comparisons of different architectures, where “Conv” and “TF-E” stand for “convolution” and “Transformer
encoder”, respectively. (a) Many CNN backbones use a pyramid structure for dense prediction tasks such as object detection
(DET), instance and semantic segmentation (SEG). (b) The recently proposed Vision Transformer (ViT) [12] is a “columnar”
structure specifically designed for image classification (CLS). (c) By incorporating the pyramid structure from CNNs, we
present the Pyramid Vision Transformer (PVT), which can be used as a versatile backbone for many computer vision tasks,
broadening the scope and impact of ViT. Moreover, our experiments also show that PVT can easily be combined with
DETR [5] to build an end-to-end object detection system without convolutions.

Abstract
Although convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved great success in computer vision, this work investigates a simpler, convolution-free backbone network useful for many dense prediction tasks. Unlike the recentlyproposed Vision Transformer (ViT) that was designed for
image classification specifically, we introduce the Pyramid Vision Transformer (PVT), which overcomes the difficulties of porting Transformer to various dense prediction
tasks. PVT has several merits compared to current state
of the arts. (1) Different from ViT that typically yields lowresolution outputs and incurs high computational and memory costs, PVT not only can be trained on dense partitions
of an image to achieve high output resolution, which is important for dense prediction, but also uses a progressive
shrinking pyramid to reduce the computations of large feature maps. (2) PVT inherits the advantages of both CNN
and Transformer, making it a unified backbone for variB Corresponding authors: Deng-Ping Fan (dengpfan@gmail.com);
Tong Lu (lutong@nju.edu.cn).

ous vision tasks without convolutions, where it can be used
as a direct replacement for CNN backbones. (3) We validate PVT through extensive experiments, showing that it
boosts the performance of many downstream tasks, including object detection, instance and semantic segmentation.
For example, with a comparable number of parameters,
PVT+RetinaNet achieves 40.4 AP on the COCO dataset,
surpassing ResNet50+RetinNet (36.3 AP) by 4.1 absolute
AP (see Figure 2). We hope that PVT could serve as an
alternative and useful backbone for pixel-level predictions
and facilitate future research.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural network (CNNs) have achieved remarkable success in computer vision, making them a versatile and dominant approach for almost all tasks [53, 21,
72, 48, 20, 38, 8, 31]. Nevertheless, this work aims to explore an alternative backbone network beyond CNN, which
can be used for dense prediction tasks such as object detection [39, 13], semantic [81] and instance segmentation [39],
in addition to image classification [11].
1568

