Synthesized Feature based Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
on a Mixture of Subspaces
Ali Cheraghian*,1,2 , Shafin Rahman* ,3 , Sameera Ramasinghe1,2 , Pengfei Fang1,2 , Christian Simon1,2
Lars Petersson1,2 , Mehrtash Harandi2,4
1
Australian National University, 2 Data61-CSIRO, Australia
3
North South University, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 4 Monash University, Australia
{Ali.Cheraghian, Sameera.Ramasinghe, Pengfei.Fang, Christian.Simon}@anu.edu.au,
shafin.rahman@northsouth.edu, Lars.Petersson@data61.csiro.au, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

Abstract
Cluster 2

Cluster 1

Few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL) aims to incrementally add sets of novel classes to a well-trained base
model in multiple training sessions with the restriction that
only a few novel instances are available per class. While
learning novel classes, FSCIL methods gradually forget
base (old) class training and overfit to a few novel class
samples. Existing approaches have addressed this problem
by computing the class prototypes from the visual or semantic word vector domain. In this paper, we propose addressing this problem using a mixture of subspaces. Subspaces
define the cluster structure of the visual domain and help
to describe the visual and semantic domain considering
the overall distribution of the data. Additionally, we propose to employ a variational autoencoder (VAE) to generate
synthesized visual samples for augmenting pseudo-feature
while learning novel classes incrementally. The combined
effect of the mixture of subspaces and synthesized features
reduces the forgetting and overfitting problem of FSCIL. Extensive experiments on three image classification datasets
show that our proposed method achieves competitive results
compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In many practical applications, it is crucial for a model to
classify novel objects, i.e., objects for which only a few instances are available during training. For example, this can
occur when the distribution of the test data deviates from
that experienced at training, or if the model faces new objects from a class for which significantly less data was provided during training. While the former, to some extent, can
be addressed by various techniques such as domain adapta* denotes equal contribution.

Mixture of
Sabspaces

Subspace 1

Cluster 3

Subspace 2
Subspace
Merging

Subspace 3
Real feature

Synthetic feature

Figure 1: We cluster the training samples into a number of clusters, in this example, three. Then, we generate three corresponding
subspaces, which are constructed from these three clusters. These
subspaces are then used to project visual features and semantic
vectors onto. The distance between the projected visual feature
and the projected semantic vector is minimized according to a loss
function during training in each subspace. In addition to projecting real sample features, we also project synthesized features to
the mixture of subspaces. The combined effect of the mixture of
subspaces and synthesized features helps the network not overfit
to few-shot data of novel classes and forget base class knowledge.

tion, addressing the latter is usually studied under the FewShot Learning (FSL) paradigm [33, 10]. Generally, in a FSL
framework, the goal is to classify samples into few-shot
classes given only a training set of base categories. However, some variations of the problem classify both base and
novel class instances together in a generalized manner. In a
more realistic scenario, all novel class instances may not be
available at a time. It creates another branch of the problem,
few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL), where novel
classes are added to the model incrementally over time, and
in each incremental step, the model is tested based on both
base and novel class instances. Because of this restriction,
FSCIL is the most complex form of FSL problem.
Initial results on FSCIL have been proposed in the literature [35, 20, 4, 8]. We identify two critical challenges in this
problem. (a) Catastrophic forgetting of base classes: Recent works observed a fascinating performance using word

8661

