Generalizable Mixed-Precision Quantization via Attribution Rank Preservation
Ziwei Wang1,2,3 , Han Xiao1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{wang-zw18, h-xiao20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Conventional Mixed-precision Quantization
Layer k-1

ImageNet

Search

In this paper, we propose a generalizable mixedprecision quantization (GMPQ) method for efficient inference. Conventional methods require the consistency
of datasets for bitwidth search and model deployment to
guarantee the policy optimality, leading to heavy search
cost on challenging largescale datasets in realistic applications. On the contrary, our GMPQ searches the mixedquantization policy that can be generalized to largescale
datasets with only a small amount of data, so that the
search cost is significantly reduced without performance
degradation. Specifically, we observe that locating network attribution correctly is general ability for accurate visual analysis across different data distribution. Therefore,
despite of pursuing higher model accuracy and complexity, we preserve attribution rank consistency between the
quantized models and their full-precision counterparts via efficient capacity-aware attribution imitation for generalizable mixed-precision quantization strategy search. Extensive experiments show that our method obtains competitive accuracy-complexity trade-off compared with the
state-of-the-art mixed-precision networks in significantly reduced search cost. The code is available at https://github.com/ZiweiWangTHU/GMPQ.git.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved the state-of-the
art performance across a large number of vision tasks
such as image classification [15, 44, 18], object detection
[40, 28, 14], face recognition [6, 49, 29] and many others. However, the mobile devices with limited storage and
computational resources are not capable of processing deep
models due to the extremely high complexity. Therefore, it
is desirable to design network compression strategy according to the hardware configurations.
∗ Corresponding author

1 0 2 Bit
1 0 1 1 4 Bit Finetune

ImageNet

Layer k
CIFAR-10

1
0 1

1 Bit
2 Bit
Generalize

VOC

Search Layer k+1
0 0 2 Bit Finetune ImageNet
1 0 1
3 Bit
GMPQ
(a) Comparison between conventional methods and GMPQ
ARD=9.84

ARD=36.78

ARD=14.27

ARD=42.10

Optimal
Random
Quantization
Quantization
(b) Attribution for networks in different precision

Full-precision

Figure 1. (a) Conventional methods require the consistency of
datasets for bitwidth search and model deployment, while our GMPQ searches the optimal quantization policy on small datasets and
generalizes it to largescale datasets. (b) The attribution computed
by Grad-cam for images from ImageNet (top row) and PASCAL
VOC (bottom row). Different from random quantization, the optimal quantization policy keeps similar attribution with the fullprecision counterparts regardless of datasets. ARD means the average Attribution Rank Distance for the top-100 pixels with the
highest attribution in the full-precision feature maps.

Recently, several network compression techniques have
been proposed including pruning [27, 16, 33], quantization [59, 30, 51], efficient architecture design [20, 17, 37]

5291

