Pri3D: Can 3D Priors Help 2D Representation Learning?
Ji Hou1

Saining Xie2
1

Benjamin Graham2

Technical University of Munich

Angela Dai1
2

Matthias Nießner1

Facebook AI Research

Figure 1: Pri3D leverages 3D priors for downstream 2D image understanding tasks: during pre-training, we incorporate
view-invariant and geometric priors from color-geometry information given by RGB-D datasets, imbuing geometric priors
into learned features. We show that these 3D-imbued learned features can effectively transfer to improved performance on
2D tasks such as semantic segmentation, object detection, and instance segmentation.

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D perception have shown impressive progress in understanding geometric structures of 3D
shapes and even scenes. Inspired by these advances in geometric understanding, we aim to imbue image-based perception with representations learned under geometric constraints. We introduce an approach to learn view-invariant,
geometry-aware representations for network pre-training,
based on multi-view RGB-D data, that can then be effectively transferred to downstream 2D tasks. We propose
to employ contrastive learning under both multi-view image constraints and image-geometry constraints to encode
3D priors into learned 2D representations. This results
not only in improvement over 2D-only representation learning on the image-based tasks of semantic segmentation, instance segmentation and object detection on real-world indoor datasets, but moreover, provides significant improvement in the low data regime. We show significant improvement of 6.0% on semantic segmentation on full data as
well as 11.9% on 20% data against baselines on ScanNet.
Our code is open sourced at https://github.com/
Sekunde/Pri3D.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have seen rapid progress in learningbased approaches for semantic understanding of 3D scenes,
particularly in the tasks of 3D semantic segmentation, 3D
object detection, and 3D semantic instance segmentation
[40, 8, 51, 28, 22, 17, 12, 29, 38]. Such approaches leverage geometric observations, exploiting the representation of
points [40, 41], voxels [8, 22], or meshes [28] to obtain accurate 3D semantics. These have shown significant promise
towards realizing applications such as depth-based scene
understanding for robotics, as well as augmented or virtual
reality. In parallel to the development of such methods, the
availability of large-scale RGB-D datasets [46, 27, 3, 7], has
further accelerated the research in this area.
One advantage of learning directly in 3D in contrast to
learning solely from 2D images is that methods operate in
metric 3D space; hence, it is not necessary to learn viewdependent effects and/or projective mappings. This allows
training 3D neural networks from scratch in a relatively
short time frame and typically requires a (relatively) small
number of training samples; e.g., state-of-the-art 3D neural networks can be trained with around 1000 scenes from
ScanNet. Our main idea is to leverage these advantages in

5693

