Multiple Heads are Better than One:
Few-shot Font Generation with Multiple Localized Experts
Song Park1
1

Sanghyuk Chun2, 3

Junbum Cha3

School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University

Abstract
A few-shot font generation (FFG) method has to satisfy two objectives: the generated images should preserve
the underlying global structure of the target character and
present the diverse local reference style. Existing FFG
methods aim to disentangle content and style either by extracting a universal representation style or extracting multiple component-wise style representations. However, previous methods either fail to capture diverse local styles or
cannot be generalized to a character with unseen components, e.g., unseen language systems. To mitigate the issues, we propose a novel FFG method, named Multiple Localized Experts Few-shot Font Generation Network (MXFont). MX-Font extracts multiple style features not explicitly conditioned on component labels, but automatically by
multiple experts to represent different local concepts, e.g.,
left-side sub-glyph. Owing to the multiple experts, MX-Font
can capture diverse local concepts and show the generalizability to unseen languages. During training, we utilize
component labels as weak supervision to guide each expert to be specialized for different local concepts. We formulate the component assign problem to each expert as
the graph matching problem, and solve it by the Hungarian algorithm. We also employ the independence loss and
the content-style adversarial loss to impose the contentstyle disentanglement. In our experiments, MX-Font outperforms previous state-of-the-art FFG methods in the Chinese
generation and cross-lingual, e.g., Chinese to Korean, generation. Source code is available at https://github.
com/clovaai/mxfont.

1. Introduction
A few-shot font generation task (FFG) [35, 45, 9, 34, 4,
5, 31] aims to generate a new font library using only a few
reference glyphs, e.g., less than 10 glyph images, without
additional model fine-tuning at the test time. FFG is espe* Hyunjung Shim is a corresponding author.

Bado Lee3
2

Hyunjung Shim1 *

NAVER AI Lab

吉 益 幸侯
Few Reference Images
in Unseen Style

3

NAVER CLOVA

很高兴见到你
Source Images in
Seen Language

Model
without
Additional Training

Generated Images by Our Method
in Seen Language

안녕하세요
Source Images in
Unseen Language

Generated Images by Our Method
in Unseen Language

Figure 1. Cross-lingual few-shot font generation results by MXFont. With only four references, the proposed method, MX-Font,
can generate a high quality font library. Furthermore, we first show
the effectiveness of the proposed method on the zero-shot crosslingual few-shot generation task, i.e., generating unseen Korean
glyphs using the Chinese font generation model.

cially a desirable task when designing a new font library
for glyph-rich scripts, e.g., Chinese (> 50K glyphs), Korean (≈ 11K glyphs), or Thai (≈ 11K glyphs). It is because
the traditional font design process is very labor-intensive
due to the complex characteristics of the font domain. Another real-world scenario of FFG is to extend an existing
font design to different language systems. For example, an
international multi-media content, such as a video game or
movie designed with a creative font, is required to re-design
coherent style fonts for different languages.
A high-quality font design is obliged to satisfy two objectives. First, the generated glyph should maintain all the
detailed structure of the target character, particularly important for glyph-rich scripts with highly complex structure.
For example, even very small damages on a local component of a Chinese glyph can hurt the meaning of the target
character. As another objective, a generated glyph should
have a diverse local style of the reference glyphs, e.g., serifness, strokes, thickness, or size. To achieve both objectives,
existing methods formulate FFG by disentangling the content information and the style information from the given
glyphs [35, 45, 9, 4, 31]. They combine the content features
from the source glyph and the style features from the refer-

13900

