Beyond Question-Based Biases:
Assessing Multimodal Shortcut Learning in Visual Question Answering
Rémi Cadène1,2 * †
Damien Teney3,4
Matthieu Cord1,5
Corentin Dancette1 *
1
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, 4 place Jussieu, Paris
2
3
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, USA
Idiap Research Institute
4
5
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
Valeo.ai
1

{firstname.lastname}@sorbonne-universite.fr

Abstract
We introduce an evaluation methodology for visual question answering (VQA) to better diagnose cases of shortcut
learning. These cases happen when a model exploits spurious statistical regularities to produce correct answers but
does not actually deploy the desired behavior. There is
a need to identify possible shortcuts in a dataset and assess their use before deploying a model in the real world.
The research community in VQA has focused exclusively
on question-based shortcuts, where a model might, for example, answer “What is the color of the sky” with “blue”
by relying mostly on the question-conditional training prior
and give little weight to visual evidence. We go a step further and consider multimodal shortcuts that involve both
questions and images. We first identify potential shortcuts
in the popular VQA v2 training set by mining trivial predictive rules such as co-occurrences of words and visual
elements. We then introduce VQA-CounterExamples (VQACE), an evaluation protocol based on our subset of CounterExamples i.e. image-question-answer triplets where our
rules lead to incorrect answers. We use this new evaluation in a large-scale study of existing approaches for
VQA. We demonstrate that even state-of-the-art models perform poorly and that existing techniques to reduce biases
are largely ineffective in this context. Our findings suggest that past work on question-based biases in VQA has
only addressed one facet of a complex issue. The code
for our method is available at https://github.com/
cdancette/detect-shortcuts

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a popular task that
aims at developing models able to answer free-form questions about the contents of given images. The research com* Equal contribution † Work done before April 2021 and joining Tesla

3

damien.teney@idiap.ch

munity introduced several datasets [5, 23, 26, 27] to study
various topics such as multimodal fusion [7] and visual reasoning [4, 22]. The popular VQA v2 dataset [21] is the
largest dataset of photographs of real scenes and humanprovided questions. Because of strong selection biases and
annotation artifacts, these datasets have served as a test-bed
for the study of dataset biases and shortcut learning [18] (we
will use the term “shortcut” exclusively in the rest of the paper). These spurious correlations correspond to superficial
statistical patterns in the training data that allow predicting
correct answers without deploying the desirable behavior.
Issues of shortcut learning have become an increasing concern for other tasks in vision and natural language processing [18, 14]. In extreme cases, shortcuts in VQA may allow
guessing the answer without even looking at the image [1].
Some shortcuts can be more subtle and involve both textual
and visual elements. For instance, training questions containing What sport are strongly associated with the answer
tennis when they co-occur with a racket in the image (see
Figure 1). However, some examples can be found in the
validation set, such as What sport field is in the background
?, that lead to a different answer (soccer) despite a racquet
being present in the image. Because of such exceptions,
a model that strongly relies on simple co-occurrences will
fail on unusual questions and scenes. Our work studies such
multimodal patterns and their impact on VQA models.
The presence of dataset biases in VQA datasets is well
known [1, 21, 23, 29], but existing evaluation protocols
are limited to text-based shortcuts. Our work introduces
VQA-CounterExamples (VQA-CE for short) which is an
evaluation protocol for multimodal shortcuts. It is easy
to reproduce and can be used on any model trained on
VQA v2, without requiring retraining. We first start with a
method to discover superficial statistical patterns in a given
VQA dataset that could be the cause of shortcut learning.
We discover a collection of co-occurrences of textual and
visual elements that are strongly predictive of certain an-

1574

