Structured Outdoor Architecture Reconstruction
by Exploration and Classification
Fuyang Zhang

Xiang Xu
Nelson Nauata
Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University, BC, Canada

{fuyangz, xuxiangx, nnauata, furukawa}@sfu.ca

4.5

2.2

5.1

Exploration route

6.0

Classification score

Figure 1. Our explore-and-classify reconstruction framework iterates between exploring new building structures by heuristic actions and
classifying the correctness of geometries. The figure shows a particular path of exploration by our system. The red color highlights the
major improvements against the previous step.

Abstract
This paper presents an explore-and-classify framework
for structured architectural reconstruction from an aerial
image. Starting from a potentially imperfect building reconstruction by an existing algorithm, our approach 1) explores the space of building models by modifying the reconstruction via heuristic actions; 2) learns to classify the
correctness of building models while generating classification labels based on the ground-truth; and 3) repeat. At test
time, we iterate exploration and classification, seeking for
a result with the best classification score. We evaluate the
approach using initial reconstructions by two baselines and
two state-of-the-art reconstruction algorithms. Qualitative
and quantitative evaluations demonstrate that our approach
consistently improves the reconstruction quality from every
initial reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Imagine a task of drawing to reconstruct the face of a
person you met in the morning. This is a challenging task,
where most people would perform trial and error, that is,
iterate modifying and verifying the face reconstruction until being satisfied with the result. In the space of structured reconstruction, which is notoriously difficult even
with the emergence of deep learning, researchers compete
on designing effective neural architectures that directly re-

constructs structured geometry (or its constituent information) [16, 22, 21, 24]. Our idea is to decompose the process
of reconstruction into the iteration of trial and error, where
the core learning is in verifying the correctness of a given
geometry as opposed to one-shot geometry regression.
More concretely, the paper proposes a novel exploreand-classify approach for structured reconstruction. Starting from an imperfect building reconstruction by an existing algorithm, our approach uses simple geometry-editing
actions to explore a set of offspring graphs and learns to
classify the correctness of them at different levels of local
geometries. At test time, we iterate exploration and classification with a search method such as beam-search or sequential Monte Carlo [6], trying to find the result with the
best classification score.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach on the
task of structured outdoor architecture reconstruction from
an aerial image [18], where a building structure is represented as a graph (See Fig. 1). We use two baselines and
two state-of-the-art algorithms [22, 18] to generate the initial reconstructions. Our system consistently makes big improvements over all the initial reconstructions and achieves
state-of-the-art performance.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are twofold: 1) A novel explore-and-classify framework with local
geometry classifiers for a structured reconstruction problem; and 2) A state-of-the-art performance on outdoor architecture reconstruction problem with significant improvements over all the baselines and the best existing ap12427

