Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation with Cyclic Memory Network
Guo-Sen Xie†,‡ *, Huan Xiong§,‡∗ , Jie Liu‡ , Yazhou Yao† , Ling Shao\
‡

†

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE \ Inception Institute of AI, UAE
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China § Harbin Institute of Technology, China

Abstract

Support Image

Prototypes

Multi-Resolution Features

OR

Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) is an important
task for novel (unseen) object segmentation under the datascarcity scenario. However, most FSS methods rely on unidirectional feature aggregation, e.g., from support prototypes to get the query prediction, and from high-resolution
features to guide the low-resolution ones. This usually fails
to fully capture the cross-resolution feature relationships
and thus leads to inaccurate estimates of the query objects.
To resolve the above dilemma, we propose a cyclic memory
network (CMN) to directly learn to read abundant support
information from all resolution features in a cyclic manner.
Specifically, we first generate N pairs (key and value) of
multi-resolution query features guided by the support feature and its mask. Next, we circularly take one pair of these
features as the query to be segmented, and the rest N-1 pairs
are written into an external memory accordingly, i.e., this
leave-one-out process is conducted for N times. In each cycle, the query feature is updated by collaboratively matching its key and value with the memory, which can elegantly
cover all the spatial locations from different resolutions.
Furthermore, we incorporate the query feature re-adding
and the query feature recursive updating mechanisms into
the memory reading operation. CMN, equipped with these
merits, can thus capture cross-resolution relationships and
better handle the object appearance and scale variations in
FSS. Experiments on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i well validate the effectiveness of our model for FSS.

1. Introduction
Training high performance semantic segmentation models [1, 3, 18, 24, 42], based on convolutional neural networks [12, 27, 38, 47], typically requires large amounts of
human-annotated training data, e.g., pixel-level annotations
are essential for training a desirable segmentation model.
However, data annotating by humans is usually costly and
labor-intensive. Moreover, these models, almost always,
* Corresponding authors.

Query Image

CNN Unidirectional Feature Aggregation

(a) Unidirectional Feature Aggregation Methods
Multi-Resolution Features

Support Image

Query Image

CNN

Query
Memory
Memory

Memory
Query
Memory

Memory
Memory
Query

Cyclic Memory Reading

(b) Cyclic Memory Network
Figure 1. Illustrations of existing FSS models and our CMN.
(a) Existing FSS methods usually rely on unidirectional feature
aggregation, e.g., utilizing the support prototypes to get the query
prediction or leveraging the high-resolution features to guide the
low-resolution ones. However, some car regions are wrongly predicted as airplane, which is due to the large object variations in the
support and query images (the airplanes have different scales and
appearance colors). In this case, these unidirectional methods fail
to capture and overcome the object variations. (b) CMN predicts
the airplane in the query image pretty well, which benefits from
our cyclic memory reading on the multi-resolution features.

fail to segment novel (unseen) objects, when given very
few (one) training images (image) with annotations. To
this end, as in conventional zero- and few-shot classification
models [28, 36, 37] that aim to mitigate data annotation and
novel object recognition issues in the high-level semantic
category space, few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) [25]
has become an active research topic for alleviating these issues in the low-level image pixel space, under the object
segmentation scenario.
FSS leverages scarce support images with ground-truth

7293

