Ask&Confirm: Active Detail Enriching for Cross-Modal Retrieval with Partial
Query
Guanyu Cai1,2 *, Jun Zhang2 , Xinyang Jiang3†, Yifei Gong2 ,
Lianghua He1 , Fufu Yu2 , Pai Peng2 , Xiaowei Guo2 , Feiyue Huang2 , Xing Sun2†
Tongji University1 , Tencent Youtu Lab2 , Microsoft Research3
{caiguanyu,Helianghua}@tongji.edu.cn,xinyangjiang@microsoft.com,pengpai sh@163.com
{bobbyjzhang,yifeigong,fufuyu,scorpioguo,garyhuang,winfredsun}@tencent.com

User

Abstract

Agent

Retrieval Result

People with
skateboards.

Text-based image retrieval has seen considerable
progress in recent years. However, the performance of existing methods suffers in real life since the user is likely
to provide an incomplete description of an image, which
often leads to results filled with false positives that fit the
incomplete description. In this work, we introduce the
partial-query problem and extensively analyze its influence
on text-based image retrieval. Previous interactive methods tackle the problem by passively receiving users’ feedback to supplement the incomplete query iteratively, which
is time-consuming and requires heavy user effort. Instead,
we propose a novel retrieval framework that conducts the
interactive process in an Ask-and-Confirm fashion, where
AI actively searches for discriminative details missing in
the current query, and users only need to confirm AI’s proposal. Specifically, we propose an object-based interaction to make the interactive retrieval more user-friendly and
present a reinforcement-learning-based policy to search for
discriminative objects. Furthermore, since fully-supervised
training is often infeasible due to the difficulty of obtaining human-machine dialog data, we present a weaklysupervised training strategy that needs no human-annotated
dialogs other than a text-image dataset. Experiments show
that our framework significantly improves the performance
of text-based image retrieval. Code is available at https:
//github.com/CuthbertCai/Ask-Confirm.

1. Introduction
Recently, cross-modal retrieval, especially text-based
image retrieval has gained increasing attention [36]. Although significant improvement has been achieved with existing methods [15, 36, 7] for text-based retrieval, we found
in practice their retrieval result is barely satisfactory when
* Work done during internship at Youtu Lab
† Corresponding author: Xinyang Jiang, Xing Sun

OK.

Is there a street
in the scene?
No.
Is there a trophy
in the scene?
Yes.

Figure 1: An illustration of Ask&Confirm. The agent enriches the textual query and narrows down the retrieval
scope by iteratively asking users to confirm more information. The target image is highlighted with a red rectangle.
users only describe some local regions in an image.
In this work, we introduce a new concept of partialquery problem in text-based image retrieval, where the initial text query only describes some objects in the target image. Studies [30, 28] have found that when examining an
image, people tend to only focus on the objects that stand
out the most. This could lead to problems where the objects
that people focus on are not the discriminative objects that
can distinguish the target image from similar candidates,
thus making the user’s input insufficient for retrieving the
target image. As shown in Figure 2 (a) and (b), a crossmodal retrieval model performs poorly when a query is only
partially given. In both examples, the target image ranks
lower than 1000 th, while the other false positives rank top
three. A common object (blue box) described by the partial query is presented in all images. However, the rest of
images are vastly different. For example, in Figure 2 (a),
besides the stroller mentioned in the query, the target image
consists of umbrellas, chairs, and so on. Whereas the others
consist of different objects like trees and buses. If the retrieval model receives a complete description including all
objects, existing methods [15, 17, 32] perform excellently.
To show how the partial query hurts retrieval, we test two

1835

