Learning to Regress Bodies from Images using
Differentiable Semantic Rendering
Sai Kumar Dwivedi1
Nikos Athanasiou1
Muhammed Kocabas1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Michael J. Black1
ETH Zurich

2

{sdwivedi, nathanasiou, mkocabas, black}@tue.mpg.de

Figure 1: Differentiable Semantic Rendering (DSR). A state-of-the-art approach [14] (purple) fails to estimate accurate
3D pose and shape for in-the-wild scenarios. We address this by exploiting the clothing semantics of the human body. Our
approach, DSR, (blue) captures more accurate 3D pose and shape compared to previous work.

Abstract
Learning to regress 3D human body shape and pose
(e.g. SMPL parameters) from monocular images typically
exploits losses on 2D keypoints, silhouettes, and/or partsegmentation when 3D training data is not available. Such
losses, however, are limited because 2D keypoints do not supervise body shape and segmentations of people in clothing
do not match projected minimally-clothed SMPL shapes. To
exploit richer image information about clothed people, we
introduce higher-level semantic information about clothing
to penalize clothed and non-clothed regions of the human
body differently. To do so, we train a body regressor using
a novel “Differentiable Semantic Rendering (DSR)” loss.
For Minimally-Clothed (MC) regions, we define the DSRMC loss, which encourages a tight match between a rendered SMPL body and the minimally-clothed regions of the
image. For clothed regions, we define the DSR-C loss to encourage the rendered SMPL body to be inside the clothing
mask. To ensure end-to-end differentiable training, we learn
a semantic clothing prior for SMPL vertices from thousands
of clothed human scans. We perform extensive qualitative
and quantitative experiments to evaluate the role of clothing

semantics on the accuracy of 3D human pose and shape estimation. We outperform all previous state-of-the-art methods on 3DPW and Human3.6M and obtain on par results
on MPI-INF-3DHP. Code and trained models are available
for research at https://dsr.is.tue.mpg.de/.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose and shape from in-the-wild
images has received great research interest [5, 14, 15, 18,
20, 30, 34, 54] because of its varied applications in animation, games, and the fashion industry. One aspect that makes
this problem challenging is the difficulty of obtaining accurate 3D ground-truth annotations, as they require either specialized –mostly indoors– MoCap systems or careful calibration and setup of IMU sensors [46]. Such data would
facilitate training robust regressors paving the way for estimating human-scene interaction with greater granularity.
Given the lack of in-the-wild 3D ground-truth, the vast
majority of previous methods focus on 2D keypoints [5, 14]
with some learned 3D priors. Even though sparse 2D keypoints give useful constrained, relying only on these leads
to unrealistic poses because of depth ambiguities and occlu-

11250

