Dynamic Divide-and-Conquer Adversarial Training for
Robust Semantic Segmentation

1

Xiaogang Xu1 Hengshuang Zhao2,3 Jiaya Jia1,4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 University of Oxford
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 SmartMore
{xgxu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk,

hszhao@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Adversarial training is promising for improving robustness of deep neural networks towards adversarial perturbations, especially on the classification task. The effect of
this type of training on semantic segmentation, contrarily,
just commences. We make the initial attempt to explore
the defense strategy on semantic segmentation by formulating a general adversarial training procedure that can perform decently on both adversarial and clean samples. We
propose a dynamic divide-and-conquer adversarial training
(DDC-AT) strategy to enhance the defense effect, by setting additional branches in the target model during training, and dealing with pixels with diverse properties towards adversarial perturbation. Our dynamical division
mechanism divides pixels into multiple branches automatically. Note all these additional branches can be abandoned during inference and thus leave no extra parameter and computation cost. Extensive experiments with various segmentation models are conducted on PASCAL VOC
2012 and Cityscapes datasets, in which DDC-AT yields satisfying performance under both white- and black-box attack. The code is available at https://github.com/dvlabresearch/Robust-Semantic-Segmentation.

1. Introduction
Recent work has revealed that deep learning models, especially in the classification task, are often vulnerable to
adversarial samples [40, 15, 35]. The adversarial attack can
deceive the target model by generating crafted adversarial
perturbations on original clean samples. Such perturbations
are often imperceptible. Meanwhile, such threat also exists
in semantic segmentation [46, 31, 1], as shown in Fig. 1.
However, there is seldom work to improve the robustness of
semantic segmentation networks. As a universal approach,
adversarial training [15, 25, 29] is effective to enhance the
target model in classification by training models with adver-

(a) Image
(b) No Defense (c) With Our Defense
Figure 1. For each image in (a), the left side is the normal data
while the right side is perturbed by adversarial noise. (b) shows
that the adversarial attack could fail existing segmentation models.
We provide an effective defense strategy shown in (c). The top and
bottom rows are results with PSPNet and DeepLabv3, respectively.

sarial samples. In this paper, we study the effect of adversarial training on the semantic segmentation task. We find
that adversarial training impedes convergence on clean samples, which also happens in classification. We aim to make
networks perform well on adversarial examples and meanwhile maintaining good performance on clean samples.
For the semantic segmentation task, each pixel has one
classification output. Thus the property of every pixel in
one image toward adversarial perturbations might be different. Based on this motivation, we design a dynamic divideand-conquer adversarial training (DDC-AT) strategy. We
propose to use multiple branches in the target model during
training, each handling pixels with a set of properties. During training, a “main branch” is adopted to deal with pixels from adversarial samples and pixels from clean samples
that are not likely to be perturbed; an “auxiliary branch”
is utilized to deal with pixels from clean samples that are
sensitive to perturbations.
Moreover, such a divide-and-conquer setting is dynamic.
During training, pixels near the decision boundary from
clean samples are initially set to the “auxiliary branch”.
They become more insensitive to perturbations in the “auxiliary branch”, and finally move back to the “main branch”
for processing. Such a dynamic procedure is implemented
by training a “mask branch”. With this mechanism, our
method reduces performance deterioration over clean sam-

7486

