Audio2Gestures: Generating Diverse Gestures from Speech Audio with
Conditional Variational Autoencoders
Jing Li1 , Di Kang2 , Wenjie Pei1 , Xuefei Zhe2 , Ying Zhang2 , Zhenyu He * 1 , and Linchao Bao2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Tencent AI Lab
Motion 1

Abstract
Generating conversational gestures from speech audio
is challenging due to the inherent one-to-many mapping between audio and body motions. Conventional CNNs/RNNs
assume one-to-one mapping, and thus tend to predict
the average of all possible target motions, resulting in
plain/boring motions during inference. In order to overcome this problem, we propose a novel conditional variational autoencoder (VAE) that explicitly models one-tomany audio-to-motion mapping by splitting the cross-modal
latent code into shared code and motion-specific code. The
shared code mainly models the strong correlation between
audio and motion (such as the synchronized audio and motion beats), while the motion-specific code captures diverse
motion information independent of the audio. However,
splitting the latent code into two parts poses training difficulties for the VAE model. A mapping network facilitating random sampling along with other techniques including relaxed motion loss, bicycle constraint, and diversity
loss are designed to better train the VAE. Experiments on
both 3D and 2D motion datasets verify that our method
generates more realistic and diverse motions than state-ofthe-art methods, quantitatively and qualitatively. Finally,
we demonstrate that our method can be readily used to
generate motion sequences with user-specified motion clips
on the timeline. Code and more results are at https:
//jingli513.github.io/audio2gestures.

1. Introduction
In the real world, co-speech gestures help express oneself better, and in the virtual world, it makes a talking avatar
act more vividly. Attracted by these merits, there has been
a growing demand for generating realistic human motions
for given audio clips recently. This problem is very challenging because of the complicated one-to-many relationship between audio and motion. A speaker may act different gestures when speaking the same words due to different
mental and physical states.

Motion 2

Other
motions

“Completely”

···

Figure 1. Illustration of the existence of one-to-many mapping between audio and motion in Trinity dataset [10]. Different gestures
are performed when the subject says “completely”.Similar phenomena broadly exist in co-speech gestures. The character used
for demonstration is from Mixamo [1].

Existing algorithms developed for audio to body dynamics have some obvious limitations. For example, [12] adapts
a fully convolutional neural network to co-speech gesture
synthesis tasks. Nevertheless, their model tends to predict
averaged motion and thus generates motions lacking diversity. This is due to the underlying one-to-one mapping assumption of their model, which ignores that the relationship between speech and co-speech gesture is one-to-many
in nature. Under such an overly simplified assumption, the
model has no choice but to learn the averaged motion when
several motions match almost the same audio clips in order
to minimize the error. The above evidence inspires us to
study whether or not explicitly modeling this multimodality
improves the overall motion quality. To enhance the regression capability, we introduce an extra motion-specific latent
code. With this varying full latent code, which contains the
same shared code and varying motion-specific code, the decoder can regress different motion targets well for the same
audio, achieving one-to-many mapping results. Under this
formulation, the shared code extracted from audio input
serves as part of the control signal. The motion-specific
code further modulates the audio-controlled motion, enabling multimodal motion generation.
Although this formulation is straightforward, it is not
trivial to make it work as expected. Firstly, there exists an
easy degenerated solution since the motion decoder could
utilize only the motion-specific code to reconstruct the motion. Secondly, we need to generate the motion-specific

* Corresponding author: zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn

11293

