Audio-Visual Floorplan Reconstruction
Senthil Purushwalkam* 1 Sebastia Vicenc Amengual Gari2
Carl Schissler2 Philip Robinson2 Abhinav Gupta3
1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Facebook Reality Labs

3

Vamsi Krishna Ithapu2
Kristen Grauman3,4

Facebook AI Research

4

University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Given only a few glimpses of an environment, how much
can we infer about its entire floorplan? Existing methods
can map only what is visible or immediately apparent from
context, and thus require substantial movements through a
space to fully map it. We explore how both audio and visual
sensing together can provide rapid floorplan reconstruction
from limited viewpoints. Audio not only helps sense geometry
outside the camera’s field of view, but it also reveals the
existence of distant freespace (e.g., a dog barking in another
room) and suggests the presence of rooms not visible to
the camera (e.g., a dishwasher humming in what must be
the kitchen to the left). We introduce AV-Map, a novel multimodal encoder-decoder framework that reasons jointly about
audio and vision to reconstruct a floorplan from a short
input video sequence. We train our model to predict both
the interior structure of the environment and the associated
rooms’ semantic labels. Our results on 85 large real-world
environments show the impact: with just a few glimpses
spanning 26% of an area, we can estimate the whole area
with 66% accuracy—substantially better than the state of
the art approach for extrapolating visual maps.

1. Introduction
Floorplans of complex 3D environments—such as homes,
offices, shops, churches—are a compact ground-plane representation of their overall layout, showing the different rooms
and their connectivity. Floorplans are useful for visualizing
a large space, navigating an unfamiliar building, planning
safety routes, and communicating architectural designs.
Traditionally a floorplan is created by distilling a fully
observed 3D environment into its footprint—whether manually or with the aid of 3D sensors [42, 31]. Recent research
aims to infer room layouts using imagery and/or scans, with
impressive results [29, 8, 27, 46]. However, existing methods are limited to mapping the regions they directly observe.
* work done while interning at Facebook AI Research. Project webpage:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~spurushw/publication/avmap

Figure 1: Audio-visual floorplan reconstruction: A short video walk
through the house can reconstruct the visible portions of the floorplan, but
is blind to many areas. We introduce audio-visual floorplan reconstruction,
where sounds in the environment help infer both the geometric properties
of the hidden areas as well as the semantic labels of the unobserved rooms
(e.g., cooking sounds behind a wall to the camera’s left suggest the kitchen).

They require a dense walk-through for the camera to capture
most of the space. This is often wasteful if not impossible
for a human manually photographing a large space or a robot
needing to immediately perform tasks in a new environment.
In this work, we address this shortcoming by estimating
floorplans beyond the regions captured by a camera.
Our idea is to “see" beyond the visible regions by listening. Audio provides strong spatial and semantic signals
that complement the mapping capabilities of visual sensing. In particular, the value of audio for floorplan estimation
is threefold. First, observed sound is inherently driven by
geometry; audio reflections bounce off major surfaces and
reveal the shape of a room, beyond the camera’s field of
view. Second, sounds heard from afar can suggest the existence of distant freespace where the sounding object could
exist. Third, hearing semantically meaningful sounds from
different directions naturally reveals the plausible room layouts based on the activities or objects those sounds represent.

1183

