Self-Supervised Object Detection via Generative Image Synthesis
Siva Karthik Mustikovela1,3 * Shalini De Mello1 Aayush Prakash1
Umar Iqbal1 Sifei Liu1 Thu Nguyen-Phuoc2 Carsten Rother3 Jan Kautz1
1
2
3
NVIDIA
University of Bath
Heidelberg University
{siva.mustikovela, carsten.rother}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de; aayush382.iitkgp@gmail.com;
T.Nguyen.Phuoc@bath.ac.uk; {shalinig, sifeil, uiqbal, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
We present SSOD – the first end-to-end analysis-bysynthesis framework with controllable GANs for the task of
self-supervised object detection. We use collections of realworld images without bounding box annotations to learn
to synthesize and detect objects. We leverage controllable
GANs to synthesize images with pre-defined object properties and use them to train object detectors. We propose
a tight end-to-end coupling of the synthesis and detection
networks to optimally train our system. Finally, we also
propose a method to optimally adapt SSOD to an intended
target data without requiring labels for it. For the task
of car detection, on the challenging KITTI and Cityscapes
datasets, we show that SSOD outperforms the prior stateof-the-art purely image-based self-supervised object detection method Wetectron. Even without requiring any 3D
CAD assets, it also surpasses the state-of-the-art renderingbased method Meta-Sim2. Our work advances the field of
self-supervised object detection by introducing a successful new paradigm of using controllable GAN-based image
synthesis for it and by significantly improving the baseline accuracy of the task. We open-source our code at
https://github.com/NVlabs/SSOD.

1. Introduction
Object detection plays a crucial role in various autonomous vision pipelines, e.g., in robotics and selfdriving. Convolutional neural networks-based detection
methods, such as [40, 32], have achieved impressive performance. However, they are fully-supervised and require
large amounts of human annotated data, which is timeconsuming to acquire for all object types and operating environments. They also do not scale well when target domains change, e.g., from one city to another in self-driving.
To reduce annotations, some existing works train detectors without requiring bounding box annotations and follow
two paradigms. The first is of self/weakly supervised object detection methods [41, 42, 53], which either use imagelevel object presence labels (a.k.a. self-supervision) or
point/scribble annotations (a.k.a weak-supervision). They
also rely on high-quality object proposals detected by
* Siva Karthik Mustikovela was an intern at NVIDIA during the project.

Target Test Image

Unlabeled Source Data

Learn Image Synthesis

Inference

Synthesized
Image
Detections
Input
Parameters

Controllable
Generative
Synthesis

Detection
Network
Annotation

Training

Learn Target Distribution

Unlabeled Target Data

Figure 1. Self-Supervised Object Detection. We learn object detection purely using natural image collections without bounding
box labels. We leverage controllable GANs to synthesize images
and to detect objects together in a tightly coupled framework. We
learn image synthesis from unlabeled singe-object source images
(e.g., Compcars [52]) and optimally adapt our framework to any
multi-object unlabeled target dataset (e.g., KITTI [15]).

methods requiring human annotations [57]. The second
paradigm is of rendering-based methods, including MetaSim [26] and Meta-Sim2 [10], which learn object detection from synthetically rendered images. Creating them,
however, requires large collections of high-quality 3D CAD
models for all the objects in the scene, manual scene setups
and expensive rendering engines. Such images also tends to
have a large domain gap from real-world ones.
Recently, there has been much progress in making Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [16] controllable using input parameters like shape, viewpoint, position and
keypoints [36, 37, 38, 45], opening up the possibility of
synthesizing images with desired attributes. Controllable
GANs have also been used successfully to learn other vision tasks, e.g., viewpoint [34] and keypoints [50, 56, 22]
estimation in a self-supervised manner, but have not been
explored previously for self-supervised object detection.
Inspired by these, we propose the first end-to-end
analysis-by-synthesis framework for self-supervised object
detection using controllable GANs, called SSOD (Fig. 1).
We learn to both synthesize images and detect objects
purely using unlabeled image collections, i.e., without requiring bounding box-labels and without using 3D CAD

8609

