Generalize then Adapt: Source-Free Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Jogendra Nath Kundu1 * Akshay Kulkarni1 * Amit Singh1 Varun Jampani2 R. Venkatesh Babu1
1
2
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Google Research
Trade
source-model w/o
source-data

Abstract

Leave-one-out
heads

Global
head

Unsupervised domain adaptation (DA) has gained substantial interest in semantic segmentation. However, almost
all prior arts assume concurrent access to both labeled
source and unlabeled target, making them unsuitable for
scenarios demanding source-free adaptation. In this work1 ,
we enable source-free DA by partitioning the task into two:
a) source-only domain generalization and b) source-free
target adaptation. Towards the former, we provide theoretical insights to develop a multi-head framework trained with
a virtually extended multi-source dataset, aiming to balance
generalization and specificity. Towards the latter, we utilize
the multi-head framework to extract reliable target pseudolabels for self-training. Additionally, we introduce a novel
conditional prior-enforcing auto-encoder that discourages
spatial irregularities, thereby enhancing the pseudo-label
quality. Experiments on the standard GTA5→Cityscapes
and SoMAN
SYNTHIA→Cityscapes benchmarks show our superiority even against the non-source-free prior-arts. Further,
we show our compatibility with online adaptation enabling
deployment in
a sequentially changing environment.
Prior-enforcing
Auto-Encoder (PAE)

1. Introduction
Almost all supervised learning systems assume that the
training and testing data follow the same input distribution.
However, this assumption is impractical as target scenarios
often exhibit a distribution shift. For example, self-driving
cars often fail to generalize when deployed in conditions
different from training, such as cross-city [10] or crossweather [59] deployment. This is because the model fails
to apprehend the generic, causal factors of variations and
instead, holds on to domain-specific spurious correlations
[24]. Over-reliance on training data from a particular distribution can cause the model to fail even for mild domainshifts like changes in illumination, texture, background, etc.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (DA) is one of the primary ways to address such problems. Here, the goal is to
transfer the knowledge from a labeled source domain to an
* Equal contribution.
1 Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/sfdaseg

Multi-aug.
source-data

sourcemodel
cPAE

Unlabeled
target-data

?

cPAE

Source-free
target
Adaptation
SoMAN
SoMAN

Inference-stage
model

Figure 1. In source-free DA, the vendor accesses source-data to
prepare a foresighted source-model. Following this, the client receives only the source-model to perform unsupervised target adaptation while prevented access to the proprietary source-data.

unlabeled target domain. The major limitation of typical
DA approaches [58] is the requirement of concurrent access
to both source and target domain samples. While concurrent
access better characterizes the distribution shift, it is a major
bottleneck for real-world deployment scenarios. Consider
a modern corporate dealing where the vendor organization
has access to a large-scale labeled dataset (i.e. source-data)
which is used to train a source-model. The vendor finds
multiple clients interested in deploying the source-model in
their specific target environments. However, both parties
are restrained from data sharing due to proprietary, privacy,
or profit related concerns. This motivates us to seek learning frameworks where the vendor can trade only the sourcemodel and the client can perform target adaptation without
the source-data. This special case of domain adaptation
[40, 34, 43] is Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA).
In this work, we aim to develop an SFDA framework
for semantic segmentation of urban road scenes. In a cooperative setup, both vendor and the client must adopt specialized learning strategies to benefit the end goal.
a) Vendor-side strategies. These strategies can be discussed under two broad aspects viz. source dataset and
training strategy. The vendor must acquire a substantially
diverse large-scale dataset aiming to subsume unknown target scenarios. In literature, Multi-Source DA (MSDA)
[89, 71, 1] and domain generalization (DG) [38] works use
multiple labeled source domains to improve target gener-

7046

