Multiscale Vision Transformers
Yanghao Li *, 1

Haoqi Fan *, 1
Bo Xiong *, 1
Karttikeya Mangalam *, 1, 2
Zhicheng Yan 1
Jitendra Malik 1, 2
Christoph Feichtenhofer *, 1
1

2

Facebook AI Research

UC Berkeley

Abstract
We present Multiscale Vision Transformers (MViT) for
video and image recognition, by connecting the seminal idea
of multiscale feature hierarchies with transformer models.
Multiscale Transformers have several channel-resolution
scale stages. Starting from the input resolution and a small
channel dimension, the stages hierarchically expand the
channel capacity while reducing the spatial resolution. This
creates a multiscale pyramid of features with early layers operating at high spatial resolution to model simple
low-level visual information, and deeper layers at spatially
coarse, but complex, high-dimensional features. We evaluate this fundamental architectural prior for modeling the
dense nature of visual signals for a variety of video recognition tasks where it outperforms concurrent vision transformers that rely on large scale external pre-training and
are 5-10× more costly in computation and parameters. We
further remove the temporal dimension and apply our model
for image classification where it outperforms prior work
on vision transformers. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/SlowFast.

1. Introduction
We begin with the intellectual history of neural network
models for computer vision. Based on their studies of cat
and monkey visual cortex, Hubel and Wiesel [60] developed
a hierarchical model of the visual pathway with neurons
in lower areas such as V1 responding to features such as
oriented edges and bars, and in higher areas to more specific stimuli. Fukushima proposed the Neocognitron [37], a
neural network architecture for pattern recognition explicitly motivated by Hubel and Wiesel’s hierarchy. His model
had alternating layers of simple cells and complex cells, thus
incorporating downsampling, and shift invariance, thus incorporating convolutional structure. LeCun et al. [70] took the
additional step of using backpropagation to train the weights
of this network. But already the main aspects of hierarchy of
visual processing had been established: (i) Reduction in spatial resolution as one goes up the processing hierarchy and
(ii) Increase in the number of different “channels”, with each
* Equal technical contribution.

W

C
H

Input

scale1

scale2

scale3

Figure 1. Multiscale Vision Transformers learn a hierarchy from
dense (in space) and simple (in channels) to coarse and complex
features. Several resolution-channel scale stages progressively
increase the channel capacity of the intermediate latent sequence
while reducing its length and thereby spatial resolution.

channel corresponding to ever more specialized features.
In a parallel development, the computer vision community developed multiscale processing, sometimes called
“pyramid” strategies, with Rosenfeld and Thurston [91], Burt
and Adelson [10], Koenderink [66], among the key papers.
There were two motivations (i) To decrease the computing requirements by working at lower resolutions and (ii) A better
sense of “context” at the lower resolutions, which could then
guide the processing at higher resolutions (this is a precursor
to the benefit of “depth” in today’s neural networks.)
The Transformer [104] architecture allows learning arbitrary functions defined over sets and has been scalably
successful in sequence tasks such as language comprehension [29] and machine translation [9]. Fundamentally, a
transformer uses blocks with two basic operations. First,
is an attention operation [4] for modeling inter-element relations. Second, is a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), which
models relations within an element. Intertwining these operations with normalization [2] and residual connections [49]
allows transformers to generalize to a wide variety of tasks.
Recently, transformers have been applied to key computer vision tasks such as image classification. In the spirit
of architectural universalism, vision transformers [28, 101]
approach performance of convolutional models across a variety of data and compute regimes. By only having a first
layer that ‘patchifies’ the input in spirit of a 2D convolution, followed by a stack of transformer blocks, the vision
transformer aims to showcase the power of the transformer
architecture using little inductive bias.

6824

