Localized Simple Multiple Kernel K-means
Xinwang Liu1 ,* Sihang Zhou1 , Li Liu1 , Chang Tang2 , Siwei Wang1 , Jiyuan Liu1 and Yi Zhang1
1
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, 410072, China.
2
China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, Hubei, 430074, China.
xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
As a representative of multiple kernel clustering (MKC),
simple multiple kernel k-means (SimpleMKKM) is recently
put forward to boosting the clustering performance by optimally fusing a group of pre-specified kernel matrices. Despite achieving significant improvement in a variety of applications, we find out that SimpleMKKM could indiscriminately force all sample pairs to be equally aligned with the
same ideal similarity. As a result, it does not sufficiently
take the variation of samples into consideration, leading to
unsatisfying clustering performance. To address these issues, this paper proposes a novel MKC algorithm with a
“local” kernel alignment, which only requires that the similarity of a sample to its k-nearest neighbours be aligned
with the ideal similarity matrix. Such an alignment helps
the clustering algorithm to focus on closer sample pairs
that shall stay together and avoids involving unreliable similarity evaluation for farther sample pairs. After that, we
theoretically show that the objective of SimpleMKKM is a
special case of this local kernel alignment criterion with
normalizing each base kernel matrix. Based on this observation, the proposed localized SimpleMKKM can be readily
implemented by existing SimpleMKKM package. Moreover,
we conduct extensive experiments on several widely used
benchmark datasets to evaluate the clustering performance
of localized SimpleMKKM. The experimental results have
demonstrated that our algorithm consistently outperforms
the state-of-the-art ones, verifying the effectiveness of the
proposed local kernel alignment criterion. The code of Localized SimpleMKKM is publicly available at: https://
github.com/xinwangliu/LocalizedSMKKM .

1. Introduction
Multiple kernel clustering (MKC) provides an elegant
framework to group samples into different clusters by extracting complementary information from multiple sources
[25, 21, 26, 8, 5, 18, 22, 29, 10, 7, 27, 28]. Given a group of
* Corresponding Author

pre-defined kernel matrices, MKC integrates the available
multiple kernel information to categorize data items with
similar structures or patterns into the same group, which
has been intensively studied and widely applied into various applications [9, 14, 9, 23, 17, 16, 13]. For example, the
work in [11] proposes a multiple kernel k-means clustering
algorithm with a matrix-induced regularization term to reduce the redundancy of the selected kernels. A local kernel
alignment variant is then developed by sufficiently considering the variation among sample, which is experimentally
verified to enhance the clustering performance in [9]. By
assuming an optimal kernel residing in the neighborhood of
the combined kernels, the work in [14] proposes an optimal
neighborhood multiple kernel clustering algorithm, which
improves the clustering performance by enhancing the representability of the learned optimal kernel. Differently, late
fusion based multiple kernel clustering strategy seeks to
exploit the complementary information in kernel partition
space to achieve consensus on partition level [23]. Specifically, the pioneering work in [23] proposes to maximally
align the multiple base partitions with the consensus partition, which enjoys considerable algorithm acceleration and
satisfactory clustering performance. Along this line, an effective and efficient late fusion based algorithm is proposed
in [12] to handle incomplete multi-view data.
As a representative of MKC, a novel simple multiple kernel k-means (SimpleMKKM) is recently proposed [15]. Instead of jointly minimizing the kernel weights and clustering partition matrix, SimpleMKKM takes a minimization
on kernel weights and maximization on clustering partition
matrix optimization framework, leading to an intractable
min-max optimization. After that, it is equivalently transformed into a minimization problem and a reduced gradient
algorithm is designed to solve the resultant optimization.
This algorithm is validated to be efficient for optimization,
robust against the noisy views, and has attracted intensive
attention of many researchers.
Although the recently proposed SimleMKKM bears the
aforementioned merits, we observe that it strictly aligns the
combined kernel matrix with an “ideal” similarity gener-

9293

