Temporally-Coherent Surface Reconstruction via Metric-Consistent Atlases
Jan Bednarik1 Vladimir G. Kim2 Siddhartha Chaudhuri2 Shaifali Parashar1
Mathieu Salzmann1 Pascal Fua1 Noam Aigerman2
1
ref. frame

EPFL, L AUSANNE , S WITZERLAND

surface reconstruction

2

A DOBE R ESEARCH

correspondences

OUR

AN

DSR
Figure 1. Temporally-coherent reconstruction and correspondences predicted by our approach (OUR), compared with other atlasbased ones – AtlasNet [19] (AN), and Differential Surface Representation [7] (DSR). Left: The reconstructed surfaces, textured with
a consistent texture to visualize the correspondences between the surfaces. Middle and Right: deviations visualized using a colormap
(middle) and a heatmap (right). The competing methods exhibit artifacts and wrong correspondences, while OUR yields reconstructions
close to the GT. The black arrows point to inconsistencies, which are absent from our results.

Abstract
We propose a method for the unsupervised reconstruction of a temporally-coherent sequence of surfaces
from a sequence of time-evolving point clouds, yielding
dense, semantically meaningful correspondences between
all keyframes. We represent the reconstructed surface as
an atlas, using a neural network. Using canonical correspondences defined via the atlas, we encourage the reconstruction to be as isometric as possible across frames, leading to semantically-meaningful reconstruction. Through experiments and comparisons, we empirically show that our
method achieves results that exceed that state of the art in
the accuracy of unsupervised correspondences and accuracy of surface reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Applications such as UV-mapping, shape analysis, and
partial scan-completion all rely on the availability of a
surface representation that is coherent across different inThis work was partially carried out while the first author was an intern at Adobe Research and was supported in part by the Swiss National
Science Foundation.

stances. Namely, the different surfaces should be in correspondence, such that each point on one surface maps
to a point with the same semantic meaning on another.
In the literature, the most common way to achieve coherence consists of explicitly computing and establishing correspondences between non-coherent input representations,
such as 3D meshes [49, 3, 45, 22, 16, 42] or 3D point
clouds [24, 21]. This, however, assumes that the input
data contains points that can be matched in a semanticallymeaningful manner, and in fact only circumvents the true
task of retrieving a coherent surface representation.
In this paper, we tackle this problem more directly by
learning to reconstruct temporally-coherent surfaces from a
sequence of 3D point clouds representing a shape deforming over time. To this end, we rely on the AtlasNet patchbased representation [19] to model the surface underlying
the 3D points. However, whereas in the original AtlasNet,
any patch can correspond to any part of the surface, we enforce consistency of the patch locations through the whole
sequence effectively creating a time-consistent atlas.
To learn atlases that are semantically and temporally
consistent, meaning that each 2D point on each 2D atlas
patch models the same semantic surface point over time,
we leverage differential geometry to require the correspon-

10458

