End-to-End Video Instance Segmentation via Spatial-Temporal Graph Neural
Networks
Tao Wang1 , Ning Xu2 , Kean Chen1 , and Weiyao Lin1 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Adobe Research†, San Jose, USA
wang tao1111@sjtu.edu.cn, nxu@adobe.com, ckadashuaige@sjtu.edu.cn, wylin@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) Existing Methods
Detection

Video instance segmentation is a challenging task that
extends image instance segmentation to the video domain.
Existing methods either rely only on single-frame information for the detection and segmentation subproblems or handle tracking as a separate post-processing step, which limit
their capability to fully leverage and share useful spatialtemporal information for all the subproblems. In this paper, we propose a novel graph-neural-network (GNN) based
method to handle the aforementioned limitation. Specifically, graph nodes representing instance features are used
for detection and segmentation while graph edges representing instance relations are used for tracking. Both inter and intra-frame information is effectively propagated
and shared via graph updates and all the subproblems
(i.e. detection, segmentation and tracking) are jointly optimized in an unified framework. The performance of our
method shows great improvement on the YoutubeVIS validation dataset compared to existing methods and achieves
36.5% AP with a ResNet-50 backbone, operating at 22 FPS.

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS) is a challenging and
fundamental task in computer vision. In the image domain,
instance segmentation needs to simultaneously detect and
segment object instances [10], while in the time domain, the
video instance segmentation [32] is much more challenging
since it also requires accurate tracking of objects across the
entire videos.
Existing VIS methods typically adopt two different
strategies to tackle the instance tracking task. The first strategy is to adopt the tracking-by-detection framework which
* Corresponding Author, Email: wylin@sjtu.edu.cn
† The paper is supported in part by the following

grants: National Key Research and Development Program of China Grant
(No.2018AAA0100400), National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 61971277), and Adobe Gift Funding.

Segmentation
Association

Detection
Segmentation

(b) Our Method
History Instance
Detection
Graph Feature
Fusion

Node Feature

Edge Feature

Segmentation
Tracking

Figure 1. Comparison between existing methods and our methods. (a) Most existing methods solves VIS subproblems separately and ignore temporal feature fusion. (b) In our method, we
use graph neural network to model the instance-level relations and
fuse spatial-temporal features. Meanwhile, detection, segmentation and tracking results are jointly predicted based on graph features.

first predicts candidate detection and segmentation frame
by frame with a sophisticated image instance segmentation model, and then associates these candidates by classification or re-identification to generate mask sequences
[5, 18, 32], as shown in Figure 1 (a). Its performance heavily relies on the qualities of image-level instance segmentation, the property of similarity metrics and the association
strategy. The other strategy is to predict clip-level instance
masks by propagate instance masks from central frame to
the whole video clip and merge these clip-level sequences
to generate video-level results [2]. Such propagation process usually relies on some heuristics and thus a lot of postprocessing and refinement operations are necessary.
In addition, both the strategies have one common limitation that their tracking is a separate step from detection
and segmentation modules, forbidding useful information
shared across different tasks. For example, a newly de-

10797

