RandomRooms: Unsupervised Pre-training from Synthetic Shapes and
Randomized Layouts for 3D Object Detection
Yongming Rao1 *, Benlin Liu2,3 *, Yi Wei1 , Jiwen Lu1† , Cho-Jui Hsieh2 , Jie Zhou1
1
Tsinghua University, 2 UCLA, 3 University of Washington
raoyongming95@gmail.com; liubl@cs.washington.edu; wziyi20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D point cloud understanding has made great progress
in recent years. However, one major bottleneck is the
scarcity of annotated real datasets, especially compared to
2D object detection tasks, since a large amount of labor is
involved in annotating the real scans of a scene. A promising solution to this problem is to make better use of the
synthetic dataset, which consists of CAD object models, to
boost the learning on real datasets. This can be achieved
by the pre-training and fine-tuning procedure. However, recent work on 3D pre-training exhibits failure when transfer features learned on synthetic objects to other real-world
applications. In this work, we put forward a new method
called RandomRooms to accomplish this objective. In particular, we propose to generate random layouts of a scene by
making use of the objects in the synthetic CAD dataset and
learn the 3D scene representation by applying object-level
contrastive learning on two random scenes generated from
the same set of synthetic objects. The model pre-trained
in this way can serve as a better initialization when later
fine-tuning on the 3D object detection task. Empirically, we
show consistent improvement in downstream 3D detection
tasks on several base models, especially when less training data are used, which strongly demonstrates the effectiveness and generalization of our method. Benefiting from
the rich semantic knowledge and diverse objects from synthetic data, our method establishes the new state-of-the-art
on widely-used 3D detection benchmarks ScanNetV2 and
SUN RGB-D. We expect our attempt to provide a new perspective for bridging object and scene-level 3D understanding.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great progress in 3D deep
learning, especially on 3D point clouds. With the emer* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

RandomRooms

synthetic objects

pseudo scenes

Figure 1: The main idea of RandomRooms. To generate two
different layouts, we randomly place the same set of objects
sampled from synthetic datasets in rectangular rooms. With
the proposed object-level contrastive learning, models pretrained on these pseudo scenes can serve as a better initialization for downstream 3D object detection task.
gence of powerful models, we are now able to make significant breakthroughs on many point cloud tasks, ranging
from object-level understanding ones [24, 53, 27, 29] to
scene-level understanding ones, such as 3D object detection [45, 59, 28, 44] and 3D semantic segmentation [25,
62, 21, 4, 19]. These scene-level tasks are considered to be
more complicated and more important as they often require
higher level understanding compared to object level tasks
like shape classification. One of the most important tasks
for 3D point cloud scene understanding is the 3D object detection, which aims at localizing the objects of interest in
the point cloud of the scene and telling the category they
belong to. However, one major bottleneck that hinders the
researchers from moving forward is the lack of large-scale
real datasets, considering the difficulty in collecting and labeling high-quality 3D scene data. Compared to 2D object
detection task where we have large annotated real datasets
COCO [30], the real datasets here we use for 3D object detection task are much smaller in scales, and generating a
13283

