Time

Just One Moment:
⋯
Structural Vulnerability of Deep Action Recognition
against
One+Frame Attack
Arranging Flowers
Correct Label
Wrong Label

Jaehui Hwang, Jun-Hyuk Kim, Jun-Ho
Choi,
and Jong-Seok Lee
Peeling
Apples
School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University, Korea

Perturbation

⋯

{jaehui.hwang, junhyuk.kim, idearibosome, jong-seok.lee}@yonsei.ac.kr
Attacked Frame
Time

Abstract
The video-based action recognition task has been extensively studied in recent years. In this paper, we study
the structural vulnerability of deep learning-based action
recognition models against the adversarial attack using the
one frame attack that adds an inconspicuous perturbation
to only a single frame of a given video clip. Our analysis
shows that the models are highly vulnerable against the one
frame attack due to their structural properties. Experiments
demonstrate high fooling rates and inconspicuous characteristics of the attack. Furthermore, we show that strong
universal one frame perturbations can be obtained under
various scenarios. Our work raises the serious issue of adversarial vulnerability of the state-of-the-art action recognition models in various perspectives.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition using videos has been extensively studied in recent years thanks to the development of
deep network-based algorithms based on the abundance of
computational resources and data [6]. From a network design perspective, the distinguished main research topic of
action recognition is how to model temporal information
residing in video clips. Concerning this, various attempts
have been made, such as utilizing the long short-term memory (LSTM) module [3] or the optical flow [1], but recently, 3D convolutional neural network (CNN)-based action recognition models are widely used. To improve the
performance and efficiency of 3D CNN-based action recognition models, various mechanisms in the temporal dimension have been proposed, such as frame selection [4] and
convolutional operations [1, 22, 20].
Many researchers have found the vulnerability of deep
learning-based algorithms against so-called adversarial attacks, which add an inconspicuous perturbation to input
data to mislead a target model to produce wrong output.
It has been reported that many state-of-the-art deep image

⋯
+

Arranging Flowers

Correct Label

Perturbation

Wrong Label

Peeling Apples

⋯
Attacked Frame

Figure 1: Overall illustration of one frame attack targeting a
vulnerable frame. With only one attacked frame, the target
action recognition model wrongly classifies a given video in
Kinetics-400 [8] as “peeling apples” instead of “arranging
flowers.”

classification methods are highly vulnerable to the adversarial attacks [16] and can raise severe security concerns [5].
On the other hand, there are not many studies on the vulnerability of video-based deep action recognition systems.
We argue that the ways of modeling temporal information in deep models for action recognition have significant
impact on the vulnerability of the models, which we denote as structural vulnerability. Although there exist a few
attempts for adversarial attacks on action recognition systems [23, 14], they do not sufficiently consider the structural
vulnerability of recent action recognition models. As a result, they do not fully satisfy two criteria that a successful
adversarial attack should meet: 1) achieving a high fooling rate and 2) keeping adversarial perturbation invisible to
conceal that the video clip is attacked. Wei et al. [23] proposed an attack method of perturbing only a few frames of
a video clip, in order to reduce computational resources and
achieve inconspicuousness. However, this method targets
only LSTM-based models and relies on the particular property of LSTM, i.e., temporal propagation of information.
Thus, it does not achieve a high fooling rate on the latest
CNN-based action recognition models (see Table 1). On

7668

