GAN-Control: Explicitly Controllable GANs
Alon Shoshan

Nadav Bhonker

Igor Kviatkovsky
Amazon

Gérard Medioni

{alonshos, nadavb, kviat, medioni}@amazon.com

Figure 1: We propose a framework for training GANs in a disentangled manner which allows for explicit control over
generation attributes. Our method is applicable to diverse controls in various domains. First row (left to right) demonstrates
our control over facial expression, age and illumination of human portraits. Second row (left to right) demonstrates our
control over artistic style, age and pose of paintings. Third row demonstrates our pose control over faces of dogs.

Abstract
We present a framework for training GANs with explicit
control over generated facial images. We are able to control
the generated image by settings exact attributes such as age,
pose, expression, etc. Most approaches for manipulating
GAN-generated images achieve partial control by leveraging the latent space disentanglement properties, obtained
implicitly after standard GAN training. Such methods are
able to change the relative intensity of certain attributes,
but not explicitly set their values. Recently proposed methods, designed for explicit control over human faces, harness
morphable 3D face models (3DMM) to allow fine-grained
control capabilities in GANs. Unlike these methods, our
control is not constrained to 3DMM parameters and is extendable beyond the domain of human faces. Using contrastive learning, we obtain GANs with an explicitly disentangled latent space. This disentanglement is utilized to
train control-encoders mapping human-interpretable inputs
to suitable latent vectors, thus allowing explicit control. In
the domain of human faces we demonstrate control over
identity, age, pose, expression, hair color and illumination.
We also demonstrate control capabilities of our framework
in the domains of painted portraits and dog image genera-

tion. We demonstrate that our approach achieves state-ofthe-art performance both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Generating controllable photorealistic images has applications spanning a variety of fields such as cinematography, graphic design, video games, medical imaging, virtual
communication and ML research. For faces in particular,
impressive breakthroughs were made. As an example, in
the film industry, computer generated characters are replacing live actor footage. Earlier work on controlled face generation primarily relied on 3D face rig modeling [32, 43],
controlled by 3D morphable face model parameters, such
as 3DMM [9, 19]. While easily controllable, such methods
tend to suffer from low photorealism. Other methods that
rely on 3D face scanning techniques may provide highly
photorealistic images, but at a significant cost and limited
variability. Recent works on high resolution images synthesis using generative adversarial networks (GANs) [21] have
demonstrated the ability to generate photorealistic faces of
novel identities, indistinguishable from those of real humans [27, 29, 30]. However, these methods alone lack in-

14083

