D ISCO B OX: Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation and Semantic
Correspondence from Box Supervision
Shiyi Lan1∗ Zhiding Yu2† Christopher Choy2 Subhashree Radhakrishnan2 Guilin Liu2
Yuke Zhu2,3 Larry S. Davis1 Anima Anandkumar2,4
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 NVIDIA 3 The University of Texas at Austin 4 Caltech

Abstract
We introduce DiscoBox, a novel framework that jointly
learns instance segmentation and semantic correspondence
using bounding box supervision. Specifically, we propose
a self-ensembling framework where instance segmentation
and semantic correspondence are jointly guided by a structured teacher in addition to the bounding box supervision.
The teacher is a structured energy model incorporating a
pairwise potential and a cross-image potential to model the
pairwise pixel relationships both within and across the boxes. Minimizing the teacher energy simultaneously yields
refined object masks and dense correspondences between
intra-class objects, which are taken as pseudo-labels to supervise the task network and provide positive/negative correspondence pairs for dense contrastive learning. We show
a symbiotic relationship where the two tasks mutually benefit from each other. Our best model achieves 37.9% AP on
COCO instance segmentation, surpassing prior weakly supervised methods and is competitive to supervised methods.
We also obtain state of the art weakly supervised results on
PASCAL VOC12 and PF-PASCAL with real-time inference.

1. Introduction
The ability to localize and recognize objects is at the core
of human vision. This has motivated the vision community
to study object detection [1] as a fundamental visual recognition task. Instance segmentation [2] is further introduced
on top of detection to predict the foreground object masks,
thus enabling localization with pixel-level accuracy. More
recently, a growing number of works aim to lift the above
tasks to the 3D space [3–7]. As a result, landmark [3,8] and
(semantic) correspondence [9–30] have been widely studied to associate object parts across different views. These
methods have become critical components in pose estimation [31–34] and reconstruction [35–38] because they help
∗ Work done during an internship at NVIDIA Research.
† Corresponding author: <zhidingy@nvidia.com>.

DiscoBox

Object Detection
Instance Segmentation
Semantic Correspondence

Figure 1. Task overview. Given a pair of images, D ISCO B OX simultaneously outputs detection, instance segmentation and semantic correspondence predictions. Best viewed in color.

to reduce uncertainties through additional constraints, such
as determining camera poses and viewpoints [31, 36].
Among various correspondence tasks, semantic correspondence aims to establish the associations across different scenes and object instances, and is arguably the most
challenging one due to large variations in appearance and
pose. The literature of semantic correspondence and instance segmentation have largely remained decoupled. For
instance, the main semantic correspondence benchmarks [19,39–43] have been focusing on object-centric scenarios
which de-emphasizes the role of object localization, while
the latest instance segmentation methods do not make use
of intra-class correspondences. However, these seemingly
separate problems can benefit from each other because associating object parts requires understanding the object of
interest a priori. Similarly, knowing the semantic parts of
an object requires understanding the geometry of functional
parts and can improve object localization [44, 45].

3406

