Learning by Aligning:
Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification using Cross-Modal Correspondences
Hyunjong Park*
Sanghoon Lee*
Junghyup Lee
Bumsub Ham†
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/LbA

Abstract
We address the problem of visible-infrared person reidentification (VI-reID), that is, retrieving a set of person
images, captured by visible or infrared cameras, in a crossmodal setting. Two main challenges in VI-reID are intraclass variations across person images, and cross-modal discrepancies between visible and infrared images. Assuming
that the person images are roughly aligned, previous approaches attempt to learn coarse image- or rigid part-level
person representations that are discriminative and generalizable across different modalities. However, the person images, typically cropped by off-the-shelf object detectors, are
not necessarily well-aligned, which distract discriminative
person representation learning. In this paper, we introduce
a novel feature learning framework that addresses these
problems in a unified way. To this end, we propose to exploit
dense correspondences between cross-modal person images. This allows to address the cross-modal discrepancies
in a pixel-level, suppressing modality-related features from
person representations more effectively. This also encourages pixel-wise associations between cross-modal local features, further facilitating discriminative feature learning for
VI-reID. Extensive experiments and analyses on standard
VI-reID benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach, which significantly outperforms the state of the
art.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (reID) aims at retrieving person
images, captured across multiple cameras, with the same
identity as a query person. It provides a wide range of applications, including surveillance, security, and pedestrian
analysis, and has gained a lot of attention over the last
decade [40, 47]. Most reID methods formulate the task as
a single-modality retrieval problem, and focus on finding
matches, e.g., between RGB images. Visible cameras are
incapable of capturing appearances of persons, particularly
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1: An example of dense cross-modal correspondences between RGB and IR images from the SYSU-MM01 dataset [36].
For the visualization purpose only, we show the top 20 matches
according to similarities between local person representations
learned without (left) and with (right) our approach. Our person
representations are robust to the cross-modal discrepancies, while
being highly discriminative, especially for person regions. (Best
viewed in color.)

important for person reID, under poor-illumination conditions (e.g., at night time or dark indoors). Infrared (IR) cameras, on the other hand, work well, regardless of visual light,
capturing an overall scene layout, while not taking scene
details, such as texture and color. Accordingly, visible-IR
person re-identification (VI-reID), that is, retrieving IR person images of the same identity as an RGB query and vice
versa, has recently been of great interest [36].
VI-reID is extremely challenging due to intra-class variations (e.g. viewpoint, pose, illumination and background
clutter), noisy samples (e.g. misalignment and occlusion),
and cross-modal discrepancies between RGB and IR images. Visual attributes and statistics of RGB/IR images are
significantly different from one another [36]. VI-reID methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) alleviate the discrepancies using cross-modal metric losses [7, 37,
41] along with a modality discriminator [4] to learn person
representations robust to the cross-modal discrepancies, and
further refine the representations with self-attention [39] or
disentanglement techniques [3]. These approaches focus
on learning coarse image-level or rigid part-level representations, assuming that person images are roughly aligned.

12046

