Defending against Universal Adversarial Patches by Clipping Feature Norms
Cheng Yu1,3 , Jiansheng Chen1,2,3 ,* Youze Xue1 , Yuyang Liu1 , Weitao Wan1 , Jiayu Bao1 , and Huimin Ma3
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
3
University of Science and Technology Beijing, China

Abstract
Physical-world adversarial attacks based on universal
adversarial patches have been proved to be able to mislead deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), exposing the vulnerability of real-world visual classification systems based on CNNs. In this paper, we empirically reveal
and mathematically explain that the universal adversarial
patches usually lead to deep feature vectors with very large
norms in popular CNNs. Inspired by this, we propose a
simple yet effective defending approach using a new feature
norm clipping (FNC) layer which is a differentiable module
that can be flexibly inserted in different CNNs to adaptively
suppress the generation of large norm deep feature vectors.
FNC introduces no trainable parameter and only very low
computational overhead. However, experiments on multiple
datasets validate that it can effectively improve the robustness of different CNNs towards white-box universal patch
attacks while maintaining a satisfactory recognition accuracy for clean samples.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved remarkable success on various computer vision
tasks. However, researches have shown that most CNNs
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [14, 19], where maliciously crafted perturbations are added to the input image
to fool the network. The existence of adversarial examples
under different constraints has become a serious concern
to visual systems and applications based on CNNs especially in safety-critical domains. Compared to the conventional adversarial attacks which add perturbation with input
norm constraints directly to the whole digital image, physical world attack is relatively more challenging. In the physical world, it is hard and expensive to accurately manipulate pixels that may scatter all around the image. A more
promising way is to generate a spatially localized patch-like
* Corresponding author.

Cascaded CNN Modules

F
N
C

F
N
C

…

F
N
C

‘Afghan
hound’

Feature Norm Clipping

Intermediate Feature Map

Final Feature Map

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method based on feature
norm clipping (FNC) layers.

perturbation in which the pixel values can be arbitrarily selected. Usually, such a patch is generated so that it is effective no matter what the image is and where it is placed
in the image to achieve real-world attacking robustness.
Such an approach is called the universal adversarial patch
attack [2], which has remained as the most effective and
widely adopted way to attack real-world computer vision
systems built upon CNNs including image classifier [2, 8],
object detector [4, 24, 7] and face recognizer [17].
Despite its clear threat to real-world applications, research on defending against the universal adversarial patch
attack is still limited. Some previous defending approaches,
including Digital Watermarking (DW) [5] and Local Gradient Smoothing (LGS) [13], are based on patch detection
following empirical clues. Lacking theoretical foundations,
their performance usually drops dramatically when facing
white-box or adaptive attacks in which the defending strategy is transparent to attackers [1]. By iteratively generating adversarial patches in the training process, the adversarial training can also be used in defending against patch
attacks [22]. However, such an approach requires extra
training with extremely high computational overhead and
there has been no work to show its feasibility for large-scale
datasets like ImageNet [10] by far. Chiang et al. [3] proposed a certified defense against the adversarial patch when
the output lies in the interval bound. However, this estimated bound gets looser with the increase of the network

16434

