MDETR - Modulated Detection for End-to-End Multi-Modal Understanding
Aishwarya Kamath1 Mannat Singh2 Yann LeCun123 Gabriel Synnaeve2 Ishan Misra2
Nicolas Carion3
1
2
NYU Center for Data Science Facebook AI Research 3 NYU Courant Institute
{aish, yann.lecun, nc2794}@nyu.edu, {mannatsingh,imisra,gab}@fb.com

Abstract
Multi-modal reasoning systems rely on a pre-trained object detector to extract regions of interest from the image. However, this crucial module is typically used as a
black box, trained independently of the downstream task
and on a fixed vocabulary of objects and attributes. This
makes it challenging for such systems to capture the long
tail of visual concepts expressed in free form text. In this
paper we propose MDETR, an end-to-end modulated detector that detects objects in an image conditioned on a
raw text query, like a caption or a question. We use a
transformer-based architecture to reason jointly over text
and image by fusing the two modalities at an early stage of
the model. We pre-train the network on 1.3M text-image
pairs, mined from pre-existing multi-modal datasets having explicit alignment between phrases in text and objects
in the image. We then fine-tune on several downstream
tasks such as phrase grounding, referring expression comprehension and segmentation, achieving state-of-the-art results on popular benchmarks. We also investigate the utility of our model as an object detector on a given label set
when fine-tuned in a few-shot setting. We show that our
pre-training approach provides a way to handle the long
tail of object categories which have very few labelled instances. Our approach can be easily extended for visual
question answering, achieving competitive performance on
GQA and CLEVR. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/ashkamath/mdetr.

1. Introduction
Object detection forms an integral component of most
state-of-the-art multi-modal understanding systems [6, 24],
typically used as a black-box to detect a fixed vocabulary
of concepts in an image followed by multi-modal alignment. This “pipelined” approach limits co-training with
other modalities as context and restricts the downstream
model to only have access to the detected objects and not the
whole image. In addition, the detection system is usually

Figure 1: Output of MDETR for the query “A pink elephant”. The
colors are not segmentation masks but the real colors of the pixels.
The model has never seen a pink nor a blue elephant in training.

frozen, which prevents further refinement of the model’s
perceptive capability. In the vision-language setting, it implies restricting the vocabulary of the resulting system to
the categories and attributes of the detector, and is often a
bottleneck for performance on these tasks [65]. As a result, such a system cannot recognize novel combinations of
concepts expressed in free-form text.
A recent line of work [59, 39, 12] considers the problem
of text-conditioned object detection. These methods extend
mainstream one-stage and two-stage detection architectures
to achieve this goal. However, to the best of our knowledge, it has not been demonstrated that such detectors can
improve performance on downstream tasks that require reasoning over the detected objects, such as visual question answering (VQA). We believe this is because these detectors
are not end-to-end differentiable and thus cannot be trained
in synergy with downstream tasks.
Our method, MDETR, is an end-to-end modulated detector based on the recent DETR [2] detection framework,
and performs object detection in conjunction with natural
language understanding, enabling truly end-to-end multimodal reasoning. MDETR relies solely on text and aligned
boxes as a form of supervision for concepts in an image.
Thus, unlike current detection methods, MDETR detects
nuanced concepts from free-form text, and generalizes to
unseen combinations of categories and attributes. We showcase such a combination as well as modulated detection in
11780

