Global Pooling, More than Meets the Eye:
Position Information is Encoded Channel-Wise in CNNs
Md Amirul Islam* 1,6 Matthew Kowal* 2,6 Sen Jia4 Konstantinos G. Derpanis2,5,6 Neil D. B. Bruce3,6
1
Ryerson University, Canada 2 York University, Canada 3 University of Guelph, Canada
4
Toronto AI Lab, LG Electronics 5 Samsung AI Centre Toronto, Canada 6 Vector Institute for AI, Canada
amirul@cs.ryerson.ca, {m2kowal,kosta}@eecs.yorku.ca, sen.jia@lge.com, brucen@uoguelph.ca

Abstract
In this paper, we challenge the common assumption that
collapsing the spatial dimensions of a 3D (spatial-channel)
tensor in a convolutional neural network (CNN) into a vector
via global pooling removes all spatial information. Specifically, we demonstrate that positional information is encoded
based on the ordering of the channel dimensions, while
semantic information is largely not. Following this demonstration, we show the real world impact of these findings
by applying them to two applications. First, we propose a
simple yet effective data augmentation strategy and loss function which improves the translation invariance of a CNN’s
output. Second, we propose a method to efficiently determine which channels in the latent representation are responsible for (i) encoding overall position information or
(ii) region-specific positions. We first show that semantic
segmentation has a significant reliance on the overall position channels to make predictions. We then show for the
first time that it is possible to perform a ‘region-specific’
attack, and degrade a network’s performance in a particular
part of the input. We believe our findings and demonstrated
applications will benefit research areas concerned with understanding the characteristics of CNNs. Code is available
at: https://github.com/islamamirul/PermuteNet.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental ideas behind different neural network architectures [10, 23, 24, 2, 9] is the idea of invariance.
Given an input signal, an X-invariant operation is one that
produces the same output regardless of any change (of some
type X) to the input. This property is desirable in a multitude
of applications in computer vision, the most obvious being
object recognition [17, 10, 23]; the goal being to assign the
corresponding image-level label (e.g., dog) regardless of
where the object is located in the image. This is referred to
* Equal Contribution

as translation invariance. Another property of operations
that is intimately related to translation invariance is that of
translation equivariance: shifting the input and then passing
it through the operation is equivalent to passing the input
through the operation, and then shifting the signal.
To achieve invariant neural networks, a common strategy is to use equivariant operations on a per-layer basis [5],
which then culminates in an invariant output. One of the
best examples of this can be found in convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) for the task of image classification. Following a hierarchy of translation equivariant convolutional
layers, CNNs use a global pooling layer to transform the 3D
(spatial-channel) tensor into a 1D vector, which is then fed
into a fully connected layer to produce the classification logits. One would therefore (intuitively) assume that after the
spatial dimensions are collapsed due to the global pooling
operation [18, 24], spatial information should be removed
while translation invariance is produced. However, previous
work has shown that absolute position information exists
both in the latent representations [11] as well as the output
of the network [14, 12].
None of these previous works have answered the critical
question: How can a CNN contain positional information
in the representations if there exists a global pooling layer
in the forward pass? In this paper, we provide an answer to
this question, and demonstrate through rigorous quantitative
experiments that CNNs do this by encoding the position
information along the channel dimension even though the
spatial dimensions are collapsed. Moreover, we show that
the position information is encoded based on the ordering
of the channel dimensions, while the semantic information
is largely invariant to this ordering. We argue that these
findings are important to better understand the properties of
CNNs and to guide their future design.
To demonstrate the real-world impact of these findings,
we leverage the fact that position information is encoded
channel-wise in a number of domains and applications. First,
we tackle the lack of translation invariance of CNNs. We
propose a simple yet effective loss function which minimizes

793

