Animatable Neural Radiance Fields for Modeling Dynamic Human Bodies
Sida Peng1∗

Junting Dong1∗
Qing Shuai1
1

Qianqian Wang2

Xiaowei Zhou1

Zhejiang University

2

Frame 100

Hujun Bao1†

Cornell University

Input: multi-view video

Frame 1

Shangzhan Zhang1

Output: animatable human model

Frame 200

Synthesized images

Reposed geometries

Figure 1: Given a multi-view video of a performer, our method reconstructs an animatable human model, which can be used
for novel view synthesis and 3D shape generation under novel human poses.

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of reconstructing an
animatable human model from a multi-view video. Some
recent works have proposed to decompose a non-rigidly deforming scene into a canonical neural radiance field and a
set of deformation fields that map observation-space points
to the canonical space, thereby enabling them to learn the
dynamic scene from images. However, they represent the
deformation field as translational vector field or SE(3) field,
which makes the optimization highly under-constrained.
Moreover, these representations cannot be explicitly controlled by input motions. Instead, we introduce neural blend
weight fields to produce the deformation fields. Based on
the skeleton-driven deformation, blend weight fields are
used with 3D human skeletons to generate observation-tocanonical and canonical-to-observation correspondences.
Since 3D human skeletons are more observable, they can
regularize the learning of deformation fields. Moreover,
the learned blend weight fields can be combined with input skeletal motions to generate new deformation fields to
animate the human model. Experiments show that our approach significantly outperforms recent human synthesis
methods. The code and supplementary materials are available at https://zju3dv.github.io/animatable nerf/.

∗ The first two authors contributed equally. The authors from Zhejiang
University are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG.
† Corresponding author: Hujun Bao.

1. Introduction
Rendering animatable human characters has a variety
of applications such as free-viewpoint videos, telepresence,
video games and movies. The core step is to reconstruct
animatable human models, which tends to be expensive and
time-consuming in traditional pipelines due to two factors.
First, high-quality human reconstruction generally relies on
complicated hardware, such as a dense array of cameras
[56, 16] or depth sensors [10, 14]. Second, human animation requires skilled artists to manually create a skeleton
suitable for the human model and carefully design skinning
weights [29] to achieve realistic animation, which takes
countless human labor.
In this work, we aim to reduce the cost of human reconstruction and animation, to enable the creation of digital humans at scale. Specifically, we focus on the problem of automatically reconstructing animatable humans from multiview videos, as illustrated in Figure 1. However, this problem is extremely challenging. There are two core questions
we need to answer: how to represent animatable human
models and how to learn this representation from videos?
Recently, neural radiance fields (NeRF) [41] has proposed a representation that can be efficiently learned from
images with a differentiable renderer. It represents static 3D
scenes as color and density fields, which work particularly
well with volume rendering techniques. To extend NeRF
to handle non-rigidly deforming scenes, [46, 51] decompose a video into a canonical NeRF and a set of deformation
fields that transform observation-space points at each video

14314

