Improving Low-Precision Network Quantization via Bin Regularization
Tiantian Han

Dong Li

Ji Liu

Lu Tian

Yi Shan

Xilinx Inc., Beijing, China
{hantian, dongl, jiliu1, lutian, yishan}@xilinx.com

Abstract
Model quantization is an important mechanism for
energy-efficient deployment of deep neural networks on
resource-constrained devices by reducing the bit precision
of weights and activations. However, it remains challenging
to maintain high accuracy as bit precision decreases, especially for low-precision networks (e.g., 2-bit MobileNetV2).
Existing methods have been explored to address this problem by minimizing the quantization error or mimicking the
data distribution of full-precision networks. In this work, we
propose a novel weight regularization algorithm for improving low-precision network quantization. Instead of constraining the overall data distribution, we separably optimize all elements in each quantization bin to be as close
to the target quantized value as possible. Such bin regularization (BR) mechanism encourages the weight distribution of each quantization bin to be sharp and approximate
to a Dirac delta distribution ideally. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves consistent improvements
over the state-of-the-art quantization-aware training methods for different low-precision networks. Particularly, our
bin regularization improves LSQ for 2-bit MobileNetV2 and
MobileNetV3-Small by 3.9% and 4.9% top-1 accuracy on
ImageNet, respectively.

(a) Target distribution

(b) Top-1 accuracy of low-bit MobileNetV2

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
achieved remarkable progress in a wide range of applications including computer vision, natural language processing, speech recognition, etc. With the popularity of CNNs,
there is an increasing demand for techniques to run networks efficiently on resource-constrained devices (e.g., mobile phones or FPGA). These techniques include network
quantization, pruning, manual design of efficient architecture, or neural architecture search (NAS). We focus on network quantization by quantizing the networks to low bit
precision in this work. It allows reduced memory footprint,
faster inference time and lower power consumption when

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of target distributions by different
regularization methods. KURE [31] encourages the overall
distribution to be uniform, while our bin regularization (BR)
encourages each quantization bin distribution to be sharp.
(b) Top-1 accuracy of low-bit MobileNetV2 with different
regularization methods.

deploying CNN models on the edge devices.
Usually, the network accuracy decreases and the hardware performance increases as bit precision decreases. Recent network quantization methods have shown promising
performance for 8-bit quantization by post-training quanti-

5261

