Learning a Sketch Tensor Space for Image Inpainting of Man-made Scenes
Chenjie Cao, Yanwei Fu
School of Data Science, Fudan University
{20110980001,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

(a) Inputs

(b) Exemplar-based

(c) GateConv

(d) EdgeConnect

(e) Ours

Figure 1: Results of (b) Exemplar-based inpainting [2], (c) GateConv [43], (d) EdgeConnect [28], and (e) our method, with
the inpainted areas highlighted by red dot box. Our method makes better inpainting without artifacts.

Abstract
This paper studies the task of inpainting man-made
scenes. It is very challenging due to the difficulty in preserving the visual patterns of images, such as edges, lines, and
junctions. Especially, most previous works are failed to restore the object/building structures for images of man-made
scenes. To this end, this paper proposes learning a Sketch
Tensor (ST) space for inpainting man-made scenes. Such a
space is learned to restore the edges, lines, and junctions
in images, and thus makes reliable predictions of the holistic image structures. To facilitate the structure refinement,
we propose a Multi-scale Sketch Tensor inpainting (MST)
network, with a novel encoder-decoder structure. The encoder extracts lines and edges from the input images to
project them into an ST space. From this space, the decoder
is learned to restore the input images. Extensive experiments validate the efficacy of our model. Furthermore, our
model can also achieve competitive performance in inpainting general nature images over the competitors.

1. Introduction
As a long-standing problem, image inpainting has been
studied to address the problem of filling in the missing parts
of the images being semantically consistent and visually re-

alistic with plausible results. Thus, image inpainting is useful to many real-world applications, e.g. image restoration,
image editing, and object removal [6].
Intrinsically as an inverse problem, the inpainting is challenging in both restoring the missed global structure (semantically consistent), and generating realistic regions locally coherent to unmasked regions (visually consistent).
Especially, it is hard to reconstruct the missed image regions from the complex man-made scenes and structures,
due to the difficulty in preserving the prominent low-level
visual patterns, such as edges, line segments, and junctions,
as shown in Fig. 1. To this end, this paper particularly focuses on learning to reconstruct these visual patterns for image inpainting, and proposes a method of the best merits in
repairing the masked regions of man-made scene images,
such as images with indoor and outdoor buildings.
Both traditional approaches [2, 8, 19] and deep learning methods [24, 44, 40, 17, 43, 21] had made great efforts on reconstructing the structures of images in producing visually realistic results. However, these methods are
still challenged by producing structurally coherent results,
especially in the inpainting of man-made scenes. Typically, inpainting approaches may suffer from the following problems. (1) Missing critical structures. Traditional
synthesis-based approaches are normally unable to model

14509

