Foreground-Action Consistency Network for Weakly Supervised Temporal
Action Localization
Linjiang Huang1,2 Liang Wang3 Hongsheng Li1,2 *
1
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence, Hong Kong
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
ljhuang524@gmail.com, wangliang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
As a challenging task of high-level video understanding,
weakly supervised temporal action localization has been
attracting increasing attention. With only video annotations, most existing methods seek to handle this task with
a localization-by-classification framework, which generally
adopts a selector to select snippets of high probabilities of
actions or namely the foreground. Nevertheless, the existing foreground selection strategies have a major limitation of only considering the unilateral relation from foreground to actions, which cannot guarantee the foregroundaction consistency. In this paper, we present a framework
named FAC-Net based on the I3D backbone, on which three
branches are appended, named class-wise foreground classification branch, class-agnostic attention branch and multiple instance learning branch. First, our class-wise foreground classification branch regularizes the relation between actions and foreground to maximize the foregroundbackground separation. Besides, the class-agnostic attention branch and multiple instance learning branch are
adopted to regularize the foreground-action consistency
and help to learn a meaningful foreground classifier. Within
each branch, we introduce a hybrid attention mechanism,
which calculates multiple attention scores for each snippet, to focus on both discriminative and less-discriminative
snippets to capture the full action boundaries. Experimental results on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.3 demonstrate
the state-of-the-art performance of our method.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization in videos has been widely
used in various fields [39, 38]. This task aims to localize
action instances in untrimmed videos along the temporal dimension. Most existing methods [45, 35, 42, 49, 4, 18, 20]
are trained in a fully supervised manner. However, such
* Corresponding author.

GT
Foreground
Selection
Score

Attention
Mechanism

Action
Score
Foreground
Selection
Score

Multiple
Instance
Learning

Action
Score

Figure 1. An example of the action of “HammerThrow”. The barcode is the ground-truth (GT). The following line charts are foreground selection scores and frame-wise classification scores. We
show the results of two representative methods STPN [31] (attention mechanism) and W-TALC [26] (multiple instance learning). It
is obvious that these methods cannot guarantee foreground-action
consistency, leading to compromising results.

a requirement of frame-level annotations does not suit
real-world applications since densely annotating large-scale
videos is expensive and time-consuming. To address this
difficulty, weakly supervised methods [14, 1, 41] have been
developed with only video-level labels, which are much easier to annotate. Among diverse weak supervisions, videolevel category labels are the easiest to collect and are thus
most commonly used [41, 26, 31].
Because of the absence of frame-wise annotations, existing works mainly embrace a localization-by-classification
pipeline [41, 44], in which an important component is the
selector to select snippets with high probabilities of actions, or namely the foreground. Existing mechanisms
for foreground selection can be categorized into two main
strategies, i.e., attention mechanism [26, 19] and multiple instance learning (MIL) [31]. However, both strategies have their intrinsic drawbacks. As shown in Fig. 1,
the attention mechanism (either class-agnostic attention or
class-wise attention) usually suffers from the discrepancy
[37, 50, 19] between classification and detection, i.e., the
attention scores being concentrated around most discrim-

8002

