Learning Object-Compositional Neural Radiance Field
for Editable Scene Rendering
Bangbang Yang1
Han Zhou1
1

Yinghao Xu3
Guofeng Zhang1

Yinda Zhang2
Hujun Bao1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

2

Google

3

Yijin Li1
Zhaopeng Cui1 *

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Object Activation
Code Library

Scene Branch

Rendered Background

Code1

Manipulation

Code2

Object Branch

Duplicate Objects

Objects
Objects
at Original Poses Manipulated

Move Objects

Rendered with Manipulation

Original Scene View
from ScanNet

Figure 1. We propose a novel object-compositional neural radiance field that supports editable scene rendering on real-world datasets. To
obtain a view with object manipulation, we jointly render the transformed objects from the conditioned object branch and the surrounding
background from the scene branch.

Abstract
Implicit neural rendering techniques have shown
promising results for novel view synthesis. However, existing methods usually encode the entire scene as a whole,
which is generally not aware of the object identity and limits the ability to the high-level editing tasks such as moving or adding furniture. In this paper, we present a novel
neural scene rendering system, which learns an objectcompositional neural radiance field and produces realistic
rendering with editing capability for a clustered and realworld scene. Specifically, we design a novel two-pathway
architecture, in which the scene branch encodes the scene
geometry and appearance, and the object branch encodes
each standalone object conditioned on learnable object activation codes. To survive the training in heavily cluttered
scenes, we propose a scene-guided training strategy to solve
the 3D space ambiguity in the occluded regions and learn
sharp boundaries for each object. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our system not only achieves competitive
performance for static scene novel-view synthesis, but also
produces realistic rendering for object-level editing.

1. Introduction
Virtual tour in a real-world scene is one of the most desired experiences for virtual and augmented reality. While
early works rely on laborious capturing and reconstruction
of the physical world, e.g., geometry, texture, material, etc.,
* Corresponding author

Code is available on the project webpage: https://zju3dv.
github.io/object_nerf/

the emerging neural rendering methods open great opportunities to ease this task by learning directly from a collection
of posed images and achieve promising realistic images. A
common follow-up question to ask is: Can we modify the
scene, e.g., moving or adding furniture, while still maintaining the realistic rendering capability.
Unfortunately, this is not well-supported by existing neural rendering methods. Early approaches tend to encode the
entire visible scene into a single neural network, such as
NeRF [17] and SRN [26]. While handling small objects
perfectly, these models are hard to scale up for large-scale
scenes due to the fixed network capacity. On the other hand,
a family of neural rendering approaches utilizes volumetric representation [12] to densely encode local information
at specific locations, which migrates the scalability burden
from network parameters to the scene representation and
empirically produces better rendering quality. However, the
scene representation and rendering network are in general
agnostic to the object identity, which does not support highlevel editing tasks such as moving furniture.
In this paper, we propose a neural rendering system that
enables scene editing on real-world scenes. Taking a collection of posed images captured from the real scene and
rough 2D instance masks, our model can render the whole
scene as it is in reality, as well as with objects manipulated,
such as moving, rotating, or duplicating. Most related to
us, OSF [7] enables editable scene rendering in a bottomup fashion by learning one model per-object and then perform joint rendering. However, their method does not learn
the object arrangements in the real world and requires training images captured for each individual object beforehand,

13779

