RANK-NOSH: Efficient Predictor-Based Architecture Search via
Non-Uniform Successive Halving
Ruochen Wang1 , Xiangning Chen1 , Minhao Cheng1 , Xiaocheng Tang2 , Cho-Jui Hsieh1
1
Department of Computer Science, UCLA, 2 DiDi AI Labs
Abstract
Predictor-based algorithms have achieved remarkable
performance in the Neural Architecture Search (NAS) tasks.
However, these methods suffer from high computation costs,
as training the performance predictor usually requires
training and evaluating hundreds of architectures from
scratch. Previous works along this line mainly focus on reducing the number of architectures required to fit the predictor. In this work, we tackle this challenge from a different perspective - improve search efficiency by cutting down
the computation budget of architecture training. We propose NOn-uniform Successive Halving (NOSH), a hierarchical scheduling algorithm that terminates the training of
underperforming architectures early to avoid wasting budget. To effectively leverage the non-uniform supervision signals produced by NOSH, we formulate predictor-based architecture search as learning to rank with pairwise comparisons. The resulting method - RANK-NOSH, reduces the
search budget by ⇠ 5⇥ while achieving competitive or even
better performance than previous state-of-the-art predictorbased methods on various spaces and datasets.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search has demonstrated its effectiveness in discovering high-performance architectures for
various computer vision tasks, including image classification [6, 23, 44], semantic segmentation [21, 32], and image
generation [14, 15, 16]. Concretely, NAS methods attempt
to identify the best architecture from a vast search space according to a predefined performance metric (e.g., accuracy,
latency, etc.). Pioneering works in this field require training and evaluating thousands of architectures in the search
space [26, 50, 51]. For example, the reinforcement learning
method proposed by Zoph et al. [51] trains over 20,000 networks. The tremendous amount of computation overhead
largely limits their practical usage. Since then, improving
the efficiency of architecture search algorithms has become
a central topic in the NAS community.
Recently, weight-sharing technique witnesses much suc-

cess in improving the search efficiency of NAS [2, 7, 23,
29, 44]. Those methods train a supernet that encompasses
all architectures in the search space, and use the pretrained
supernet to evaluate the performance of architectures. Despite their search efficiency, weight-sharing methods are not
generally applicable to arbitrary search spaces due to the
restrictions in constructing supernets [27, 46]. Moreover,
they also suffer from various inductive biases caused by the
weight-sharing mechanism [6, 33, 38, 47, 48], which has a
tendency towards parameter-free operations and wide, shallow structures.
On the other hand, predictor-based NAS methods are
free from the aforementioned disadvantages. Starting from
a pool of randomly selected architectures, previous methods
iteratively conduct the following steps: 1) train and evaluate all the architectures in the pool fully; 2) fit a surrogate
performance predictor; 3) use the predictor to propose new
architectures and add them to the pool for the next round
[12, 40, 45]. Compared with previous RL and evolutionbased NAS methods, using a performance predictor can reduce the number of networks evaluated from scratch. However, training all the architectures in the candidate pool fully
is still extremely computationally expensive. Most complementary advances alone this line focus on developing better
predictors that require a smaller training pool [12, 40, 45],
but the potential to further cut down the search cost by reducing the training length of individual architectures in the
pool has not drawn much attention.
In this work, we aim to investigate the possibility of reducing the search cost of predictor-based NAS by reducing the number of epochs required to train every architecture in the candidate pool. Inspired by successive halving
[17], our key idea is that the learning process of poor architectures can be terminated early to avoid wasting budgets.
However, it is non-trivial to integrate successive halving to
predictor-based NAS formulations. Firstly, predictor-based
algorithms iteratively add new architectures to the candidate
pool [12, 40, 45], whereas regular successive halving only
removes underperforming candidates from the initial pool.
Secondly, with successive halving, architectures in the pool
will be trained for different number of epochs, so their val-

10377

