Semi-Supervised Single-Stage Controllable GANs for Conditional Fine-Grained
Image Generation
Tianyi Chen1 , Yi Liu1 , Yunfei Zhang1 , Si Wu1,3∗, Yong Xu1 , Feng Liangbing2 , and Hau San Wong3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Cosmos Vision Technology Co., Ltd
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{csttychen, csly, cszhangyunfei}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {cswusi, yxu}@scut.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Deep generative learning [6, 21, 22, 23, 26, 7] has gained
a wide range of research interests due to the high capacity of the generative models in learning complex data distributions. Most of them are based on generative adver∗ Corresponding author.

Full Sup.

Previous state-of-the-art deep generative models improve fine-grained image generation quality by designing hierarchical model structures and synthesizing images
across multiple stages. The learning process is typically performed without any supervision in object categories.
To address this issue, while at the same time to alleviate
the level of complexity of both model design and training, we propose a Single-Stage Controllable GAN (SSCGAN) for conditional fine-grained image synthesis in a
semi-supervised setting. Considering the fact that finegrained object categories may have subtle distinctions and
shared attributes, we take into account three factors of variation for generative modeling: class-independent content,
cross-class attributes and class semantics, and associate
them with different variables. To ensure disentanglement
among the variables, we maximize mutual information between the class-independent variable and synthesized images, map real data to the latent space of a generator to
perform consistency regularization of cross-class attributes,
and incorporate class semantic-based regularization into a
discriminator’s feature space. We show that the proposed
approach delivers a single-stage controllable generator and
high-fidelity synthesized images of fine-grained categories.
SSC-GAN establishes state-of-the-art semi-supervised image synthesis results across multiple fine-grained datasets.

Real

Abstract

Semi-Sup.

lb.feng@cosmosvisiontech.com, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Figure 1. The representative images are synthesized by SSC-GAN
in semi-supervised (top row) and fully supervised (middle row)
settings on the CUB dataset [42]. Although only half of training
data are labeled in the semi-supervised case, the synthesis quality
of SSC-GAN is comparable to that of the model with full supervision, and can be close to the quality of real data (bottom row).

sarial networks (GANs) [17] and variational autoencoders
(VAEs) [27]. Unsupervised or supervised training patterns
are typically adopted to achieve remarkable success in image synthesis [16, 43, 29, 44, 11, 12, 1, 2]. However, the
resulting generators are either unable to control class semantics or require massive labeled samples. To address this
issue, semi-supervised generative learning has been studied
[13, 25, 31, 33, 40]. Generic semi-supervised generative
modeling is based on the assumption that the amount of unlabeled data is adequate. This does not hold when learning
on fine-grained data, due to the reason that both data acquisition and annotation may be expensive and require extensive expertise.
Training high-fidelity generators for fine-grained object categories is inherently challenging [48, 47, 49], due to
the difficulties in the following aspects: On the one hand,
both training samples and labels are insufficient; on the other hand, the distinctions among different categories can be

9264

