Removing the Bias of Integral Pose Regression
Kerui Gu1
Linlin Yang1,2
Angela Yao1
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
University of Bonn, Germany
{keruigu, yangll, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Heatmap-based detection methods are dominant for
2D human pose estimation even though regression is
more intuitive. The introduction of the integral regression
method, which, architecture-wise uses an implicit heatmap,
brings the two approaches even closer together. This
begs the question – does detection really outperform
regression? In this paper, we investigate the difference
in supervision between the heatmap-based detection and
integral regression, as this is the key remaining difference
between the two approaches. In the process, we discover an
underlying bias behind integral pose regression that arises
from taking the expectation after the softmax function. To
counter the bias, we present a compensation method which
we find to improve integral regression accuracy on all 2D
pose estimation benchmarks. We further propose a simple
combined detection and bias-compensated regression
method that considerably outperforms state-of-the-art
baselines with few added components.

1. Introduction
Pose estimation aims to determine the spatial position
of articulated joints such as the human body or hand.
At first glance, it seems that the problem should be a
straight-forward regression. However, methods which directly regress joint coordinates [4, 29, 25] are less effective
than those which locate the joints by estimating a likelihood
heatmap [24, 8, 36, 28]. The rationale is that working with
heatmaps allows the architecture to remain fully convolutional, thereby retaining spatial structures throughout the
encoding and decoding process.
As labels, heatmap methods use a Gaussian centered at
the ground truth joint coordinate. This formulation converts
pose estimation into a detection problem; the network is
tasked with predicting, at each pixel, the probability of that
pixel being a joint pixel. The standard approach is to then
use an argmax function to decode the output heatmap into

Ω1

Ω2

Ω3

Ω4
β=1

β=5

β=8

β=1

β=5

β=8

β=1

β=5

β=8

Figure 1. An illustration of the integral regression bias, with the
implicit heatmap overlaid with the resulting predicted joint location as indicated by the white square. The bias, i.e. difference
between the heatmap mode and predicted location, increases as
the mode is further from the center and the value of β decreases.
There is no bias only when the heatmap mode is centered. This
paper proposes a method to compensate for the bias by partitioning the heatmap into individual regions (Ω1 to Ω4 , see upper left
heatmap) to ensure that the heatmap mode is centered.

a joint coordinate. The argmax function has two key drawbacks: it is not differentiable and it fixes the resolution of
the estimated coordinate to that of the heatmap itself. Despite these disadvantages, however, detection-based methods1 are highly effective and achieve state-of-the-art results
for human pose estimation [24, 8, 36, 28].
An alternative form of decoding is to take a softmax together with an expectation [14, 29, 25, 21]. Both the soft1 The naming convention used in the literature can be confusing in the
context of this discussion as detection-based methods are often referred to
as indirect regression or heatmap regression [2, 14, 40].

11067

