Rethinking 360° Image Visual Attention Modelling with Unsupervised Learning.
Yasser Abdelaziz Dahou Djilali,* Tarun Krishna,* Kevin McGuinness and Noel E. O’Connor
Insight Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin City University (DCU)
{yasser.dahoudjilali2, tarun.krishna2}@mail.dcu.ie

Abstract
Despite the success of self-supervised representation
learning on planar data, to date it has not been studied
on 360° images. In this paper, we extend recent advances
in contrastive learning to learn latent representations that
are sufficiently invariant to be highly effective for spherical
saliency prediction as a downstream task. We argue that
omni-directional images are particularly suited to such an
approach due to the geometry of the data domain. To verify this hypothesis, we design an unsupervised framework
that effectively maximizes the mutual information between
the different views from both the equator and the poles. We
show that the decoder is able to learn good quality saliency
distributions from the encoder embeddings. Our model compares favorably with fully-supervised learning methods on
the Salient360!, VR-EyeTracking and Sitzman datasets. This
performance is achieved using an encoder that is trained in
a completely unsupervised way and a relatively lightweight
supervised decoder (3.8 × fewer parameters in the case of
the ResNet50 encoder). We believe that this combination of
supervised and unsupervised learning is an important step
toward flexible formulations of human visual attention. The
results can be reproduced on GitHub

1. Introduction
Unlike traditional media, omni-directional images (ODIs)
provide users with the ability to explore different regions of
the viewing sphere. The average person’s head movements
(HM) are typically a good prediction of the most probable
viewport localized within the sphere, while eye movements
(EM) reflect regions-of-interest (RoIs) inside the predicted
viewports. Thus, when predicting the most salient pixels for
360° images, it is necessary to predict both HM and EM [68].
Despite remarkable advances in the field of visual attention
[34, 6, 68], existing approaches for 360° saliency prediction
are still limited in scope/power for two main reasons.
First, all previous state-of-the-art 360° saliency static
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Given a set of 360° images and associated projections, a
deep representation is learnt by maximizing the mutual information
between views of the same scene in the embedding space, while
discarding views of different scenes.

approaches are trained end-to-end in a supervised manner.
This limits their capacity to leverage unlabelled data. Compared to the large-scale 2D video/image saliency datasets
[6] (i.e., up to 10000 images / 1000 video sequences), 360°
video/image HM/EM datasets are rather small. This is due
to the complex annotation process, which limits the capacity
of the fully supervised approaches. Therefore, exploiting
unlabelled data for learning better features is critical, and
intuitively a good design to follow. Second, most previous
approaches apply a CNN on each patch/cube resulting from
the equi-rectangular (ERP) and cube map (CMP) projections.
The former suffer from geometric distortions near the poles,
whereas the latter stretch the salient regions into different
cube faces, forcing the model to lose the global contextual
information. These methods are also of high computational
complexity, which may limit their applicability.
Modeling visual attention in ODIs using a representation
learning function (an encoder) has the core objective of discovering useful representations conditioned by the spherical

15414

