DCT-SNN: Using DCT to Distribute Spatial Information over Time for
Low-Latency Spiking Neural Networks
Isha Garg*
Sayeed Shafayet Chowdhury*
Kaushik Roy
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA 47907
gargi, chowdh23, kaushik@purdue.edu

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) offer a promising
alternative to traditional deep learning, since they
provide higher computational efficiency due to eventdriven information processing. SNNs distribute the analog
values of pixel intensities into binary spikes over time.
However, the most widely used input coding schemes,
such as Poisson based rate-coding, do not leverage the
additional temporal learning capability of SNNs effectively.
Moreover, these SNNs suffer from high inference latency
which is a major bottleneck to their deployment. To
overcome this, we propose a time-based encoding scheme
that utilizes Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) to reduce
the number of timesteps required for inference (DCTSNN). DCT decomposes an image into a weighted sum
of sinusoidal basis images. At each time step, a single
frequency base, taken in order and modulated by its
corresponding DCT coefficient, is input to an accumulator
that generates spikes upon crossing a threshold. We use
the proposed scheme to train DCT-SNN, a low-latency deep
SNN with leaky-integrate-and-fire neurons using surrogate
gradient descent based backpropagation. We achieve top1 accuracy of 89.94%, 68.30% and 52.43% on CIFAR10, CIFAR-100 and TinyImageNet, respectively using VGG
architectures. Notably, DCT-SNN performs inference with
2-14X reduced latency compared to other state-of-theart SNNs, while achieving comparable accuracy to their
standard deep learning counterparts. The dimension of
the transform allows us to control the number of timesteps
required for inference. Additionally, we can trade-off
accuracy with latency in a principled manner by dropping
the highest frequency components during inference. The
code is publicly available.1

1. Introduction
Deep Learning networks have tremendously improved
state-of-the-art performance for many tasks such as object
* equal contribution
1 https://github.com/SayeedChowdhury/dct-snn

detection, classification and natural language processing
[7, 12, 19]. However, such architectures are extremely
energy-intensive [22] and require custom architectures
and training methodologies for edge deployment [14].
To address this, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have
emerged as a promising alternative to traditional deep
learning architectures [25, 31]. SNNs are bio-plausible
networks inspired from the learning mechanisms observed
in mammalian brains. They are analogous in structure to
standard networks, but perform computation in the form of
spikes instead of fully analog values, as done in standard
networks. In this paper, we refer to standard networks
as Analog Neural Networks (ANNs) to distinguish them
from their spiking counterparts with digital (spiking) inputs.
The input and the correspondingly generated activations in
SNNs are all binary spikes and inference is performed by
accumulating the spikes over time. This can be visualized
as distributing the one step inference of ANNs into a multistep, very sparse inference scheme in the SNN.
The primary source of energy efficiency of SNNs
comes from the fact that very few neurons spike at
any given timestep. This event driven computation and
the replacement of every multiply–accumulate (MAC)
operation in the ANN by an addition in SNN allows
SNNs to infer with lesser energy. This energy benefit can
be further enhanced using custom SNN implementations
with architectural modifications [17]. Li et al. [23] have
released a spiking version of the CIFAR-10 dataset based
on inputs from neuromorphic sensors. IBM has designed
a non-commercial processor ‘TrueNorth’ [2], and Intel has
designed its equivalent ‘Loihi’ [6], that can train and infer
on SNNs. Blouw et al. [3] have shown SNNs implemented
on Loihi to be two orders of magnitude more efficient than
an equivalent ANN running on GPU for keyword spotting.
However, the higher inference latency in SNNs due to
accumulation of spikes over timesteps remains a challenge.
Energy efficiency at the cost of too high a latency would still
hamper real-time deployment. Consequently, reduction of
timesteps required for inference in SNNs is an active field
of research. One of the major factors that affect the number

4671

