ME-PCN: Point Completion Conditioned on Mask Emptiness

1

Bingchen Gong1 , Yinyu Nie2 , Yiqun Lin3 , Xiaoguang Han* 3 , and Yizhou Yu* 1
The University of Hong Kong, 2 Technical University of Munich, 3 SSE, CUHK(SZ)

bccs@connect.hku.hk, yinyu.nie@tum.de, lyq211003@gmail.com, hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Point completion refers to completing the missing geometries of an object from incomplete observations. Mainstream methods predict the missing shapes by decoding a
global feature learned from the input point cloud, which often leads to deficient results in preserving topology consistency and surface details. In this work, we present MEPCN, a point completion network that leverages emptiness
in 3D shape space. Given a single depth scan, previous
methods often encode the occupied partial shapes while ignoring the empty regions (e.g. holes) in depth maps. In contrast, we argue that these ‘emptiness’ clues indicate shape
boundaries that can be used to improve topology representation and detail granularity on surfaces. Specifically, our
ME-PCN encodes both the occupied point cloud and the
neighboring ‘empty points’. It estimates coarse-grained but
complete and reasonable surface points in the first stage,
followed by a refinement stage to produce fine-grained surface details. Comprehensive experiments verify that our
ME-PCN presents better qualitative and quantitative performance against the state-of-the-art. Besides, we further
prove that our ‘emptiness’ design is lightweight and easy
to embed in existing methods, which shows consistent effectiveness in improving the CD and EMD scores.

1. Introduction
Capturing 3D data for objects around us is as easy as
taking a picture with cell phones thanks to the popularity of
common 3D scanning sensors like LIDAR and depth cameras. Such availability has greatly enriched the practical applications in vision and robotics communities.
Different from image sensors, data from 3D scanners
usually come incompletely with a much lower resolution,
e.g., depth maps with missing values. To recover complete shapes from the partial inputs, volumetric and viewbased projection methods leverage 3D convolutions to rep* Corresponding author

(a) Input

(b) Ours

(c) MSN

(d) GT

Figure 1: Given a partial scan (a), our method encodes the
spatial emptiness (blue points in (a)) neighboring to observations and predicts complete and topology consistent surfaces (b) compared with MSN [10] on the ground-truth (d).
resent shapes into voxel grids. However, those 3D convolutions, suffering from expensive memory and computational
cost, are bottlenecked by the resolution-computation balance. It becomes even disadvantaged when the inputs are
unordered and sparse. Implicit methods learn a signed distance function (SDF) to represent shape surfaces and are
capable of reaching any high resolution. However, they
still rely on voxel grids, and an extra computation-intensive
post-processing step is required to extract the final shape
surface. In contrast, the point cloud is a more compact representation of 3D shapes. Compared with voxels, it is more
scalable and computation-efficient to express shapes with
different granularity. Several deep neural networks have
been proposed to directly take advantage of point cloud representation, such as PCN [31], TopNet [21], MSN [10].
A key concept in existing point completion methods is
an encoder-decoder architecture followed by an optional
refining process, where the completed point cloud is generated from an encoded global feature. The widely used
encoders for point cloud are PointNet [15] and its variant
PointNet++ [16]. With the encoder-decoder design, current
methods directly predict the complete points from the visible, occupied input points, while ignoring the unoccupied,

12488

