Sparse-shot Learning with Exclusive Cross-Entropy
for Extremely Many Localisations
Andreas Panteli1,2 , Jonas Teuwen1,2,3 , Hugo Horlings1 and Efstratios Gavves2,4
1
Netherlands Cancer Institute, 2 University of Amsterdam,
3
Radboud University Medical Center, 4 Ellogon.AI
{a.panteli, j.teuwen, h.horlings}@nki.nl, egavves@uva.nl

Abstract
Object localisation, in the context of regular images, often depicts objects like people or cars. In these images,
there is typically a relatively small number of objects per
class, which usually is manageable to annotate. However,
outside the setting of regular images, we are often confronted with a different situation. In computational pathology, digitised tissue sections are extremely large images,
whose dimensions quickly exceed 250’000 × 250’000 pixels, where relevant objects, such as tumour cells or lymphocytes can quickly number in the millions. Annotating them
all is practically impossible and annotating sparsely a few,
out of many more, is the only possibility. Unfortunately,
learning from sparse annotations, or sparse-shot learning,
clashes with standard supervised learning because what is
not annotated is treated as a negative. However, assigning
negative labels to what are true positives leads to confusion in the gradients and biased learning. To this end, we
present exclusive cross-entropy, which slows down the biased learning by examining the second-order loss derivatives in order to drop the loss terms corresponding to likely
biased terms. Experiments on nine datasets and two different localisation tasks, detection with YOLLO and segmentation with Unet, show that we obtain considerable improvements compared to cross-entropy or focal loss, while often
reaching the best possible performance for the model with
only 10-40% of annotations.

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep learning and big datasets, object
localisation, be it bounding box detection [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6],
semantic segmentation [7, 8, 9], or instance segmentation
[10, 11, 12, 13], has progressed with leaps and bounds ever
since deformable part models [14, 15] and selective search
[16, 17]. The basic assumption for all above localisation
methods is that all relevant objects in the image are anno-

Figure 1: Left: A digitised tissue section containing millions of cells. An image typically corresponds to only a
small part of smaller coloured-in regions in the whole slide.
Only a handful of annotations are available, and after great
effort (about 6’000 annotations in our data). Right: with
red the non-exhaustively annotated objects in a small 1’000
by 1’000 region of a tissue slide image, roughly 30% of the
total number of objects in green (right).
tated. This is a reasonable assumption for regular images
like in PASCAL VOC 2007 [18] or MSCOCO [19], containing on average 512 × 512 -or sometimes up to 1’000 ×
1’000- images with no more than a dozen objects per class
per image. Outside the realm of regular images, however,
we are often confronted with a different situation: digitised tissue sections are typically very large images, of file
size around 1-10 GB, whose dimensions can quickly exceed 250’000 × 250’000 px, where relevant objects, such
as tumour cells or lymphocytes can quickly number in the
millions. Annotating them all, even relying on regions-ofinterest, can be hard and in practice only sparse annotations
are feasible. In this paper we focus on learning from sparse
annotations, coined sparse-shot learning, especially when
the objective is localising an extreme numbers of objects.
Learning from sparse annotations clashes with supervised learning, especially in the context of object localisation. In the absence of any other knowledge, the typical assumption is to assign a negative label to all locations in the image that are not annotated as (true) positives.
This is a suboptimal choice on two grounds. For one, it is

2813

