Robustness and Generalization via Generative Adversarial Training
Omid Poursaeed1,2

Tianxing Jiang1

Serge Belongie1,2
1

Cornell University

2

Ser-Nam Lim3

Cornell Tech

Abstract
While deep neural networks have achieved remarkable
success in various computer vision tasks, they often fail to
generalize to new domains and subtle variations of input
images. Several defenses have been proposed to improve
the robustness against these variations. However, current
defenses can only withstand the specific attack used in training, and the models often remain vulnerable to other input
variations. Moreover, these methods often degrade performance of the model on clean images and do not generalize
to out-of-domain samples. In this paper we present Generative Adversarial Training, an approach to simultaneously
improve the model’s generalization to the test set and outof-domain samples as well as its robustness to unseen adversarial attacks. Instead of altering a low-level pre-defined
aspect of images, we generate a spectrum of low-level, midlevel and high-level changes using generative models with a
disentangled latent space. Adversarial training with these
examples enable the model to withstand a wide range of
attacks by observing a variety of input alterations during
training. We show that our approach not only improves performance of the model on clean images and out-of-domain
samples but also makes it robust against unforeseen attacks
and outperforms prior work. We validate effectiveness of
our method by demonstrating results on various tasks such
as classification, segmentation and object detection.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown promising generalization to in-domain samples. However, they are vulnerable to
slight alterations of input images and have limited generalization to new domains. Several defenses have been proposed for improving the models’ robustness against input
variations. However, these models only provide robustness
against a narrow range of threat models used in training,
and they have poor generalization to unseen attacks. We
hypothesize that this is due to the fact that they only con-

Harry Yang3

3

Facebook AI

sider a small subset of realistic examples on or near the
manifold of natural images. For instance, additive perturbations leave high-level semantic aspects of images intact.
Therefore, models trained against these examples do not
provide robustness to high-level input variations. In order
for a model to become robust to all realistic variations of inputs, it needs to see a diverse set of samples during training.
However, most of the existing works only alter a low-level
aspect of images such as color [18, 24, 4], spatial [13, 36, 1],
pose [2, 42], and others. Even if we consider the union of
several types of attacks, the model can still be vulnerable
to other input variations that are not contained in any of the
constituent threat models. To provide robustness against unforeseen attacks, we propose adversarial training against a
range of low-level to high-level variations of inputs. We
leverage generative models with disentangled latent representations to systematically build diverse and realistic examples without leaving the manifold of natural images. We
show that our approach improves generalization and robustness of the model to unseen variations of input images without training against any of them.
We build upon state-of-the-art generative models which
disentangle factors of variation in images. We create fine
and coarse-grained adversarial changes by manipulating
various latent variables at different resolutions. Loss of the
target network is used to guide the generation process. The
pre-trained generative model constrains the search space for
our adversarial examples to realistic images, thereby revealing the target model’s vulnerability in the natural image space. We verify that we do not deviate from the space
of realistic images with a user study as well as a t-SNE plot
comparing distributions of real and adversarial images. As a
result, we observe that including these examples in training
the model enhances its accuracy on clean images as well as
out-of-domain samples. Moreover, since the model has seen
a variety of low-level and high-level alterations of images, it
becomes robust to a wide range of adversarial examples including recoloring, spatial transformations, perceptual and
additive perturbations.

15711

