Tripartite Information Mining and Integration for Image Matting
Yuhao Liu1, *, Jiake Xie2, *, Xiao Shi3 , Yu Qiao1 , Yujie Huang4 , Yong Tang2†, Xin Yang1,†
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 PicUp.AI
3
Agricultural Information Institute of CAAS, 4 Fudan University
{yuhaoLiu7456, coachqiao2018}@gmail.com, {jxie, yt}@picup.ai
sixiaosmile@outlook.com, 19112020091@fudan.edu.cn, xinyang@dlut.edu.cn

Input Image

User Trimap

CAM’s [17] Alpha

Our Alpha

CAM’s [17] Synthesis

Our Synthesis

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of our method and CAM [17] on the Real-World images. Both results are produced from the
model trained on DIM [56] dataset. Please zoom in to see the fine details.

Abstract
With the development of deep convolutional neural networks, image matting has ushered in a new phase. Regarding the nature of image matting, most researches have focused on solutions for transition regions. However, we argue that many existing approaches are excessively focused
on transition-dominant local fields and ignored the inherent coordination between global information and transition optimisation. In this paper, we propose the Tripartite Information Mining and Integration Network (TIMINet) to harmonize the coordination between global and local attributes formally. Specifically, we resort to a novel
3-branch encoder to accomplish comprehensive mining of
the input information, which can supplement the neglected
coordination between global and local fields. In order to
achieve effective and complete interaction between such
multi-branches information, we develop the Tripartite In* Joint first authors. † Joint corresponding authors.
https://wukaoliu.github.io/TIMI-Net.

Project page:

formation Integration (T I 2 ) Module to transform and integrate the interconnections between the different branches.
In addition, we built a large-scale human matting dataset
(Human-2K) to advance human image matting, which consists of 2100 high-precision human images (2000 images
for training and 100 images for test). Finally, we conduct extensive experiments to prove the performance of our
proposed TIMI-Net, which demonstrates that our method
performs favourably against the SOTA approaches on the
alphamatting.com (Rank First), Composition-1K (MSE0.006, Grad-11.5), Distinctions-646 and our Human-2K.
Also, we have developed an online evaluation website to
perform natural image matting.

1. Introduction
The digital matting is one of the important tasks in computer vision, which aims to accurately estimate the opacity
of foreground objects in images and video sequences. It
has a wide range of applications, particularly in the fields of

7555

