Universal Representation Learning from Multiple Domains
for Few-shot Classification
Wei-Hong Li, Xialei Liu*, and Hakan Bilen
VICO Group, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/vico/research/URL

Abstract
In this paper, we look at the problem of few-shot image
classification that aims to learn a classifier for previously unseen classes and domains from few labeled samples. Recent
methods use various adaptation strategies for aligning their
visual representations to new domains or select the relevant
ones from multiple domain-specific feature extractors. In this
work, we present URL, which learns a single set of universal
visual representations by distilling knowledge of multiple
domain-specific networks after co-aligning their features
with the help of adapters and centered kernel alignment.
We show that the universal representations can be further
refined for previously unseen domains by an efficient adaptation step in a similar spirit to distance learning methods. We
rigorously evaluate our model in the recent Meta-Dataset
benchmark and demonstrate that it significantly outperforms
the previous methods while being more efficient.

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks progress to dramatically improve results in most of standard computer vision tasks,
there is a growing community interest for more ambitious
goals. One of them is to improve the data efficiency of the
standard supervised methods that rely on large amount of expensive and time-consuming hand-labeled data. Just like the
human intelligence is capable of learning concepts from few
labeled samples, few-shot learning [24, 33] aims at adapting
a classifier to accommodate new classes not seen in training,
given a few labeled samples from these classes.
Earlier works in few-shot learning focus on evaluating
their methods in homogeneous learning tasks, e.g. Ominglot [25], miniImageNet [53], tieredImageNet [43], where
both the meta-train and meta-test examples are sampled
from a single data distribution (or dataset). Recently, the
interest of the community has shifted to a more realistic
and challenging experimental setting, where the goal is to
* Xialei Liu is the corresponding author.

Unseen Domains

Retrieve or Blend
Extractors

Feature
Adaptation
Distill

...

(a) one extractor per domain

...

(b) universal feature extractor by distillation

Seen Domains

Figure 1. URL – Universal Representation Learning. Unlike the
previous methods [13, 29] (illustrated in (a)) that learn K feature
extractors {fϕ∗τ }K
τ , one for each domain, and retrieve or combine
their features for the target task during meta-test stage, our method
(illustrated in (b)) learns a single universal feature extractor fϕ
that is distilled from from multiple feature extractors {fϕ∗τ }K
τ . In
meta-test stage, we use a linear transformation Aϑ to further refine
the universal representations to unseen domains.

learn few-shot models that can generalize not only within
a single data distribution but also to previously unseen data
distributions. To this end, Triantafillou et al. [52] propose a
new heterogeneous benchmark, Meta-Dataset that consists
of ten datasets from different domains for meta-training and
meta-test. While, initially two domains were kept as unseen
domains, later three more unseen domains are included to
meta-test the generalization ability of learned models.
While the few-shot methods [14, 48, 49, 53], which were
proposed before Meta-Dataset was available, can be directly applied to this new benchmark with minor modifications, they fail to cope with domain gap between train and
test datasets and thus obtain subpar performance on MetaDataset. Recently several few-shot learning methods are

9526

