Unconstrained Scene Generation with Locally Conditioned Radiance Fields
Terrance DeVries†1

Miguel Angel Bautista1

Graham W. Taylor2,3
1

Nitish Srivastava1

Joshua M. Susskind1

2
3
Apple
University of Guelph
Vector Institute
https://apple.github.io/ml-gsn/

Figure 1: Scenes sampled from our learned prior, rendered from freely moving camera paths containing various rotation,
translation, and forward/backward motions. See supplementary material for corresponding extended videos.

Abstract
We tackle the challenge of learning a distribution over
complex, realistic, indoor scenes. In this paper, we introduce Generative Scene Networks (GSN), which learns
to decompose scenes into a collection of many local radiance fields that can be rendered from a free moving camera. Our model can be used as a prior to generate new
scenes, or to complete a scene given only sparse 2D observations. Recent work has shown that generative models of radiance fields can capture properties such as multiview consistency and view-dependent lighting. However,
these models are specialized for constrained viewing of single objects, such as cars or faces. Due to the size and
complexity of realistic indoor environments, existing models lack the representational capacity to adequately capture
them. Our decomposition scheme scales to larger and more
complex scenes while preserving details and diversity, and
the learned prior enables high-quality rendering from viewpoints that are significantly different from observed viewpoints. When compared to existing models, GSN produces
quantitatively higher-quality scene renderings across sev-

eral different scene datasets.

1. Introduction
Spatial understanding entails the ability to infer the geometry and appearance of a scene when observed from any
viewpoint or orientation given sparse or incomplete observations. Although a wide range of geometry and learningbased approaches for 3D view synthesis [8, 9, 28, 29, 37, 43,
51] can interpolate between observed views of a scene, they
cannot extrapolate to infer unobserved parts of the scene.
The fundamental limitation of these models is their inability to learn a prior over scenes. As a result, learning-based
approaches have limited performance in the extrapolation
regime, whether it be inpainting disocclusions or synthesizing views beyond the boundaries of the given observations.
For example, the popular NeRF [29] approach represents a
scene via its radiance field, enabling continuous view interpolation given a densely captured scene. However, since
NeRF does not learn a scene prior, it cannot extrapolate
† Work done during an internship at Apple

14304

