The Devil is in the Task: Exploiting Reciprocal
Appearance-Localization Features for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Zhikang Zou1 * Xiaoqing Ye1 * Liang Du2 * Xianhui Cheng4 * Xiao Tan1
Li Zhang3 Jianfeng Feng2 Xiangyang Xue4 Errui Ding1
1

Baidu Inc., China
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University,
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University
3
School of Data Science, Fudan University
4
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2

Abstract
Low-cost monocular 3D object detection plays a fundamental role in autonomous driving, whereas its accuracy
is still far from satisfactory. In this paper, we dig into the
3D object detection task and reformulate it as the sub-tasks
of object localization and appearance perception, which
benefits to a deep excavation of reciprocal information underlying the entire task. We introduce a Dynamic Feature
Reflecting Network, named DFR-Net, which contains two
novel standalone modules: (i) the Appearance-Localization
Feature Reflecting module (ALFR) that first separates taskspecific features and then self-mutually reflects the reciprocal features; (ii) the Dynamic Intra-Trading module (DIT)
that adaptively realigns the training processes of various
sub-tasks via a self-learning manner. Extensive experiments
on the challenging KITTI dataset demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization of DFR-Net. We rank 1st among all
the monocular 3D object detectors in the KITTI test set (till
March 16th, 2021). The proposed method is also easy to
be plug-and-play in many cutting-edge 3D detection frameworks at negligible cost to boost performance. The code
will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Building on the promising progress achieved by 2D object detection in recent years [27, 26], vision- and LiDARbased 3D object detection have received increasing attention from both industry and academia due to their critical
roles in outdoor autonomous driving [14] and indoor robotic
navigation. 3D object detectors based on expensive LiDAR
* indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. Comparison of the baseline method (D4 LCN [8]) and
our proposed DFR-Net. (a) The baseline method first uses the encoder (“E”) to extract RGB and predicted depth features and then
adopts independent heads to decode the shared features for 3D
detection tasks. (b) In our method, we first cluster the sub-tasks
with common characteristics to build up separated task streams
and then exploit the reciprocal information between the streams
via self-mutual feature reflecting. (c) The ground truth, the prediction of the baseline method, and our prediction are shown in the
bird’s-eye view (BEV) pseudo LiDAR for better visualization.

sensors [35, 29, 10, 11] have been widely developed and
excelled in 3D object detection, whereas a much cheaper
alternative, i.e., monocular 3D object detection, remains an
open and challenging research field.
Monocular 3D object detectors can be roughly divided

2713

