Explaining Local, Global, And Higher-Order Interactions In Deep Learning
Samuel Lerman

Charles Venuto
Henry Kautz
University of Rochester

Chenliang Xu

{slerman@ur.,charles.venuto@chet.,kautz@cs.,chenliang.xu@}rochester.edu

Abstract
We present a simple yet highly generalizable method for
explaining interacting parts within a neural network’s reasoning process. First, we design an algorithm based on
cross derivatives for computing statistical interaction effects between individual features, which is generalized to
both 2-way and higher-order (3-way or more) interactions.
We present results side by side with a weight-based attribution technique, corroborating that cross derivatives are a
superior metric for both 2-way and higher-order interaction
detection. Moreover, we extend the use of cross derivatives
as an explanatory device in neural networks to the computer
vision setting by expanding Grad-CAM, a popular gradientbased explanatory tool for CNNs, to the higher order. While
Grad-CAM can only explain the importance of individual
objects in images, our method, which we call Taylor-CAM,
can explain a neural network’s relational reasoning across
multiple objects. We show the success of our explanations
both qualitatively and quantitatively, including with a user
study. We will release all code as a tool package to facilitate
explainable deep learning.

1. Introduction
The universe is made up of myriad interacting parts. To
truly understand complex systems and processes, it is not
enough to view their functions as an amalgamation of independent contributors. Rather, they are a complex web of
inter-operating influences. For much of the past, explainable deep learning has concerned itself with identifying
important features, feature vectors, and isolated concepts.
However, in the real world, humans intuitively understand
that decisions are consequences of complex relations, not
merely extrapolated from rankings of singular phenomena.
For example, upon seeing a yield sign, it is natural to
look to see if there are also passing cars. If not, the yield
sign may be safely dismissed and one could keep driving
without stopping. If there is a passing car, the law is to
yield to the other car. If an intelligent agent made the decision to stop upon approaching a yield sign and a passing

Figure 1: An automated driver decides whether to “stop”
or “go.” Here, the decision cannot be explained by individual factors alone, but by the interaction between the yield
sign and the passing car. Taylor-CAM identifies interactions by considering how changing one object affects the
significance of another, such as how changing a passing car
into an empty road would change the meaning of the yield
sign from “stop” to “go.”

car, explaining their actions with precision would require an
explanation of this interaction. As far as individual factors
go, perhaps a nearby pedestrian is also present, but without an interactional interpretation, one would not be able to
distinguish the independence of the yield sign and passing
car from the pedestrian, and one would not be privy to the
knowledge of the salient interaction. Furthermore, a naive
observer might think that yield signs always indicate “stop”
without realizing that the agent’s response to the yield sign
would depend on the presence of a passing car.
Similarly, explaining an agent’s strategies in any task
— be it computer vision, natural language processing,
biomedicine, reinforcement learning, or future forecasting
— is imprecise without an interactional approach. However, interactional strategies are not always summarizable
by heatmaps [6, 24, 25, 39, 40] or ordered rankings [10,
21, 29]; and they often require an understanding of many

1224

