IDARTS: Interactive Differentiable Architecture Search
Song Xue1,2∗ , Runqi Wang1 *, Baochang Zhang1,5 , Tian Wang1,2†, Guodong Guo3 , David Doermann4
1
Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Image and Video Understanding for Social Safety,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Application;
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, Beijing, China
4
University at Buffalo, USA
5
Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, Nizhni Novgorod, Russian Federation
{songxue, runqiwang, bczhang, wangtian}@buaa.edu.cn,
guoguodong01@baidu.com, doermann@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Differentiable Architecture Search (DARTS) improves
the efficiency of architecture search by learning the architecture and network parameters end-to-end. However, the
intrinsic relationship between the architecture’s parameters
is neglected, leading to a sub-optimal optimization process.
The reason lies in the fact that the gradient descent method
used in DARTS ignores the coupling relationship of the parameters and therefore degrades the optimization. In this
paper, we address this issue by formulating DARTS as a bilinear optimization problem and introducing an Interactive
Differentiable Architecture Search (IDARTS). We first develop a backtracking backpropagation process, which can
decouple the relationships of different kinds of parameters
and train them in the same framework. The backtracking
method coordinates the training of different parameters that
fully explore their interaction and optimize training. We
present experiments on the CIFAR10 and ImageNet datasets
that demonstrate the efficacy of the IDARTS approach by
achieving a top-1 accuracy of 76.52% on ImageNet without
additional search cost vs. 75.8% with the state-of-the-art
PC-DARTS.

1. Introduction
The goal of Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is to automatically design neural architectures to replace traditional
manual architecture design. NAS has had a significant impact on computer vision, in part by reducing this need for
* Co-first author.
† Corresponding author.

manual work. Recently, Liu et al. [18] proposed differentiable architecture search (DARTS) as an alternative
that makes architecture search more efficient. DARTS relaxes the search space to be continuous and differentiable.
DARTS learns the weight of each operation with gradient
descent so that the architecture can be optimized with respect to its validation set performance by gradient descent.
Despite its sophisticated design, DARTS is still subject to
a large yet redundant space of network architectures and
thus suffers from significant memory and computation overhead. To address the problems of DARTS, researchers have
proposed alternative formulations [3, 13, 30, 2, 33, 4, 11].
Among them, PC-DARTS [30] reduces redundancy in the
network space by performing a more efficient search without compromising the performance. PC-DARTS only samples a subset of channels in a super-net during the search to
reduce computation and introduces edge normalization to
stabilize the search for network connectivity by explicitly
learning an extra set of edge-selection parameters.
However, these DARTS alternatives ignore the intrinsic
relationship between different kinds of parameters, and as
a result, the selected architecture is sub-optimal due to an
insufficient training process. The reason lies in the fact that
the coupling relationship will affect the training of the network architecture to its limit before it is selected or left out.
To address this issue, we introduce a bilinear model into
DARTS and develop a new backpropagation method to decouple the hidden relationships among variables to facilitate
the optimization process. To the best of our knowledge, few
works have formulated DARTS as a bilinear problem.
In the paper, we address these issues by formulating
DARTS as a bilinear optimization problem and developing the efficient Interactive Differentiable Architecture

1163

