CAPTRA: CAtegory-level Pose Tracking
for Rigid and Articulated Objects from Point Clouds
†

Yijia Weng1* He Wang1,2,5*
Qiang Zhou 4 Yuzhe Qin3 Yueqi Duan2
Qingnan Fan2,6 Baoquan Chen1 Hao Su3 Leonidas J. Guibas2
1
CFCS, Peking University 2 Stanford University 3 UCSD
4
Shandong University 5 Beijing Institute for General AI 6 Tencent AI Lab

Figure 1. Our method tracks 9DoF category-level poses (3D rotation, 3D translation, and 3D size) of novel rigid objects as well as parts
in articulated objects from live point cloud streams. We demonstrate: (a) our method can reliably track rigid object poses from the
challenging NOCS-REAL275 dataset [29]; (b) our method can perfectly track articulated objects with big global and articulated motions
from the SAPIEN datasets[34]; (c)(d) trained only on SAPIEN, our model can directly generalize to novel real laptops from BMVC
dataset[18], and novel real drawers under robotic interaction. In all cases, our method significantly outperforms the previous state-of-thearts and baselines. Here we visualize the estimated 9DoF poses as 3D bounding boxes: green boxes indicate in tracking whereas red boxes
indicate off tracking.

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the problem of category-level online pose tracking of objects from point cloud sequences.
For the first time, we propose a unified framework that can
handle 9DoF pose tracking for novel rigid object instances
as well as per-part pose tracking for articulated objects
from known categories. Here the 9DoF pose, comprising
6D pose and 3D size, is equivalent to a 3D amodal bounding box representation with free 6D pose. Given the depth
point cloud at the current frame and the estimated pose from
the last frame, our novel end-to-end pipeline learns to accurately update the pose. Our pipeline is composed of three
modules: 1) a pose canonicalization module that normal-

izes the pose of the input depth point cloud; 2) RotationNet,
a module that directly regresses small interframe delta rotations; and 3) CoordinateNet, a module that predicts the
normalized coordinates and segmentation, enabling analytical computation of the 3D size and translation. Leveraging the small pose regime in the pose-canonicalized point
clouds, our method integrates the best of both worlds by
combining dense coordinate prediction and direct rotation regression, thus yielding an end-to-end differentiable
pipeline optimized for 9DoF pose accuracy (without using non-differentiable RANSAC). Our extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method achieves new state-of-the-art
performance on category-level rigid object pose (NOCSREAL275 [29]) and articulated object pose benchmarks
(SAPIEN [34], BMVC [18]) at the fastest FPS ⇠ 12.

*: equal contributions, †: corresponding author
Project page: https://yijiaweng.github.io/CAPTRA

13209

