ACAV100M: Automatic Curation of Large-Scale Datasets for
Audio-Visual Video Representation Learning
Sangho Lee∗, Jiwan Chung∗, Youngjae Yu, Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
Thomas Breuel, Gal Chechik
NVIDIA Research

Yale Song
Microsoft Research

https://acav100m.github.io

Abstract
The natural association between visual observations
and their corresponding sound provides powerful selfsupervisory signals for learning video representations,
which makes the ever-growing amount of online videos an
attractive source of training data. However, large portions
of online videos contain irrelevant audio-visual signals
because of edited/overdubbed audio, and models trained
on such uncurated videos have shown to learn suboptimal representations. Therefore, existing self-supervised approaches rely on datasets with predetermined taxonomies of
semantic concepts, where there is a high chance of audiovisual correspondence. Unfortunately, constructing such
datasets require labor intensive manual annotation and/or
verification, which severely limits the utility of online videos
for large-scale learning. In this work, we present an automatic dataset curation approach based on subset optimization where the objective is to maximize the mutual information between audio and visual channels in videos.
We demonstrate that our approach finds videos with high
audio-visual correspondence and show that self-supervised
models trained on our data achieve competitive performances compared to models trained on existing manually
curated datasets. The most significant benefit of our approach is scalability: We release ACAV100M that contains
100 million videos with high audio-visual correspondence,
ideal for self-supervised video representation learning.

1. Introduction
Our long-term objective is learning to recognize objects,
actions, and sound in videos without the need for manual
ground-truth labels. This is not only a theoretically interesting problem, since it mimics the development of au∗ Equal Contribution

Uncurated
Internet Videos

Dataset Curation

ACAV100M

max $ 𝑀𝐼(𝐴$ , 𝑉$ )
!⊂#

$∈!

Ours: Subset Optimization

x
Noisy AV
Correspondence

Annotation
Verification
Conventional: Labor Intensive

High AV Correspondence

Figure 1. We address the challenge of constructing a large-scale
audio-visual dataset from uncurated Internet videos without relying on manual annotation or verification. We solve a constrained
optimization problem that finds a subset maximizing the mutual
information between audio and visual signals in videos. The result
is a new 100M video dataset with high audio-visual correspondence, ideal for self-supervised video representation learning.

ditory and visual perception by infants [21], it is also of
immense practical importance, since accurate manual labeling of audio-visual data is impractical. Compared to
self-supervised learning on static images [50, 28, 25, 12],
audio-visual inputs pose additional challenges: large portions of a video may contain no relevant information, and
auditory and visual inputs may not always be in correspondence. Consequently, existing self-supervised methods on
audio-visual data either start with datasets for which there is
a high probability of audio-visual correspondence, or they
learn audio-visual properties corresponding only to shortterm statistical regularities. The necessary datasets are usually manually created or rely on domain-specific properties
(e.g., [9, 20] and below). If we want to carry out selfsupervised learning on full length (minutes, hours) of video
without manually generating and/or selecting video clips,
we need automated ways of curating such collections of audio/video clips from diverse collections of full length video.
We consider self-supervised learning from unlabeled

10274

