ViewNet: Unsupervised Viewpoint Estimation from Conditional Generation
Octave Mariotti

Oisin Mac Aodha

Hakan Bilen

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/vico/ViewNet

Cycle
consistency

Abstract
Understanding the 3D world without supervision is currently a major challenge in computer vision as the annotations required to supervise deep networks for tasks in this
domain are expensive to obtain on a large scale. In this
paper, we address the problem of unsupervised viewpoint
estimation. We formulate this as a self-supervised learning
task, where image reconstruction provides the supervision
needed to predict the camera viewpoint. Specifically, we
make use of pairs of images of the same object at training time, from unknown viewpoints, to self-supervise training by combining the viewpoint information from one image
with the appearance information from the other. We demonstrate that using a perspective spatial transformer allows
efficient viewpoint learning, outperforming existing unsupervised approaches on synthetic data, and obtains competitive results on the challenging PASCAL3D+ dataset.

1. Introduction
Object viewpoint estimation is one of the key components required to enable autonomous systems to understand
the 3D world. Earlier methods [20, 21, 4] were successfully
demonstrated to work in controlled environments. While
more recent work, benefiting from modern learnable representations [55, 17, 32], have been shown to help other vision
tasks such as object detection and 3D reconstruction [31]
and have been deployed in various applications [46, 16, 33].
In this paper, we focus on recovering the 3D pose of an
object relative to the camera viewing it from a single image.
This requires an accurate understanding of the 3D structure
of the objects depicted in an image, and is can be complicated by challenges such as object symmetry. While largescale image datasets annotated with semantic supervision
(e.g. [11, 34]) have been a key enabler for modern deep networks, obtaining viewpoint annotations can be extremely
laborious, expensive, and error-prone. For instance, the annotation procedure for the commonly used object viewpoint
benchmark, PASCAL3D+ [59], required annotators to manually select an appropriate 3D CAD model from a pool of

Training

Image pairs

Viewpoint
ViewNet

Single images
Viewpoint
ViewNet

Figure 1: ViewNet learns to extract the camera viewpoint
via self-supervised training on a collection of image pairs.
At inference it can estimate viewpoint from a single image.
models and click on the 2D locations for a set of predefined landmarks for each object instance. Similarly, creating 3D face pose estimation datasets such as [63] involves
a time consuming step of fitting morphable 3D face models
to 2D face images. As a result, creating large-scale viewpoint datasets for a diverse set of objects, especially when
3D CAD models are unavailable, is challenging using existing annotation pipelines.
To overcome this problem, we propose a self-supervised
object viewpoint estimation method, ViewNet, that learns
from an unlabeled (i.e. without ground truth pose) collection of image pairs from a given object category (see Figure 1). Our method exploits multi-view consistency and
does not require any manual viewpoint annotations. Our
work is inspired by the analysis by synthesis and conditional
generation paradigms [61, 54, 35, 37] where we learn to disentangle viewpoint and 3D appearance of objects and reconstruct images based on these disentangled factors. To this
end, we leverage the information contained in image pairs
of the same object with different viewpoints. Such pairs
may be generated synthetically or obtained from videos.
Given such an image pair, our method extracts 3D appearance from the first image and viewpoint from the second
one, and reconstructs the second one based on this factorization. At test time, our method can be used to predict the
viewpoint relative to the camera of objects from single im-

10418

