Generic Event Boundary Detection: A Benchmark for Event Segmentation
Mike Zheng Shou1,2 , Stan Weixian Lei2 , Weiyao Wang1 , Deepti Ghadiyaram1 , Matt Feiszli1
1

Facebook AI

2

National University of Singapore

Abstract
This paper presents a novel task together with a new
benchmark for detecting generic, taxonomy-free event
boundaries that segment a whole video into chunks. Conventional work in temporal video segmentation and action detection focuses on localizing pre-defined action categories and thus does not scale to generic videos. Cognitive Science has known since last century that humans consistently segment videos into meaningful temporal chunks.
This segmentation happens naturally, without pre-defined
event categories and without being explicitly asked to do so.
Here, we repeat these cognitive experiments on mainstream
CV datasets; with our novel annotation guideline which addresses the complexities of taxonomy-free event boundary
annotation, we introduce the task of Generic Event Boundary Detection (GEBD) and the new benchmark KineticsGEBD. We view GEBD as an important stepping stone towards understanding the video as a whole, and believe it
has been previously neglected due to a lack of proper task
definition and annotations. Through experiment and human
study we demonstrate the value of the annotations. Further, we benchmark supervised and un-supervised GEBD
approaches on the TAPOS dataset and our Kinetics-GEBD.
We release our annotations and baseline codes at CVPR’21
LOVEU Challenge: https://sites.google.com/
view/loveucvpr21.

1. Introduction
Cognitive science tells us [49] that humans perceive
video in terms of “events” (goal-directed sequences of actions, like “washing a car” or “cooking a meal”), and further, people segment events naturally and spontaneously
while perceiving video, breaking down longer events into
a series of shorter temporal units. However, mainstream
SOTA video models [47, 48, 13, 7, 28, 12] still commonly
process short clips (e.g. 1s long), followed by some kind of
pooling operation to generate video-level predictions.
Recent years have seen significant progress in temporal

Boundary:
Change
from Dark
to Bright

Boundary:
Shot cut

Boundary:
Change from
Run to Jump

time

Boundary:
A new
subject
appears

Boundary:
Change
from Jump
to Stand up

time

time

Figure 1: Examples of generic event boundaries: 1) A long
jump is segmented at a shot cut, then between actions of
Run, Jump and Stand up (dominant subject in red circle).
2) color / brightness change 3) new subject appears.

action detection [8, 9, 14], segmentation [24, 3, 21, 11] and
parsing [35, 38] in videos. Despite this, we have not seen
major developments in modeling long-form video. The cognitive science suggests that one underlying deficit is event
segmentation: unlike our SOTA models, humans naturally
divide video into meaningful units and can reason about
these units. In contrast to our current methods build upon
limited sets of predefined action classes, humans perceive a
broad and diverse set of segment boundaries without any
predefined target classes.
To enable machines to develop such ability, we propose a new task called Generic Event Boundary Detection
(GEBD) which aims at localizing the moments where humans naturally perceive event boundaries. As Fig. 1 shows,
our event boundaries could happen at the moments where

8075

