Motion Guided Attention Fusion to Recognize Interactions from Videos
Tae Soo Kim

Jonathan Jones
Gregory D. Hager
Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles St, Baltimore, MD
{tkim60,jdjones,hager}@jhu.edu

Abstract
We present a dual-pathway approach for recognizing
fine-grained interactions from videos. We build on the success of prior dual-stream approaches, but make a distinction between the static and dynamic representations of objects and their interactions explicit by introducing separate
motion and object detection pathways. Then, using our
new Motion-Guided Attention Fusion module, we fuse the
bottom-up features in the motion pathway with features captured from object detections to learn the temporal aspects of
an action. We show that our approach can generalize across
appearance effectively and recognize actions where an actor interacts with previously unseen objects. We validate
our approach using the compositional action recognition
task from the Something-Something-v2 dataset where we
outperform existing state-of-the-art methods. We also show
that our method can generalize well to real world tasks
by showing state-of-the-art performance on recognizing humans assembling various IKEA furniture on the IKEA-ASM
dataset.

Figure 1: Do current video models have the ability to recognize an unseen instantiation of an interaction defined using a combination of seen components? We show that it is
possible by specifying the dynamic structure of an action
using a sequence of object detections in a top-down fashion. When the top-down structure is combined with a dualpathway bottom-up approach, we show that the model can
then generalize even to unseen interactions.

1. Introduction
In recent years, “two-stream” approaches have emerged
as a dominant paradigm in video-based action recognition
[16, 6, 15]. Such methods process a video stream using
two different neural modules whose scores are fused to produce a final prediction. Each module has its own purpose:
typically, one module captures temporal information about
motion in the scene, and the other captures spatial information about the appearance of relevant objects, actors, and
perhaps background context.
Although it is not always explicit in their formulation,
two-stream models capture the idea that actions fundamentally describe compositional interactions between people
and their environment. These interactions are made up of
atomic actions (verbs) which can take a variety of arguments (in analogy to syntactic analyses, subjects or objects).
For instance, pick up a mug might be represented as

the triple (person, pick up, mug). Due to this compositionality, automated recognition of human object interactions in video thus faces the fundamental challenge that the
set of labels is combinatorially large. As a result, enumerating all possible descriptions to train end-to-end methods
[32, 6, 15, 49, 24] is impractical. As illustrated in Figure 1,
the compositional nature of interactions ultimately requires
a vision system that can generalize to actions with previously seen structure but instantiated with possibly unseen
combinations of components.
In response to this challenge, there have been attempts
to impose an explicit top-down structure to decompose an
action into its actors (objects) and spatial-temporal relation among them using object detections [48, 36, 25, 26].
However, such methods do not exhibit clear and obvious improvements unless ensembled with end-to-end RGB

13076

