Towards Discovery and Attribution of Open-world GAN Generated Images
Sharath Girish*

Saksham Suri*

Saketh Rambhatla

Abhinav Shrivastava

sgirish@cs.umd.edu

sakshams@cs.umd.edu

rssaketh@umd.edu

abhinav@cs.umd.edu

University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract

Labeled set

Discovery set (Unlabeled)

Unseen
GANs

Unseen GANs

With the recent progress in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), it is imperative for media and visual forensics to develop detectors which can identify and attribute
images to the model generating them. Existing works
have shown to attribute images to their corresponding GAN
sources with high accuracy. However, these works are limited to a closed set scenario, failing to generalize to GANs
unseen during train time and are therefore, not scalable
with a steady influx of new GANs. We present an iterative
algorithm for discovering images generated from previously
unseen GANs by exploiting the fact that all GANs leave distinct fingerprints on their generated images. Our algorithm
consists of multiple components including network training,
out-of-distribution detection, clustering, merge and refine
steps. Through extensive experiments, we show that our
algorithm discovers unseen GANs with high accuracy and
also generalizes to GANs trained on unseen real datasets.
We additionally apply our algorithm to attribution and discovery of GANs in an online fashion as well as to the
more standard task of real/fake detection. Our experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach to discover
new GANs and can be used in an open-world setup.

1. Introduction
With an ever increasing number of GANs introduced
each year, concerns about the malicious use of this technology, especially in the case of social media content [1, 2, 3]
are increasing at an alarming rate which can have adverse impacts on public security and privacy. Therefore,
a plethora of works have been proposed which focus on the
real/fake detection task [4, 5, 6]. However, it is also important to focus on the problem of attribution, i.e. identifying the source of these images. Attributing images to their
sources can potentially deter malicious organizations and
hold them accountable by leading legal proceedings. Additionally, as GANs are becoming part of commercial services
* First two authors contributed equally

ProGAN
(CelebA-HQ)

ProGAN
(LSUN)

2017

StarGAN
(CelebA)

SNGAN
(ImageNet)

2017-18

Seen GAN

StyleGAN
(CelebA-HQ)

BigGAN
(ImageNet)

ProGAN
(CelebA-HQ)

2018

Online attribution and discovery of new GANs
Attribution

ImageNet

BeGAN
(CelebA)

Cluster2

Cluster1

Cluster3

Cluster4

ProGAN
(CelebA-HQ)

Discovered clusters

Figure 1. A plethora of GANs are released every year, and there
could be a set of images that come from several unknown sources.
Our approach is capable of discovering and attributing unknown
GAN sources while requiring label supervision for only an initial
small set of GANs. We attribute with high accuracies, seen GANs
from a set of images as well as identify and cluster unknown GAN
sources with high purities.

such as face animation applications, their popularity draws
piracy and plagiarism [7] which is an attack on intellectual
property. Therefore, it is pertinent to develop effective techniques to attribute images to specific sources.
To address this problem, [7, 8, 9] perform attribution for
multiple GAN architectures and obtain high classification
accuracies. However, they are limited to the closed-world
setup as they attribute only to the GANs seen during training and are incapable of identifying unseen GANs. Such a
setup is infeasible in practical scenarios where there are a
large number of images belonging to sources not seen during training. This raises the question of whether we can
discover these new sources and group together the set of images which are generated by them. We term this problem as
“GAN discovery and attribution” as it involves attributing
images to known sources as well as discovering unknown
sources. This is a much more challenging and real world
setup as the number of sources are unknown and keep increasing. Additionally, there can be a significant domain
shift based on the dataset type of GAN generated images.
Many works such as [5, 7, 8] show that GANs leave
unique artificial signatures in the images they generate. We
exploit this information to implicitly identify signatures and
cluster images belonging to unseen sources together while

14094

