Extensions of Karger’s Algorithm: Why They Fail in Theory and How They Are
Useful in Practice
Erik Jenner
Enrique Fita Sanmartı́n
Fred A. Hamprecht
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
University of Heidelberg, Germany
erik@ejenner.com, {enrique.fita.sanmartin,fred.hamprecht}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
The minimum graph cut and minimum s-t-cut problems
are important primitives in the modeling of combinatorial
problems in computer science, including in computer vision
and machine learning. Some of the most efﬁcient algorithms
for ﬁnding global minimum cuts are randomized algorithms
based on Karger’s groundbreaking contraction algorithm.
Here, we study whether Karger’s algorithm can be successfully generalized to other cut problems. We ﬁrst prove that a
wide class of natural generalizations of Karger’s algorithm
cannot efﬁciently solve the s-t-mincut or the normalized cut
problem to optimality. However, we then present a simple
new algorithm for seeded segmentation / graph-based semisupervised learning that is closely based on Karger’s original algorithm, showing that for these problems, extensions
of Karger’s algorithm can be useful. The new algorithm has
linear asymptotic runtime and yields a potential that can be
interpreted as the posterior probability of a sample belonging to a given seed / class. We clarify its relation to the
random walker algorithm / harmonic energy minimization
in terms of distributions over spanning forests. On classical problems from seeded image segmentation and graphbased semi-supervised learning on image data, the method
performs at least as well as the random walker / harmonic
energy minimization / Gaussian processes.

1. Introduction
Minimum graph cuts have been applied to machine
learning problems for a long time. They have been used in
natural language processing [33] and especially in computer
vision, for example in segmentation [39, 34, 2], restoration [13], and energy minimization more generally [21].
Nowadays, they still form an important part of many deep
learning pipelines, for example for segmentation [41, 28,
29, 25, 26], image classiﬁcation [31], and recently also neural style transfer [42].

For ﬁnding global minimum cuts (deﬁned together with
all other terminology in Section 2), Karger’s contraction algorithm [16, 19] started a wave of randomized algorithms
solving this problem efﬁciently [17, 8, 10, 27].
Thanks to these randomized algorithms, global mincuts
can, somewhat surprisingly, be found more efﬁciently than
s-t-mincuts. An interesting question is therefore to what
extent randomized algorithms can be applied to other graph
cut problems, and in particular whether Karger’s algorithm
can be fruitfully extended. An especially important cut
problem are s-t-mincuts. While approximating them is possible in nearly linear time in the number of edges [20, 35]
and has also been studied using randomized algorithms
based on graph sparsiﬁcation [1], it is to our knowledge still
an open question whether Karger’s algorithm can be modiﬁed to efﬁciently ﬁnd s-t-mincuts.
In Section 3, we give a deﬁnitive answer to this question by proving that a large class of extensions of Karger’s
contraction algorithm can in general not exactly solve the st-mincut problem efﬁciently. Our result also applies to the
normalized cut problem [36], which, like the s-t-mincut,
plays an important role in image segmentation.
However, extensions of Karger’s algorithm can still be
useful if applied in the right way. In Section 4, we
show how a straightforward extension of Karger’s algorithm
can be used successfully for seeded segmentation / semisupervised learning tasks. We interpret this extension as a
forest sampling method and observe its similarities to the
random walker algorithm [11] for seeded graph segmentation. In semi-supervised learning, the same algorithm is
known as harmonic energy minimization [43] or Gaussian
Processes, so the same observations apply.
The main contribution of this paper is purely conceptual. Still, in Section 5 we show in two classical experiments that the proposed algorithm compares well against
the random walker / harmonic energy minimization, perhaps the most inﬂuential algorithm in seeded segmentation
/ semi-supervised learning to date. Since our method has
an asymptotic time complexity of only O(m) on a graph

4602

