Learning to Hallucinate Examples from Extrinsic and Intrinsic Supervision
Liangke Gui1 * Adrien Bardes2 * † Ruslan Salakhutdinov1
Alexander Hauptmann1
Martial Hebert1
Yu-Xiong Wang3
1
2
CMU Facebook AI Research, Inria 3 UIUC
{liangkeg, rsalakhu, alex, hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

adrien.bardes@inria.fr

yxw@illinois.edu

Abstract
Learning to hallucinate additional examples has recently
been shown as a promising direction to address few-shot
learning tasks. This work investigates two important yet
overlooked natural supervision signals for guiding the hallucination process – (i) extrinsic: classifiers trained on hallucinated examples should be close to strong classifiers that
would be learned from a large amount of real examples;
and (ii) intrinsic: clusters of hallucinated and real examples belonging to the same class should be pulled together,
while simultaneously pushing apart clusters of hallucinated
and real examples from different classes. We achieve (i) by
introducing an additional mentor model on data-abundant
base classes for directing the hallucinator, and achieve (ii)
by performing contrastive learning between hallucinated
and real examples. As a general, model-agnostic framework,
our dual mentor- and self-directed (DMAS) hallucinator
significantly improves few-shot learning performance on
widely-used benchmarks in various scenarios.

1. Introduction
To alleviate the reliance on large, labeled datasets for
learning deep models, few-shot learning has attracted increasing attention, with the goal of learning novel concepts from
one, or only a few, annotated examples [20, 68, 71, 59, 21].
Existing work tries to solve this problem from the perspective of meta-learning [55, 7, 64], which is motivated by the
human ability to leverage prior experiences when tackling a
new task. Unlike the standard machine learning paradigm,
where a model is trained on a set of examples, meta-learning
is performed on a set of “simulated” tasks, each consisting of
its own support and query sets [68]. The support set is used
as the few-shot training data for the leaner, and the query
set is used as the test data to evaluate the leaner’s quality.
By sampling small support and query sets from a large col* equal contribution
† work done while visiting CMU

min

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Learning a hallucinator to generate useful examples for
few-shot learning through extrinsic and intrinsic supervision. During meta-training, we sample a few-shot task (e.g., 2-way 2-shot
classification) on base classes (Fig. 1a). Extrinsic supervision:
The desired classifier for this task is the (dashed) one that would be
learned from a large set of real examples (Fig. 1b). We explicitly
introduce this strong classifier as “mentor” (abundant examples are
available for base classes). We then learn the hallucinator in a way
that minimizes the discrepancy between the (solid) “student” classifier (trained on hallucinated examples together with the few real
0
examples) and the (dashed) mentor classifier (Fig. 1c). Intrinsic
supervision: Through contrastive learning, clusters of hallucinated
and real examples belonging to the same class are pulled together
(→←), while simultaneously pushing apart (↔) clusters of hallucinated and real examples from different classes (Fig. 1c). During
meta-testing, we use the meta-trained, fixed hallucinator to generate additional examples as augmentation for learning classifiers
on novel classes. Real examples as light diamonds, hallucinated
examples as dark triangles, and classifiers as solid or dashed lines.

lection of labeled examples of base classes, meta-learning
based approaches learn to extract task-agnostic knowledge,
and apply it to a new few-shot learning task of novel classes.
One notable type of task-agnostic (or meta) knowledge
comes from the shared mechanism of data augmentation
or hallucination across categories [70, 22, 56, 84]. Since
synthesizing raw images is often challenging or sometimes
unnecessary, recent work has instead focused on hallucinating examples in a learned feature space [70, 22, 56, 84, 76,
83, 87]. This can be achieved by, for example, integrating a
“hallucinator” module into a meta-learning framework, where
it generates hallucinated examples guided by real ones from
the support set [70]. The hallucinator captures the intra-class
variation shared across categories, which generalizes to unseen classes. The learner then uses an augmented training set,
which includes both the real and the hallucinated examples to

8701

