TransVG: End-to-End Visual Grounding with Transformers
Jiajun Deng† , Zhengyuan Yang‡ , Tianlang Chen‡ , Wengang Zhou†,§ , Houqiang Li†,§
†

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡
§

University of Rochester

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
dengjj@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a neat yet effective transformerbased framework for visual grounding, namely TransVG,
to address the task of grounding a language query to the
corresponding region onto an image. The state-of-the-art
methods, including two-stage or one-stage ones, rely on
a complex module with manually-designed mechanisms to
perform the query reasoning and multi-modal fusion. However, the involvement of certain mechanisms in fusion module design, such as query decomposition and image scene
graph, makes the models easily overfit to datasets with specific scenarios, and limits the plenitudinous interaction between the visual-linguistic context. To avoid this caveat,
we propose to establish the multi-modal correspondence
by leveraging transformers, and empirically show that the
complex fusion modules (e.g., modular attention network,
dynamic graph, and multi-modal tree) can be replaced by a
simple stack of transformer encoder layers with higher performance. Moreover, we re-formulate the visual grounding
as a direct coordinates regression problem and avoid making predictions out of a set of candidates (i.e., region proposals or anchor boxes). Extensive experiments are conducted on five widely used datasets, and a series of stateof-the-art records are set by our TransVG. We build the
benchmark of transformer-based visual grounding framework and make the code available at https://github.
com/djiajunustc/TransVG.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding (also known as referring expression
comprehension [31, 60], phrase localization [23, 38], and
natural language object retrieval [21, 25]) aims to predict
the location of a region referred by the language expression
onto an image. The evolution of this technique is of great
potential to provide an intelligent interface for the natural
language expression of human beings and the visual components of the physical world. Existing methods addressing

Language
Model

a white cushion chair with a
grey pillow on it

Region-Expression
Matching

CNN

Best matching
proposal

Region Proposals

(a) Two-stage pipeline
a white cushion chair with a
grey pillow on it

CNN

Language
Model

Visual-Linguistic
Fusion
Dense
Predictions

(b) One-stage pipeline
a white cushion chair with a
grey pillow on it

Prediction with
max score

Linguistic
Transformer

Visual-Linguistic
Transformer
CNN

Visual
Transformer

Direct Coordinates
Regression

(c) TransVG (ours)

Figure 1. A comparison of (a) two-stage pipeline, (b) one-stage
pipeline, and (c) our proposed TransVG framework. TransVG performs intra-modality and inter-modality relation reasoning with a
stack of transformer layers in a homogeneous way, and grounds
the object by directly regressing the box coordinates.

this task can be broadly grouped into the two-stage and onestage pipelines shown in Figure 1. In specific, the two-stage
approaches [31, 34, 46, 60] first generate a set of sparse region proposals and then exploit region-expression matching
to find the best one. The one-stage approaches [9, 27, 56]
perform visual-linguistic fusion at intermediate layers of an
object detector and output the box with the maximal score
over pre-defined dense anchors.
Multi-modal fusion and reasoning is widely studied in
the literature [1, 35, 49, 54, 65], and it is the core problem
in visual grounding. In general, the early two-stage and onestage methods address multi-modal fusion in a simple way.
Concretely, the two-stage Similarity Net [46] measures the

1769

