Discriminative Region-based Multi-Label Zero-Shot Learning
Sanath Narayan* 1

Akshita Gupta* 1 Salman Khan2 Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,3
Ling Shao1 Mubarak Shah4
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 2 Mohamed Bin Zayed University of AI, UAE
3
Linköping University, Sweden 4 University of Central Florida, USA

Abstract
Multi-label zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a more realistic
counter-part of standard single-label ZSL since several objects can co-exist in a natural image. However, the occurrence of multiple objects complicates the reasoning and requires region-specific processing of visual features to preserve their contextual cues. We note that the best existing
multi-label ZSL method takes a shared approach towards
attending to region features with a common set of attention maps for all the classes. Such shared maps lead to
diffused attention, which does not discriminatively focus on
relevant locations when the number of classes are large.
Moreover, mapping spatially-pooled visual features to the
class semantics leads to inter-class feature entanglement,
thus hampering the classification. Here, we propose an
alternate approach towards region-based discriminabilitypreserving multi-label zero-shot classification. Our approach maintains the spatial resolution to preserve regionlevel characteristics and utilizes a bi-level attention module
(BiAM) to enrich the features by incorporating both region
and scene context information. The enriched region-level
features are then mapped to the class semantics and only
their class predictions are spatially pooled to obtain imagelevel predictions, thereby keeping the multi-class features
disentangled. Our approach sets a new state of the art on
two large-scale multi-label zero-shot benchmarks: NUSWIDE and Open Images. On NUS-WIDE, our approach
achieves an absolute gain of 6.9% mAP for ZSL, compared
to the best published results. Source code is available at
https://github.com/akshitac8/BiAM.

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification strives to recognize all the categories (labels) present in an image. In the standard multilabel classification [32, 39, 15, 4, 21, 40, 41] setting, the
category labels in both the train and test sets are identical.
* Equal contribution

In contrast, the task of multi-label zero-shot learning (ZSL)
is to recognize multiple new unseen categories in images at
test time, without having seen the corresponding visual examples during training. In the generalized ZSL (GZSL) setting, test images can simultaneously contain multiple seen
and unseen classes. GZSL is particularly challenging in the
large-scale multi-label setting, where several diverse categories occur in an image (e.g., maximum of 117 labels per
image in NUS-WIDE [5]) along with a large number of unseen categories at test time (e.g., 400 unseen classes in Open
Images [16]). Here, we investigate this challenging problem
of multi-label (generalized) zero-shot classification.
Existing multi-label (G)ZSL methods tackle the problem
by using global image features [20, 46], structured knowledge graph [17] and attention schemes [13]. Among these,
the recently introduced LESA [13] proposes a shared attention scheme based on region-based feature representations
and achieves state-of-the-art results. LESA learns multiple
attention maps that are shared across all categories. The
region-based image features are weighted by these shared
attentions and then spatially aggregated. Subsequently, the
aggregated features are projected to the label space via a
joint visual-semantic embedding space.
While achieving promising results, LESA suffers from
two key limitations. Firstly, classification is performed on
features obtained using a set of attention maps that are
shared across all the classes. In such a shared attention
framework, many categories are observed to be inferred
from only a few dominant attention maps, which tend to
be diffused across an image rather than discriminatively focusing on regions likely belonging to a specific class (see
Fig. 1). This is problematic for large-scale benchmarks
comprising several hundred categories, e.g., more than 7k
seen classes in Open Images [16] with significant inter and
intra-class variations. Secondly, attended features are spatially pooled before projection to the label space, thus entangling the multi-label information in the collapsed imagelevel feature vectors. Since multiple diverse labels can appear in an image, the class-specific discriminability within
such a collapsed representation is severely hampered.

8731

