Homogeneous Architecture Augmentation for Neural Predictor
Yuqiao Liu*1 , Yehui Tang* 2 , Yanan Sun†1
1

2

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University.
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.
lyqguitar@gmail.com; yhtang@pku.edu.cn;ysun@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) can automatically design well-performed architectures of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) for the tasks at hand. However, one bottleneck
of NAS is the prohibitively computational cost largely due
to the expensive performance evaluation. The neural predictors can directly estimate the performance without any
training of the DNNs to be evaluated, thus have drawn
increasing attention from researchers. Despite their popularity, they also suffer a severe limitation: the shortage of annotated DNN architectures for effectively training the neural predictors. In this paper, we proposed Homogeneous Architecture Augmentation for Neural Predictor
(HAAP) of DNN architectures to address the issue aforementioned. Specifically, a homogeneous architecture augmentation algorithm is proposed in HAAP to generate sufficient training data taking the use of homogeneous representation. Furthermore, the one-hot encoding strategy is
introduced into HAAP to make the representation of DNN
architectures more effective. The experiments have been
conducted on both NAS-Benchmark-101 and NAS-Bench201 dataset. The experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed HAAP algorithm outperforms the state of the
arts compared, yet with much less training data. In addition, the ablation studies on both benchmark datasets have
also shown the universality of the homogeneous architecture augmentation. Our code has been made available at
https://github.com/lyq998/HAAP.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been successfully
applied to various challenging real-world problems, including image classification [16], natural language processing [8], speech recognition [40], to name a few. Welldesigned architectures of DNNs are generally viewed as
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

the deciding factor that the DNNs can achieve promising
performance. Traditionally, designing architecture is nevertheless time-consuming, and is often exerted by experts
with rich knowledge in both the DNNs and the task domain. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is an automatic
way to design the architectures of DNNs without such kind
of expertise.
Generally, the NAS algorithm is composed of three different parts: search space, search strategy and performance
estimation [10]. Particularly, given a search space predefined, the search strategy should find a well-performed architecture when the search terminates. In literature, there
are mainly three techniques used as the search strategies:
reinforcement learning [32], gradient-based algorithms [21]
and Evolutionary Computation (EC) [1]. However, no matter which technique is used, all NAS algorithms need to
estimate the performance of the DNNs searched in order
for the effective proceeding of search. In most NAS algorithms, the search strategy evaluates the solutions individually, which inevitably gives rise to heavy computational
overheads. For instance, on the commonly used CIFAR10 benchmark dataset [19], the Large-Scale evolution NAS
algorithm [24] used 250 GPU computers for 11 days. Not
only that, the NAS algorithm [41] used 800 GPUs for nearly
one month. Unfortunately, this is unaffordable for most academic researchers. To address this issue, various algorithms
have been designed to speed up the estimation process without numerous computation resource, which can be classified
into four different categories: weight inheritance [24], early
stopping policy [29, 14], reduced training set [25] and neural predictor [33].
The neural predictor requires a number of well-trained
architectures, and then a regression model is trained to map
the architectures and the corresponding performance values. When a new DNN is generated, its performance is directly predicted by the regression model. Compared to other
speed-up algorithms mentioned above, the neural predictors
can provide satisfactory prediction result, thus is popular
among the community.
Many previous works focused on designing better re-

12249

