High-Fidelity Pluralistic Image Completion with Transformers
Ziyu Wan1
1

Jingbo Zhang1

Dongdong Chen2

Jing Liao1 *

City University of Hong Kong 2 Microsoft Cloud + AI
http://raywzy.com/ICT

Figure 1: Pluralistic free-form image completion results produced by our method.

Abstract
Image completion has made tremendous progress with
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), because of their
powerful texture modeling capacity. However, due to some
inherent properties (e.g., local inductive prior, spatialinvariant kernels), CNNs do not perform well in understanding global structures or naturally support pluralistic completion. Recently, transformers demonstrate their
power in modeling the long-term relationship and generating diverse results, but their computation complexity is
quadratic to input length, thus hampering the application
in processing high-resolution images. This paper brings
the best of both worlds to pluralistic image completion: appearance prior reconstruction with transformer and texture
replenishment with CNN. The former transformer recovers
pluralistic coherent structures together with some coarse
textures, while the latter CNN enhances the local texture details of coarse priors guided by the high-resolution masked
images. The proposed method vastly outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in terms of three aspects: 1) large performance boost on image fidelity even compared to deterministic completion methods; 2) better diversity and higher
fidelity for pluralistic completion; 3) exceptional general* Corresponding author.

ization ability on large masks and generic dataset, like ImageNet. Code and pre-trained models have been publicly
released at https://github.com/raywzy/ICT.

1. Introduction
Image completion (a.k.a. image inpainting), which aims
to fill the missing parts of images with visually realistic and
semantically appropriate contents, has been a longstanding and critical problem in computer vision areas. It is
widely used in a broad range of applications, such as object
removal [2], photo restoration [34, 35], image manipulation [23, 15], and image re-targeting [6]. To solve this challenging task, traditional methods like PatchMatch [2] usually search for similar patches within the image and paste
them into the missing regions, but they require appropriate
information to be contained in the input image, e.g., similar
structures or patches, which is often difficult to satisfy.
In recent years, CNN-based solutions [22, 14, 18, 27,
36, 21] started to dominate this field. By training on largescale datasets in a self-supervised way, CNNs have shown
their strength in learning rich texture patterns, and fills the
missing regions with such learned patterns. Moreover, CNN
models are computationally efficient considering the sparse
connectivity of convolutions. Nonetheless, they share some

4692

