Saliency-Associated Object Tracking
Zikun Zhou1 , Wenjie Pei1,* , Xin Li2 , Hongpeng Wang1,2 , Feng Zheng3 , and Zhenyu He1,*
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Southern University of Science and Technology
zhouzikunhit@gmail.com
wanghp@hit.edu.cn

wenjiecoder@outlook.com
zfeng02@gmail.com

Abstract
Most existing trackers based on deep learning perform
tracking in a holistic strategy, which aims to learn deep representations of the whole target for localizing the target. It
is arduous for such methods to track targets with various
appearance variations. To address this limitation, another
type of methods adopts a part-based tracking strategy which
divides the target into equal patches and tracks all these
patches in parallel. The target state is inferred by summarizing the tracking results of these patches. A potential limitation of such trackers is that not all patches are equally
informative for tracking. Some patches that are not discriminative may have adverse effects. In this paper, we propose
to track the salient local parts of the target that are discriminative for tracking. In particular, we propose a fine-grained
saliency mining module to capture the local saliencies. Further, we design a saliency-association modeling module to
associate the captured saliencies together to learn effective
correlation representations between the exemplar and the
search image for state estimation. Extensive experiments on
five diverse datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
performs favorably against state-of-the-art trackers.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking aims to predict the target states
in a tracking sequence given the initial state of the target object in the first sequence frame. It is a fundamental
research topic in Computer Vision and has a wide range
of applications including video surveillance, robotics, and
motion analysis. Although deep trackers [6, 36, 38, 44],
which benefit from excellent feature learning for images by
deep neural networks, have achieved great progress in recent years, tracking targets with various real-time appearance variations, such as deformation, occlusion, and viewpoint changes, etc., remains an extremely challenging task.
A classical type of deep tracking approaches [2, 7, 25,
49] performs tracking in a holistic strategy, which seeks to
* Corresponding authors.

xinlihitsz@gmail.com

zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn

Predicted boxes

Saliencies

#164

#164

#164

#177

#177

#195

#195

Ours

DW-Corr

PG-Corr

Ours

DW-Corr

PG-Corr

#164

#164

#177

#177

#177

#195

#195

#195

Correlation features

Figure 1. Given a search image in a tracking sequence, our SAOT
first captures local saliencies (yellow dots) of the target that
are discriminative for tracking, and then associates the captured
saliencies together to learn precise correlations between the target
exemplar and the search image for reflecting target states. Thus,
our model can generate more precise correlation features than
DW-Corr [25] (in the holistic tracking strategy) and PG-Corr [32]
(in the part-based strategy), and accordingly predict more precise
bounding boxes. The correlation features are visualized by averaging all channels (red color indicates higher correlation). Largersize salient dots indicate higher saliency values.

learn a precise deep feature representation for the whole
target object and then localize the target in the search image. A prominent example is the Siamese-based trackers [1, 25, 26, 29, 39], which learn deep representations
for both the target exemplar and the search image in the
same feature space by a Siamese neural network, and then
perform target tracking by feature matching between them.
Such methods perform well in ordinary scenarios in which
the target keeps stable appearances close to the exemplar,
but struggle in the challenging scenarios where the target
varies substantially. This is because the global appearance
gap between the target exemplar and the target state in the
search image results in an inevitable tracking error. The
online learning trackers [8, 18, 38], which are another typical type of methods, are designed to adapt to the appearance

9866

