Multi-modality Associative Bridging through Memory:
Speech Sound Recollected from Face Video
Minsu Kim*
Joanna Hong*
Se Jin Park
Yong Man Ro†
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST, South Korea
{ms.k, joanna2587, jinny960812, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
(a)

In this paper, we introduce a novel audio-visual multimodal bridging framework that can utilize both audio and
visual information, even with uni-modal inputs. We exploit
a memory network that stores source (i.e., visual) and target (i.e., audio) modal representations, where source modal
representation is what we are given, and target modal representations are what we want to obtain from the memory network. We then construct an associative bridge between source and target memories that considers the interrelationship between the two memories. By learning the
interrelationship through the associative bridge, the proposed bridging framework is able to obtain the target modal
representations inside the memory network, even with the
source modal input only, and it provides rich information
for its downstream tasks. We apply the proposed framework to two tasks: lip reading and speech reconstruction
from silent video. Through the proposed associative bridge
and modality-specific memories, each task knowledge is enriched with the recalled audio context, achieving state-ofthe-art performance. We also verify that the associative
bridge properly relates the source and target memories.

1. Introduction
Recently, many studies are dealing with diverse information from multiple sources finding relationships among
them [40]. Especially, deep learning based multi-modal
learning has drawn big attention with its powerful performance. While the classic approaches [20, 5, 52, 53] need
to design each modal feature manually, using Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) has the advantage of automatically learning meaningful representation from each modality. Many
applications including action recognition [15, 25], object
detection [11], and image/text retrieval [64] have shown the
effectiveness of multi-modal learning through DNNs by analyzing a phenomenon in multi-view.
* Both authors have contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author

Visual
modality

Downstream
task

Fusion

Audio
modality
Visual
modality

Video
Encoder

Audio
modality

Audio
Encoder

Downstream
task

(b)

(c)

Visual
modality

querying

common latent space

Associative Bridging
with Memory

Downstream
task

recalling
Recalled audio
modality

Figure 1. Illustration of audio-visual multi-modal learning. (a) Fusion of two modalities. (b) Learning from a common latent space
of two modalities. (c) The proposed framework provides an associative bridge between two modalities through memory. The audio
(i.e., target) modality is recalled from memory by querying the visual (i.e., source) modality. Then, both the visual and the recalled
audio modalities are utilized for a downstream task.

Audio-visual data is one of the main ingredients for
multi-modal applications such as synchronization [7, 8],
speech recognition [1, 38], and speech reconstruction from
silent video [39, 3]. Along with the rapid increase of the
demands for audio-visual applications, research efforts on
how to efficiently handle audio-visual data have been made.
There are two main streams on handling audio-visual data.
First is to extract features from the two modalities and fuse
them to achieve complementary effect, as shown in Fig.1
(a). Such researches [38, 1, 36] try to find the most suitable architecture of DNNs to fuse the modalities. Commonly used methods are early fusion, late fusion, and intermediate fusion. These fusion methods are known to be
simple, yet effectively improve the performance of a given
task. However, since both modalities are necessary for the
fusion, these methods cannot work when one of the modalities is missing. Second is finding a common hidden representation of two modalities by training DNNs (Fig.1 (b)).
Different from the first method, it can utilize the shared information of both modalities from the learned cross-modal

296

