Unsupervised Point Cloud Object Co-segmentation by
Co-contrastive Learning and Mutual Attention Sampling

1

Cheng-Kun Yang1 Yung-Yu Chuang1 Yen-Yu Lin2,3
National Taiwan University 2 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Abstract
This paper presents a new task, point cloud object cosegmentation, aiming to segment the common 3D objects
in a set of point clouds. We formulate this task as an object point sampling problem, and develop two techniques,
the mutual attention module and co-contrastive learning, to
enable it. The proposed method employs two point samplers based on deep neural networks, the object sampler
and the background sampler. The former targets at sampling points of common objects while the latter focuses on
the rest. The mutual attention module explores point-wise
correlation across point clouds. It is embedded in both samplers and can identify points with strong cross-cloud correlation from the rest. After extracting features for points
selected by the two samplers, we optimize the networks by
developing the co-contrastive loss, which minimizes feature
discrepancy of the estimated object points while maximizing
feature separation between the estimated object and background points. Our method works on point clouds of an
arbitrary object class. It is end-to-end trainable and does
not need point-level annotations. It is evaluated on the
ScanObjectNN and S3DIS datasets and achieves promising results. The source code will be available at https:
//github.com/jimmy15923/unsup_point_coseg.

1. Introduction
Point clouds retain 3D geometric structures and are
adopted in many 3D vision applications, such as remote
sensing [24], autonomous driving [9, 14, 30], and robotics
[21]. As an essential technique for 3D understanding, point
cloud segmentation gains significant progress owing to advanced network architectures [32, 33, 38, 43, 45, 51] and
large-scale datasets [3, 5, 6, 12, 14, 26, 30, 34, 40]. Despite
effectiveness, deep-learning-based methods for point cloud
segmentation rely on lots of training data with point-level
annotations. The high annotation cost for training data collection impedes the utility of point cloud segmentation.
2D image object co-segmentation [16,17,20,23,50] aims
to segment the common objects in a set of images without
additional annotations. It significantly mitigates the prob-

input

3

Academia Sinica

competitive samplers

similar
dissimilar

output

mutual attention module

co-contrastive loss

Figure 1: Overview of our method for unsupervised
point cloud co-segmentation. The input to our method is a
set of point clouds covering objects of a common category
(chairs, in this example). Our method only requires 3D coordinates as the input. Color is added here for visualization.
Our method picks out the co-segmented points of the common objects (those in red). It formulates co-segmentation
as a sampling problem by employing two competitive samplers: one for foreground points and the other for the rest.
A mutual attention module is embedded in each sampler for
capturing cross-cloud point correlation. The whole network
is end-to-end trained by the proposed co-contrastive loss.
lem of high annotation costs in object segmentation. However, it is challenging to apply 2D image co-segmentation
techniques to 3D point clouds as it must resolve three major
issues. First, most image co-segmentation methods rely on
object proposal generators or saliency detectors [16,17,50].
These generators and detectors work on the appearance domain of image pixels, but do not apply to the geometric domain of 3D points. Second, compared to images,
point clouds are unordered and unstructured. The extracted
point features are typically insufficient for co-segmentation.
Third, most 2D co-segmentation methods adopt a network
pre-trained on a large dataset, e.g. ImageNet [35], to extract high-level semantic features. Although point cloud
model pre-training has been studied [7,36,47], training from
scratch is still widely used in modern point cloud research.
In this paper, we present an unsupervised method for
17335

