Multi-view 3D Reconstruction with Transformers
Dan Wang1 Xinrui Cui2 * Xun Chen2
Zhengxia Zou3 Tianyang Shi4 Septimiu Salcudean1 Z. Jane Wang1 Rabab Ward1
1
University of British Columbia 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 4 NetEase Fuxi AI Lab

Abstract
Deep CNN-based methods have so far achieved the state
of the art results in multi-view 3D object reconstruction.
Despite the considerable progress, the two core modules of
these methods - view feature extraction and multi-view fusion, are usually investigated separately, and the relations
among multiple input views are rarely explored. Inspired
by the recent great success in Transformer models, we reformulate the multi-view 3D reconstruction as a sequenceto-sequence prediction problem and propose a framework
named 3D Volume Transformer. Unlike previous CNNbased methods using a separate design, we unify the feature
extraction and view fusion in a single Transformer network.
A natural advantage of our design lies in the exploration of
view-to-view relationships using self-attention among multiple unordered inputs. On ShapeNet - a large-scale 3D reconstruction benchmark, our method achieves a new stateof-the-art accuracy in multi-view reconstruction with fewer
parameters (70% less) than CNN-based methods. Experimental results also suggest the strong scaling capability of
our method. Our code will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Learning 3D object representation from multi-view images is a fundamental and challenging problem in 3D modeling, virtual reality, and computer animation. Recently,
deep learning approaches have greatly promoted the research in multi-view 3D reconstruction, where the deep
convolutional neural network (CNN) based approaches
have so far achieved the state of the art results in this task
[26, 28, 27].
To learn effective 3D representation from multiple input views, most recent CNN-based approaches follow the
design principle of divide-and-conquer, where a common
practice is to introduce a CNN for single-view feature extraction and multi-view fusion for integrating the features
* Corresponding Author. Email:xinruic@ece.ubc.ca

or reconstruction results from multiple views. Despite the
strong connection between the two modules, their methodology designs are investigated separately. Also, during the
CNN feature extraction stage that processes each view image separately, the relations in different views are rarely explored. Although some recent approaches have introduced
recurrent neural network (RNN) to learn object relationships among different views [5, 12], such a design lacks
computational efficiency, and the input views of the RNN
model are permutation-sensitive [22], which is not compatible with a set of unordered input views. It is also shown
in recent researches that CNN-based reconstruction methods may suffer from the model scaling problem. For example, when the number of input views exceeds a particular
scale (e.g., 4), the accuracy of methods will be saturated,
showing the difficulty of learning complementary knowledge from a large set of independent CNN feature extraction
units [28, 27].
Considering the above challenges, we propose a new
framework named “3D Volume Transformer” and explore
the potential of the self-attention-based Transformer model
for the multi-view 3D object reconstruction task. We reformulate the multi-view 3D reconstruction as a sequence-tosequence prediction problem and unify the feature extraction and view fusion in a single Transformer network. On
the one hand, in multi-view 3D reconstruction, we need to
learn the underlying 3D representation by exploring the relationships among multiple input views since we can only
see part of the 3D structure from a particular view. On
the other hand, in a Transformer model, the self-attention
mechanism has recently shown its great power in learning
complex semantic abstractions within an arbitrary number
of input tokens [6, 20] and is naturally suitable for exploring the view-to-view relationships of a 3D object’s different semantic parts. Given all this, the structure of Transformer [21, 8] becomes a natural and attractive solution for
the multi-view 3D reconstruction.
Our Transformer-based framework contains a 2D-view
Transformer encoder and a 3D-volume Transformer decoder, as presented in Figure 1. The 2D-view Transformer

5722

