Robust 2D/3D Vehicle Parsing in Arbitrary Camera Views for CVIS
Hui Miao† 1 , Feixiang Lu† 2 , Zongdai Liu2 , Liangjun Zhang2 , Dinesh Manocha3 and Bin Zhou* 1,4
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
Robotics and Autonomous Driving Laboratory, Baidu Research
3
University of Maryland, College Park 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
We present a novel approach to robustly detect and perceive vehicles in different camera views as part of a cooperative vehicle-infrastructure system (CVIS). Our formulation is designed for arbitrary camera views and makes no
assumptions about intrinsic or extrinsic parameters. First,
to deal with multi-view data scarcity, we propose a partassisted novel view synthesis algorithm for data augmentation. We train a part-based texture inpainting network in a
self-supervised manner. Then we render the textured model
into the background image with the target 6-DoF pose. Second, to handle various camera parameters, we present a
new method that produces dense mappings between image pixels and 3D points to perform robust 2D/3D vehicle
parsing. Third, we build the first CVIS dataset for benchmarking, which annotates more than 1540 images (14017
instances) from real-world traffic scenarios. We combine
these novel algorithms and datasets to develop a robust approach for 2D/3D vehicle parsing for CVIS. In practice, our
approach outperforms SOTA methods on 2D detection, instance segmentation, and 6-DoF pose estimation by 3.8%,
4.3%, and 2.9%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Cooperative vehicle-infrastructure system (CVIS) have
become a key focus of research and technology in the field
of autonomous driving (AD) [43, 41]. In a CVIS, camera,
radar, LiDAR, and other sensors are mounted on vehicles
and street-light poles at different locations (e.g., front, side,
top, etc.). The simultaneous perception of vehicles and road
terminals can minimize blind zones and provide warning for
out-of-sight collisions in advance. An example is shown in
Fig. 1, which is a typical traffic scenario. From the frontview of the autonomous vehicle, many of the other vehi† Joint first author
* Corresponding author: zhoubin@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1: We highlight a scene rendered from multiple
views in a CVIS. We use our approach to detect and parse
novel-view vehicles from a single image corresponding to
the front view.

cles are partially or completely occluded, presenting perception challenges. From the side/top-view, we can clearly
see many of these occluded vehicles’ views. Although multiple views can get better perception results, in the end, performance relies on improvement w.r.t. each of these single
views. The ultimate perception problem in a CVIS, therefore, is how to effectively detect the vehicles in novel views.
Many widely used AD datasets (e.g., KITTI [15], CityScapers [7], ApolloScape [18], ApolloCar3D [45]) only provide labeled front-view data. If we directly use these labeled front-view datasets to train the deep neural networks
(DNNs), the detection performance would degrade dramatically when testing these networks on the data from other
views (e.g., the side view or the top-view). A common
strategy is to capture new images for manual annotation,
which is labor-intensive, costly, and inefficient. As a result,
we need a novel set of view synthesis algorithms for data

15631

