A New Journey from SDRTV to HDRTV
Xiangyu Chen1* Zhengwen Zhang1* Jimmy S. Ren2,3 Lynhoo Tian2 Yu Qiao1,4 Chao Dong1†
1
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 SenseTime Research
3
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai
{chxy95, zhengwen.zhang02, jimmy.sj.ren, lynhoo.tian}@gmail.com {yu.qiao, chao.dong}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Nowadays modern displays are capable to render video
content with high dynamic range (HDR) and wide color
gamut (WCG). However, most available resources are still
in standard dynamic range (SDR). Therefore, there is an
urgent demand to transform existing SDR-TV contents into
their HDR-TV versions. In this paper, we conduct an analysis of SDRTV-to-HDRTV task by modeling the formation of
SDRTV/HDRTV content. Base on the analysis, we propose
a three-step solution pipeline including adaptive global
color mapping, local enhancement and highlight generation. Moreover, the above analysis inspires us to present a
lightweight network that utilizes global statistics as guidance to conduct image-adaptive color mapping. In addition, we construct a dataset using HDR videos in HDR10
standard, named HDRTV1K, and select five metrics to evaluate the results of SDRTV-to-HDRTV algorithms. Furthermore, our final results achieve state-of-the-art performance
in quantitative comparisons and visual quality. The code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
chxy95/HDRTVNet.

1. Introduction
The resolution of television (TV) content has increased
from standard definition (SD) to high definition (HD) and
most recently to ultra-high definition (UHD). High dynamic
range (HDR) is one of the biggest features of the latest TV
generation. HDRTV1 content has much wider color space
and higher dynamic range than SDR content, and HDRTV
standard allows us to create images and videos that are
closer to what we see in real life. While HDR display devices have become prevalent in daily life, most accessible
resources are still in SDR format. Therefore, we need al* indicates contribute equally. † Corresponding author.
1 We add a suffix TV after HDR/SDR to indicate content in HDR-

TV/SDR-TV format and standard.

gorithms to convert SDRTV content to their HDRTV version. The task, denoted as SDRTV-to-HDRTV, is of great
practical value, but received relatively less attention in the
research community. The reason is mainly two-fold. First,
existing HDRTV standards (e.g., HDR10 and HLG) have
not been well defined until recent years. Second, there is
a lack of large-scale datasets for training and testing. This
work aims at promoting the development of this emerging
area, by presenting the analysis of this problem, basic methods, evaluation metrics and a new dataset.
SDRTV-to-HDRTV is a highly ill-posed problem. In actual production, contents of SDRTV and HDRTV are derived from the same Raw file but are processed under different standards. Thus, they have different dynamic ranges,
color gamuts and bit-depths. To some extent, SDRTV-toHDRTV is similar to image-to-image translation such as
Pixel2Pixel [11] and CycleGAN [37]. On the contrary, the
task of LDR-to-HDR, which is similar in terms of name, has
completely different connotations. LDR-to-HDR methods
[21, 26, 10, 24, 5] aim to predict the HDR scene luminance
in the linear domain, which is closer to Raw file in essence.
SDRTV-to-HDRTV has recently been touched in Deep SRITM [19] and JSI-GAN [20], which try to solve the problem
of joint super-resolution and SDRTV-to-HDRTV. Although
the above-mentioned works are all related to SDRTV-toHDRTV, they are not dedicated to this problem. We will
detail these comments in Sec. 2 and Sec. 3.
This paper aims to address SDRTV-to-HDRTV based
on deep understanding of this problem. We first provide a
simplified formation pipeline for SDRTV/HDRTV content,
which consists of tone mapping, gamut mapping, transfer
function and quantization, as in Fig. 1(a). Based on the formation pipeline, we propose a solution pipeline, including
adaptive global color mapping (AGCM), local enhancement
(LE) and highlight generation (HG). For AGCM, we propose a novel color condition block to extract global image
prior and adapt different images. With only 1 × 1 filters, the
network achieves the best performance with less parameters compared with other photo retouching methods such as

4500

