Deep Co-Training with Task Decomposition
for Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation
Luyu Yang1 , Yan Wang2 , Mingfei Gao3 ,
Abhinav Shrivastava1 , Kilian Q. Weinberger2 , Wei-Lun Chao4 , Ser-Nam Lim5
1

University of Maryland
4

2

Cornell University

Ohio State University

5

3

Salesforce Research

Facebook AI
SSDA

Abstract
Semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA) aims to adapt
models trained from a labeled source domain to a different
but related target domain, from which unlabeled data and
a small set of labeled data are provided. Current methods
that treat source and target supervision without distinction
overlook their inherent discrepancy, resulting in a sourcedominated model that has not effectively use the target supervision. In this paper, we argue that the labeled target
data needs to be distinguished for effective SSDA, and propose to explicitly decompose the SSDA task into two subtasks: a semi-supervised learning (SSL) task in the target
domain and an unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) task
across domains. By doing so, the two sub-tasks can better leverage the corresponding supervision and thus yield
very different classifiers. To integrate the strengths of the
two classifiers, we apply the well established co-training
framework, in which the two classifiers exchange their high
confident predictions to iteratively “teach each other” so
that both classifiers can excel in the target domain. We call
our approach Deep Co-training with Task decomposition
(D E C OTA). D E C OTA requires no adversarial training and
is easy to implement. Moreover, D E C OTA is well founded
on the theoretical condition of when co-training would succeed. As a result, D E C OTA achieves state-of-the-art results
on several SSDA datasets, outperforming the prior art by
a notable 4% margin on DomainNet. Code is available at
https://github.com/LoyoYang/DeCoTa.

1. Introduction
Domain adaptation (DA) aims to adapt machine learned
models from a source domain to a related but different target
domain [4, 14, 53, 13]. DA is particularly important in settings where labeled target data is hard to obtain, but labeled
source data is plentiful [63, 41, 21], e.g., adaptation from

SSL

UDA

Co-training

labeled source

unlabeled target

labeled target

pseudo-labeled target

classifier

Figure 1: Deep Co-training with Task decomposition (D E C OTA).
We decompose semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA) into
two sub-tasks: semi-supervised learning (SSL) in the target domain,
and unsupervised DA (UDA) across domains. The two sub-tasks
offer different pseudo-label confidences to the unlabeled data (light
blue & light red circles), which we leverage via co-training: exchanging their high confident predictions to teach each other.
synthetic to real images [21, 55, 48, 47, 56] and adaptation
to a new or rare environment [10, 69, 54, 9]. Most of the
existing works focus on the unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) setting, in which the target domain is completely
unlabeled. Several recent works, however, show that adding
merely a tiny amount of target labeled data (e.g., just one
labeled image per class) can notably boost the performance
[51, 26, 45, 1, 31, 30, 12, 74], suggesting that this setting
may be more promising for domain adaptation to succeed.
In this paper, we thus focus on the latter setting, which is
referred to as semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA).

8906

