Panoptic Narrative Grounding
Cristina González1
1

Nicolás Ayobi1
Jordi Pont-Tuset2

Isabela Hernández1
Pablo Arbeláez1

José Hernández1

Center for Research and Formation in Artificial Intelligence, Universidad de los Andes, Colombia
2

Google Research, Switzerland

Abstract
This paper proposes Panoptic Narrative Grounding, a
spatially fine and general formulation of the natural language visual grounding problem. We establish an experimental framework for the study of this new task, including new ground truth and metrics, and we propose a
strong baseline method to serve as stepping stone for future work. We exploit the intrinsic semantic richness in an
image by including panoptic categories, and we approach
visual grounding at a fine-grained level by using segmentations. In terms of ground truth, we propose an algorithm to automatically transfer Localized Narratives annotations to specific regions in the panoptic segmentations of
the MS COCO dataset. To guarantee the quality of our annotations, we take advantage of the semantic structure contained in WordNet to exclusively incorporate noun phrases
that are grounded to a meaningfully related panoptic segmentation region. The proposed baseline achieves a performance of 55.4 absolute Average Recall points. This result
is a suitable foundation to push the envelope further in the
development of methods for Panoptic Narrative Grounding.

1. Introduction
Vision and language skills play a key role in humans’ understanding of the world and they are rarely used independently. Their interaction is crucial in achieving high-level
tasks such as describing objects, narrating a visual scene,
or answering questions based on visual cues. Inspired
by these capabilities of human intelligence, researchers
have formulated tasks at the intersection of computer vision and natural language processing, such as image captioning [5, 18, 25, 40], referring expression comprehension
and segmentation [15, 19, 31, 32], visual question answering [2], among many others.
Current experimental frameworks approach vision and
language tasks at different granularity levels. Image cap-

Figure 1: Panoptic Narrative Grounding. Given an input
image (left) with an associated caption (right), our goal is
to produce a panoptic segmentation that grounds its visual
objects densely (left).

tioning is among the coarsest, aiming at pairing an image with a textual description of its content. With increasing granularity, there are frameworks that intend to assign
specific regions in the image to short descriptions, such
as referring expression comprehension and segmentation,
and region descriptions in the Visual Genome [19] dataset.
The finest approaches tackle visual grounding at word level,
with bounding boxes in the image linked to noun phrases in
the caption, as in the Flickr30k Entities [49, 35] dataset.
Given the general dichotomy in computer vision tasks
between things (countable objects) and stuff (amorphous
regions of similar texture), these datasets mainly focus on
things categories. However, several works [8, 1, 10, 17]
have highlighted the importance of jointly considering both
things and stuff classes towards real-world applications.
Kirillov et al. [17] defined the panoptic segmentation task
as the unified formulation of semantic segmentation, which
recognizes stuff, and instance segmentation, which detects
and segments things.
Recently, Pont-Tuset et al. [36] proposed Localized Narratives, a multimodal dataset for visual grounding based on
the natural human task of describing images while simultaneously pointing with the mouse at the regions being described. Their grounding annotations have the densest sampling of current datasets, in that they visually ground every
word in the caption with mouse trace segments. Moreover,

1364

