Differentiable Convolution Search for Point Cloud Processing
Xing Nie1,2 , Yongcheng Liu1 , Shaohong Chen4 , Jianlong Chang3 ,
Chunlei Huo1∗, Gaofeng Meng1,2,5 , Qi Tian3 , Weiming Hu1 , Chunhong Pan1 ,
1
2
4

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. 3 Huawei Cloud & AI.

Xidian University. 5 Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, HK Institute of Science & Innovation, CAS.
Email: niexing2019@ia.ac.cn, {yongcheng.liu, clhuo}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Exploiting convolutional neural networks for point cloud
processing is quite challenging, due to the inherent irregular distribution and discrete shape representation of point
clouds. To address these problems, many handcrafted convolution variants have sprung up in recent years. Though
with elaborate design, these variants could be far from optimal in sufﬁciently capturing diverse shapes formed by discrete points. In this paper, we propose PointSeaConv, i.e.,
a novel differential convolution search paradigm on point
clouds. It can work in a purely data-driven manner and
thus is capable of auto-creating a group of suitable convolutions for geometric shape modeling. We also propose
a joint optimization framework for simultaneous search of
internal convolution and external architecture, and introduce epsilon-greedy algorithm to alleviate the effect of discretization error. As a result, PointSeaNet, a deep network
that is sufﬁcient to capture geometric shapes at both convolution level and architecture level, can be searched out
for point cloud processing. Extensive experiments strongly evidence that our proposed PointSeaNet surpasses current handcrafted deep models on challenging benchmarks
across multiple tasks with remarkable margins.

1. Introduction
Recently, 3D point cloud processing has received great
attention, since it plays an important role in the ﬁelds of
autonomous driving, robotics, geomatics, and so on. Nevertheless, compared with 2D image processing, this task is
quite challenging due to the non-grid structure and orderless
permutation of point clouds. Furthermore, it is extremely
difﬁcult to perform shape analysis for point clouds, as the
underlying shape formed by those discrete points is visually
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. A sketch of the proposed convolution search paradigm,
i.e., PointSeaConv. PointSeaConv is achieved by constructing a
dynamic and learnable directed acyclic graph (DAG). Most handcrafted convolutions can be regarded as its special cases.

elusive to capture.
In order to tackle this task, many geometric descriptors [56] have been manually designed over the past
decades. Though usable in certain scenarios, these descriptors often suffer from unsatisfactory performance and poor
task-adaptivity. Recently, convolutional neural networks
(CNN) in deep learning technologies has made remarkable
achievements in the processing of regular data, e.g., image
[22, 45], video [48], and speech [37]. Accordingly, there
has been a growing interest in exploiting the power of CNN
for irregular point cloud processing [33, 44, 58].
To facilitate the application of classic CNN, some researchers transform point clouds into regular multi-view
images [13, 50] or voxel grids [42, 71]. While practicable, these transformations usually lead to the loss of shape
information because of self-occlusions or quantization artifacts. As a pioneer, PointNet [43] learns directly on point

7437

