Voxel-based Network for Shape Completion by Leveraging Edge Generation
Xiaogang Wang
Marcelo H Ang Jr
Gim Hee Lee
National University of Singapore
xiaogangw@u.nus.edu {mpeangh,gimhee.lee}@nus.edu.sg

Input

Abstract
Deep learning technique has yielded significant improvements in point cloud completion with the aim of completing
missing object shapes from partial inputs. However, most
existing methods fail to recover realistic structures due to
over-smoothing of fine-grained details. In this paper, we
develop a voxel-based network for point cloud completion
by leveraging edge generation (VE-PCN). We first embed
point clouds into regular voxel grids, and then generate
complete objects with the help of the hallucinated shape
edges. This decoupled architecture together with a multiscale grid feature learning is able to generate more realistic on-surface details. We evaluate our model on the
publicly available completion datasets and show that it
outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches quantitatively and qualitatively. Our source code is available at
https:// github.com/ xiaogangw/ VE-PCN.

1. Introduction
3D shape completion is a fundamental problem in computer vision and robotic perception. The aim is to reconstruct complete object topologies from sparse and incomplete observations, e.g. raw data collected by RGB-D or
LiDAR sensors. Since incompleteness and irregularity of
input point clouds impose difficulties on down-stream tasks
such as 3D object classification [25, 26, 39, 16], segmentation [25, 26, 17] and detection [3, 24, 44, 49], several point
cloud completion methods [46, 31, 36, 20, 41, 28] are proposed to improve the quality of the point clouds. Although
existing works have achieved impressive results, they are
limited to low-fidelity outputs. In this work, we focus on
generating high-quality 3D objects from occluded inputs.
Numerous methods have attempted to achieve shape
completion from different representations, e.g. meshes [9,
34], implicit fields [4, 18, 21, 30] and point clouds [46, 31,
36, 20, 41, 28, 2, 48, 14, 37, 38, 40, 43, 12, 10]. Meshes
represent object shapes by a set of vertices and edges. Despite their ability to reconstruct complex object structures,
it is difficult to change shape topologies during training due

Edge
s

Output

GT

Figure 1: We propose an edge-guiding and voxel-based
point cloud completion network to reconstruct complete
points from incomplete inputs. Under the guidance of hallucinated edges and the help of gridding structures, we are
able to generate fine-grained details for the thin structures.
to the fixed vertex connection patterns. Implicit fields represent shapes by signed distance functions (SDF) [23] that
are more flexible to achieve arbitrary resolutions. However, learning an accurate SDF requires a large amount of
sampling for a single object. In contrast, point clouds are
concise 3D shape representations and easier to add new
points during training. Nonetheless, previous point cloud
shape completion works [46, 31] are struggling at synthesizing surface details since point clouds are unordered and
challenging to control. To alleviate this problem, recent
works [20, 36, 43] propose to add a skip connection between the partial input and the decoder and have shown better reconstruction on object details. Despite the effort, the
results for complex topologies are still inferior because of
unrealistic points generated on the missing part.
In view of these limitations, we propose a voxel-based
shape completion network that leverages the generated object edges to recover more fine-grained details. The voxel
representation has also been used in GRNet [43], where a
Gridding and Gridding Reverse layer are proposed for conversion between unordered points and 3D grids. However,
their voxel representation is only used to reconstruct low-

13189

