HeadGAN: One-shot Neural Head Synthesis and Editing
Michail Christos Doukas1,2 , Stefanos Zafeiriou1,2 , Viktoriia Sharmanska1,3
1
Imperial College London, UK 2 Huawei Technologies, London, UK 3 University of Sussex, UK
{michail-christos.doukas16, s.zafeiriou, sharmanska.v}@imperial.ac.uk

(a) Reference image

(b) Reenactment

(d) Expression Editing

(c) Reconstruction (self-reenactment)

(e) Pose Editing

(f) Frontalisation

Figure 1: Our proposed HeadGAN method performs reenactment (b), by fully transferring the facial expressions and head
pose from a driving frame to a reference image. When the driving and reference identities coincide (c), it can be used for
facial video compression and reconstruction. In addition, HeadGAN can be applied to facial expression editing (d), novel
view synthesis (e) and face frontalisation (f). Project’s page: https://michaildoukas.github.io/HeadGAN/

Abstract
Recent attempts to solve the problem of head reenactment using a single reference image have shown promising
results. However, most of them either perform poorly in
terms of photo-realism, or fail to meet the identity preservation problem, or do not fully transfer the driving pose
and expression. We propose HeadGAN, a novel system that
conditions synthesis on 3D face representations, which can
be extracted from any driving video and adapted to the facial geometry of any reference image, disentangling identity
from expression. We further improve mouth movements, by
utilising audio features as a complementary input. The 3D
face representation enables HeadGAN to be further used as
an efficient method for compression and reconstruction and
a tool for expression and pose editing.

1. Introduction
Visual data synthesis [44, 43], including talking head
animation [45, 49, 48, 17, 33, 34, 23] are particularly exciting and thriving research areas, with countless applications in editing, games, social media, VR, teleconference
and virtual assistance. Over the past years, solutions were
mainly given by the graphics community. For instance,
Face2Face [40] method performs face reenactment, by recovering facial expressions from a driving video and overwriting them to the source frames. Some recent learningbased approaches [23, 25, 13] have sought to solve the problem of full head reenactment, which aims to transfer not
only the expression, but also the pose, from a driving person to the source identity. The shortcoming of such methods
is their dependence on long video footage of the source, as
they train person-specific models. At the same time, various

14398

