SurfGen: Adversarial 3D Shape Synthesis with Explicit Surface Discriminators
Andrew Luo1 Tianqin Li1 Wen-Hao Zhang2 Tai Sing Lee1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Chicago

Abstract
Recent advances in deep generative models have led to
immense progress in 3D shape synthesis. While existing
models are able to synthesize shapes represented as voxels,
point-clouds, or implicit functions, these methods only indirectly enforce the plausibility of the final 3D shape surface.
Here we present a 3D shape synthesis framework (SurfGen)
that directly applies adversarial training to the object surface. Our approach uses a differentiable spherical projection layer to capture and represent the explicit zero isosurface of an implicit 3D generator as functions defined on the
unit sphere. By processing the spherical representation of
3D object surfaces with a spherical CNN in an adversarial
setting, our generator can better learn the statistics of natural shape surfaces. We evaluate our model on large-scale
shape datasets, and demonstrate that the end-to-end trained
model is capable of generating high fidelity 3D shapes with
diverse topology.

1. Introduction
Shape generation is primarily concerned with the synthesis of diverse, realistic, and novel shapes. High fidelity
models of 3D shapes are key to creating immersive virtual
worlds, and are important to many disciplines, including architecture, visual effects, and training robots in simulated
navigation.
With the introduction of large scale 3D object datasets
such as ShapeNet [6] and ModelNet [62], there has been
significant progress towards building generative models of
3D shapes. The predominant approach is to perform training using representations that are straightforward for neural
networks to work with, such as voxel grids, point clouds,
or implicit functions. This is in contrast to the majority
of graphics & simulation tasks, which require an triangle
mesh representation of a shape. When learned in an adversarial setting, the discriminator in these frameworks only
indirectly ensure the realism of the object surface.
A major barrier in training a neural network on object
surfaces is the inherent irregularity and discrete nature of
3D surfaces. Different objects within the same object class
can have vastly different topologies, and can be characterized by different internal connectivity when represented as
a triangle mesh. Our key insight is that a discriminator applied to the surface should focus on the geometric properties

Figure 1. Examples of chairs with complex structure generated by
our model trained on ShapeNet [6] chair class.

of the surface (curvature, orientation, topology, etc.), while
ignoring properties that are irrelevant to the shape. Here
we propose to transform object surfaces to spherical maps
computed with a differentiable function fM→S . A spherical
map is a surface representation defined on discrete samples
from the surface of a sphere. The values at each pixel represents a minimal distance of the object surface along a ray, as
well as the surface occupancy along the ray. The spherical
map is appealing because it is a singular representation that
captures the surface geometry of a shape. Given a spherical
map, we then utilize a network with spherical convolution
layers to complete our discriminator.
We propose SurfGen, an end-to-end generative model of
3D shapes that is trained with a discriminator which operates on the explicit zero isosurface of an implicit shape
function. We demonstrate that applying adversarial training
on the surface of an object leads to generated highly realistic shapes. This results in an approach that can generate
high quality shapes with arbitrary topology and resolution.
Examples of shapes generated by our model are shown in
Figure 1.
In summary our contributions are three fold:
• We introduce a spherical projection operator that takes
as input an explicit triangle mesh, and is fully differentiable w.r.t. the vertices.
• We propose SurfGen, an end-to-end differentiable 3D
shape synthesis framework which applies an adversarial objective on the zero isosurface of the generator.
• We demonstrate our model can synthesize realistic,
high quality shapes that have diverse topology.

16238

