Entropy Maximization and Meta Classification for
Out-of-Distribution Detection in Semantic Segmentation
Robin Chan, Matthias Rottmann and Hanno Gottschalk
IZMD, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Wuppertal
{rchan,rottmann,hgottsch}@uni-wuppertal.de

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) for the semantic segmentation of images are usually trained to operate on a predefined closed set of object classes. This is in contrast to
the “open world” setting where DNNs are envisioned to be
deployed to. From a functional safety point of view, the ability to detect so-called “out-of-distribution” (OoD) samples,
i.e., objects outside of a DNN’s semantic space, is crucial
for many applications such as automated driving. A natural baseline approach to OoD detection is to threshold on
the pixel-wise softmax entropy. We present a two-step procedure that significantly improves that approach. Firstly,
we utilize samples from the COCO dataset as OoD proxy
and introduce a second training objective to maximize the
softmax entropy on these samples. Starting from pretrained
semantic segmentation networks we re-train a number of
DNNs on different in-distribution datasets and consistently
observe improved OoD detection performance when evaluating on completely disjoint OoD datasets. Secondly, we
perform a transparent post-processing step to discard false
positive OoD samples by so-called “meta classification.”
To this end, we apply linear models to a set of hand-crafted
metrics derived from the DNN’s softmax probabilities. In
our experiments we consistently observe a clear additional
gain in OoD detection performance, cutting down the number of detection errors by 52% when comparing the best
baseline with our results. We achieve this improvement sacrificing only marginally in original segmentation performance. Therefore, our method contributes to safer DNNs
with more reliable overall system performance.

1. Introduction
In recent years spectacular advances in the computer
vision task semantic segmentation have been achieved by
deep learning [47, 51]. Deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) are envisioned to be deployed to real world applications, where they are likely to be exposed to data that is

Baseline segmentation mask

Baseline entropy heatmap

Our segmentation mask

Our entropy heatmap

Figure 1: Comparison of segmentation mask and softmax
entropy before our OoD training (top row) and after (bottom row). While there are minor differences in the segmentation masks, the annotated unknown object (marked
with green contours) becomes clearly recognizable in the
entropy heatmap due to our OoD training. In the heatmap
high values are red, low ones are blue.

substantially different from the model’s training data. We
consider data samples that are not included in the set of a
model’s semantic space as out-of-distribution (OoD) samples. State-of-the-art neural networks for semantic segmentation, however, are trained to recognize a predefined closed
set of object classes [13, 32], e.g. for the usage in environment perception systems of autonomous vehicles [24]. In
open world settings there are countless possibly occurring
objects. Defining additional classes requires a large amount
of annotated data (cf. [12, 52]) and may even lead to performance drops [15]. One natural approach is to introduce a
none-of-the-known output for objects not belonging to any
of the predefined classes [49]. In other words, one uses a
set of object classes that is sufficient for most scenarios and
treats OoD objects by enforcing an alternative model output
for such samples. From a functional safety point of view, it
is a crucial but missing prerequisite that neural networks are

5128

