Online Refinement of Low-level Feature Based Activation Map for Weakly
Supervised Object Localization
Jinheng Xie, Cheng Luo, Xiangping Zhu, Ziqi Jin, Weizeng Lu, Linlin Shen*
Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence of Robotics of Society
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
xiejinheng2020@email.szu.edu.cn, xiangping.zhu2010@gmail.com, llshen@szu.edu.cn

CAM (Offline)

Abstract

Supervised object localization and detection methods
based on deep neural networks [22, 14, 21, 13] have
achieved great advances. However, these methods usually
rely on massive training data with intensive annotations, especially location-level labels. To alleviate the high annotation costs, weakly supervised object localization requiring
only image-level annotations has gained lots of attentions.
* Corresponding Author

CNN

…

…

1. Introduction

(a)

High-level features

W1,k*

+W2,k*

+… =

× Online × Complete
× Threshold robust

Ours (Online)

(b)

CNN

We present a two-stage learning framework for weakly
supervised object localization (WSOL). While most previous efforts rely on high-level feature based CAMs (Class
Activation Maps), this paper proposes to localize objects
using the low-level feature based activation maps. In the
first stage, an activation map generator produces activation maps based on the low-level feature maps in the classifier, such that rich contextual object information is included
in an online manner. In the second stage, we employ an
evaluator to evaluate the activation maps predicted by the
activation map generator. Based on this, we further propose a weighted entropy loss, an attentive erasing, and an
area loss to drive the activation map generator to substantially reduce the uncertainty of activations between object
and background, and explore less discriminative regions.
Based on the low-level object information preserved in the
first stage, the second stage model gradually generates a
well-separated, complete, and compact activation map of
object in the image, which can be easily thresholded for
accurate localization. Extensive experiments on CUB-2002011 and ImageNet-1K datasets show that our framework
surpasses previous methods by a large margin, which sets a
new state-of-the-art for WSOL. Code will be available soon.

W1,k
W2,k
W3,k

GAP

…

Stage one

Stage two

Generation

Refinement

Low-level features

√ Online √ Complete
√ Threshold robust

Figure 1: Comparison between CAM and the proposed method.
(a) Overview of the CAM pipeline. (b) Overview of the proposed
two-stage learning framework. Red bounding boxes illustrate the
localization results.

Instead of exploring the entire extent of the objects, classification networks incline to identify patterns from small
and sparse regions. Due to this limitation, class activation maps [44] (CAM), a weighted average of high-level
feature maps, usually indicate only the discriminative regions of objects. Fig. 1(a) gives the diagram of CAM. As
shown in figure, only the head region, which is the most
discriminative part to distinguish the bird, is localized. See
Fig. 2 for more examples of CAM based localization. However, discriminative region is insufficient for accurate object localization. To address this issue, various solutions
[28, 4, 31, 2, 41, 27, 3, 40, 38, 16] have been explored. For
example, [11, 40, 3] attempt to erase the most discriminative
regions, promoting the network to discover less discriminative regions. As high-level features are used as region
guidance, these approaches have limited potentials to derive complete and compact activation maps. Furthermore,
when the following thresholding is used to separate foreground and background pixels, the result is very sensitive
to the setting of threshold, due to the diverse distribution of

132

