Finding Representative Interpretations on Convolutional Neural Networks

Peter Cho-Ho Lam1 , Lingyang Chu* 2 , Maxim Torgonskiy1 , Jian Pei3 , Yong Zhang1 , and Lanjun Wang1
1

Huawei Canada Technologies Co., Ltd.
2
McMaster University
3
Simon Fraser University
{cho.ho.lam, maxim.torgonskiy, yong.zhang3, lanjun.wang}@huawei.com
chul9@mcmaster.ca
jpei@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
Interpreting the decision logic behind effective deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) on images complements
the success of deep learning models. However, the existing
methods can only interpret some specific decision logic on
individual or a small number of images. To facilitate human understandability and generalization ability, it is important to develop representative interpretations that interpret common decision logics of a CNN on a large group of
similar images, which reveal the common semantics data
contributes to many closely related predictions. In this paper, we develop a novel unsupervised approach to produce
a highly representative interpretation for a large number of
similar images. We formulate the problem of finding representative interpretations as a co-clustering problem, and
convert it into a submodular cost submodular cover problem based on a sample of the linear decision boundaries of a
CNN. We also present a visualization and similarity ranking
method. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the excellent performance of our method.

1. Introduction
Interpretability becomes more and more important for
machine learning [40, 48]. As a fundamental deep learning model, the interpretability of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [26, 34] has been intensively explored [9,
45, 47, 50, 61, 72]. For example, many interpretation methods [12, 48, 50, 56] have been proposed to interpret the specific decision logic of a CNN on a single input image or
a small group of images. However, the challenge of interpretation on CNNs for image classification is still far from
being settled. An interpretation accommodating only one
individual image or a small group of images is highly sensitive to the noise contained in the interpreted image [20],
* Peter Cho-Ho Lam and Lingyang Chu contribute equally in this work.
Please refer to [35] for the complete version of this paper.

and thus cannot be robustly reused to interpret the predictions on a large group of unseen images [3, 16, 57].
To tackle the challenge, we advocate seeking representative interpretations [7], which interpret the common decision logic of a CNN. A representative interpretation is
more convincing, because it can be validly reused to interpret the same decision logic that governs the predictions on
a large number of unseen images [7]. Moreover, a representative interpretation also provides a deeper insight into
the common semantic of a large number of similar images [21, 32, 70]. Such common semantics are generally
believed to be captured by CNNs to achieve excellent prediction performance [18, 72, 73].
However, interpreting the common decision logic of a
CNN on a large group of similar images in an unsupervised
manner is a novel problem that has not been systematically
studied in literature [21]. Can we straight-forwardly extend
the existing interpretation methods to produce representative interpretations on a CNN? Unfortunately, many existing methods [9, 12, 45, 50, 48] focus on interpreting the
specific decision logic of a CNN on a single input image or
a small group of images, and thus cannot produce representative interpretations. More critically, it is difficult to produce a representative interpretation without knowing a large
group of similar images that are predicted by a common
decision logic of a CNN. As discussed in Section 2, some
concept-based interpretation methods summarize the common decision-making concepts from a group of conceptually similar images. However, those methods are either limited to sophisticatedly customized CNN models [11, 70], or
require a large set of conceptually annotated images [18, 73]
that are too expensive to obtain in most real world applications [21].
In this paper, we propose the novel unsupervised task of
finding representative interpretations on convolutional neural networks. The goal is to find and visualize the common
decision logic of a CNN that governs the predictions on an
input image and a large set of similar images. We make a
series of technical contributions as follows.

1345

