Asymmetric Loss For Multi-Label Classification
Tal Ridnik* Emanuel Ben-Baruch*
Nadav Zamir Asaf Noy Itamar Friedman Matan Protter Lihi Zelnik-Manor
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{emanuel.benbaruch, tal.ridnik, nadav.zamir, asaf.noy, itamar.friedman, matan.protter, lihi.zelnik}
@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In a typical multi-label setting, a picture contains on
average few positive labels, and many negative ones.
This positive-negative imbalance dominates the optimization process, and can lead to under-emphasizing gradients
from positive labels during training, resulting in poor accuracy. In this paper, we introduce a novel asymmetric loss
(”ASL”), which operates differently on positive and negative samples. The loss enables to dynamically down-weights
and hard-thresholds easy negative samples, while also discarding possibly mislabeled samples. We demonstrate how
ASL can balance the probabilities of different samples, and
how this balancing is translated to better mAP scores. With
ASL, we reach state-of-the-art results on multiple popular
multi-label datasets: MS-COCO, Pascal-VOC, NUS-WIDE
and Open Images. We also demonstrate ASL applicability
for other tasks, such as single-label classification and object detection. ASL is effective, easy to implement, and does
not increase the training time or complexity. Implementation is available at: https://github.com/Alibaba-MIIL/ASL.

1. Introduction
Typical natural images contain multiple objects and concepts [34, 37], highlighting the importance of multi-label
classification for real-world tasks. Recently, remarkable
advances have been made in multi-label benchmarks such
as MS-COCO [20], NUS-WIDE [7], Pascal-VOC [11] and
Open Images [17]. Notable success was reported by exploiting label correlation via graph neural networks which
represent the label relationships [6, 5, 10] or word embeddings based on knowledge priors [6, 31]. Other approaches are based on modeling image parts and attentional
regions [36, 12, 32, 35], as well as using recurrent neural
* Equal contribution

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Real world challenges in multi-label classification. A typical image contains few positive samples, and
many negative ones, leading to high negative-positive imbalance. Also, missing labels in ground-truth are common
in multi-label datasets. (b) Proposed solution with ASL.
The loss properties will be detailed in Section 2.5
networks [22, 29].
Despite their effectiveness, recent approaches are characterized by extensive architecture modifications and relying on additional external information, such as word embeddings and NLP models. In this work, we question whether
such intricate solutions are truly necessary for achieving
high performance in multi-label classification tasks. In particular, we demonstrate that a careful design of the loss
function can greatly benefit classification accuracy, while
still maintaining a simple and efficient solution, based on
standard architectures and training schemes.
A key characteristic of multi-label classification is the inherent positive-negative imbalance created when the overall
number of labels is large. Most images contain only a small
fraction of the possible labels, implying that the number
of positive samples per category will be, on average, much
lower than the number of negative samples. To address this,
[33] suggested a loss function for statically handling the imbalance in multi-label problems. However, it was aimed

82

