Zero-shot Natural Language Video Localization
Jinwoo Nam1,∗
Daechul Ahn1,∗
1
GIST, South Korea

Dongyeop Kang2,§
2
UC Berkeley

Seong Jong Ha3
Jonghyun Choi1,†
3
Vision AI Lab, AI Center, NCSOFT

{skaws2003, daechulahn}@gm.gist.ac.kr, dongyeopk@berkeley.edu, seongjongha@ncsoft.com, jhc@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Understanding videos to localize moments with natural
language often requires large expensive annotated video regions paired with language queries. To eliminate the annotation costs, we make a first attempt to train a natural language video localization model in zero-shot manner. Inspired by unsupervised image captioning setup, we
merely require random text corpora, unlabeled video collections, and an off-the-shelf object detector to train a model.
With the unpaired data, we propose to generate pseudosupervision of candidate temporal regions and corresponding query sentences, and develop a simple NLVL model
to train with the pseudo-supervision. Our empirical validations show that the proposed pseudo-supervised method
outperforms several baseline approaches and a number of
methods using stronger supervision on Charades-STA and
ActivityNet-Captions.

1. Introduction
On increasing demands of understanding videos to
search with natural language queries, natural language
video localization (NLVL) has been actively investigated in
recent literature [19,35,39,43,44,57]. The task targets to localize a temporal moment in a video by a natural language
query. In recent years, significant performance improvements on benchmark datasets has been made, facilitated by
the advances on deep learning methods [19, 39, 43, 45] and
massively annotated data [2, 19, 26, 37, 58].
As illustrated in Fig. 1-(a), the annotations consist of a
temporal region in a video (start time, end time) and a corresponding query sentence. However, obtaining such paired
annotation is laborious and expensive. To alleviate the annotation cost, a number of recent works addressed weaklysupervised setup of NLVL [12, 21, 33] which aims to localize a moment without the temporal alignment of given
query sentence. Although it eliminates the annotation cost
∗ : equal contribution. † : corresponding author. § now at U. of Minnesota,
Twin Cities. Code: https://github.com/gistvision/PSVL

Query
the person pours some water
into the glass

Query
the person pours some water
into the glass

Video + Temporal region {ts, te}

Video

(a) Fully-supervised NLVL

(b) Weakly-supervised NLVL

Text Corpora

Text Corpora

Object detector

Image collection

Object detector

Video collection
Video

(c) Unsupervised Image Captioning

(d) Zero-shot NLVL

Figure 1: Tasks with different levels of supervision. (a) Supervised NLVL (queries and temporal regions on video) (b) WeaklySupervised NLVL [21,33] (query on videos) (c) Unsupervised Image Captioning [15,29] (on images) (d) Proposed Zero-shot NLVL
(on videos).

of specifying start and end points of the query sentence in
video (illustrated in Fig. 1-(b)), the remaining cost of annotating natural language query is still considerable [15].
To avoid the costly annotations, we propose zero-shot
NLVL (ZS-NLVL) task setup which aims to learn an NLVL
model without any paired annotation, the first in the literature to our best knowledge. Inspired by [15, 29] addressing
an image captioning task only with unpaired images, natural language corpora, and an object detector (Fig. 1-(c)),
we propose to train an NLVL model by leveraging easily
accessible unpaired data including videos, natural language
corpora, and an off-the-shelf object detector, with no knowledge about video data to localize [3, 15]. We depict the
given data for the zero-shot NLVL setup in Fig. 1-(d).
To address this task, we approach to generate pseudosupervision of candidate temporal regions in video and corresponding sentences to train an NLVL model. The pseudosupervision approach has several benefits as follows. First,

1470

