BioFors: A Large Biomedical Image Forensics Dataset
Ekraam Sabir, Soumyaroop Nandi, Wael AbdAlmageed, Prem Natarajan
USC Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA, USA
{esabir, soumyarn, wamageed, pnataraj}@isi.edu

Abstract
Research in media forensics has gained traction to combat the spread of misinformation. However, most of this
research has been directed towards content generated on
social media. Biomedical image forensics is a related problem, where manipulation or misuse of images reported in
biomedical research documents is of serious concern. The
problem has failed to gain momentum beyond an academic
discussion due to an absence of benchmark datasets and
standardized tasks. In this paper we present BioFors1 –
the first dataset for benchmarking common biomedical image manipulations. BioFors comprises 47,805 images extracted from 1,031 open-source research papers. Images
in BioFors are divided into four categories – Microscopy,
Blot/Gel, FACS and Macroscopy. We also propose three
tasks for forensic analysis – external duplication detection,
internal duplication detection and cut/sharp-transition detection. We benchmark BioFors on all tasks with suitable
state-of-the-art algorithms. Our results and analysis show
that existing algorithms developed on common computer vision datasets are not robust when applied to biomedical images, validating that more research is required to address
the unique challenges of biomedical image forensics.

1. Introduction
Multimedia forensic research has branched off into several sub-domains to tackle various forms of misinformation and manipulation. Popular forensic research problems include detection of digital forgeries such as deepfakes
[31, 41], copy-move and splicing manipulations [52, 53, 51]
or semantic forgeries [40, 23]. These forensic-research areas essentially deal with social media content. A related but
distinct research domain is biomedical image forensics; i.e.
detection of research misconduct in biomedical publications
[4, 13, 5]. Research misconduct can appear in several forms
such as plagiarism, fabrication and falsification. Scientific
misconduct has consequences beyond ethics and leads to re1 https://github.com/ISICV/BioFors

Within Document
Esfandiari et. al., SCD 2012

Across Documents
Meyfour et al., J. Proteome Res. 2017

Ghiasi et al., J. Cell Physiol. 2018

Figure 1. Real world examples of suspicious duplications in
biomedical images. Top and bottom rows show duplications between images in the same and different documents respectively.

tractions [5] and by one estimate $392, 582 of financial loss
for each retracted article [46]. The general scope of scientific misconduct and unethical behavior is broad. In this paper we focus on detection of manipulation or inappropriate
duplication of scientific images in biomedical literature.
Duplication and tampering of protein, cell, tissue and
other experimental images has become a nuisance in the
biomedical sciences community. As the description suggests, duplication involves reusing part of images generated
by one experiment to misrepresent results for unrelated experiments. Tampering of images involves pixel- or patchlevel forgery to hide unfavorable aspects of the image or
to produce favorable results. Biomedical image forgeries
can be more difficult for a human to detect than manipulated images on social media due to the presence of arbitrary
and confusing patterns and lack of real-world semantic context. Detecting forgeries is further complicated by manipulations involving images across different documents. Figure
1 shows reported examples2 of inappropriate duplications in
2 https://scienceintegritydigest.com/2020/11/11/46-papers-from-aroyan-institute-professor/

10963

