Gradient Normalization for Generative Adversarial Networks
Yi-Lun Wu

Hong-Han Shuai Zhi-Rui Tam Hong-Yu Chiu
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

{w86763777.eed08g, hhshuai, ray.eed08g, james77777778.eed07g}@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel normalization method
called gradient normalization (GN) to tackle the training instability of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
caused by the sharp gradient space. Unlike existing work
such as gradient penalty and spectral normalization, the
proposed GN only imposes a hard 1-Lipschitz constraint on
the discriminator function, which increases the capacity of
the discriminator. Moreover, the proposed gradient normalization can be applied to different GAN architectures with
little modification. Extensive experiments on four datasets
show that GANs trained with gradient normalization outperform existing methods in terms of both Frechet Inception
Distance and Inception Score.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9] have recently
achieved great success for synthesizing new data from a
given prior distribution, which facilitates a variety of applications, e.g., super resolution imaging [15], style transfer between domains [20, 32]. In the original definition,
GANs consist of two networks: the generator aims to construct realistic samples to fool the discriminator while the
discriminator learns to discriminate real samples from synthetic samples which are produced by the generator.
Although the state-of-the-art GANs generate high fidelity images that easily fool humans, the unstable training
process remains a challenging problem. Therefore, a recent
line of study focuses on overcoming the unstable training
issue [2, 3, 10, 21, 23]. For example, one of the reasons
for the unstable GAN training is caused by the sharp gradient space of the discriminator, which causes the mode collapse in the training process of the generator [23]. Although
L2 normalization [14] and weight clipping [3] are simple
but effective methods in stabilizing GANs, these additional
constraints limit the model capacity of discriminator. As a
result, the generator is inclined to fool the discriminator before learning to generate real images. Another kind of popular approaches is to formulate the discriminator as a Lip-

schitz continuous function bounded under a fixed Lipschitz
constant K by applying regularization or normalization on
discriminator [10, 18, 22, 23]. As such, the discriminator
gradient space becomes smoother without significantly sacrificing the performance of the discriminator.
Imposing a Lipschitz constraint on the discriminator can
be characterized by three properties. 1) Model- or modulewise constraint. If the constraint objective depends on full
model instead of the summation of internal modules, we
define such methods to be a model-wise constraint and the
converse to be a module-wise constraint. For instance, the
Gradient penalty (1-GP) [10] is a model-wise constraint,
while Spectral Normalization (SN) [18] is a module-wise
(layer-wise) constraint, i.e.. We argue that model-wise constraints are better since the module-wise constraints limit
the layer capacities and thus reduce the multiplicative power
of neural networks. 2) Sampling-based or non-samplingbased constraint. If the approach requires sampling data
from a fixed pool, such method is defined as a samplingbased constraint. For example, 1-GP is a sampling-based
constraint due to the regularization, while SN is a nonsampling-based constraint since the normalization only depends on the model architecture. The non-sampling-based
methods are expected to perform better than samplingbased methods since the sampling-based constraints might
not be effective for the data that are not sampled before. 3)
Hard or soft constraint. If the Lipschitz constant of any
function in the function space of the constrained discriminators is not greater than a fixed finite value, such approach
is defined as a hard constraint and the converse as a soft
constraint. For example, SN is a hard constraint and the
fixed finite value is equal to 1, while 1-GP is a soft constraint since the tightness of the constraint is fluctuated by
the regularization and thus the upper bound is not limited.
The hard constraint is expected to perform better since the
consistent Lipschitz constant can guarantee the gradient stability of unseen data.
To the best of our knowledge, none of the constraints
in previous work is model-wise, non-sampling-based, and
hard at the same time. In this paper, we propose a new
normalization method, named gradient normalization (GN),

6373

