Deep Blind Video Super-resolution
Jinshan Pan1 Haoran Bai1 Jiangxin Dong1 Jiawei Zhang2 Jinhui Tang1∗
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 SenseTime Research

(b) Bicubic

(a) Low-resolution (LR) input frame

(c) IKC [10]

(f) TOFlow [43]

(d) KGAN[2]+ZSSR[34]

(g) Deblur[30]+EDVR[12] (h) w/o kernel modeling

(e) DUF [16]

(i) Ours

Figure 1. Blind video super-resolution results (×4). Existing video super-resolution algorithms usually assume the blur kernel in the degradation is known or predefined and do not model the blur kernel in the restoration process. We show that blind image super-resolution
methods do not handle the video super-resolution problem well (see (c)-(d)), while existing video super-resolution methods without modeling the blur kernel does not effectively capture the intrinsic characteristics of the video super-resolution problem which thus leads to
over-smoothed results (see (e)-(h)). Our algorithm explicitly estimates blur kernels from low-resolution videos, which is able to generate
clearer results with finer structural details.

Abstract
Existing video super-resolution (SR) algorithms usually
assume that the blur kernels in the degradation process are
known and do not model the blur kernels in the restoration. However, this assumption does not hold for blind
video SR and usually leads to over-smoothed super-resolved
frames. In this paper, we propose an effective blind video
SR algorithm based on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Our algorithm first estimates blur kernels from
low-resolution (LR) input videos. Then, with the estimated
blur kernels, we develop an effective image deconvolution
method based on the image formation model of blind video
SR to generate intermediate latent frames so that sharp image contents can be restored well. To effectively explore the
information from adjacent frames, we estimate the motion
fields from LR input videos, extract features from LR videos
by a feature extraction network, and warp the extracted features from LR inputs based on the motion fields. Moreover,
we develop an effective sharp feature exploration method
which first extracts sharp features from restored intermediate latent frames and then uses a transformation operation
based on the extracted sharp features and warped features
from LR inputs to generate better features for HR video
restoration. We formulate the proposed algorithm into an
∗ Corresponding author.

end-to-end trainable framework and show that it performs
favorably against state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Blind video super-resolution (SR) aims to estimate highresolution (HR) frames from a low-resolution (LR) sequence with unknown blur kernels. It is a fundamental
problem in the vision and graphics communities and has received active research efforts within the last decade as highdefinition devices have been widely used in our daily lives.
As the HR sequences are usually contaminated by unknown
blur, it is quite challenging to restore HR videos from lowresolution sequences.
Since blind video SR is an ill-posed problem, conventional methods usually develop kinds of hand-crafted priors
to make this problem well-posed and estimate latent HR image in a variational approach [9, 1, 5, 33, 23, 27]. In spite
of achieving decent results, these algorithms usually need
to solve complex energy functions or involve complicated
matching processes, and the performance is limited by the
hand-crafted priors. In addition, most of these algorithms
usually assume that the blur kernel is known or predefined
(e.g., Bicubic kernel) and do not model blur kernels in the
restoration, which cannot effectively capture the intrinsic

4811

