Object Tracking by Jointly Exploiting Frame and Event Domain
Jiqing Zhang1,∗ , Xin Yang1,∗ , Yingkai Fu1 , Xiaopeng Wei1 , Baocai Yin1,† , Bo Dong2,†
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 SRI International

Abstract
Inspired by the complementarity between conventional
frame-based and bio-inspired event-based cameras, we propose a multi-modal based approach to fuse visual cues from
the frame- and event-domain to enhance the single object
tracking performance, especially in degraded conditions
(e.g., scenes with high dynamic range, low light, and fastmotion objects). The proposed approach can effectively and
adaptively combine meaningful information from both domains. Our approach’s effectiveness is enforced by a novel
designed cross-domain attention schemes, which can effectively enhance features based on self- and cross-domain attention schemes; The adaptiveness is guarded by a specially
designed weighting scheme, which can adaptively balance
the contribution of the two domains. To exploit event-based
visual cues in single-object tracking, we construct a largescale frame-event-based dataset, which we subsequently
employ to train a novel frame-event fusion based model. Extensive experiments show that the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art frame-based tracking methods by
at least 10.4% and 11.9% in terms of representative success
rate and precision rate, respectively. Besides, the effectiveness of each key component of our approach is evidenced
by our thorough ablation study.

1. Introduction
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based
approaches show promising performance in object tracking
tasks [4, 6, 10, 12, 14, 18, 20, 30, 37, 46, 48, 49]. These
approaches mainly use conventional frame-based cameras
as sensing devices since they can effectively measure absolute light intensity and provide a rich representation of
a scene. However, conventional frame-based sensors have
limited frame rates (i.e., ≤ 120 FPS) and dynamic range
(i.e., ≤ 60 dB). Thus, they do not work robustly in degraded
conditions. Figure 1 (a) and (b) show two examples of degraded conditions, high dynamic range, and fast-moving
object, respectively. Under both conditions, we hardly see
∗ Joint first authors. † Baocai Yin (ybc@dlut.edu.cn) and Bo Dong
(bo.dong@sri.com) are the corresponding authors.

(a)

(b)

time
1.0
0.5
0.0

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Limitations of conventional frame-based and bioinspired event-based cameras. (a) and (b) show the limitation of
a frame-based camera under HDR and fast-moving object, respectively. (d) shows an event-based camera’s asynchronous output of
the scene shown in (c), sparse and no texture information.

the moving objects. Thus, obtaining meaningful visual cues
of the objects is challenging. By contrast, an event-based
camera, a bio-inspired sensor, offers high temporal resolution (up to 1MHz), high dynamic range (up to 140 dB), and
low energy consumption [7]. Nevertheless, it cannot measure absolute light intensity and thus texture cues (as shown
in Figure 1 (d)). Both sensors are, therefore, complementary. The unique complementarity triggers us to propose a
multi-modal sensor fusion-based approach to improve the
tracking performance in degraded conditions, which leverages the advantages of both the frame- and event-domain.
Yet, event-based cameras measure light intensity
changes and output events asynchronously. It differs significantly from conventional frame-based cameras, which
represent scenes with synchronous frames. Besides, CNNsbased approaches are not designed to digest asynchronous
inputs. Therefore, combining asynchronous events and synchronous images remains challenging. To address the challenge, we propose a simple yet effective event aggregation
approach to discretize the time domain of asynchronous
events. Each of the discretized time slices can be accumu-

13043

