Digging into Uncertainty in Self-supervised Multi-view Stereo
Hongbin Xu1, 2 , Zhipeng Zhou4 , Yali Wang1 , Wenxiong Kang2, 5 , Baigui Sun4 , Hao Li4 , Yu Qiao1,3 *
1
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
South China University of Technology, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4 Alibaba Group, 5 Pazhou Laboratory
hongbinxu1013@gmail.com

Abstract
Self-supervised Multi-view stereo (MVS) with a pretext task of image reconstruction has achieved significant
progress recently. However, previous methods are built
upon intuitions, lacking comprehensive explanations about
the effectiveness of the pretext task in self-supervised MVS.
To this end, we propose to estimate epistemic uncertainty
in self-supervised MVS, accounting for what the model ignores. Specially, the limitations can be categorized into two
types: ambiguious supervision in foreground and invalid supervision in background. To address these issues, we propose a novel Uncertainty reduction Multi-view Stereo (UMVS) framework for self-supervised learning. To alleviate
ambiguous supervision in foreground, we involve extra correspondence prior with a flow-depth consistency loss. The
dense 2D correspondence of optical flows is used to regularize the 3D stereo correspondence in MVS. To handle
the invalid supervision in background, we use Monte-Carlo
Dropout to acquire the uncertainty map and further filter
the unreliable supervision signals on invalid regions. Extensive experiments on DTU and Tank&Temples benchmark
show that our U-MVS framework1 achieves the best performance among unsupervised MVS methods, with competitive
performance with its supervised opponents.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) [30] is a fundamental computer vision problem which aims to recover 3D information from multiple images on different views. Standing
on the shoulder of giants in traditional methods [11, 29],
recent learning-based methods [37, 38] have extended the
MVS pipeline to deep neural networks, achieving state-ofthe-art performance in several benchmarks [1, 20]. However, the fully supervised learning paradigm suffers from
* Corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/ToughStoneX/U-MVS

yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn

(a) Fully-supervised Training
Reference Image

Source Images

Predicted Depth Map

Ground Truth

Loss

...

Loss

Predicted Depth Map

Homography
Warping

Reconstructed Image

Reference Image

(b) Self-supervised Training
Depth Map

Fully-supervised

Certain

Depth Map

Certain

Uncertain

Self-supervised

Uncertain

(c) Uncertainty in Supervision

Figure 1. Illustration of the effectiveness of fully-supervised and
self-supervised training in learning-based MVS via the visualization of uncertainty in supervision.

the non-negligible problem of requiring tedious and expensive procedures for collecting ground truth depth annotations. Hence, it leads the community to consider competitive alternative of learning-based approaches which require
fewer labels.
A prominent and appealing trend is to construct a selfsupervised MVS task [12, 19, 7, 15], which further transforms the original depth estimation problem as RGB image reconstruction problem. However, previous methods
are merely built upon intuitive motivations, lacking comprehensive explanations about which image regions such
self-supervision signal can effectively work for multi-view
depth estimation. For fully-supervised MVS (Fig. 1(a)),
the regions where supervision exists are explicit, if given
the ground truth depth map. Whereas, for self-supervised
MVS shown in Fig. 1(b), the pretext task of image reconstruction actually provides indistinct supervision based on
color similarity, which is agnostic to the exact presence of

6078

