AutoFormer: Searching Transformers for Visual Recognition
Minghao Chen1,∗ , Houwen Peng2,∗,† , Jianlong Fu2 , Haibin Ling1
1
Stony Brook University 2 Microsoft Research Asia
Abstract
Recently, pure transformer-based models have shown
great potentials for vision tasks such as image classiﬁcation and detection. However, the design of transformer networks is challenging. It has been observed that the depth,
embedding dimension, and number of heads can largely affect the performance of vision transformers. Previous models conﬁgure these dimensions based upon manual crafting. In this work, we propose a new one-shot architecture
search framework, namely AutoFormer, dedicated to vision
transformer search. AutoFormer entangles the weights of
different blocks in the same layers during supernet training. Beneﬁting from the strategy, the trained supernet allows thousands of subnets to be very well-trained. Specifically, the performance of these subnets with weights inherited from the supernet is comparable to those retrained
from scratch. Besides, the searched models, which we refer to AutoFormers, surpass the recent state-of-the-arts such
as ViT and DeiT. In particular, AutoFormer-tiny/small/base
achieve 74.7%/81.7%/82.4% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet
with 5.7M/22.9M/53.7M parameters, respectively. Lastly,
we verify the transferability of AutoFormer by providing
the performance on downstream benchmarks and distillation experiments. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/microsoft/Cream.

1. Introduction
Vision transformer recently has drawn signiﬁcant attention in computer vision because of its high model capability
and superior potentials in capturing long-range dependencies. Building on top of transformers [52], modern stateof-the-art models, such as ViT [13] and DeiT [50], are able
to learn powerful visual representations from images and
achieve very competitive performance compared to previous convolutional neural network models [17, 25].
However, the design of transformer neural architectures
is nontrivial. For example, how to choose the best network
∗ Equal contributions. Work performed when Minghao is an intern of
MSRA. † Corresponding author: houwen.peng@microsoft.com.

Figure 1. The comparison between AutoFormers and transformerbased, convolution-based and architecture-searched models, such
as DeiT [50], and ResNet [18].

depth, embedding dimension and/or head number? These
factors are all critical for elevating model capacity, yet ﬁnding a good combination of them is difﬁcult. As seen in
Fig. 2, increasing the depth, head number and MLP ratio
(the ratio of hidden dimension to the embedding dimension
in the multi-layer perceptron) of transformers helps achieve
higher accuracy at ﬁrst but get overﬁt after hitting the peak
value. Scaling up the embedding dimension can improve
model capability, but the accuracy gain plateaus for larger
models. These phenomenons demonstrate the challenge of
designing optimal transformer architectures.
Previous works on designing vision transformers are
based upon manual crafting, which heavily relies on human expertise and typically requires a deal of trial-anderror [13, 50, 67]. There are a few works on automating transformer design using neural architecture search
(NAS) [45, 55]. However, they are all concentrated on natural language tasks, such as machine translation, which are
quite different from computer vision tasks. As a result, it is
hard to generalize prior automatic search algorithms to ﬁnd
effective vision transformer architectures.
In this work, we present a new architecture search algorithm, named AutoFormer, dedicated to ﬁnding pure vision
transformer models. Our approach mainly addresses two
challenges in transformer search. 1) How to strike a good

12270

