Unified Questioner Transformer for Descriptive Question Generation
in Goal-Oriented Visual Dialogue
Shoya Matsumori*†1 , Kosuke Shingyouchi†1 , Yuki Abe1 ,
Yosuke Fukuchi1 , Komei Sugiura1 , Michita Imai1
1
Keio University

scene file

Abstract
Building an interactive artificial intelligence that can
ask questions about the real world is one of the biggest
challenges for vision and language problems. In particular, goal-oriented visual dialogue, where the aim of the
agent is to seek information by asking questions during
a turn-taking dialogue, has been gaining scholarly attention recently. While several existing models based on the
GuessWhat?! dataset [10] have been proposed, the Questioner typically asks simple category-based questions or absolute spatial questions. This might be problematic for complex scenes where the objects share attributes, or in cases
where descriptive questions are required to distinguish objects. In this paper, we propose a novel Questioner architecture, called Unified Questioner Transformer (UniQer), for
descriptive question generation with referring expressions.
In addition, we build a goal-oriented visual dialogue task
called CLEVR Ask. It synthesizes complex scenes that require the Questioner to generate descriptive questions. We
train our model with two variants of CLEVR Ask datasets.
The results of the quantitative and qualitative evaluations
show that UniQer outperforms the baseline.

1. Introduction
Information seeking through interaction is one of the
most vital abilities for artificial intelligence. This is particularly true in the human-agent interaction scenario [24, 17].
For example, task-oriented agents need to understand what
the users are thinking, i.e., beliefs, preferences, and intentions, in order to correctly interpret their instructions [14,
39]. In most cases, such information is not provided prior
to the interaction, so the agents have to elicit it by asking
questions on the fly.
To build effective information-seeking agents, several
studies in the vision and language community have tackled
* Corresponding Author: shoya@ailab.ics.keio.ac.jp
† Equally Contributed

image

Oracle

 
Image


 

Dialogue History

Object Encoder
Transformer (OET)

QGen

Question Decoder
Transformer (QDT)

object features
Object Targeting
Module (OTM)

Guesser

✔

✗

✗

✗

✔ target ✗ distracter



Figure 1: UniQer and CLEVR Ask task. UniQer unifies the
Question Generator (QGen), which generates yes-no questions, and the Guesser, which guesses an Oracle’s reference
object, into a single transformer encoder-decoder architecture. The Object Targeting Module is introduced to assign
target objects which are to be set apart from distracter objects in the QGen.
the goal-oriented visual dialogue task [10, 28]. This task
consists of two agents, called a Questioner and an Oracle,
and the goal is to train the Questioner to guess the Oracle’s reference object by asking yes-no questions during a
turn-taking dialogue. The Oracle then needs to provide an
answer given the question and the target object.
In goal-oriented visual dialogue, deciding which objects
and how to address will depend on the complexity of the
presented image. For example, in simple scenes, where
each object has different attributes and thus is easy to distinguish, the Questioner only needs to ask category-based
questions such as “Is it a car?”. In a more complex scene,
on the other hand, the Questioner needs to ask descriptive
questions with referring expressions [7, 31] to narrow down

1898

