Black-box Detection of Backdoor Attacks with Limited Information and Data
Yinpeng Dong1,3 , Xiao Yang1 , Zhijie Deng1 , Tianyu Pang1 , Zihao Xiao3 , Hang Su1,2 , Jun Zhu1,2,3 *
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center
1
BNRist Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China 3 RealAI

1. Introduction
Despite the unprecedented success of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in various pattern recognition tasks [17], the
reliability of these models has been significantly challenged
in adversarial environments [2, 5], where an adversary can
cause unintended behavior of a victim model by malicious
attacks. For example, adversarial attacks [4, 13, 18, 42] apply imperceptible perturbations to natural examples with the
purpose of misleading the target model during inference.
Different from adversarial attacks, backdoor (Trojan) attacks [9, 19, 33] aim to embed a backdoor in a DNN model
by injecting poisoned samples into its training data. The in* Corresponding author.

Trigger:

Target class: “Stop”

Training

Clean samples

…

Samples
labeled as
“Stop”

Train

…
Poisoned samples

Inference

Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have made rapid
progress in recent years, they are vulnerable in adversarial
environments. A malicious backdoor could be embedded in
a model by poisoning the training dataset, whose intention
is to make the infected model give wrong predictions during
inference when the specific trigger appears. To mitigate the
potential threats of backdoor attacks, various backdoor detection and defense methods have been proposed. However,
the existing techniques usually require the poisoned training
data or access to the white-box model, which is commonly
unavailable in practice. In this paper, we propose a blackbox backdoor detection (B3D) method to identify backdoor
attacks with only query access to the model. We introduce
a gradient-free optimization algorithm to reverse-engineer
the potential trigger for each class, which helps to reveal the
existence of backdoor attacks. In addition to backdoor detection, we also propose a simple strategy for reliable predictions using the identified backdoored models. Extensive
experiments on hundreds of DNN models trained on several
datasets corroborate the effectiveness of our method under
the black-box setting against various backdoor attacks.

DNN model
“Speed
Limit (50)”

Inputs without
trigger

“Road
Work”
“Stop”

Inputs with
trigger

“Stop”

Detection

Abstract

Setting

{dyp17, yangxiao19, dzj17, pty17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zihao.xiao@realai.ai, {suhangss, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Class
Reversed
trigger

“Speed “Road …
“Turn
“Stop” … “Pedestrian”
Limit (50)” Work”
Right”

…

…

Figure 1: Illustration of backdoor attack and detection. By specifying the target class and the trigger pattern, the adversary poisons
a portion of training data to have the trigger stamped and the label
changed to the target. During inference, the model predicts normally on clean inputs but misclassifies the triggered inputs as the
target class. Our detection method reverse-engineers the potential
trigger for each class and judges whether any class induces a much
smaller trigger, which can be used to detect backdoor attacks.

fected model performs normally on clean inputs, but whenever the embedded backdoor is activated by a backdoor trigger, such as a small pattern in the input, the model will output an adversary-desired target class, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
As many users with insufficient training data and computational resources would like to outsource the training procedure or utilize commercial APIs from third parties for solving a specific task, the vendors of machine learning services
with malicious purposes can easily exploit the vulnerability
of DNNs to insert backdoors [9, 19]. From the industry perspective, backdoor attacks are among the most worrisome

16482

