Curvature Generation in Curved Spaces for Few-Shot Learning
Zhi Gao1 , Yuwei Wu1 ,* Yunde Jia1 , Mehrtash Harandi2
1
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Eng., Monash University, and Data61, Australia
{gaozhi 2017,wuyuwei,jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

Abstract

Curvature
FSL Task

Few-shot learning describes the challenging problem of
recognizing samples from unseen classes given very few labeled examples. In many cases, few-shot learning is cast
as learning an embedding space that assigns test samples
to their corresponding class prototypes. Previous methods assume that data of all few-shot learning tasks comply with a fixed geometrical structure, mostly a Euclidean
structure. Questioning this assumption that is clearly difficult to hold in real-world scenarios and incurs distortions to
data, we propose to learn a task-aware curved embedding
space by making use of the hyperbolic geometry. As a result, task-specific embedding spaces where suitable curvatures are generated to match the characteristics of data are
constructed, leading to more generic embedding spaces. We
then leverage on intra-class and inter-class context information in the embedding space to generate class prototypes
for discriminative classification. We conduct a comprehensive set of experiments on inductive and transductive fewshot learning, demonstrating the benefits of our proposed
method over existing embedding methods.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning (FSL) [2, 12, 57] aims to recognize samples from unseen classes, given very few labeled
examples per class. In many cases, embedding methods [5, 44, 45, 53, 55] are the method of choice in addressing the FSL problem. The underlying idea is to learn an embedding space from seen classes, hoping that for new FSL
tasks with unseen classes, class prototypes in the embedding space are informative enough to assist classification
(e.g., by assigning test samples to the closest prototypes).
Prior to our work, most embedding methods assume that
data of all FSL tasks have the Euclidean structure, and use
a Euclidean embedding space and corresponding Euclidean
* Corresponding author

Curvature is 0

Curvature is -1

Curvature is -0.01

Accuracy=

Accuracy=
63.7%

Accuracy=
77.7%

Accuracy=
69.0%

Accuracy=

Accuracy=
80.7%

Accuracy=
65.0%

Accuracy=
83.7%

Task 1

solar dish unicycle
walker
hound

tobacco shop

harvestman

89.3%

Task 2

frying pan carousel
bolete

stage

triceratops

89.1%

Task 3

cliff

dishrag

ashcan

cocktail shaker

consomme

Accuracy=

93.3%

Figure 1. An example to show that a fixed curvature is not suitable
for all FSL tasks. We evaluate the curvature as 0, −1, and −0.01
on three FSL tasks sampled from the Mini-ImageNet dataset [50].
In Task 1, we achieve good results when the curvature is 0 (i.e., a
Euclidean space), while the curvature 0 achieves inferior results in
Task 2 and Task 3, whose suitable curvatures are −1 and −0.01,
respectively. This shows that a fixed curvature is not suitable for
all FSL tasks.

operations (e.g., distance measure in vector spaces) for classification [3, 35, 38, 55]. However, such an assumption is
clearly difficult to hold in real-world scenarios. Although
some data (e.g., remote sensing images [15]) is intrinsically Euclidean, non-Euclidean structures are also widely
encountered in data (e.g., face images are located in natural manifolds [59]). Thus, assuming the same geometrical
structure among all FSL tasks may incur distortions to data
and result in inferior performance. In this paper, we propose a curvature generation embedding method that learns
a task-aware curved embedding space to match geometrical
structures of data by using hyperbolic geometry.
Hyperbolic geometry that defines curved spaces can
gracefully represent hierarchies in data and has been shown
to be superior to Euclidean geometry for some problems in
recent studies [33, 47, 30, 32, 36]. Curvature is a fundamental concept in hyperbolic geometry, representing the deviation of curved spaces from a flat space. Via changing the

8691

