Progressive Seed Generation Auto-encoder
for Unsupervised Point Cloud Learning
Juyoung Yang

Pyunghwan Ahn
Doyeon Kim
Haeil Lee
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea

Junmo Kim

{yjy6711, p.ahn, doyeon kim, haeil.lee, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
With the development of 3D scanning technologies, 3D
vision tasks have become a popular research area. Owing to the large amount of data acquired by sensors, unsupervised learning is essential for understanding and utilizing point clouds without an expensive annotation process. In this paper, we propose a novel framework and
an effective auto-encoder architecture named “PSG-Net”
for reconstruction-based learning of point clouds. Unlike
existing studies that used fixed or random 2D points, our
framework generates input-dependent point-wise features
for the latent point set. PSG-Net uses the encoded input
to produce point-wise features through the seed generation
module and extracts richer features in multiple stages with
gradually increasing resolution by applying the seed feature propagation module progressively. We prove the effectiveness of PSG-Net experimentally; PSG-Net shows stateof-the-art performances in point cloud reconstruction and
unsupervised classification, and achieves comparable performance to counterpart methods in supervised completion.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), have achieved success in the performance of various computer vision tasks [10, 14, 13]. Recently, research centered on 2D space has been expanded to
3D space following the development of 3D scanning techniques. 3D sensors such as LiDAR and RGB-D cameras
acquire data in form of point clouds, so it is essential to
effectively recognize this type of data in robotics and autonomous driving applications. Point clouds lie in 3D space,
so they incur significantly higher labeling costs for a specific vision task when compared to 2D data. Therefore,
the need for effective unsupervised learning techniques for
point clouds is highly emphasized.
For unsupervised learning, auto-encoder structures
based on CNNs have been widely used to deal with 2D image data. Although CNNs show superior ability in learn-

Figure 1. Examples of the 3D point cloud reconstruction, unsupervised classification, point cloud completion results with PSG-Net.
Our network successfully performs each task from the input point
cloud.

ing general features from 2D images, it is difficult to apply
CNNs to point clouds because of the irregularity of the data
format. Thus, network architectures that are specifically designed for point cloud recognition must be used as the encoder of the auto-encoder. In previous studies [5, 34, 24],
point cloud classification networks such as PointNet [16]
and PointNet++ [17] have been used as encoders, and some
other works have utilized graph layers [30]. Encoders extract a global feature representation called a codeword vector, which becomes the input to the decoder.
For the decoder architecture, a popular approach is the
concept of “folding” a 2D plane into a 3D object surface because the number of the output point clouds may not be determined. During the folding operation, the latent point set
sampled from the 2D plane is transformed into 3D points,
thus achieving point cloud generation. This approach was
first proposed in FoldingNet [30] and has been mathematically established in several studies [5, 34]. In FoldingNet,
a pre-defined set of fixed grid points in 2D space was used
as the latent point set to the decoder along with the output
of the encoder. Then, the folding operation was applied to
transform this 2D point set into 3D points. In AtlasNet [5]
and 3D Point Capsule Network (3D-PointCapsNet) [34],

6413

