A Simple Framework for 3D Lensless Imaging with Programmable Masks
Yucheng Zheng† , Yi Hua‡ , Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan‡ , M. Salman Asif†
University of California Riverside† , Carnegie Mellon University‡

Lensless cameras provide a framework to build thin
imaging systems by replacing the lens in a conventional
camera with an amplitude or phase mask near the sensor. Existing methods for lensless imaging can recover the
depth and intensity of the scene, but they require solving
computationally-expensive inverse problems. Furthermore,
existing methods struggle to recover dense scenes with large
depth variations. In this paper, we propose a lensless imaging system that captures a small number of measurements
using different patterns on a programmable mask. In this
context, we make three contributions. First, we present a
fast recovery algorithm to recover textures on a fixed number of depth planes in the scene. Second, we consider the
mask design problem, for programmable lensless cameras,
and provide a design template for optimizing the mask patterns with the goal of improving depth estimation. Third,
we use a refinement network as a post-processing step to
identify and remove artifacts in the reconstruction. These
modifications are evaluated extensively with experimental
results on a lensless camera prototype to showcase the performance benefits of the optimized masks and recovery algorithms over the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Lensless cameras have traditionally been developed and
used for imaging high-energy radiations such as X-ray and
Gamma ray, where fabricating lenses is either extremely
expensive or physically unrealizable [8, 9, 12]. In the
last few years, such lensless cameras have been proposed
for imaging in visible and infrared wavebands as well;
here, the absence of the lens provides advantages in thin
form-factor imaging [5, 6], better depth-of-field tradeoffs in
microscopy [1, 2], reduced cost in infrared/multi-spectral
imaging [20, 24], and provides the ability to do inference
from coded measurements [24, 29].
Depth estimation is an integral part of lensless imaging.
The basic principle of a lensless camera is that the sensor
records the summation of the measurements associated with

27.3mm

100.0mm

91.3mm

311.1mm

Ours

Abstract

SweepCam

yzhen069@ucr.edu, huayi@cmu.edu, saswin@andrew.cmu.edu, sasif@ece.ucr.edu

Figure 1: Examples of two 3D scenes reconstructed at different depth
planes from eight sensor measurements using SweepCam [16] and our proposed method.

the scene points. Each scene point casts its own unique sensor measurement, depending on its three-dimensional (3D)
spatial location and radiance. Thus, the 3D scene information is encoded in the sensor measurements, but its recovery
requires us to solve a nonlinear inverse problem. Further, it
is important to model this depth dependence in the measurements especially since ignoring it results in significant
reduction in the quality of reconstructions.
Existing methods for 3D lensless imaging can be divided
into two categories. One category of methods estimate the
3D scene with a single image measurement [1, 2, 4, 7, 33].
These methods jointly estimate the image and depth map
of a 3D scene by solving an optimization problem using
iterative techniques. Since the number of variables to be estimated is much larger than the number of measurements,
the recovery problem is severely under-determined and the
methods rely on some prior knowledge about the 3D scene.
For instance, [2] assumes that 3D volume is sparse and
solves an ℓ1 norm-based optimization problem to estimate
a 3D image. Another drawback of these optimization-based
methods is their large computational cost and run time.
The second category of methods capture multiple measurements, each with a different mask, which makes the 3D
recovery of dense scenes possible [16, 32]. The most related work that concerns designing mask patterns for multiple measurements is SweepCam [16], which captures multiple measurements of the same scene using a programmable,
shifting mask and estimates one plane in the 3D scene at a
time. The recovery of a single plane is much faster than
joint recovery of the entire 3D scene, but the number of
mask patterns needed to achieve artifact-free reconstruction
of a single depth plane can be large (in the range of 100–

2603

