Attention is not Enough: Mitigating the Distribution Discrepancy in
Asynchronous Multimodal Sequence Fusion
Tao Liang1,2

Guosheng Lin3 Lei Feng3 Yan Zhang4 Fengmao Lv1,5∗
1
Southwest Jiaotong University
2
Engineering Productivity & Quality Assurance of IES, Bytedance
3
Nanyang Technological University
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
5
Center of Statistical Research, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
{fengmaolv,taoliangdpg}@126.com

{gslin,feng0093}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Videos flow as the mixture of language, acoustic, and
vision modalities. A thorough video understanding needs
to fuse time-series data of different modalities for prediction. Due to the variable receiving frequency for sequences from each modality, there usually exists inherent
asynchrony across the collected multimodal streams. Towards an efficient multimodal fusion from asynchronous
multimodal streams, we need to model the correlations
between elements from different modalities. The recent
Multimodal Transformer (MulT) approach extends the selfattention mechanism of the original Transformer network
to learn the crossmodal dependencies between elements.
However, the direct replication of self-attention will suffer from the distribution mismatch across different modality features. As a result, the learnt crossmodal dependencies can be unreliable. Motivated by this observation, this
work proposes the Modality-Invariant Crossmodal Attention (MICA) approach towards learning crossmodal interactions over modality-invariant space in which the distribution mismatch between different modalities is well bridged.
To this end, both the marginal distribution and the elements
with high-confidence correlations are aligned over the common space of the query and key vectors which are computed
from different modalities. Experiments on three standard
benchmarks of multimodal video understanding clearly validate the superiority of our approach.

1. Introduction
Videos analysis involves time-series data of language,
acoustic, and vision modalities. Towards a thorough video
∗ Corresponding author: F. Lv (email: fengmaolv@126.com).

yixianqianzy@gmail.com

understanding, we need to fuse the data sequences from different modalities. In practice, however, the collected multimodal streams are usually asynchronous due to the variable receiving frequency for sequences of different modalities [18]. For example, the sound or the subtitle may not
exactly match what the video displays. The inherent asynchrony across different modalities raises a challenge on performing efficient multimodal fusion which requires to have
precise information of the actual relationships between elements from different modality sequences.
To this end, the prior works manually preprocess the visual and acoustic sequences by aligning them to the resolution of textual words [15, 19, 24]. Then, multimodal fusion
is performed on the word-aligned time steps. However, the
manual alignment process usually requires a huge amount
of time and labor effort. The recent Multimodal Transformer (MulT) approach extends the self-attention mechanism of the standard Transformer to learn the correlations
between elements from different modalities [18]. Based
on the latent crossmodal interaction explored via the crossmodal attention operations, MulT performs multimodal fusion directly from the asynchronous multimodal sequences
without manual alignment.
However, if we take a further insight into the crossmodal
attention mechanism in MulT, we will find that the direct
replication of Transformer is suboptimal for asynchronous
multimodal sequence fusion. In the standard Transformer
model, the self-attention operations explore the correlations
between elements by comparing the query and key vectors
which are computed from the elements’ features [21, 27].
On the other hand, MulT focuses on exploring the crossmodal correlations between elements. The query and key
vectors involved in the crossmodal attention operation are
computed from different modalities. Due to the heterogeneities across different modality features [9, 27], there

8148

