e-ViL: A Dataset and Benchmark for Natural Language Explanations in
Vision-Language Tasks
Maxime Kayser1* Oana-Maria Camburu1 Leonard Salewski2 Cornelius Emde1
Virginie Do1** Zeynep Akata2,3,4 Thomas Lukasiewicz1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford 2 University of Tübingen
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 4 Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Abstract
Recently, there has been an increasing number of efforts
to introduce models capable of generating natural language
explanations (NLEs) for their predictions on vision-language
(VL) tasks. Such models are appealing, because they can provide human-friendly and comprehensive explanations. However, there is a lack of comparison between existing methods,
which is due to a lack of re-usable evaluation frameworks
and a scarcity of datasets. In this work, we introduce eViL and e-SNLI-VE. e-ViL is a benchmark for explainable
vision-language tasks that establishes a unified evaluation
framework and provides the first comprehensive comparison
of existing approaches that generate NLEs for VL tasks. It
spans four models and three datasets and both automatic
metrics and human evaluation are used to assess modelgenerated explanations. e-SNLI-VE is currently the largest
existing VL dataset with NLEs (over 430k instances). We also
propose a new model that combines UNITER [15], which
learns joint embeddings of images and text, and GPT-2 [38],
a pre-trained language model that is well-suited for text generation. It surpasses the previous state of the art by a large
margin across all datasets. Code and data are available
here: https://github.com/maximek3/e-ViL.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models achieve promising performance
across a variety of tasks but are typically black box in nature. There are several arguments for making these models
more explainable. For example, explanations are crucial
in establishing trust and accountability, which is especially
relevant in safety-critical applications such as healthcare
or autonomous vehicles. They can also enable us to better understand and correct the learned biases of models [5].
*Corresponding Author: maxime.kayser@cs.ox.ac.uk
**Now at Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL, and Facebook AI Research.

Explainability efforts in vision tasks largely focus on highlighting relevant regions in the image, which can be achieved
via tools such as saliency maps [1] or attention maps [47].
Our work focuses on natural language explanations (NLEs),
which aim to explain the decision-making process of a model
via generated sentences. Besides being easy to understand
for lay users, NLEs can explain more complex and finegrained reasoning, which goes beyond highlighting the important image regions. We compare different models that
generate NLEs for vision-language (VL) tasks, i.e., tasks
where the input consists of visual and textual information,
such as visual question-answering (VQA).
NLEs for VL tasks (VL-NLE) is an emerging field, and
only few datasets exist. Moreover, existing datasets tend to
be relatively small and unchallenging (e.g., VQA-X [37])
or noisy (e.g., VQA-E [29]). Another limitation of the VLNLE field is that there is currently no unified evaluation
framework, i.e., there is no consensus on how to evaluate
NLEs. NLEs are difficult to evaluate, as correct explanations
can differ both in syntactic form and in semantic meaning.
For example, “Because she has a big smile on her face” and
“Because her team just scored a goal” can both be correct
explanations for the answer “Yes” to the question “Is the girl
happy?”, but existing automatic natural language generation
(NLG) metrics are poor at capturing this. As such, the gold
standard for assessing NLEs is human evaluation. Past work
have all used different approaches for human evaluations,
and therefore no objective comparison exists.
In this work, we propose five main contributions to address the lack of comparison between existing work. (1) We
propose e-ViL, the first benchmark for VL-NLE tasks. eViL spans across three datasets of human-written NLEs, and
provides a unified evaluation framework that is designed to
be re-usable for future works. (2) Using e-ViL, we compare four VL-NLE models. (3) We introduce e-SNLI-VE, a
dataset of over 430k instances, the currently largest dataset
for VL-NLE. (4) We introduce a novel model, called e-UG,

1244

