Explain Me the Painting: Multi-Topic
Knowledgeable Art Description Generation
Zechen Bai* Yuta Nakashima1 Noa Garcia1
1
Osaka University
zechenbai@outlook.com

n-yuta@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Have you ever looked at a painting and wondered what
is the story behind it? This work presents a framework
to bring art closer to people by generating comprehensive
descriptions of fine-art paintings. Generating informative
descriptions for artworks, however, is extremely challenging, as it requires to 1) describe multiple aspects of the image such as its style, content, or composition, and 2) provide background and contextual knowledge about the artist,
their influences, or the historical period. To address these
challenges, we introduce a multi-topic and knowledgeable
art description framework, which modules the generated
sentences according to three artistic topics and, additionally, enhances each description with external knowledge.
The framework is validated through an exhaustive analysis, both quantitative and qualitative, as well as a comparative human evaluation, demonstrating outstanding results
in terms of both topic diversity and information veracity.

1. Introduction
For the general public, art tends to be considered as a
mysterious and remote discipline that requires a lot of study
to be fully appreciated. In the last few years, many efforts
have been made to apply artificial intelligence technologies
to the domain of art to make it more accessible [16]. Thanks
to the large-scale digitisation of artworks from collections
all over the world [22, 66, 49, 61], computer vision techniques have been widely adopted to address different artrelated problems [30, 45, 11, 20, 44, 34, 8, 59, 18, 69].
Most of the existing work in the field is focused on the
automatic analysis of paintings, addressing problems such
as attribute prediction [45, 59], content analysis [11, 21] or
style identification [29, 54, 30]. However, there is still an
absence of research that conveys in-depth and comprehensive information of artworks for the general public. In other
words, most previous work only allows people to under* Work done during a remote internship at Osaka University.

noagarcia@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

Real-world Image

Image
Captioner

(Factual) A young boy is
performing tricks on a skateboard.

Art Painting Image
Art
Describer

Vasari
Signorelli
Lamentation

External
Knowledge

1502
Christ
Cortona
...

(Context) An account of Vasari
says that Signorelli wanted to
represent in the figure of the
naked Christ his own son, who
died of plague in 1502. (Content)
In the middle of the painting,
there is an unreal landscape,
clear and ... (Form) It strikes the
observer with great power on
account of its dimensions, the
liveliness of ...

Figure 1. Art description generation. Comparison between standard image captioning (top) and art image description generation
(bottom). Standard image captioning usually generates a single
factual natural sentence to describe the content of a real-world image, while our art image description contains multiple sentences
to explain an artwork from different artistic perspectives.

stand a unique aspect of an artwork by providing a single
tag, usually associated with either its style or its content.
However, a real understanding of art is much more complex than being able to successfully categorize each piece
into a set of pre-defined tags. The intricate relationships between the content, form, and context of each artwork are
not at hand in a simple categorization process. In this work,
we take a step forward on the field of art understanding and
accessibility by proposing to automatically generate rich
descriptions of paintings from multiple artistic perspectives.
We propose a multi-topic and knowledgeable art description
generation framework that produces detailed explanations
about different aspects of paintings. Such a service would
facilitate a deeper interaction between the general public
and artworks, as well as potentially ease the work of art curators by automatically generating comments of paintings.

5422

