Dynamic Attentive Graph Learning for Image Restoration
Chong Mou† , Jian Zhang†,‡ , Zhuoyuan Wu†
†
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
‡
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
eechongm@gmail.com; zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn; wuzhuoyuan@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Non-local self-similarity in natural images has been verified to be an effective prior for image restoration. However,
most existing deep non-local methods assign a fixed number
of neighbors for each query item, neglecting the dynamics
of non-local correlations. Moreover, the non-local correlations are usually based on pixels, prone to be biased due to
image degradation. To rectify these weaknesses, in this paper, we propose a dynamic attentive graph learning model
(DAGL) to explore the dynamic non-local property on patch
level for image restoration. Specifically, we propose an improved graph model to perform patch-wise graph convolution with a dynamic and adaptive number of neighbors
for each node. In this way, image content can adaptively
balance over-smooth and over-sharp artifacts through the
number of its connected neighbors, and the patch-wise nonlocal correlations can enhance the message passing process. Experimental results on various image restoration
tasks: synthetic image denoising, real image denoising, image demosaicing, and compression artifact reduction show
that our DAGL can produce state-of-the-art results with
superior accuracy and visual quality. The source code is
available at https://github.com/jianzhangcs/DAGL.

1. Introduction
Image restoration (IR) is typically an ill-posed inverse
problem aiming to restore a high-quality image (IHQ )
from its degraded measurement (ILQ ) corrupted by various degradation factors. The degradation process can be
defined as ILQ = HIHQ + n, where H is a linear degradation matrix, and n represents additive noise [48, 55]. According to H, IR can be categorized into many subtasks,
e.g., denoising, compression artifact reduction, demosaicing, super-resolution, compressive sensing [49, 53, 54, 46].
The rise of deep learning has greatly facilitated the deThis work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61902009). (Corresponding author: Jian Zhang.)

velopment of image restoration. Many deep learning-based
methods [49, 50, 51, 33] have been proposed to solve this
ill-posed problem. Despite the remarkable success, most
methods focus on learning from a lot of external training
data without fully utilizing the internal prior in images.
By contrast, many classic model-based methods are implemented based on various priors, e.g., total variation [26],
sparse representation [9, 10, 47], and self-similarity [4, 7].
The self-similarity assumes that similar content would recur across the whole image, and the local content can be
recovered with the help of similar items from other places.
Inspired by [4], non-local neural networks [40] utilized selfsimilarity via deep networks, which are subsequently introduced to many image restoration tasks [20, 52]. However, these pixel-wise non-local methods are easily influenced by noisy signals within corrupted images. [18, 19]
were proposed to establish long-range correlations on patch
level. Nevertheless, the patch matching step is isolated
from the training process. In N3Net [29], a differentiable
K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) method was proposed. However, restricted by the high complexity of channel-wise feature fusion, N3Net can only perform the non-local operation within a small search region (10 × 10) and a small
number of matching patches. Some very recent methods [24, 23, 5] proposed more efficient patch-wise non-local
methods. But they followed the same paradigm as existing
non-local methods to construct fully connected correlations.
In general, the repeatability of different image content
is distinct, causing different requirements of non-local correlations in restoring different image content. An early
work [56] has well studied this property, finding that smooth
image contents recur much more frequently than complex
image details, and they should be treated differently.
Graph convolutional network (GCN) is a special nonlocal method designed to process the graph data by establishing long-range correlations in non-Euclidean space.
However, the large domain gap limits the application of this
flexible non-local method in computer vision community.
Recently, few works [36, 35, 21] proposed to apply GCN to
image restoration tasks. Specifically, [36] and [35] are built

4328

