Going deeper with Image Transformers
Hugo Touvron

Matthieu Cord

Alexandre Sablayrolles

Abstract
Transformers have been recently adapted for large scale
image classification, achieving high scores shaking up the
long supremacy of convolutional neural networks. However
the optimization of vision transformers has been little studied so far. In this work, we build and optimize deeper transformer networks for image classification. In particular, we
investigate the interplay of architecture and optimization
of such dedicated transformers. We make two architecture changes that significantly improve the accuracy of deep
transformers. This leads us to produce models whose performance does not saturate early with more depth, for instance we obtain 86.5% top-1 accuracy on Imagenet when
training with no external data, we thus attain the current
sate of the art with less floating-point operations and parameters. Our best model establishes the new state of the
art on Imagenet with Reassessed labels and Imagenet-V2 /
match frequency, in the setting with no additional training
data. We share our code and models1 .

1. Introduction
Residual architectures are prominent in computer vision
since the advent of ResNet [27]. They are defined as a sequence of functions of the form
xl+1 = gl (xl ) + Rl (xl ),

(1)

where the function gl and Rl define how the network updates the input xl at layer l. The function gl is typically identity, while Rl is the main building block of
the network: many variants in the literature essentially
differ on how this residual branch Rl is constructed or
parametrized [51, 63, 73]. Residual architectures highlight
the strong interplay between optimization and architecture
design. As pointed out by He et al. [27], residual networks
do not offer a better representational power. They achieve
better performance because they are easier to train: shortly
after their seminal work, He et al. discussed [28] the importance of having a clear path both forward and backward,
and advocate setting gl to the identity function.
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/deit

Gabriel Synnaeve

Hervé Jégou

The vision transformers [19] instantiate a particular form
of residual architecture: after casting the input image into a
set x0 of vectors, the network alternates self-attention layers
(SA) with feed-forward networks (FFN), as
x′l = xl + SA(η(xl ))
xl+1 = x′l + FFN(η(x′l ))

(2)

where η is the LayerNorm operator [1]. This definition follows the original architecture of Vaswani et al. [67], except the LayerNorm is applied before the block (pre-norm)
in the residual branch, as advocated by He et al. [28].
Child et al. [13] adopt this choice with LayerNorm for training deeper transformers for various media, including for image generation where they train transformers with 48 layers.
How to normalize, weigh, or initialize the residual
blocks of a residual architecture has received significant attention both for convolutional neural networks [7, 8, 28, 76]
and for transformers applied to NLP or speech tasks [2, 34,
76]. In Section 2, we revisit this topic for transformer architectures solving image classification problems. Examples
of approaches closely related to ours include Fixup [76], TFixup [34], ReZero [2] and SkipInit [16].
Following our analysis of the interplay between different
initialization, optimization and architectural design, we propose an approach that is effective to improve the training of
deeper architecture compared to current methods for image
transformers. Formally, we add a learnable diagonal matrix
on the output of each residual block, initialized close to (but
not at) 0. Adding this simple layer after each residual block
improves the training dynamic, allowing us to train deeper
high-capacity image transformers that benefit from depth.
We refer to this approach as LayerScale.
Section 3 introduces our second contribution, namely
class-attention layers, that we present in Figure 2. It is akin
to an encoder/decoder architecture, in which we explicitly
separate the transformer layers involving self-attention between patches, from class-attention layers that are devoted
to extract the content of the processed patches into a single
vector so that it can be fed to a linear classifier. This explicit
separation avoids the contradictory objective of guiding the
attention process while processing the class embedding. We
refer to this new architecture as CaiT (Class-Attention in
Image Transformers).

32

