ICE: Inter-instance Contrastive Encoding for Unsupervised Person
Re-identification
Hao Chen1,2,3 Benoit Lagadec3 Francois Bremond1,2
1
Inria 2 Université Côte d’Azur 3 European Systems Integration
{hao.chen, francois.bremond}@inria.fr

Abstract
Unsupervised person re-identification (ReID) aims at
learning discriminative identity features without annotations. Recently, self-supervised contrastive learning has
gained increasing attention for its effectiveness in unsupervised representation learning. The main idea of instance contrastive learning is to match a same instance
in different augmented views. However, the relationship
between different instances has not been fully explored in
previous contrastive methods, especially for instance-level
contrastive loss. To address this issue, we propose Interinstance Contrastive Encoding (ICE) that leverages interinstance pairwise similarity scores to boost previous classlevel contrastive ReID methods. We first use pairwise similarity ranking as one-hot hard pseudo labels for hard instance contrast, which aims at reducing intra-class variance. Then, we use similarity scores as soft pseudo labels
to enhance the consistency between augmented and original views, which makes our model more robust to augmentation perturbations. Experiments on several largescale person ReID datasets validate the effectiveness of our
proposed unsupervised method ICE, which is competitive
with even supervised methods. Code is made available at
https://github.com/chenhao2345/ICE.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) targets at retrieving an
person of interest across non-overlapping cameras by comparing the similarity of appearance representations. Supervised ReID methods [28, 2, 22] use human-annotated labels
to build discriminative appearance representations which
are robust to pose, camera property and view-point variation. However, annotating cross-camera identity labels is
a cumbersome task, which makes supervised methods less
scalable in real-world deployments. Unsupervised methods
[20, 21, 32] directly train a model on unlabeled data and
thus have a better scalability.
Most of previous unsupervised ReID methods [27, 11,
41] are based on unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA).

benoit.lagadec@esifrance.net

UDA methods adjust a model from a labeled source domain
to an unlabeled target domain. The source domain provides
a good starting point that facilitates target domain adaptation. With the help of a large-scale source dataset, state-ofthe-art UDA methods [11, 41] significantly enhance the performance of unsupervised ReID. However, the performance
of UDA methods is strongly influenced by source dataset’s
scale and quality. Moreover, a large-scale labeled dataset is
not always available in the real world. In this case, fully unsupervised methods [20, 21] own more flexibility, as they do
not require any identity annotation and directly learn from
unlabeled data in a target domain.
Recently, contrastive learning has shown excellent performance in unsupervised representation learning. State-ofthe-art contrastive methods [38, 5, 14] consider each image
instance as a class and learns representations by matching
augmented views of a same instance. As a class is usually composed of multiple positive instances, it hurts the
performance of fine-grained ReID tasks when different images of a same identity are considered as different classes.
Self-paced Contrastive Learning (SpCL) [13] alleviates this
problem by matching an instance with the centroid of the
multiple positives, where each positive converges to its centroid at a uniform pace. Although SpCL has achieved impressive performance, this method does not consider interinstance affinities, which can be leveraged to reduce intraclass variance and make clusters more compact. In supervised ReID, state-of-the-art methods [2, 22] usually adopt
a hard triplet loss [16] to lay more emphasis on hard samples inside a class, so that hard samples can get closer to
normal samples. In this paper, we introduce Inter-instance
Contrastive Encoding (ICE), in which we match an instance
with its hardest positive in a mini-batch to make clusters
more compact and improve pseudo label quality. Matching
the hardest positive refers to using one-hot “hard” pseudo
labels.
Since no ground truth is available, mining hardest positives within clusters is likely to introduce false positives
into the training process. In addition, the one-hot label does
not take the complex inter-instance relationship into consideration when multiple pseudo positives and negatives exist

14960

