Super Resolve Dynamic Scene from Continuous Spike Streams
Jing Zhao1 , Jiyu Xie2 , Ruiqin Xiong1 ,* Jian Zhang3 , Zhaofei Yu1 , Tiejun Huang1
1
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
3
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
{jzhaopku, rqxiong, zhangjian.sz, yuzf12, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, xjy646@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, a novel retina-inspired camera, namely spike
camera, has shown great potential for recording high-speed
dynamic scenes. Unlike conventional digital cameras that
compact the visual information within an exposure interval into a single snapshot, the spike camera continuously
outputs binary spike streams to record the dynamic scenes,
yielding a very high temporal resolution. Most of the existing reconstruction methods for spike camera focus on reconstructing images with the same resolution as spike camera. However, as a trade-off of high temporal resolution, the
spatial resolution of spike camera is limited, resulting in inferior details of the reconstruction. To address this issue, we
develop a spike camera super-resolution framework, aiming to super resolve high-resolution intensity images from
the low-resolution binary spike streams. Due to the relative
motion between the camera and the objects to capture, the
spikes fired by the same sensor pixel no longer describes
the same points in the external scene. In this paper, we exploit the relative motion and derive the relationship between
light intensity and each spike, so as to recover the external
scene with both high temporal and high spatial resolution.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
can reconstruct pleasant high-resolution images from lowresolution spike streams.

1. Introduction
With the development of real-time computer vision applications, such as unmanned aerial vehicle, autonomous
driving and robotics, the inherent limitations of conventional digital cameras become increasingly evident. Conventional cameras generally accumulate the photoelectric
information in a certain exposure window to form a snapshot frame. Such an imaging mechanism can produce clear
images with fine details for still scenes. However, for dy* Ruiqin Xiong (rqxiong@pku.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

(a) Spike stream

(b) TFP [34]

(c) TFI [34]

(d) TVS [35]

(e) TVS [35] + SRFBN [13]

(f) Proposed

Figure 1. The image for a doll falling from a height. (a) Spike
streams captured by the spike camera [6]. (b)-(d) Spike camera reconstruction with different methods [34, 35], which suffers
low resolution with poor details. (e) x2 super resolution result by
combining the state-of-the-art spike camera reconstruction method
[35] with competitive image super-resolution method [13]. (f) x2
reconstruction by super-resolving the intensity image from spike
streams with the proposed method, which can reconstruct the textures and details.

namic scenes with high speed motion, a single point on a
moving object can be projected onto different pixels on the
sensor, resulting in blurry artifacts for the moving objects.
To address this issue, a novel neuromorphic camera,
namely spike camera, has been developed to record dynamic scenes [6, 7]. Unlike the conventional cameras that
capture the visual scene by a snapshot, the spike camera
abandons the concept of exposure window. Instead, it mon-

2533

