Region-aware Contrastive Learning for Semantic Segmentation
Hanzhe Hu1,2 , Jinshi Cui1 *, Liwei Wang1 *
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University 2 Zhejiang Lab
huhz@pku.edu.cn {cjs, wanglw}@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent works have made great success in semantic segmentation by exploiting contextual information in a local
or global manner within individual image and supervising the model with pixel-wise cross entropy loss. However,
from the holistic view of the whole dataset, semantic relations not only exist inside one single image, but also prevail
in the whole training data, which makes solely considering intra-image correlations insufficient. Inspired by recent
progress in unsupervised contrastive learning, we propose
the region-aware contrastive learning (RegionContrast) for
semantic segmentation in the supervised manner. In order to enhance the similarity of semantically similar pixels while keeping the discrimination from others, we employ contrastive learning to realize this objective. With the
help of memory bank, we explore to store all the representative features into the memory. Without loss of generality,
to efficiently incorporate all training data into the memory
bank while avoiding taking too much computation resource,
we propose to construct region centers to represent features
from different categories for every image. Hence, the proposed region-aware contrastive learning is performed in
a region level for all the training data, which saves much
more memory than methods exploring the pixel-level relations. The proposed RegionContrast brings little computation cost during training and requires no extra overhead for
testing. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on three benchmark
datasets including Cityscapes, ADE20K and COCO Stuff.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims to assign a category
label to each pixel in an image, is a fundamental and challenging problem in computer vision. It has been widely
applied to many applications, such as autonomous driving,
scene understanding and image editing.
In the past few years, benefiting from the availabil* Corresponding authors.

(a) Most Current Methods

(b) Proposed RegionContrast

Figure 1. Main difference between our method and previous ones.
1(a) Most existing methods only focus on intra-image relations.
1(b) Our proposed RegionContrast, apart from solely focusing on
intra-image information, also considers inter-image correlations in
a region level.

ity of large-scale datasets such as ImageNet [11] and
Cityscapes [10], semantic segmentation has achieved significant progress. In particular, based on the fully convolutional network (FCN) [30], many state-of-the-art methods emerge, which focus on exploiting contextual information. DeepLabV3 [5] proposes ASPP module which aggregates spatial regularly sampled pixels at different dilated
rates while PSPNet [52] proposes pyramid pooling module
which partitions the feature maps into multiple regions before pooling. Non-local Network [40] adopts self-attention
mechanism to enable every pixel to receive information
from all other pixels, resulting in a much more complete
pixel-wise representation.
Aforementioned methods, though achieving satisfactory

16291

