A Dark Flash Normal Camera
Zhihao Xia1 * Jason Lawrence2
1
Washington University in St. Louis

Supreeth Achar2
2
Google Research

Abstract
Casual photography is often performed in uncontrolled
lighting that can result in low quality images and degrade
the performance of downstream processing. We consider
the problem of estimating surface normal and reflectance
maps of scenes depicting people despite these conditions
by supplementing the available visible illumination with a
single near infrared (NIR) light source and camera, a socalled “dark flash image”. Our method takes as input a
single color image captured under arbitrary visible lighting and a single dark flash image captured under controlled
front-lit NIR lighting at the same viewpoint, and computes
a normal map, a diffuse albedo map, and a specular intensity map of the scene. Since ground truth normal and reflectance maps of faces are difficult to capture, we propose
a novel training technique that combines information from
two readily available and complementary sources: a stereo
depth signal and photometric shading cues. We evaluate
our method over a range of subjects and lighting conditions
and describe two applications: optimizing stereo geometry
and filling the shadows in an image.

1. Introduction
In casual mobile photography, images are often captured under poor lighting conditions. Controlling the visible
lighting or supplementing it with a flash is often too difficult or too disruptive to be practical. On the other hand, the
near infrared (NIR) lighting in a scene can be much more
easily controlled and is invisible to the user. In this paper,
we demonstrate how a single “dark flash” NIR image and a
single visible image taken under uncontrolled lighting can
be used to recover high quality maps of the surface normals, diffuse albedos, and specular intensities in the scene.
We collectively refer to the albedo and specular intensity
estimates as a “reflectance map”. Exposing these signals
within a photography pipeline opens up a range of applications from refining independent depth estimates to digitally manipulating the lighting in the scene. Although our
method is applicable to many types of objects, we focus on
* Work done while Zhihao Xia was an intern at Google.

RGB Input

NIR Input

Normal Map

Figure 1: Estimating surface geometry from a single RGB
image is challenging. We augment this input with a single NIR “dark flash” image captured at the same time, and
present a network that can estimate high quality normal
maps and reflectance maps (not shown) under a wide range
of visible lighting conditions.

faces - the most common photography subject at the short
ranges over which active illumination is effective.
Our use of controlled NIR lighting provides a number
of benefits. First, the ambient NIR light in a scene is usually weak or completely absent in indoor environments and
is significantly attenuated by atmospheric absorption outdoors, which means it is often practical to control this aspect of a scene. Second, it results in a more tractable estimation problem in contrast to single-image “shape from

2430

