MINE: Towards Continuous Depth MPI with NeRF for Novel View Synthesis
Jiaxin Li1* , Zijian Feng1* , Qi She1 , Henghui Ding1 , Changhu Wang1 , Gim Hee Lee2
1

ByteDance, 2 National University of Singapore

Abstract
In this paper, we propose MINE to perform novel view
synthesis and depth estimation via dense 3D reconstruction from a single image. Our approach is a continuous depth generalization of the Multiplane Images (MPI)
by introducing the NEural radiance fields (NeRF). Given
a single image as input, MINE predicts a 4-channel image (RGB and volume density) at arbitrary depth values
to jointly reconstruct the camera frustum and fill in occluded contents. The reconstructed and inpainted frustum
can then be easily rendered into novel RGB or depth views
using differentiable rendering. Extensive experiments on
RealEstate10K, KITTI and Flowers Light Fields show that
our MINE outperforms state-of-the-art by a large margin in
novel view synthesis. We also achieve competitive results
in depth estimation on iBims-1 and NYU-v2 without annotated depth supervision. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/vincentfung13/MINE.

1. Introduction
Interactive 3D scene is a fascinating way to achieve immersive user experience similar to augmented/virtual reality. To automate or simplify the creation of 3D scenes, increasing efforts are invested on novel view synthesis from
a single or multiple image(s) that enables rendering at arbitrary camera poses according to user’s interaction. Despite
its usefulness, the novel view synthesis problem is challenging because it requires precise geometry understanding, and
inpainting of the occluded geometry and textures.
To tackle the problem of view synthesis, most existing
methods focus on the design of 3D or 2.5D representations of the scene, and the rendering techniques of novel
views. A straightforward idea is to perform Structure-fromMotion (SfM) [38, 37] or monocular/multiview depth estimations [11, 10, 60, 52] to recover the 3D scene. Unfortunately, this naive approach is insufficient to acquire accurate
dense 3D geometry and fill in the occluded contents of the
scene. Consequently, this results to distorsion and artifacts
* Equal contribution.

Source Image

Encoder-Decoder

3D Representation

Source Depth

Target Depth

Target Image

Differentiable
Rendering

RGB & Volume density
at arbitrary 3D position

Source Camera

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed method.

in the rendered novel views. To alleviate this problem, more
sophisticated representations including Layed Depth Image
(LDI) [51, 40], Multiplane Images (MPI) [50] are used with
deep networks to recovered 2.5D information from single /
multiple images. However, 2.5D approaches usually suffer
from limited resolution to represent the full 3D scene.
Recently, the MPI [50] representation attracts a lot of attentions. Specifically, it is a deep network supervised with
other image views of the same scene to lift a RGB image into multiple planes of RGB and alpha values. Novel
views are then rendered by performing homography warping and integral over the planes. Despite its success, the
MPI method fails to represent continuous 3D space effectively. Its depth-wise resolution is limited by the number
of discrete planes, and thus the MPIs cannot be converted
to other 3D representations such as mesh, point cloud, etc.
In contrast, the Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [28] is concurrently proposed to recover 3D information from images
using a Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP). The MLP takes a
3D position and a 2D viewing direction as input to predict
the RGB and volume occupancy density at that query position. Although NeRF produces high quality 3D structures
and novel views, it has to be trained per scene, i.e. one MLP
represents only one scene.
In view that MPI [50] is unable to represent the full 3D
space, we propose MINE that generalizes MPI to a continuous 3D representation similar to NeRF [28]. Specifically,
an input image is first fed into an encoder network to obtain the image features. A decoder network then takes these

12578

