Can Scale-Consistent Monocular Depth Be Learned in a Self-Supervised
Scale-Invariant Manner?
Lijun Wang1 , Yifan Wang1,∗, Linzhao Wang,2 Yunlong Zhan,2 Ying Wang,2 and Huchuan Lu1,3,∗
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., 3 Peng Cheng Lab
{ljwang,wyfan,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, {wanglinzhao,zhanyunlong,wangying110}@huawei.com

Geometric constraints are shown to enforce scale consistency and remedy the scale ambiguity issue in selfsupervised monocular depth estimation. Meanwhile, scaleinvariant losses focus on learning relative depth, leading
to accurate relative depth prediction. To combine the best
of both worlds, we learn scale-consistent self-supervised
depth in a scale-invariant manner. Towards this goal, we
present a scale-aware geometric (SAG) loss, which enforces scale consistency through point cloud alignment.
Compared to prior arts, SAG loss takes relative scale into
consideration during relative motion estimation, enabling
more precise alignment and explicit supervision for scale
inference. In addition, a novel two-stream architecture
for depth estimation is designed, which disentangles scale
from depth estimation and allows depth to be learned in a
scale-invariant manner. The integration of SAG loss and
two-stream network enables more consistent scale inference and more accurate relative depth estimation. Our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance under both
scale-invariant and scale-dependent evaluation settings.

0.120

1. Introduction
To alleviate the need of high-quality ground truth depth
data, there is a recent surge of interest in self-supervised
monocular depth estimation [36, 10]. The basic idea is to
jointly learn depth estimation and ego-motion prediction supervised by a photometric reconstruction loss. Although,
these approaches have achieved remarkable success in popular benchmarks, they are known to suffer from the perframe scale ambiguity issue [27, 2]. For one thing, the estimated depths are not guaranteed to be scale consistent and
the ego-motion network also fails to predict globally consistent trajectories for long videos. For another, without proper
constraints, the depth network has to adapt its scales according to the ego-motion prediction and vice versa, which con∗ Corresponding author

5.2

Abs Rel
RMSE

5.0

Abs Rel

0.125
0.115

4.8

0.110
0.105
0.100

0.88
0.87
0.86
0.85
0.84
0.83
0.82
0.81

4.6

Ours

Baseline

(a) Error

Input Image

0.97
< 1.25
< 1.252 0.96
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.92
0.91
0.90

< 1.252

0.130

RMSE
< 1.25

Abstract

Ours

Baseline

(b) Accuracy

Ours

Baseline

(c) Depth Map
Figure 1. Strength of our scale-consistent depth estimation learned
in a scale-invariant manner. (a) Scale-dependent evaluation on
KITTI [9], where predictions are aligned to ground truth using one
global scale on a per-sequence basis rather than conventional perframe scale alignments (See Sec. 4.2.2). (b) Scale-invariant learning allows our method to produce more accurate relative depth.

fuses network training and results in performance degeneration or even training divergence [27]. Meanwhile, recent
evidence [7] also indicates that the global scale is a fundamental source of uncertainty in supervised depth estimation,
and that scale-invariant losses focus on relative depth learning and largely benefit depth estimation in terms of accuracy
as well as generalization abilities [19].
In light of the above analysis, an interesting question to
ask is whether we can achieve scale-consistent depth estimation but also enjoy the advantages of scale-invariant
training under the self-supervised framework? We make
the first attempt to answer this question by proposing a new
paradigm for self-supervised monocular depth estimation.
To this end, we present a scale-aware geometric loss
(dubbed SAG loss) that operates in the 3D space. The estimated depth of adjacent frames are first projected to 3D
point clouds and then transformed into a common view using the predicted ego-motion. Instead of directly penal-

12727

