FcaNet: Frequency Channel Attention Networks
Zequn Qin1 , Pengyi Zhang1 , Fei Wu1,2 , Xi Li1,2 *
1
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University,
2
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study, Zhejiang University
zequnqin@gmail.com, pyzhang@zju.edu.cn, wufei@cs.zju.edu.cn, xilizju@zju.edu.cn

81

Abstract

1. Introduction
As an important and challenging problem in feature
modeling, attention mechanisms for convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have recently attracted considerable attention and are widely used in many fields like computer vision [40] and natural language processing [34]. In principle,
they aim at selectively concentrating on some important information and have many types of variants (e.g., spatial attention, channel attention, and self-attention) corresponding
* Corresponding author.

79
Top-1 accuracy

Attention mechanism, especially channel attention, has
gained great success in the computer vision field. Many
works focus on how to design efficient channel attention
mechanisms while ignoring a fundamental problem, i.e.,
channel attention mechanism uses scalar to represent channel, which is difficult due to massive information loss. In
this work, we start from a different view and regard the
channel representation problem as a compression process
using frequency analysis. Based on the frequency analysis, we mathematically prove that the conventional global
average pooling is a special case of the feature decomposition in the frequency domain. With the proof, we naturally
generalize the compression of the channel attention mechanism in the frequency domain and propose our method with
multi-spectral channel attention, termed as FcaNet. FcaNet
is simple but effective. We can change a few lines of code
in the calculation to implement our method within existing
channel attention methods. Moreover, the proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art results compared with other channel attention methods on image classification, object detection, and instance segmentation tasks. Our method could
consistently outperform the baseline SENet, with the same
number of parameters and the same computational cost.
Our code and models are publicly available at https:
//github.com/cfzd/FcaNet.

Ours
SENet
ResNet

80

78.57

78

75
74
73

79.84

79.19
78.72

79.39

101-layer

152-layer

77.86
77.27

77
76

80.02

79.63

75.02
74.83
74.58

34-layer
10

50-layer

20
30
40
50
60
Number of parameters (millions)

70

Figure 1. Classification accuracy comparison on ImageNet. With
the same number of parameters and computational cost, our
method consistently outperforms the baseline SENet.

to different feature dimensions. Due to the simplicity and
effectiveness in feature modeling, channel attention directly
learns to attach importance weights with different channels,
becoming a popular and powerful tool for the deep learning
community.
Typically, a core step of channel attention approaches
is to use a scalar for each channel to conduct the calculation due to the constrained computational overhead, and
global average pooling (GAP) becomes the de-facto standard choice in the deep learning community because of its
simplicity and efficiency. Nevertheless, every rose has its
thorn. The simplicity of GAP makes it hard to well capture
complex information for various inputs. Some methods like
CBAM [39] and SRM [23] further use global max pooling
and global standard deviation pooling to enhance the performance of GAP. Different from previous works, we consider the scalar representation of a channel as a compression
problem. Namely, the information of a channel should be
compactly encoded by a scalar while preserving the representation ability of the whole channel as much as possible.
In this way, how to effectively compress a channel with a

783

