TMCOSS: Thresholded Multi-Criteria Online Subset Selection for
Data-Efficient Autonomous Driving
Soumi Das
IIT Kharagpur

Harikrishna Patibandla
IIT Kharagpur

Kshounis Bera
HPE Enterprise

Suparna Bhattacharya
Hewlett Packard Labs, HPE Enterprise

Niloy Ganguly
IIT Kharagpur

Sourangshu Bhattacharya
IIT Kharagpur

Trained
model

Abstract

6

Training vision-based Autonomous driving models is a
challenging problem with enormous practical implications.
One of the main challenges is the requirement of storage
and processing of vast volumes of (possibly redundant)
driving video data. In this paper, we study the problem
of data-efficient training of autonomous driving systems.
We argue that in the context of an edge-device deployment, multi-criteria online video frame subset selection is
an appropriate technique for developing such frameworks.
We study existing convex optimization based solutions and
show that they are unable to provide solution with high
weightage to loss of selected video frames. We design a
novel multi-criteria online subset selection algorithm, TMCOSS, which uses a thresholded concave function of selection variables. Extensive experiments using driving simulator CARLA show that we are able to drop 80% of the frames,
while succeeding to complete 100% of the episodes. We
also show that TMCOSS improves performance on the crucial affordance “Relative Angle” during turns, on inclusion
of bucket-specific relative angle loss (BL), leading to selection of more frames in those parts. TMCOSS also achieves
an 80% reduction in number of training video frames, on
real-world videos from the standard BDD and Cityscapes
datasets, for the tasks of drivable area segmentation, and
semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Many A.I.-based autonomous driving applications e.g.
affordance-based driving models [21], semantic segmentation models [5], drivable area detection [24], etc., need to
collect a large amount of video data from edge devices for
training machine learning models. However, much of the
input video contains redundant information from the task
point of view. For example, in the case of affordance-based
driving models, training using many frames on straight road

1

Processing and Storage in Edge device

Incoming video
frames/ data
points

Cloud
transfer
5

2a

Reduced video /
dataset
Pairwise
Distances

Pointwise
Losses
Task specific
models

Multi-Criteria OSS

E.g. driving model,
semantic
segmentation model,
...

2b

3

Selected incoming video
frames / data points
4

Permanently Stored Data

Adding to existing data

Figure 1: Data subset selection framework on edge devices for reduced training dataset collection.

sections may not be necessary; while one may need a lot of
frames in the turns for training. In this paper, we are interested in developing an online subset selection (OSS) algorithm [13] which can be deployed on edge devices, and can
select the most informative video frames used for training
one or more models. Figure 1 shows an overview of our
application scenario.
The problem of video frame subset selection has been
studied in various contexts, including video summarization
[13, 19], video recognition[23], video fast forwarding [17],
etc. Deep reinforcement learning based methods, which
learn a frame skipping network, with reward for better performance [17, 22], or more confidence [23] on the end task
are infeasible for deployment on edge devices since they
require multiple evaluations of the end task objective (e.g.
error on a validation set or fraction of test episodes completed), for learning the parameters of the skipping network. The external criteria based methods which optimize
a global criterion between selected frames and whole video,
e.g. perceptual similarity [13], manifold spanning [15], etc
are appropriate for our setting, but do not incorporate signals from A.I. tasks, e.g. loss from the currently trained

6341

