FashionMirror: Co-attention Feature-remapping Virtual Try-on with Sequential
Template Poses
Chieh-Yun Chen

Ling Lo Pin-Jui Huang Hong-Han Shuai
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan

Wen-Huang Cheng

{cychen.ee09g,lynn97.ee08g,i309505013.eic09g,hhshuai,whcheng}@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
Virtual try-on tasks have drawn increased attention.
Prior arts focus on tackling this task via warping clothes
and fusing the information at the pixel level with the help
of semantic segmentation. However, conducting semantic
segmentation is time-consuming and easily causes error accumulation over time. Besides, warping the information at
the pixel level instead of the feature level limits the performance (e.g., unable to generate different views) and is unstable since it directly demonstrates the results even with
a misalignment. In contrast, fusing information at the feature level can be further refined by the convolution to obtain the final results. Based on these assumptions, we propose a co-attention feature-remapping framework, namely
FashionMirror, that generates the try-on results according
to the driven-pose sequence in two stages. In the first stage,
we consider the source human image and the target try-on
clothes to predict the removed mask and the try-on clothing
mask, which replaces the pre-processed semantic segmentation and reduces the inference time. In the second stage,
we first remove the clothes on the source human via the removed mask and warp the clothing features conditioning on
the try-on clothing mask to fit the next frame human. Meanwhile, we predict the optical flows from the consecutive 2D
poses and warp the source human to the next frame at the
feature level. Then, we enhance the clothing features and
source human features in every frame to generate realistic
try-on results with spatio-temporal smoothness. Both qualitative and quantitative results show that FashionMirror outperforms the state-of-the-art virtual try-on approaches.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we envisage a new shopping scenario.
Imagine that we stand in front of a fashion mirror inside
a shopping mall. The fashion mirror shows the real-time

Figure 1. Virtual try-on results in sequential poses.

virtual try-on results of the selected clothes. Therefore, we
can exhibit arbitrary poses to guide the synthesized try-on
result in the fashion mirror for viewing how suitable the garments are in multi-aspects as demonstrated in Fig. 1. To
achieve this goal, one intuitive way is to apply the singlepose virtual try-on methods (e.g., [41]) for the first frame
and apply the sequential pose transformation (e.g., [31]) for
the following frames. However, since the clothing information only depends on the first frame, errors may accumulate
in sequential generation. Another possible solution is to use
the multi-pose virtual try-on methods (e.g., [19]) in a frameby-frame manner. Nevertheless, the results of consecutive
frames may be inconsistent (i.e., flickering artifacts) since
they are generated independently.
To consider the sequential information for video-based
virtual try-on, FWGAN [10] proposes a flow-navigated
warping GAN, which (i) warps the clothing image and refines the clothing texture at the pixel level, (ii) warps the
previous frame via the optical flow generated by [11], and
(iii) conducts the pre-processed semantic segmentation to
remove the clothes from the source human image. However, the performance is limited by the generated optical
flow and warping the clothes at the pixel level prohibits

13809

