Concept Generalization in Visual Representation Learning
Mert Bulent Sariyildiz1,2, Yannis Kalantidis1
1
NAVER LABS Europe

Diane Larlus1
2
Inria*

Karteek Alahari2

Figure 1: An overview of our Concept Generalization (CoG) benchmark. (a) An example of five concepts from the
ImageNet-21K dataset [11] (IN-21K), ranked by increasing semantic distance (decreasing Lin similarity [34]) to the ImageNet1K (IN-1K) dataset [47] concept “Tiger cat”. (b) We rank the 21K concepts of IN-21K according to their semantic distance to
the 1000 concepts of IN-1K and split the ranked list to extract 5 groups of 1000 concepts. We refer to the five IN-1K-sized
datasets of increasing semantic distance from IN-1K as concept generalization levels, denoted as L1/2/3/4/5 . (c) The proposed
ImageNet-CoG benchmark uses a model trained on IN-1K as a feature extractor and evaluates its concept generalization
capabilities by learning linear classifiers for each level of more and more challenging unseen concepts.

Abstract
Measuring concept generalization, i.e., the extent to
which models trained on a set of (seen) visual concepts can
be leveraged to recognize a new set of (unseen) concepts, is a
popular way of evaluating visual representations, especially
in a self-supervised learning framework. Nonetheless, the
choice of unseen concepts for such an evaluation is usually
made arbitrarily, and independently from the seen concepts
used to train representations, thus ignoring any semantic relationships between the two. In this paper, we argue that the
semantic relationships between seen and unseen concepts
affect generalization performance and propose ImageNet-

CoG,1 a novel benchmark on the ImageNet-21K (IN-21K)
dataset that enables measuring concept generalization in
a principled way. Our benchmark leverages expert knowledge that comes from WordNet in order to define a sequence
of unseen IN-21K concept sets that are semantically more
and more distant from the ImageNet-1K (IN-1K) subset, a
ubiquitous training set. This allows us to benchmark visual
representations learned on IN-1K out-of-the box. We conduct a large-scale study encompassing 31 convolution and
transformer-based models and show how different architectures, levels of supervision, regularization techniques and
use of web data impact the concept generalization performance.

1 https://europe.naverlabs.com/cog-benchmark

* UGA, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France

9629

