Handwriting Transformers
Ankan Kumar Bhunia1 Salman Khan1,2 Hisham Cholakkal1 Rao Muhammad Anwer1
Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3 Mubarak Shah4
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE 2 Australian National University, Australia
3
Linköping University, Sweden 4 University of Central Florida, USA

Abstract
We propose a novel transformer-based styled handwritten text image generation approach, HWT, that strives to
learn both style-content entanglement as well as global
and local style patterns. The proposed HWT captures the
long and short range relationships within the style examples through a self-attention mechanism, thereby encoding
both global and local style patterns. Further, the proposed
transformer-based HWT comprises an encoder-decoder attention that enables style-content entanglement by gathering the style features of each query character. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to introduce a transformerbased network for styled handwritten text generation.
Our proposed HWT generates realistic styled handwritten text images and outperforms the state-of-the-art
demonstrated through extensive qualitative, quantitative
and human-based evaluations. The proposed HWT can
handle arbitrary length of text and any desired writing
style in a few-shot setting. Further, our HWT generalizes well to the challenging scenario where both words
and writing style are unseen during training, generating
realistic styled handwritten text images. Code is available at:
https://github.com/ankanbhunia/HandwritingTransformers

1. Introduction
Generating realistic synthetic handwritten text images,
from typed text, that is versatile in terms of both writing style and lexicon is a challenging problem. Automatic
handwritten text generation can be beneficial for people
having disabilities or injuries that prevent them from writing, translating a note or a memo from one language to another by adapting an author’s writing style or gathering additional data for training deep learning-based handwritten
text recognition models. Here, we investigate the problem
of realistic handwritten text generation of unconstrained
text sequences with arbitrary length and diverse calligraphic
attributes representing writing styles of a writer.

Figure 1: Comparison of HWT (c) with GANwriting [14]
(d) and Davis et al. [5] (e) in imitating the desired unseen
writing style (a) for given query text (b). While [14, 5]
capture global writing styles (e.g., slant), they struggle to
imitate local style patterns (e.g., character style, ligatures).
HWT (c) imitates both global and local styles, leading to
a more realistic styled handwritten text image generation.
For instance, style of ‘n’ (red line) appearing in (a) is mimicked by HWT, for a different word including same character ‘n’. Similarly, a group of characters in ‘thought’
and ‘personalities’ (blue and magenta lines) are styled
in a way that matches with words (‘throughout’ and
‘qualities’) sharing some common characters in (a).
Furthermore, HWT preserves cursive patterns and connectivity of all characters in word ‘also’ (green line).
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] have been
investigated for offline handwritten text image generation

1086

