Graspness Discovery in Clutters for Fast and Accurate Grasp Detection
Chenxi Wang∗ , Hao-Shu Fang∗ , Minghao Gou, Hongjie Fang, Jin Gao, Cewu Lu†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wcx1997@sjtu.edu.cn, fhaoshu@gmail.com, {gmh2015, galaxies}@sjtu.edu.cn,
gao3944677@126.com, lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Efﬁcient and robust grasp pose detection is vital for robotic
manipulation. For general 6 DoF grasping, conventional
methods treat all points in a scene equally and usually
adopt uniform sampling to select grasp candidates. However, we discover that ignoring where to grasp greatly
harms the speed and accuracy of current grasp pose
detection methods. In this paper, we propose “graspness”,
a quality based on geometry cues that distinguishes graspable area in cluttered scenes. A look-ahead searching
method is proposed for measuring the graspness and
statistical results justify the rationality of our method.
To quickly detect graspness in practice, we develop a
neural network named graspness model to approximate
the searching process. Extensive experiments verify the
stability, generality and effectiveness of our graspness
model, allowing it to be used as a plug-and-play module
for different methods. A large improvement in accuracy
is witnessed for various previous methods after equipping
our graspness model. Moreover, we develop GSNet, an
end-to-end network that incorporate our graspness model
for early ﬁltering of low quality predictions. Experiments
on a large scale benchmark, GraspNet-1Billion, show that
our method outperforms previous arts by a large margin
(30+ AP) and achieves a high inference speed.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental problem in robotics, robust grasp pose
detection for unstructured environment has been fascinating our community for decades. It has a broad spectrum of
applications in picking [10], assembling [40], home serving [11], etc. Advancing the generality, accuracy and efﬁciency is a long pursuit of researchers in this ﬁeld.
For grasp pose detection in the wild, it can be regarded
as a two-stage problem: given a single-view point cloud,
∗ denotes equal contribution.
Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

Figure 1. Graspness illustration for a cluttered scene. Brighter
color denotes higher graspness. We prefer the points with high
graspness for grasping.

we ﬁrst ﬁnd locations with high graspability (where stage)
and then decide grasp parameters like in-plane rotation, approaching depth, grasp score and gripper width (how stage)
for a local region.
Previous methods for 6-DoF grasp pose detection in cluttered scenes mainly focused on improving the quality of
grasp parameter prediction, i.e., the how stage, and two lines
of research are explored. The ﬁrst line [41, 27, 31] adopts
a sampling-evaluation method, where grasp candidates are
uniformly randomly sampled from the scene and evaluated
by their model. The second line [36, 13, 32] proposes endto-end networks to calculate grasp parameters for the whole
scene, where point clouds are sampled before [32] or during [36, 13] the forward propagation. For all these methods,
the where stage is not explicitly modeled (i.e., they do not
perform a ﬁltering procedure in a ﬁrst stage) and candidate
grasp points distribute uniformly in the scene.
However, we ﬁnd that such uniform sampling strategy greatly hinders the performance of the whole pipeline.
There are tremendous points in 3D contiguous space, while
positive samples are concentrated in small local regions.
Take GraspNet-1Billion [13], the current largest dataset in
grasp pose detection as an example. We statistically ﬁnd
that, even with object masks, the graspable points are less

15964

