Efficient Video Compression via Content-Adaptive Super-Resolution
Mehrdad Khani, Vibhaalakshmi Sivaraman, Mohammad Alizadeh
MIT CSAIL
{khani,vibhaa,alizadeh}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Video compression is a critical component of Internet
video delivery. Recent work has shown that deep learning
techniques can rival or outperform human-designed algorithms, but these methods are significantly less compute and
power-efficient than existing codecs. This paper presents a
new approach that augments existing codecs with a small,
content-adaptive super-resolution model that significantly
boosts video quality. Our method, SRVC, encodes video
into two bitstreams: (i) a content stream, produced by compressing downsampled low-resolution video with the existing codec, (ii) a model stream, which encodes periodic updates to a lightweight super-resolution neural network customized for short segments of the video. SRVC decodes
the video by passing the decompressed low-resolution video
frames through the (time-varying) super-resolution model
to reconstruct high-resolution video frames. Our results
show that to achieve the same PSNR, SRVC requires 20%
of the bits-per-pixel of H.265 in slow mode, and 3% of the
bits-per-pixel of DVC, a recent deep learning-based video
compression scheme. SRVC runs at 90 frames per second
on an NVIDIA V100 GPU.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a sharp increase in video traffic. It is predicted that by 2022, video will account for
more than 80% of all Internet traffic [6, 1]. Video delivery is so bandwidth-intensive that during surge periods
such as the initial months of the pandemic, Netflix and
Youtube were forced to throttle video quality to reduce overheads [2, 3]. Further, while mobile devices support 1080p
resolutions these days, cellular networks are still plagued
by low bandwidth and frequent fluctuations in most parts
of the world. Hence efficient video compression to reduce
bandwidth consumption without compromising on quality
is more critical than ever.
While the demand for video content has increased over
the years, the techniques used to compress and transmit
video have largely remained the same. Ideas such as ap-

plying Discrete Cosine Transforms (DCTs) to video blocks
and computing motion vectors [46, 18] , which were developed decades ago, are still in use today. Even the latest
H.265 codec improves upon these same ideas by incorporating variable block sizes [7]. Recent efforts [35, 10, 38] to
improve video compression have turned to deep learning to
capture the complex relationships between the components
of a video compression pipeline. These approaches have
had moderate success at outperforming current codecs, but
they are much less compute- and power-efficient.
We present SRVC, a new approach particularly useful
for cellular networks and low bitrate-scenarios, that combines existing compression algorithms with a lightweight,
content-adaptive super-resolution (SR) neural network that
significantly boosts performance with low computation
cost. SRVC compresses the input video into two bitstreams:
a content stream and a model stream, each with a separate bitrate that can be controlled independently of the other
stream. The content stream relies on a standard codec such
as H.265 to transmit low-resolution frames at a low bitrate.
The model stream encodes a time-varying SR neural network, which the decoder uses to boost the quality of decompressed frames derived from the content stream. SRVC uses
the model stream to specialize the SR network for short segments of video dynamically (e.g., every few seconds). This
makes it possible to use a small SR model, consisting of just
a few convolutional and upsampling layers.
Applying SR to improve the quality of low-bitrate compressed video isn’t new. AV1 [16], for instance, has a mode
(typically used in low-bitrate settings) that encodes frames
at low resolution and applies an upsampler at the decoder.
While AV1 relies on standard bicubic [26] or bilinear [52]
interpolation for upsampling, recent proposals have shown
that learned SR models can significantly improve the quality of these techniques [33, 20].
However, these approaches rely on generic SR neural
networks [45, 53, 25]) that are designed to generalize across
a wide range of input images. These models are large (e.g.,
10s of millions of parameters) and can typically reconstruct
only a few frames per second even on high-end GPUs [31].
But in many usecases, generalization isn’t necessary. In par-

4521

