TRAR: Routing the Attention Spans in Transformer
for Visual Question Answering
Yiyi Zhou12 , Tianhe Ren12 , Chaoyang Zhu12 , Xiaoshuai Sun12 *, Jianzhuang Liu3 ,
Xinghao Ding2 , Mingliang Xu4 , Rongrong Ji12
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies 4 Zhengzhou University, China
{zhouyiyi,xssun,dxh,rrji}@xmu.edu.cn, {rentianhe,cyzhu}@stu.xmu.edu.cn
liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com, iexumingliang@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Standard Transformer

Due to the superior ability of global dependency modeling, Transformer and its variants have become the primary choice of many vision-and-language tasks. However, in tasks like Visual Question Answering (VQA) and
Referring Expression Comprehension (REC), the multimodal prediction often requires visual information from
macro- to micro-views. Therefore, how to dynamically
schedule the global and local dependency modeling in
Transformer has become an emerging issue. In this paper, we propose an example-dependent routing scheme
called TRAnsformer Routing (TRAR) to address this issue1 .
Specifically, in TRAR, each visual Transformer layer is
equipped with a routing module with different attention
spans. The model can dynamically select the corresponding attentions based on the output of the previous inference step, so as to formulate the optimal routing path for
each example. Notably, with careful designs, TRAR can reduce the additional computation and memory overhead to
almost negligible. To validate TRAR, we conduct extensive
experiments on five benchmark datasets of VQA and REC,
and achieve superior performance gains than the standard
Transformers and a bunch of state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
After gaining dominance in the field of natural language processing [60, 10, 74, 9, 27], Transformer [60] also
becomes the prime choice of many vision-and-language
(V&L) tasks [14, 7, 30]. More and more researchers [39,
71, 79, 58, 22] follow the design paradigm of Transformer
* Corresponding author.
1 Source code: https://github.com/rentainhe/TRAR-VQA/

Predict: Green

What color are
the rocks near
the fire hydrant?

TRAR

Predict: Brown

Figure 1: Illustration of our Transformer Routing (TRAR)
and the traditional static Transformer. Circles denotes the
self-attention modules, and their colors represent different
attention spans (receptive fields). TRAR can dynamically
schedule the attention spans for each example.

to propose various multi-modal networks, achieving new
state-of-the-art performance on various benchmarks [14,
30, 28, 7]. Their great success largely attributes to the superior global dependency modeling of self-attention (SA),
which can not only capture the relationships within modalities, but also facilitate the vision and language alignments.
However, in some V&L tasks, such as visual question
answering (VQA) [14] and referring expression comprehension (REC) [30], the multi-modal inference often requires visual attentions from different receptive fields. As
shown in Fig. 1, to answer the question, the model should
not only understand the overall semantic, but more importantly, it also requires to capture the local relationships. In
this case, only relying on the global dependency modeling
in SA is still insufficient to meet such a requirement. This
finding is also supported by the recent development of image Transformers [38, 62]
Such an issue becomes more prominent in the end-to-end
multi-modal inference. After Jiang et al. [25] revealed that
well pre-trained grid features can also have expressive de-

2074

