MT-ORL: Multi-Task Occlusion Relationship Learning
Panhe Feng 1,2 Qi She 2 Lei Zhu 1 Jiaxin Li 2 Lin ZHANG 2 Zijian Feng 2
Changhu Wang 2 Chunpeng Li 1 Xuejing Kang ∗,1 Anlong Ming 1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications.

2

ByteDance Inc.

{fengpanhe,sheqi1991}@gmail.com,zhulei@stu.pku.edu.cn,{lijx1992,1999forrestz,vincent.fung13}
@gmail.com,wangchanghu@bytedance.com,{chunpeng.li,kangxuejing,mal}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Retrieving occlusion relation among objects in a single
image is challenging due to sparsity of boundaries in image. We observe two key issues in existing works: firstly,
lack of an architecture which can exploit the limited amount
of coupling in the decoder stage between the two subtasks,
namely occlusion boundary extraction and occlusion orientation prediction, and secondly, improper representation of
occlusion orientation. In this paper, we propose a novel
architecture called Occlusion-shared and Path-separated
Network (OPNet), which solves the first issue by exploiting rich occlusion cues in shared high-level features and
structured spatial information in task-specific low-level features. We then design a simple but effective orthogonal
occlusion representation (OOR) to tackle the second issue. Our method surpasses the state-of-the-art methods
by 6.1%/8.3% Boundary-AP and 6.5%/10% OrientationAP on standard PIOD/BSDS ownership datasets. Code is
available at https://github.com/fengpanhe/MT-ORL.

1. Introduction
While the human visual system is capable of intuitively
performing robust scene understanding and perception. The
reasoning of occlusion relation is highly challenging for
machines. Depending on the number, category, orientation,
and position of objects, the boundaries of objects are elusive; no simple priors can be applied to recover the foreground and background in the scene. Occlusion relationship
reasoning of objects from monocular images reveals relative
depth differences among the objects in the scene, which is
fundamental in computer vision applications, such as mobile robots [18, 28, 2], object detection [8, 4, 32, 21, 5],
segmentation [8, 38, 6, 31, 14, 39, 22], monocular depth
∗ corresponding author.

estimation/ordering [23, 25, 24, 26, 17, 37], and 3D reconstruction [30, 20, 9].
Traditional methods [12, 33, 26, 29, 13] extract the occlusion boundary and infer occlusion relation by exploiting low-level visual cues with hand-crafted features, which
is not effective due to the difficulty of defining boundaries
and occlusion cues. Modern convolution neural networks
(CNNs) [35, 34, 15] have significantly boosted the performance of occlusion relationship reasoning by commonly
decomposing the task into two subtasks: occlusion boundary extraction and occlusion orientation prediction. The
former aims to extract object boundaries from the image,
while the latter targets are discovering the orientation relation. The occlusion relationship is then recovered by progressively accumulating the orientation information on the
extracted boundaries. Despite the leap in occlusion relationship reasoning, we observe that two critical issues have
rarely been discussed, which greatly impedes performances
of previous work.
The first issue is the lack of exploitation of the limited
amount of coupling between the two subtasks. On one hand,
shared global properties of the image and abstract high-level
semantic features act as an effective initialization for the
networks to learn low-level visual cues. Shared high-level
features help different branches to generate consistent outputs under the same semantic guidance while different features may produce semantically misaligned results in the
fusion stage. On the other hand, the two subtasks need
to learn diverse and concrete properties in the lower stage
with larger spatial size. Specifically, occlusion boundary
extraction emphasizes more on locating boundaries, while
occlusion orientation attaches more importance to exploiting relations between areas. In a word, the two subtasks are
inherently coupled in abstract global features and decoupled in task-specific low-level features. However, previous
architectures adopt a fully shared decoder [34, 15], resulting in an initialization feature map from the lower network

9364

