Gradient Distribution Alignment Certificates Better Adversarial Domain
Adaptation
Zhiqiang Gao1 , Shufei Zhang1 , Kaizhu Huang* 1 , Qiufeng Wang1 , and Chaoliang Zhong2
1

Xi’an Jiatong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, China

2

Fujitsu R&D Centre, Beijing, China

Abstract
The latest heuristic for handling the domain shift in unsupervised domain adaptation tasks is to reduce the data
distribution discrepancy using adversarial learning. Recent
studies improve the conventional adversarial domain adaptation methods with discriminative information by integrating the classifier’s outputs into distribution divergence measurement. However, they still suffer from the equilibrium
problem of adversarial learning in which even if the discriminator is fully confused, sufficient similarity between
two distributions cannot be guaranteed. To overcome this
problem, we propose a novel approach named feature gradient distribution alignment (FGDA)1 . We demonstrate the
rationale of our method both theoretically and empirically.
In particular, we show that the distribution discrepancy can
be reduced by constraining feature gradients of two domains to have similar distributions. Meanwhile, our method
enjoys a theoretical guarantee that a tighter error upper
bound for target samples can be obtained than that of conventional adversarial domain adaptation methods. By integrating the proposed method with existing adversarial domain adaptation models, we achieve state-of-the-art performance on two real-world benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive performance for various applications such as image
classification [12, 16], object detection [11, 26] and semantic segmentation [21, 24]. However, DNNs may not generalize well on new data due to the data distribution shift problem which manifest in many different ways, such as sample
selection bias [5], class distribution shift [19], and covariate
shift [29]. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims
to address domain shift with access to labeled source data
* Corresponding author: Kaizhu Huang (kaizhu.huang@xjtlu.edu.cn).
1 The codes is available at https://github.com/gzqhappy/FGDA.

Figure 1. Illustration of Feature Gradient Distribution Alignment (FGDA). (a)-(c): When features of two domains distribute
very differently due to large domain shift, their gradients in nonoverlapping regions may disperse in distinct parts of the highly
complicated decision boundary, which leads to a large gradient
distribution discrepancy. With the gradient alignment, the overlapping region is enlarged to reduce the domain shift. (a)-(b):
Domain shift measured by the conventional adversarial domain
adaptation method tends to be zero when two mean features are
close enough. In this case, conventional methods fail to further
reduce the domain shift. (b)-(c): Even if the distance between two
mean features is small, the domain shift measured by our method
(in terms of feature gradient discrepancy) can be still observed due
to obvious different gradients in non-overlapping regions. FGDA
can certificate a further domain shift reduction.

and unlabeled target data [8]. The fundamental objective is
to infer the domain-invariant representations [32].
Among current deep architectures, the adversarial domain adaptation (ADA) approaches [25, 22, 30, 15] are
widely investigated and achieve state-of-the-art performance. As one seminal work, Domain-Adversarial Neural Networks (DANN) integrates adversarial learning and
domain adaptation into a mini-max game [8]. A domain
discriminator is learned to distinguish the source distribution from the target one, while a deep classification model
learns transferable representations that are indistinguishable
for the domain discriminator. Recent successful methods

8937

