Spectral Leakage and Rethinking the Kernel Size in CNNs
Nergis Tomen, Jan C. van Gemert
Computer Vision Lab, Delft University of Technology
{n.tomen,j.c.vangemert}@tudelft.nl

Abstract

1. Introduction
A fundamental component in deep image recognition
networks is the ability to non-linearly stack learned, shareable, linear mappings. The canonical example is the linear convolution operator in CNNs [15, 24, 47], while in recent visual Transformer models the query, key and values
are token-shared linear mappings acting on pixel embeddings [6, 8]. These linear mappings, which in the visual
domain typically take the form of filters, allow image feature learning. Such learnable, hierarchical, shareable, feature detectors are fundamental to the great success of deep
learning [1, 5, 26], and a better understanding of these filters
may broadly impact the whole field.
Image filters, such as local, oriented edge detectors,
provide a highly reusable decomposition of the input image [7, 34, 46] and are accurate models of early biological
vision [20]. From a deep, hierarchical feature learning per1 https://github.com/ntomen/Windowed-Convolutions-for-CNNs

Learned CNN filter

Space
Domain
Space
Domain

Severe
Severe Negligible
Negligible Learned
Learned
FilterFilter
Windowed
Windowed
FilterFilter
Truncation
Truncation Truncation
Truncation (standard)
(standard)
(ours)
(ours)

Leakage
Leakage Negligible
Negligible
(sinc(sinc
artifacts)
artifacts) Leakage
Leakage

WithWith
Artifacts
Artifacts

Negligible
Negligible
Artifacts
Artifacts

Frequency
Domain
Frequency
Domain

Convolutional layers in CNNs implement linear filters
which decompose the input into different frequency bands.
However, most modern architectures neglect standard principles of filter design when optimizing their model choices
regarding the size and shape of the convolutional kernel. In
this work, we consider the well-known problem of spectral
leakage caused by windowing artifacts in filtering operations in the context of CNNs. We show that the small size
of CNN kernels make them susceptible to spectral leakage,
which may induce performance-degrading artifacts. To address this issue, we propose the use of larger kernel sizes
along with the Hamming window function to alleviate leakage in CNN architectures. We demonstrate improved classification accuracy on multiple benchmark datasets including Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet
with the simple use of a standard window function in convolutional layers. Finally, we show that CNNs employing
the Hamming window display increased robustness against
various adversarial attacks. Our code is available online1 .

Example Gabor filter

Figure 1. Windowing artifacts cause spectral leakage in the frequency domain, when a filter is not tapered off at the boundaries
in the space domain. The top row shows example filters in space
domain, while the bottom row are their corresponding frequency
domains. Left: Example Gabor (bandpass) filter with severe truncation (kernel size 7 × 7) leads to spectral leakage in its frequency
response due to sinc artifacts. The same filter with negligible truncation (kernel size 49×49) is a good quality bandpass filter. Right:
A standard 7x7 CNN kernel trained on CIFAR-10 struggles to
learn good quality bandpass filters, as the use of small kernel sizes
typically lead to severe truncation. We propose using the standard
Hamming window to taper off the kernels in space domain, which
enables good quality bandpass frequency responses.

spective, it is interesting to ask how specialized reusable filters should be, and explore their response selectivity. In particular, here we investigate the role of frequency-selectivity
of learned filters in deep networks.
To investigate frequency-selectivity, we consider spectral leakage—which is a well-known [13, 35, 39] artifact in
generic filtering operations—in the context of CNNs. The
building block of CNNs, the convolution operator, can be
thought of as a linear filter, which, due to the small kernel
sizes employed in modern CNNs, is susceptible to spectral
leakage. Although a well-studied concept in digital signal [35] and image processing [11, 19], we observe that a
broader understanding of spectral leakage in deep networks
has largely been neglected.
Spectral leakage, in the broad sense of the term, is when
an operation on a signal introduces unwanted frequency

5138

