Assignment-Space-based Multi-Object Tracking and Segmentation
Anwesa Choudhuri, Girish Chowdhary, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{anwesac2,girishc,aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Multi-object tracking and segmentation (MOTS) is important for understanding dynamic scenes in video data.
Existing methods perform well on multi-object detection
and segmentation for independent video frames, but tracking of objects over time remains a challenge. MOTS methods formulate tracking locally, i.e., frame-by-frame, leading
to sub-optimal results. Classical global methods on tracking operate directly on object detections, which leads to a
combinatorial growth in the detection space. In contrast,
we formulate a global method for MOTS over the space of
assignments rather than detections: First, we find all top-k
assignments of objects detected and segmented between any
two consecutive frames and develop a structured prediction
formulation to score assignment sequences across any number of consecutive frames. We use dynamic programming to
find the global optimizer of this formulation in polynomial
time. Second, we connect objects which reappear after having been out of view for some time. For this we formulate an
assignment problem. On the challenging KITTI-MOTS and
MOTSChallenge datasets, this achieves state-of-the-art results among methods which don’t use depth data.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking and Segmentation (MOTS) not
only requires to detect and segment objects in a video, but
also asks to assign consistent IDs, i.e., each visible instance
of the same object is always given the same ID. MOTS
is important for understanding scenes in a video and is
crucial for autonomous driving, robotics, agricultural and
biomedical data analysis, etc. While the MOTS sub-task
of multi-object detection and segmentation on individual
video frames has received a considerable amount of attention [14, 35, 9, 13, 42, 40, 17, 18, 19, 16], tracking of objects
over multiple frames remains a challenge, especially in the
presence of occlusions and viewpoint variations.
Tracking of objects over a sequence has been addressed
using batch and online-methods. The former assumes
an entire sequence is available, while the latter operates
frame-by-frame. These methods face two main challenges.
Firstly, current MOTS methods (batch or online) formulate tracking locally. We note that accurate global track-

ing is important to understand complex environments, as
it ensures consistency in preserving identities of objects
over a long period. Classical global batch methods for
multi-object tracking (MOT) have been proposed in the past
[20, 3, 59, 4, 49, 2, 55]. These formulations face the second
challenge: Tracking is formulated directly on object detections [20, 3, 59, 4, 49, 2, 55], which leads to a combinatorial
growth of options. We note that directly formulating tracking on detections seems appealing because those are the objects of interest. However, this form of data representation
also complicates optimization because one needs to solve
for the best path for each object in the video. Note that the
number of objects is generally unknown.
To address both challenges, we propose to formulate
tracking over the space of assignments rather than object
detections. For this, we first find the top-k assignments
of object detections (and segmentations) between any two
consecutive frames. This is efficiently doable using the
Hungarian-Murty algorithm [34]. We then develop a structured prediction formulation which globally scores an assignment sequence rather than a detection sequence. By
finding the global optimizer of the structured formulation in
polynomial time using dynamic programming we can address tracking in MOTS. We jointly learn the tracking parameters and the detection/segmentation network. Further,
to establish long term connections, we introduce a postprocessing step which associates objects over longer time
intervals. This step uses an assignment problem to construct
long-term connections between previously unassigned object detections and detection sequences.
On the challenging KITTI-MOTS and MOTSChallenge
datasets [54], the method achieves state of the art results on
MOTS when compared to other 2D methods, i.e., TrackRCNN [54] and PointTrack [58]. On the KITTI-MOTS test
data, we improve upon PointTrack [58] (the next best 2D
method) by 14% (car) and 9% (pedestrian) in association
(AssA) and 8% (car) and 4% (pedestrian) overall (HOTA).
On the MOTSChallenge test data, we improve upon PointTrack [58] by 5% on sMOTSA. A qualitative comparison
with PointTrack [58] is shown in Fig. 1. We also improve
upon MOTSFusion [27], a 3D method requiring depth information, on pedestrian tracking on the KITTI-MOTS test
data (8% improvement in association (AssA), 5% improve-

13598

