Paint Transformer: Feed Forward Neural Painting with Stroke Prediction
Songhua Liu1,2,∗,† , Tianwei Lin1,∗ , Dongliang He1 , Fu Li1 ,
Ruifeng Deng1 , Xin Li1 , Errui Ding1 , Hao Wang3
1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.,
2
Nanjing University, 3 Rutgers University
1

{liusonghua,lintianwei01,hedongliang01,lifu,dengruifeng,lixin41,dingerrui}@baidu.com,
2

songhua.liu@smail.nju.edu.cn, 3 hw488@cs.rutgers.edu

Figure 1. Illustration of our results. The second row demonstrates the progressive painting process. Zoom-in for better view.

Abstract
Neural painting refers to the procedure of producing
a series of strokes for a given image and non-photorealistically recreating it using neural networks. While
reinforcement learning (RL) based agents can generate a
stroke sequence step by step for this task, it is not easy
to train a stable RL agent. On the other hand, stroke
optimization methods search for a set of stroke parameters iteratively in a large search space; such low efficiency
significantly limits their prevalence and practicality. Different from previous methods, in this paper, we formulate the task as a set prediction problem and propose a
novel Transformer-based framework, dubbed Paint Transformer, to predict the parameters of a stroke set with a
feed forward network. This way, our model can generate
a set of strokes in parallel and obtain the final painting
of size 512 × 512 in near real time. More importantly,
* Equal contribution.
† This work was done when Songhua Liu was an intern at VIS, Baidu.

since there is no dataset available for training the Paint
Transformer, we devise a self-training pipeline such that
it can be trained without any off-the-shelf dataset while
still achieving excellent generalization capability. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves better painting performance than previous ones with cheaper training
and inference costs. Codes and models are available on
https://github.com/wzmsltw/PaintTransformer.

1. Introduction
Since ancient times, painting has been a fantastic way for
human beings to record what they perceive or even how they
imagine about the world. Painting has long been known
to require professional knowledge/skills and is not easy for
ordinary people. Computer-aided art creation largely fills
this gap and enables many of us to create our own artistic compositions. Especially with the coming of AI era,
natural images can be transformed to be artistic via image
style transfer [19, 9, 12, 24, 16] or image-to-image transla-

6598

