Learning Dual Priors for JPEG Compression Artifacts Removal
Xueyang Fu1 , Xi Wang1 , Aiping Liu1 , Junwei Han2 , Zheng-Jun Zha1∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
{xyfu, aipingl, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn, wangxxi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jhan@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning (DL)-based methods have achieved great
success in solving the ill-posed JPEG compression artifacts
removal problem. However, as most DL architectures are
designed to directly learn pixel-level mapping relationships, they largely ignore semantic-level information and lack
sufficient interpretability. To address the above issues, in
this work, we propose an interpretable deep network to
learn both pixel-level regressive prior and semantic-level
discriminative prior. Specifically, we design a variational model to formulate the image de-blocking problem and
propose two prior terms for the image content and gradient, respectively. The content-relevant prior is formulated
as a DL-based image-to-image regressor to perform as a
de-blocker from the pixel-level. The gradient-relevant prior serves as a DL-based classifier to distinguish whether
the image is compressed from the semantic-level. To effectively solve the variational model, we design an alternating
minimization algorithm and unfold it into a deep network
architecture. In this way, not only the interpretability of the
deep network is increased, but also the dual priors can be
well estimated from training samples. By integrating the two priors into a single framework, the image de-blocking
problem can be well-constrained, leading to a better performance. Experiments on benchmarks and real-world use
cases demonstrate the superiority of our method to the existing state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of consumer devices (e.g.,
digital cameras and smartphones) and wireless network,
the number of images and videos has achieved explosive
∗ Corresponding author: Zheng-Jun Zha. This work was supported in
part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
under Grant 2020AAA0105702; in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants U19B2038 and 61901433; in
part by the University Synergy Innovation Program of Anhui Province under Grant GXXT-2019-025; and in part by the USTC Research Funds of
the Double First-Class Initiative under Grant YD2100002003.

growth, which has brought more pressure and challenges
to storage and transmission systems. To save the storage
capacity and transmission bandwidth, captured images and
videos are usually compressed to reduce information redundancy. Lossy compression algorithms, e.g., Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) [43] and High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) [41], have been widely explored
to achieve this goal. However, due to the inevitable signal loss during compression, these compression algorithms
usually generate visually unpleasing compression artifacts. These artifacts not only decrease the visual quality, but
also degrade the performance of downstream computer vision systems, especially at high compression ratios. Therefore, removing compression artifacts is an important postprocessing task and has attracted more attention in recent
years [20,30]. We refer the reader to review articles [28,30]
for more details. In this paper, we focus on alleviating still
image degradation caused by JPEG compression, which is
one of the most prevalent compression standards.
JPEG compression first applies the discrete cosine transformation (DCT) on 8×8 pixel blocks. Then, these DCT coefficients are coarsely quantized to remove high-frequency
details to save space. Due to the independent processing on
each pixel block and the removal of high-frequency details,
compressed images usually suffer from blocking and blurring artifacts. In addition, using a large quantization step,
banding artifacts will appear in smooth areas. Some recent
studies have proposed methods to remove undesirable JPEG
compression artifacts. According to the design mechanism,
these methods can be roughly classified into two categories:
model-based methods and deep learning (DL)-based methods. Early model-based works perform filtering to remove
compression artifacts. For instance, Foi et al. [12] propose
a shape-adaptive DCT filtering method for compression artifacts reduction. On the other hand, since multiple latent
clear versions can be estimated from a single compressed
image, this task is essentially an ill-posed inverse problem,
which requires prior knowledge to constrain it. Along this
research direction, many researchers formulate this problem as a minimization of a variational model with favor-

4086

