CrowdDriven: A New Challenging Dataset for Outdoor Visual Localization
Ara Jafarzadeh1

Manuel López Antequera2 Pau Gargallo2 Yubin Kuang2 Carl Toft1
Fredrik Kahl1 Torsten Sattler3
1
2
3
Chalmers University of Technology
Facebook
Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
Visual localization is the problem of estimating the position and orientation from which a given image (or a sequence of images) is taken in a known scene. It is an important part of a wide range of computer vision and robotics
applications, from self-driving cars to augmented/virtual
reality systems. Visual localization techniques should work
reliably and robustly under a wide range of conditions,
including seasonal, weather, illumination and man-made
changes. Recent benchmarking efforts model this by providing images under different conditions, and the community has made rapid progress on these datasets since their
inception. However, they are limited to a few geographical
regions and often recorded with a single device. We propose
a new benchmark for visual localization in outdoor scenes,
using crowd-sourced data to cover a wide range of geographical regions and camera devices with a focus on the
failure cases of current algorithms. Experiments with stateof-the-art localization approaches show that our dataset is
very challenging, with all evaluated methods failing on its
hardest parts. As part of the dataset release, we provide the
tooling used to generate it, enabling efficient and effective
2D correspondence annotation to obtain reference poses.

1. Introduction
Visual localization is the problem of estimating the position and orientation from which an image was taken, i.e.,
its camera pose, with respect to the scene. Visual localization is a vital part of many computer vision and robotics
applications such as self-driving cars, service robots such
as gardening robots, and augmented/mixed/virtual reality.
Most visual localization methods rely heavily on local
descriptors for pose estimation, and finding 2D-3D matches
between images is a fundamental part of it. However,
the trade-off between the local descriptors’ discriminative
power and their invariance limits their performance under changing conditions. On the other hand, in practice,
changes in the scene are unavoidable, and there is a need for
visual localization methods to be robust to them. Traditionally, ground truth poses for localization have been obtained
via Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [35, 62, 66]. Yet, SfM it-

self relies on local descriptors and matching. This makes
it extremely difficult to generate localization benchmarks
where feature matching using traditional feature descriptors
does not work, e.g., in the presence of day/night and strong
viewpoint changes. Benchmark datasets for localization under changing conditions such as Aachen, CMU Seasons,
and Robotcar [58] rely on manual annotations to be able
to provide ground truth poses. While these datasets provide
interesting challenges, they have mostly been captured in
controlled conditions. However, there is little control over
the capture in many applications such as Autonomous Driving, collaborative AR/MR, or crowd-sourced mapping.
In this paper, we have constructed a dataset revisiting the
common challenges that could be seen in different environments. We first actively mined a crowd-sourced database
for image sequences where classic SfM approaches fail. To
generate reliable poses, we have relied on human annotations and have created 40 sets of image sequences with diverse visual changes. The dataset and tools used for its creation are available at mapillary.com.
This paper makes the following contributions: (1) a
workflow to mine and annotate challenging image sequences for benchmarking visual localization. Our approach explicitly takes pose uncertainty into account during the annotation process. (2) the CrowdDriven dataset,
a geographically diverse and challenging dataset with reliable poses that covers various scenarios in illumination,
weather, seasonal, and viewpoint changes. (3) experiments with state-of-the-art baselines showing CrowdDriven
presents challenges that existing methods cannot handle.

2. Related Work
Visual localization methods aim to estimate the full camera pose and can be categorized based on their map representation: (1) Image-based representations encode each
image as a feature vector [3, 17, 29, 54, 72, 73]. Using
image retrieval and the known poses of the database images, the pose of a test image can either be approximated
via the poses of the top-retrieved database images [61, 83]
or computed precisely based on relative poses [59, 85].
(2) Local feature-based representations rely on classical
or learned local feature descriptors and multiple view ge-

9845

