Learning to Cut by Watching Movies
Alejandro Pardo1 Fabian Caba Heilbron2 Juan León Alcázar 1 Ali Thabet 1 Bernard Ghanem1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) 2 Adobe Research
{alejandro.pardo,humam.alwassel,ali.thabet,bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

caba@adobe.com

https://alejandropardo.net/publication/learning-to-cut/

Abstract
Video content creation keeps growing at an incredible
pace; yet, creating engaging stories remains challenging
and requires non-trivial video editing expertise. Many video
editing components are astonishingly hard to automate primarily due to the lack of raw video materials. This paper focuses on a new task for computational video editing, namely
the task of raking cut plausibility. Our key idea is to leverage
content that has already been edited to learn fine-grained
audiovisual patterns that trigger cuts. To do this, we first
collected a data source of more than 10K videos, from which
we extract more than 255K cuts. We devise a model that
learns to discriminate between real and artificial cuts via
contrastive learning. We set up a new task and a set of baselines to benchmark video cut generation. We observe that
our proposed model outperforms the baselines by large margins. To demonstrate our model in real-world applications,
we conduct human studies in a collection of unedited videos.
The results show that our model does a better job at cutting
than random and alternative baselines.

1. Introduction
The lack of video editing expertise is a common blocker
for aspiring video creators. It takes many training hours and
extensive manual work to edit videos that convey engaging
stories. Arguably, the most time-consuming and critical task
in video editing is to compose the right cuts, i.e., decide how
(and when) to join two untrimmed videos to create a single
clip that respects continuity editing [58]. To the untrained
eye, cutting might seem easy; however, experienced editors
spend hours selecting the best frames for cutting and joining
clips. In light of this complexity, it is pertinent to ask: could
artificial systems rank video cuts by how plausible they are?
Before delving into addressing the question above, it is
worth defining the task of video cut ranking in detail. As
Figure 1 illustrates, given two untrimmed input videos, the
goal is to find the best moments (in each video) to trigger
cuts, which join the pair into a single continuous sequence.

Input à Pair of untrimmed shots:

Output à Cut Plausibility Ranking:

#1

#2

#"

Figure 1: Ranking Cut Plausibility. We illustrate the process of ranking video cuts. The first row show a pair of
untrimmed videos (raw footage) as the input. The output
would be the ranking of all the possible cuts across the pair
of shots. Ideally, the top ranked cuts should be the more
plausible cuts providing a smooth transition between the
shots, and the worst cuts would be places in where there is
break of spatial-temporal continuity.

A key challenge is to generate videos that make the audience
believe actions unfold continuously. This type of cutting is
often called continuity editing and aims to evoke an illusion
of reality [7, 58], even though, the source videos could be
recorded at different times. Figure 1 shows a typical trigger
for cuts – the moment when the speaker changes. In practice,
the director could give the shot order via a storyboard or
script, and it is the editor’s job to realize which patterns
make smooth transitions between shots. Our hypothesis
is that many of those cut-trigger patterns can be found by
carefully analyzing of audio-visual cues.
Despite its importance, potential impact, and research

6858

