Learning to Resize Images for Computer Vision Tasks
Hossein Talebi and Peyman Milanfar
Google Research

Abstract

1. Introduction
The emergence of deep neural networks along with large
scale image datasets has led to major breakthroughs in machine visual recognition. Images in such datasets are typically obtained from the web and as a result have gone
through various capture pipelines and post-processing steps.
Besides these generally unknown processing operations, ef-

i
ut

es
lR

i

rig
O

in

tL

ea

rn
in

on

g

ol

Recognition Model

na

iz

ed

es

R

Task

Model

Classification

Figure 1. Our proposed framework for joint learning of the image
resizer and recognition models.

Inception-v2 [34]
DenseNet-121 [9]
ResNet-50 [8]
MobileNet-v2 [28]

Top-1 Error ↓
Bilinear Resizer
Proposed Resizer
26.7%
33.1%
24.7%
29.5%

24.0%
29.8%
23.0%
28.4%

PLCC ↑
Bicubic Resizer
Proposed Resizer
IQA

For all the ways convolutional neural nets have revolutionized computer vision in recent years, one important
aspect has received surprisingly little attention: the effect
of image size on the accuracy of tasks being trained for.
Typically, to be efficient, the input images are resized to a
relatively small spatial resolution (e.g. 224 × 224), and
both training and inference are carried out at this resolution. The actual mechanism for this re-scaling has been an
afterthought: Namely, off-the-shelf image resizers such as
bilinear and bicubic are commonly used in most machine
learning software frameworks. But do these resizers limit
the on-task performance of the trained networks? The answer is yes. Indeed, we show that the typical linear resizer
can be replaced with learned resizers that can substantially
improve performance. Importantly, while the classical resizers typically result in better perceptual quality of the
downscaled images, our proposed learned resizers do not
necessarily give better visual quality, but instead improve
task performance.
Our learned image resizer is jointly trained with a baseline vision model. This learned CNN-based resizer creates
machine friendly visual manipulations that lead to a consistent improvement of the end task metric over the baseline
model. Specifically, here we focus on the classification task
with the ImageNet dataset [26], and experiment with four
different models to learn resizers adapted to each model.
Moreover, we show that the proposed resizer can also be
useful for fine-tuning the classification baselines for other
vision tasks. To this end, we experiment with three different
baselines to develop image quality assessment (IQA) models on the AVA dataset [24].

Jo

Resizer Model

Inception-v2 [34]
DenseNet-121 [9]
EfficientNet-b0 [38]

0.662
0.662
0.642

0.686
0.683
0.671

Table 1. Summary of our results for image classification on ImageNet [26], and image quality assessment (IQA) on the AVA
dataset [24].

ficient training of visual recognition CNNs requires additional image augmentations such as spatial resizing.
Image down-scaling is the most commonly used preprocessing module in classification models. The main
reasons for spatial resizing are: (1) mini-batch learning
through gradient descent requires the same spatial resolution for all images in a batch, (2) memory limitations prohibit training CNNs at high resolutions, and (3) large image
sizes lead to slower training and inference. Given a fixed
memory budget, there is a trade-off between the memory
occupied by the spatial resolution and the batch size. This
trade-off can have a significant impact on the accuracy of
recognition CNNs [27, 39, 10, 12].
Currently rudimentary resizing methods such as nearest
neighbor, bilinear, and bicubic are among the top adopted
image resizers visual recognition systems. These resizers

497

