KiloNeRF: Speeding up Neural Radiance Fields with Thousands of Tiny MLPs
Christian Reiser1,2 Songyou Peng1,3 Yiyi Liao1,2 Andreas Geiger1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 University of Tübingen 3 ETH Zurich
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract

NeRF

NeRF synthesizes novel views of a scene with unprecedented quality by fitting a neural radiance field to RGB
images. However, NeRF requires querying a deep MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP) millions of times, leading to slow
rendering times, even on modern GPUs. In this paper, we
demonstrate that real-time rendering is possible by utilizing
thousands of tiny MLPs instead of one single large MLP.
In our setting, each individual MLP only needs to represent
parts of the scene, thus smaller and faster-to-evaluate MLPs
can be used. By combining this divide-and-conquer strategy with further optimizations, rendering is accelerated by
three orders of magnitude compared to the original NeRF
model without incurring high storage costs. Further, using
teacher-student distillation for training, we show that this
speed-up can be achieved without sacrificing visual quality.

56s

1. Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) addresses the problem of
rendering a scene from unobserved viewpoints, given a
number of RGB images and camera poses as input, e.g., for
interactive exploration. Recently, NeRF [29] demonstrated
state-of-the-art results on this problem using a neural radiance field representation for representing 3D scenes. NeRF
produces geometrically consistent, high-quality novel views
even when faced with challenges like thin structures, semitransparent objects and reflections. Additionally, NeRF’s
underlying representation requires only very little storage
and thus can be easily streamed to users.
The biggest remaining drawbacks of NeRF are its long
training and rendering times. While training can be sped up
with a multi-GPU cluster, rendering must happen in realtime on the consumer’s device for interactive applications
like virtual reality. This motivates us to focus on increasing
NeRF’s rendering speed in this paper.
NeRF represents the scene’s geometry and appearance
with a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP). During volumetric
rendering, this network is sampled hundreds of times for

KiloNeRF

2548x faster

0.02s

Figure 1: KiloNeRF. Instead of representing the entire
scene by a single, high-capacity MLP, we represent the
scene by thousands of small MLPs. This allows us to render
the scene above 2548x faster without loss in visual quality.

millions of pixels. As the MLP used in NeRF is relatively
deep and wide, this process is very slow. A natural idea is to
decrease the depth and number of hidden units per layer in
order to speed up the rendering process. However, without
any further measures, a reduction in network size leads to an
immediate loss in image quality due to the limited capacity
for fitting complex scenes. We counteract this by using a
large number of independent and small networks, and by
letting each network represent only a fraction of the scene.
We find that training our KiloNeRF with thousands of
networks, naı̈vely from scratch leads to noticeable artifacts.
To overcome this problem, we first train a regular NeRF as
teacher model. KiloNeRF is then trained such that its outputs (density and color) match those of the teacher model
for any position and view direction. Finally, KiloNeRF is
fine-tuned on the original training images. Thanks to this
three-stage training strategy, our model reaches the same

14335

