Reliably fast adversarial training via latent adversarial perturbation
Geon Yeong Park
Sang Wan Lee
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
{pky3436, sangwan}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Sign Method (FGSM; [10]) reduces the training time; however, recent works [16, 32, 31] have identified the FGSM’s
vulnerability to the sophisticated adversaries.
The trade-off between adversarial robustness and computational cost has facilitated the development of accelerated
and trustworthy AT methods. Shafahi et al. [25] significantly
reduced the computational burden by presenting a free AT
method that updates both model parameters and adversarial
perturbation through a single shared backward propagation.
Wong et al. [38] proposed a fast adversarial training based
on the discovery that a slight modification in the FGSM training method such as random initialization allows it to achieve
an adversarial robustness on par with PGD AT. They also
discovered the catastrophic overfitting problem of FGSM
AT, wherein the model suddenly loses its robustness during
training within an epoch.
Although substantial technical advances have been made
with regard to the above-mentioned methods, recent works
have reported that such approaches are not sufficiently reliable. Andriushchenko et al. [2] demonstrated that fast
adversarial training still suffers from the catastrophic overfitting, owing to the deteriorated local linearity of neural
networks. Kim et al. [14] found that the fast adversarial
training suddenly loses its robustness and eventually collapses when a simple multi-step learning rate schedule is
used. Li et al. [15] reported that although fast adversarial training may recover quickly, it still temporally exhibits
catastrophic overfitting.
This remaining problem in AT motivates us to explore
novel ways to improve the reliability of single-step AT, without bearing a considerable training time. In this study, we
demonstrate that the single-step latent adversarial training
(SLAT) with the latent adversarial perturbation operates
more effectively and reliably compared to the other singlestep adversarial training variants. While many of existing
adversarial training methods require multiple gradient computations which is inevitably time-consuming, we exploit
the gradients of latent representations from multiple layers
in parallel for the synergistic generation of adversary. Note
that the gradients of latent representations can be obtained

While multi-step adversarial training is widely popular
as an effective defense method against strong adversarial
attacks, its computational cost is notoriously expensive, compared to standard training. Several single-step adversarial
training methods have been proposed to mitigate the abovementioned overhead cost; however, their performance is not
sufficiently reliable depending on the optimization setting.
To overcome such limitations, we deviate from the existing
input-space-based adversarial training regime and propose
a single-step latent adversarial training method (SLAT),
which leverages the gradients of latent representation as the
latent adversarial perturbation. We demonstrate that the \ell _1
norm of feature gradients is implicitly regularized through
the adopted latent perturbation, thereby recovering local
linearity and ensuring reliable performance, compared to
the existing single-step adversarial training methods. Because latent perturbation is based on the gradients of the
latent representations which can be obtained for free in the
process of input gradients computation, the proposed method
costs roughly the same time as the fast gradient sign method.
Experiment results demonstrate that the proposed method,
despite its structural simplicity, outperforms state-of-the-art
accelerated adversarial training methods.

1. Introduction
Although several studies have suggested the use of deep
learning methods to solve challenging tasks, adversarial vulnerability [30] is one of the remaining major challenges
while employing deep learning to safety-critical applications.
Adversarial training (AT) approaches aim to mitigate the
problem by training the model on generated adversarial examples, i.e. the sample corrupted with human-imperceptible
noise which can fool the state-of-the-art deep neural networks. Although PGD AT [16] is one of the most effective
training methods, it consumes a considerable training time
because it relies on multiple projected gradient descent steps
to generate the adversaries. The AT based on Fast Gradient

7758

