Toward a Visual Concept Vocabulary for GAN Latent Space
Sarah Schwettmann1 , Evan Hernandez2 , David Bau2 , Samuel Klein3 , Jacob Andreas2 , Antonio Torralba2
1
MIT BCS, 2 MIT CSAIL, 3 MIT KFG
{schwett, dez, davidbau, sjklein, jda, torralba}@mit.edu

Abstract
A large body of recent work has identified transformations in the latent spaces of generative adversarial networks
(GANs) that consistently and interpretably transform generated images. But existing techniques for identifying these
transformations rely on either a fixed vocabulary of prespecified visual concepts, or on unsupervised disentanglement techniques whose alignment with human judgments
about perceptual salience is unknown. This paper introduces a new method for building open-ended vocabularies of primitive visual concepts represented in a GAN’s latent space. Our approach is built from three components:
(1) automatic identification of perceptually salient directions based on their layer selectivity; (2) human annotation of these directions with free-form, compositional natural language descriptions; and (3) decomposition of these
annotations into a visual concept vocabulary, consisting
of distilled directions labeled with single words. Experiments show that concepts learned with our approach are
reliable and composable—generalizing across classes, contexts, and observers, and enabling fine-grained manipulation of image style and content.

1. Introduction
GANs [8] map latent vectors z to images x. Past work
has found that directions in this latent space can encode specific aspects of image semantics: StyleGAN trained on bedrooms, for example, contains a direction such that moving
most z in that direction causes indoor lighting to appear
in the associated image [24]. However, current methods
for identifying these directions are ad hoc, capturing only
a limited set of human-salient dimensions of variation. In
this paper, we describe how to construct more expressive
and diverse sets of meaningful image transformations—a
visual concept vocabulary—by decomposing freeform language descriptions of GAN transformations.
Consider trying to find a direction that makes an outdoor
market more festive (Figure 1). The GAN latent space is
too large to make random search feasible, while supervised

Figure 1: Building a visual concept vocabulary. First, we generate directions that preserve most of the structure and content in
the image. Then we use human annotations to decompose them
into directions that correspond to a single salient concept. Finally,
we show the decomposed directions generalize across starting representations and input classes, and can be composed to construct
compound directions.

approaches cannot verify if the desired direction is present
[11, 7, 24, 19]. Unsupservised approaches [10, 15, 20, 21]
may not discover a festive direction, since the model’s principal components do not necessarily capture changes that
are most visually salient to humans.
To improve our understanding of the kinds of interpretable semantic transformations encoded in GAN latent
space, we propose a new approach for building an openended glossary of primitive, perceptually salient directions
from the bottom up. Our approach is built from three components:
1. A new procedure for generating perceptually salient
directions based on layer selectivity. The resulting directions make meaningful local changes to a scene but
are still non-atomic.
2. A data collection paradigm in which human annotators
directly label directions with their semantics, which

6804

