T-AutoML: Automated Machine Learning for Lesion Segmentation using
Transformers in 3D Medical Imaging
Dong Yang

Andriy Myronenko

Xiaosong Wang Ziyue Xu
NVIDIA

Holger R. Roth

Daguang Xu

Abstract
Lesion segmentation in medical imaging has been an important topic in clinical research. Researchers have proposed various detection and segmentation algorithms to address this task. Recently, deep learning-based approaches
have significantly improved the performance over conventional methods. However, most state-of-the-art deep learning methods require the manual design of multiple network components and training strategies. In this paper, we
propose a new automated machine learning algorithm, TAutoML, which not only searches for the best neural architecture, but also finds the best combination of hyperparameters and data augmentation strategies simultaneously. The proposed method utilizes the modern transformer model, which is introduced to adapt to the dynamic
length of the search space embedding and can significantly
improve the ability of the search. We validate T-AutoML
on several large-scale public lesion segmentation data-sets
and achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, given the technological advances in algorithmic design (such as deep learning) and hardware platforms
(such as GPU), medical image analysis has become a key
step in disease understanding, clinical diagnosis, and treatment planning. The sizes, shapes, and appearances of lesions in medical images can vary greatly across different
anatomical structures (shown in Fig. 1). These semantic
features are closely related to the severity of the disease.
At the same time, variations in the imaging patterns related to pathologies, scanning protocols, and medical devices introduce a computational challenge for automated algorithms [1]. Therefore, automated lesion segmentation is
one of the most challenging tasks in automated analysis of
medical images, such as 3D CT, 3D MRI, histopathology,
etc. When facing with such challenges, most machine/deep
learning models struggle to provide comprehensive solutions.
In recent years, deep convolutional neural networks have

Figure 1. An example of intensity variations of liver lesions in
3D CT, which introduces substantial challenges for automated lesion segmentation. The yellow arrows indicate the target lesion
locations. There are several large lesions in the left figure and
small ones in the middle figure. The right figure presents an atypical CT contrast of liver and lesion regions after image windowing/normalization.

been widely applied for medical image analysis. For instance, one of the most influential works in medical image
segmentation using deep neural networks is U-Net [2, 3],
which has been found to be more effective and efficient than
previous non-learning based methods. Furthermore, automated machine learning (AutoML) with neural networks
has been explored for various applications, such as image
recognition, semantic segmentation, object detection, natural image generation, etc. One of the most popular tasks
in AutoML is neural architecture search (NAS) [4], which
aims to design neural network architectures automatically
without much human heuristics or assumptions. Besides
the model weights, the model structure itself becomes fitted for the task after searching, and is even transferable to
different applications [5]. Additional constraints, such as
latency or parameter quantity of models, can be added as
searching objectives to fit the models into different computing platforms. Several works [6] have achieved state-ofthe-art (SOTA) performance with NAS in large-scale image
recognition (e.g., on ImageNet [7]). Other works applied
similar techniques to optimize other components (e.g., augmentations, loss functions) or hyper-parameters in conventional deep learning solutions. Although the recent development of AutoML has shown promising results in reducing
the workload of algorithm design and improving model performance, most AutoML methods only optimize few com-

3962

