Interpretation of Emergent Communication in
Heterogeneous Collaborative Embodied Agents
Alexander Schwing3
Unnat Jain3 *
Saim Wani2 *
Shivansh Patel1 *
3
1
Svetlana Lazebnik
Manolis Savva
Angel X. Chang1
1

Simon Fraser University

2

IIT Kanpur

3

UIUC

https://shivanshpatel35.github.io/comon

Abstract
Communication between embodied AI agents has received increasing attention in recent years. Despite its use,
it is still unclear whether the learned communication is interpretable and grounded in perception. To study the grounding
of emergent forms of communication, we first introduce the
collaborative multi-object navigation task ‘CoMON.’ In this
task, an ‘oracle agent’ has detailed environment information
in the form of a map. It communicates with a ‘navigator
agent’ that perceives the environment visually and is tasked
to find a sequence of goals. To succeed at the task, effective
communication is essential. CoMON hence serves as a basis
to study different communication mechanisms between heterogeneous agents, that is, agents with different capabilities
and roles. We study two common communication mechanisms and analyze their communication patterns through
an egocentric and spatial lens. We show that the emergent
communication can be grounded to the agent observations
and the spatial structure of the 3D environment.

1. Introduction
Research in embodied AI agents that learn to perceive,
act, and communicate within 3D environments has become
popular in recent years [3, 6, 9]. Collaboration between
multiple agents has also received an increasing amount of
attention. Consequently, there has been renewed interest
in studying communication mechanisms that increase the
effectiveness of collaborative agents [42].
A key goal of communication is to transmit information. Therefore, to analyze communication it is common to
study collaborative tasks where agents have heterogeneous
abilities or asymmetric access to information [10, 40]. A
heterogeneous agent setup also corresponds to real-world
scenarios such as guiding a delivery driver to our home
* denotes equal contribution by SP, SW, and UJ

Communication
mechanism
Messages
Map with goals and

RGBD
observations

Goal
sequence

Figure 1. We propose a collaborative multi-object navigation task
(CoMON) where an oracle agent AO communicates with a navigator agent AN . The oracle AO possesses a global map and
the navigator AN needs to perceive and navigate a 3D environment to find a sequence of goal objects while avoiding collisions.
Through this task, we study the impact of structured and unstructured communication mechanisms on navigation performance, and
the emergence of messages grounded in egocentric perception.

over a phone call. However, prior work on emergent communication has adopted simplified settings like reference
games [5, 43] or agents communicating within 2D environments [10]. Work involving communication in 3D environments has focused on whether communication can lead
to improved performance through cooperation in solving
the task [32–34], rather than detailed interpretation of the
emergent communication patterns. Despite this rich literature studying emergent communication, there has been no
systematic analysis and interpretation of emergent communication in realistic 3D environments.
In this paper, we focus on interpreting emergent communication through an egocentric and spatially grounded analysis.
To do this, we define a collaborative multi-object navigation
task (CoMON), which extends the recently proposed multiobject navigation (MultiON) task [64]. The CoMON task
requires a pair of agents—an oracle with privileged knowledge of the environment in the form of a map, and a navigator
who can perceive and navigate the environment—to communicate with each other in order for the navigator to find
and reach a sequence of goal objects (see Figure 1). The
primary role of this task is to study the emergent communication between heterogeneous agents in visually realistic 3D
environments.

15953

