Learning Better Visual Data Similarities via New Grouplet Non-Euclidean
Embedding

1

Yanfu Zhang1 , Lei Luo1 , Wenhan Xian1 , Heng Huang1,2 *
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, 2 JD Explore Academy
yaz91@pitt.edu, zzdxpyyll@gmail.com, wex37@pitt.edu, henghuanghh@gmail.com

Abstract
In many computer vision problems, it is desired to learn
the effective visual data similarity such that the prediction
accuracy can be enhanced. Deep Metric Learning (DML)
methods have been actively studied to measure the data
similarity. Pair-based and proxy-based losses are the two
major paradigms in DML. However, pair-wise methods involve expensive training costs, while proxy-based methods
are less accurate in characterizing the relationships between data points. In this paper, we provide a hybrid grouplet paradigm, which inherits the accurate pair-wise relationship in pair-based methods and the efficient training
in proxy-based methods. Our method also equips a nonEuclidean space to DML, which employs a hierarchical representation manifold. More specifically, we propose a unified graph perspective — different DML methods learn different local connecting patterns between data points. Based
on the graph interpretation, we construct a flexible subset
of data points, dubbed grouplet. Our grouplet doesn’t require explicit pair-wise relationships, instead, we encode
the data relationships in an optimal transport problem regarding the proxies, and solve this problem via a differentiable implicit layer to automatically determine the relationships. Extensive experimental results show that our method
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on several benchmarks. The ablation studies also verify the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Learning the semantic similarity between visual data
is important for many machine vision tasks, including clustering [49], image retrieval [25, 34], person reidentification [48, 8], and few-shot learning [36, 33]. Conventionally, the Mahalanobis distance [24, 46] defined on
hand-crafted features are exploited to characterize the data
* This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 1845666, 1852606,
1838627, 1837956, 1956002, IIA 2040588.

Figure 1: Top: Bounds of different colors indicate images
from different clusters. Our method employs grouplet (yellow shaded), which can be viewed as randomly split of images in a batch. Bottom: Inside a grouplet, we determine
the data-wise relationships dynamically via optimal transport. Different colors indicate different clusters. All pairs of
data (circles with numbers) and proxy (circles with letters)
are evaluated via jointly considering the data-wise relationships (e.g. automatically determine that (1, 2) is a positive
pair, and (2, 3) is negative). Data embeddings are pulled
(inner arrow) or pushed (outer arrow) harder to/away from
the proxies if mismatched, e.g. (3, a) is well distributed,
and the push is weak (thin line); (4, c) is badly distributed,
which leads to a harsh push (thick line).
similarity. Boosted by the emerging advance of deep representation learning, refined distance metrics [17, 39] are
proposed in recent works to accurately capture the geometric structure of data embeddings.
Existing supervised DML methods can be categorized
into two paradigms, pair-based methods and proxy-based

9918

