Region Similarity Representation Learning
Tete Xiao1 * Colorado J Reed1∗
1

Xiaolong Wang2

UC Berkeley

2

1. Introduction
Recently, self-supervised pre-training has outperformed
supervised pre-training for a number of computer vision applications such as image classification and object detection
[4, 5, 6]. Much of this recent progress comes from exploiting the instance discrimination task [1, 14, 37, 52, 56], in
which a network learns image-level features that are invariant to certain image augmentations. Specifically, instance
discrimination maximizes the similarity of two views of an
image, where each view is an augmented version of an im* : Equal contribution.

Trevor Darrell1

UC San Diego

Abstract
We present Region Similarity Representation Learning
(ReSim), a new approach to self-supervised representation
learning for localization-based tasks such as object detection and segmentation. While existing work has largely
focused on solely learning global representations for an
entire image, ReSim learns both regional representations
for localization as well as semantic image-level representations. ReSim operates by sliding a fixed-sized window
across the overlapping area between two views (e.g., image crops), aligning these areas with their corresponding
convolutional feature map regions, and then maximizing
the feature similarity across views. As a result, ReSim
learns spatially and semantically consistent feature representation throughout the convolutional feature maps of a
neural network. A shift or scale of an image region, e.g., a
shift or scale of an object, has a corresponding change in
the feature maps; this allows downstream tasks to leverage
these representations for localization. Through object detection, instance segmentation, and dense pose estimation
experiments, we illustrate how ReSim learns representations which significantly improve the localization and classification performance compared to a competitive MoCo-v2
bb
baseline: +2.7 APbb
75 VOC, +1.1 AP75 COCO, and +1.9
mk
AP Cityscapes. Code and pre-trained models are released
at: https://github.com/Tete-Xiao/ReSim

Kurt Keutzer1

view 1

view 2

ReSim: view regions map to
similar spatial features
Instance Discrimination: the entire
views map to similar semantic features

Figure 1. Existing instance discrimination-based self-supervised
learning frameworks learn representations by augmenting an image into two different views (e.g., cropping/scaling the input image) and then maximizing the similarity between the image features for the entire views. In this work, we present Region Similarity Representation Learning (ReSim), which learns representations by maximizing the similarity of corresponding sub-image
regions throughout the convolutional layers of a network. In the
above example, instance discrimination learns to map both views
to the same features, despite the fact that the dog’s eyes and ears
are in different locations. On the other hand, ReSim learns features
which explicitly align these changes with corresponding changes
in the convolutional feature maps.

age, while minimizing its similarity to views which originate from other images [4, 5, 7].
Chen et al. [5] compared a diverse set of possible augmentations, and found that random cropping and scaling
have the largest impact on downstream ImageNet [9] classification performance. Several follow-up works have further
explored augmentation policies and confirmed this finding [43, 47, 53]. Through cropping and scaling augmentations and similarity maximization, the network learns to
map various scales and crops of an image to the same feature representations. For example, an image crop of the top
half of a dog’s body and the right half of a dog’s body would
map to the same representation in the embedding space,
which a downstream task could then classify as “dog”.
However, instance discrimination uses global imagelevel feature representations for these views, which is obtained by average pooling the final convolutional feature

10539

