Mixture density networks
Localization head Localization
Active Learning for Deep Object Detection via Probabilistic
Modeling
uncertainty

2,3

Deep neural
network

1

3

Classification head

Scoring
function

…

1,3

Annotator

Jiwoong Choi , Ismail Elezi , Hyuk-Jae Lee , Clement Farabet , and Jose M. Alvarez3
Unlabeled pool
1
Classification Informativeness
Seoul National University, 2 Technical University of Munich, 3 NVIDIA
scores
uncertainty
{jwchoi, hjlee}@capp.snu.ac.kr, ismail.elezi@tum.de, {cfarabet, josea}@nvidia.com
Mixture density networks

Abstract
Active learning aims to reduce labeling costs by selecting only the most informative samples on a dataset. Few
existing works have addressed active learning for object detection. Most of these methods are based on multiple models or are straightforward extensions of classification methods, hence estimate an image’s informativeness using only
the classification head. In this paper, we propose a novel
deep active learning approach for object detection. Our
approach relies on mixture density networks that estimate
a probabilistic distribution for each localization and classification head’s output. We explicitly estimate the aleatoric
and epistemic uncertainty in a single forward pass of a single model. Our method uses a scoring function that aggregates these two types of uncertainties for both heads to obtain every image’s informativeness score. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our approach in PASCAL VOC and MSCOCO datasets. Our approach outperforms single-model
based methods and performs on par with multi-model based
methods at a fraction of the computing cost. Code is available at https://github.com/NVlabs/AL-MDN .

1. Introduction
The performance of deep detection networks is dependent on the size of the labeled data [31, 32]. Motivated by
this, researchers have explored smart strategies to select the
most informative samples in the dataset for labeling, known
as active learning [35]. Typically, this is done by devising
a scoring function that computes the network’s uncertainty,
selecting to label the samples for which the network is least
confident with regard to its predictions [2, 4, 40].
In general, the predictive uncertainty is decomposed into
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty [15, 20]. The former
refers to the inherent noise in the data, such as sensor noise,
and can be attributed to occlusions or lack of visual features [10, 24]. The latter refers to the uncertainty caused
by the lack of knowledge of the model and is inversely proportional to the density of training data [38]. Modeling and
distinguishing these two types of uncertainty is very impor-

Localization
uncertainty

Localization head

Deep neural
network

Classification head

Unlabeled pool

Classification
uncertainty

Annotate top-𝐾 data points
Labeled training set

Scoring
function

Annotator

…
Informativeness scores

Figure 1: Our approach predicts aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties for both the localization and classification heads
in a single forward pass of a single model. We propose an
scoring function that aggregates epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties from both heads into single value. Then, those
data points with the top-K scores are sent for labeling.
tant in active learning, as it allows the deep learning models to know about their limitations [21, 38], i.e., recognize
suspicious predictions in the sample (aleatoric uncertainty)
and recognize samples that do not resemble the training set
(epistemic uncertainty). To compute these types of uncertainty, researchers use multi-model based approaches, such
as ensembles [2] or Monte Carlo (MC) dropout [13]. These
methods reach good results but come with several limitations [11, 16]. In particular, by being multi-models, they
require a much higher computing cost, and in the case of ensembles, they also increase the number of the network’s parameters [2]. Additionally, they rely only on classification
uncertainty, totally ignoring the localization uncertainty.
In this paper, we propose a novel active learning approach for deep object detection. Our approach uses a
single model with a single forward pass, significantly reducing the computing cost compared to multiple modelbased methods. Despite this, our method reaches high accuracy. To manage so, our method utilizes both localization
and classification-based aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties. As shown in Fig. 1, we base our method on a mixture density networks [3] that learns a Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) for each of the network’s outputs, i.e., localization and classification, to compute both aleatoric and

10264

Lab
trainin

