SSH: A Self-Supervised Framework for Image Harmonization
Yifan Jiang† , He Zhang‡ , Jianming Zhang‡ , Yilin Wang‡ , Zhe Lin‡ , Kalyan Sunkavalli‡ ,
Simon Chen‡ , Sohrab Amirghodsi‡ , Sarah Kong‡ , Zhangyang Wang†
†
The University of Texas at Austin ‡ Adobe Inc.
†
{yifanjiang97,atlaswang}@utexas.edu,
‡

{hezhan,jianmzha,yilwang,zlin,sunkaval,sichen,tamirgho,sakong}@adobe.com

DC

WCT2 [38]

S 2 AM [6]

DIH [33]

DoveNet [5]

SSH (ours)

Figure 1: A visual comparison between the image harmonization results of the direct composition (DC), the current state-ofthe-art methods, and the proposed SSH. Best viewed in color and zoomed in.

Abstract
Image harmonization aims to improve the quality of image compositing by matching the “appearance” (e.g., color
tone, brightness and contrast) between foreground and
background images. However, collecting large-scale annotated datasets for this task requires complex professional
retouching. Instead, we propose a novel Self-Supervised
Harmonization framework (SSH) that can be trained using just “free” natural images without being edited. We
reformulate the image harmonization problem from a representation fusion perspective, which separately processes
the foreground and background examples, to address the
background occlusion issue. This framework design allows for a dual data augmentation method, where diverse
[foreground, background, pseudo GT] triplets can be generated by cropping an image with perturbations using 3D
color lookup tables (LUTs). In addition, we build a realworld harmonization dataset as carefully created by expert
users, for evaluation and benchmarking purposes. Our results show that the proposed self-supervised method outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods in terms of reference metrics, visual quality, and subject user study. Code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
VITA-Group/SSHarmonization.

1. Introduction
Image harmonization is a crucial step in image compositing that aims at adjusting (harmonizing) the appear-

ance—e.g., the color, saturation, brightness and contrast—
of a foreground object to better match the background image so that the resulting composite is more realistic. For
example, a subject captured under sunlight looks different
from one on a cloudy day and its appearance needs to be
edited when composited into a cloudy scene.
Previous approaches tackle this issue by transferring
the statistic information between the foreground and background regions, including color [19, 36] and texture [31].
More recently, [33, 5, 6] train deep neural networks to address the image harmonization problem, necessitating the
large-scale dataset of input-harmonized composite training
pairs. However, collecting a large-scale high-quality harmonization dataset, in general, requires tedious professional
expert retouching. Instead, existing methods [33, 5, 6] bypass this by selecting foreground objects in existing images,
perturb their color to simulate an unharmonized composite,
and train the network to regress the original input image, as
manifested in Fig. 2 left. While these approaches [33, 5, 6]
are effective to an extent, they have several limitations:
• Limited ground truth paired data. Collecting highquality paired harmonization data is time-consuming and
laborious. Even in the constrained case presented above,
it requires an accurate mask of the foreground object in
each image, shown as Fig. 2 left.
• Background occlusion. Due to synthesizing by naively
composing, existing methods cannot make effective use

4832

