LocalTrans: A Multiscale Local Transformer Network for Cross-Resolution
Homography Estimation
Ruizhi Shao1,4,* , Gaochang Wu2,* , Yuemei Zhou1 , Ying Fu3 , Lu Fang1 , and Yebin Liu1
1

Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University 2 Northeastern University
3 Beijing Institute of Technology
4 Zhuohe Technology

Global Low Resolution Image (Input)

Coventional Feature-based Method [42]

Local High Resolution Images (Input)

Our LocalTrans

Figure 1. We present a multiscale local transformer network, dubbed LocalTrans, for homography estimation. The proposed LocalTrans
network can estimate accurate homography on challenging real-captured cross-resolution cases under resolution gap up to 10×. We achieve
artifact-free stitching by warping each local high-resolution image, which substantially outperforms feature-based method in [42].

Abstract
Cross-resolution image alignment is a key problem in
multiscale gigapixel photography, which requires to estimate homography matrix using images with large resolution gap. Existing deep homography methods concatenate
the input images or features, neglecting the explicit formulation of correspondences between them, which leads to degraded accuracy in cross-resolution challenges. In this paper, we consider the cross-resolution homography estimation as a multimodal problem, and propose a local transformer network embedded within a multiscale structure to
explicitly learn correspondences between the multimodal
inputs, namely, input images with different resolutions. The
proposed local transformer adopts a local attention map
specifically for each position in the feature. By combining the local transformer with the multiscale structure, the
network is able to capture long-short range correspondences efficiently and accurately. Experiments on both the
MS-COCO dataset and the real-captured cross-resolution
dataset show that the proposed network outperforms existing state-of-the-art feature-based and deep-learning-based
homography estimation methods, and is able to accurately
align images under 10× resolution gap.
* Equal contribution

1. Introduction
The rapidly development of multiscale gigapixel photography [5, 42, 45] brings large-scale, long-term and immersive visual experience. It synthesizes a single ultra-highresolution image through aligning plenty of high-resolution
local-views with a low-resolution global-view. In multiscale gigapixel photography, the large resolution gap between two views, namely cross-resolution, puts forward a
new challenge to traditional homography estimation task.
Homography estimation is defined as the estimation of the
projection mapping between two views on the same plane
in 3D space, which usually consists of three steps: feature
extraction using SIFT [18] or SURF [2], correspondence
matching, and homography matrix estimation based on the
RANSAC [9] or a direct linear transform. It relies on dense
features with the same resolution to achieve an accurate estimation, thus, usually fail in solving the cross-resolution
problem.
Inspired by the success of deep learning, deep homography methods based on convolutional neural network are
studied to deal with challenging scenes. The pioneer deep
homography method proposed by DeTone et al. [8] implements the estimation of homography matrix with a typical VGG-net [30], which extracts correspondences from

14890

