Keep CALM and Improve Visual Feature Attribution
Jae Myung Kim1 *
1
3

University of Tübingen

Zeynep Akata1,3,4

Junsuk Choe2 *
2

Seong Joon Oh5†

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sogang University

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

4

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

5

NAVER AI Lab

Abstract
The class activation mapping, or CAM, has been the cornerstone of feature attribution methods for multiple vision
tasks. Its simplicity and effectiveness have led to wide applications in the explanation of visual predictions and weaklysupervised localization tasks. However, CAM has its own
shortcomings. The computation of attribution maps relies
on ad-hoc calibration steps that are not part of the training computational graph, making it difficult for us to understand the real meaning of the attribution values. In this
paper, we improve CAM by explicitly incorporating a latent variable encoding the location of the cue for recognition in the formulation, thereby subsuming the attribution
map into the training computational graph. The resulting model, class activation latent mapping, or CALM, is
trained with the expectation-maximization algorithm. Our
experiments show that CALM identifies discriminative attributes for image classifiers more accurately than CAM
and other visual attribution baselines. CALM also shows
performance improvements over prior arts on the weaklysupervised object localization benchmarks. Our code is
available at https://github.com/naver-ai/calm.

1. Introduction
Interpretable AI [25, 40, 24, 52] is becoming an absolute necessity in safety-critical and high-stakes applications
of machine learning. Along with good recognition and prediction accuracies, we require models to be able to transparently communicate the inner mechanisms with human
users. In visual recognition tasks, researchers have developed various feature attribution methods to inspect contributions of individual pixels or visual features towards the final model prediction. Input gradients [55, 56, 58, 5, 63, 39,
28] and input perturbation methods [59, 70, 20, 43, 23, 47]
have been actively researched.
In this paper, we focus on the class activation mapping
(CAM) [68] method, which has been the cornerstone of
* Equal contribution. Majority of work done at NAVER AI Lab.
† Corresponding author.

GT class: A

wing

CAM for class A

CAM for class B

Why class A not B?

CALM for class A

CALM for class B

Why class A not B?

head

How is A ≠ B ?

Figure 1. CAM vs CALM. CALM is better at locating the actual
cues used for the recognition than CAM. Two bird classes A and B
only differ in their head and wing attributes. Attributions for class
A, B, and their difference are shown. While CAM fails to detect
the head and wing, CALM captures them accurately.

the feature attribution research. CAM starts from the observation that many CNN classifiers make predictions by
aggregating location-wise
 signals. For example, p(y|x) =
P
1
softmax HW
f
hw yhw where f = f (x) is the extracted
feature map in RC×H×W where C, H, W are the number
of classes, height, and width of the feature map, respectively. CAM considers the pre-GAP feature map fyhw as
the attribution, after scaling it to the [0, 1] range by dropping
the negative values and dividing through by the maximum
value: s := (maxhw fhw )−1 f + ∈ [0, 1]H×W . Thanks
to the algorithmic simplicity and reasonable effectiveness,
CAM has been a popular choice as an attribution method
with many follow-up variants [53, 9, 6, 69, 61, 45, 22].
Despite its popularity and contributions to the interpretability community, CAM still has its own limitations.
What does the attribution map s really mean? We fail to find
a reasonable linguistic description because s hardly encodes
anything essential in the recognition process. s also violates
key minimal requirements, or “axioms” [40, 59, 22], for an
attribution method. For example, its dependence on the presoftmax values f make it ill-defined: translating f 7→ f + c
yields an identical model because of the translation invariance of softmax, but it changes the attribution map s.
We thus introduce a novel attribution method, class ac-

8350

