Heterogeneous Relational Complement for Vehicle Re-identification
Jiajian Zhao1,† Yifan Zhao1,† Jia Li1,4,∗ Ke Yan3 Yonghong Tian2,4
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{zhaojiajian, zhaoyf, jiali}@buaa.edu.cn, yhtian@pku.edu.cn, kerwinyan@tencent.com

Abstract
The crucial problem in vehicle re-identification is to find
the same vehicle identity when reviewing this object from
cross-view cameras, which sets a higher demand for learning viewpoint-invariant representations. In this paper, we
propose to solve this problem from two aspects: constructing robust feature representations and proposing camerasensitive evaluations. We first propose a novel Heterogeneous Relational Complement Network (HRCN) by incorporating region-specific features and cross-level features
as complements for the original high-level output. Considering the distributional differences and semantic misalignment, we propose graph-based relation modules to
embed these heterogeneous features into one unified highdimensional space. On the other hand, considering the deficiencies of cross-camera evaluations in existing measures
(i.e., CMC and AP), we then propose a Cross-camera Generalization Measure (CGM) to improve the evaluations by
introducing position-sensitivity and cross-camera generalization penalties. We further construct a new benchmark of
existing models with our proposed CGM and experimental
results reveal that our proposed HRCN model achieves new
state-of-the-art in VeRi-776, VehicleID, and VERI-Wild.

1. Introduction
Vehicle Re-identification (Re-ID) has shown broad application prospects in urban security surveillance and intelligent transportation systems. Given a gallery of images,
a vehicle Re-ID algorithm aims to associate images of the
same vehicle identity captured by different cameras. With
the proposals of large vehicle datasets [17, 19, 22, 33, 6]
and deep learning approaches [39, 28, 2, 29, 7, 41], vehicle
re-identification has made significant progresses. Although
these methods achieve a performance bottleneck on exist† Jiajian Zhao and Yifan Zhao contribute equally to this work.
∗ Jia Li is the Corresponding author. URL: http://cvteam.net

Figure 1. Motivation of our two relational complements. (a) Crossregion complement: the high-level embedding is refined by regional features to focus on discriminative regions. (b) Cross-level
complement: features from multiple layers are fused by their relationship to incorporate multi-level cues.

ing evaluation measures, recognizing identities with large
viewpoint variances, caused by the cross-camera situation,
still remains a great challenge.
Existing researches mainly tackle this challenge from
two aspects, i.e., data-driven and feature complement. Datadriven methods deem the cross-camera challenges as a natural insufficiency of data distributions. It is observed that
networks fail to recognize specific samples due to the lack
of similar cases. Thus tens of recent researches tend to synthesize more examples using 3D-based models [29, 36] or
adversarial learning [42, 23, 1, 4]. In [36], VehicleX dataset
is composed of synthetic vehicles rendered by the Unity 3D
engine. Lou et al. [23] propose to generate hard negative
and multi-view samples as a training data supplement. Due
to their instability in synthesizing unrealistic samples, methods of this category do not explicitly regularize the feature

205

