Variational Feature Disentangling for Fine-Grained Few-Shot Classification
Jingyi Xu1 , Hieu Le* 2 , Mingzhen Huang1 , ShahRukh Athar1 , and Dimitris Samaras1
1

Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, NY, USA
2
Amazon Robotics, MA, USA

Abstract
Data augmentation is an intuitive step towards solving
the problem of few-shot classification. However, ensuring
both discriminability and diversity in the augmented samples is challenging. To address this, we propose a feature
disentanglement framework that allows us to augment features with randomly sampled intra-class variations while
preserving their class-discriminative features. Specifically,
we disentangle a feature representation into two components: one represents the intra-class variance and the other
encodes the class-discriminative information. We assume
that the intra-class variance induced by variations in poses,
backgrounds, or illumination conditions is shared across
all classes and can be modelled via a common distribution.
Then we sample features repeatedly from the learned intraclass variability distribution and add them to the classdiscriminative features to get the augmented features. Such
a data augmentation scheme ensures that the augmented
features inherit crucial class-discriminative features while
exhibiting large intra-class variance. Our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on multiple challenging fine-grained few-shot image classification
benchmarks. Code is available at: https://github.
com/cvlab-stonybrook/vfd-iccv21

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual data are hard to collect and costly
to annotate [49, 46, 15]. Fine-grained visual datasets often become quite long-tailed and lead to classifiers overfitting to the abundant classes when trained in vanilla settings. Fine-grained few-shot learning (FSL) methods alleviate this problem since they learn discriminative class features, among visually similar classes, using as few as 5 or 1
training instances.
Augmenting the few-shot classes by generating addi* Work done prior to Amazon

Deltaencoder

Ours

Figure 1: Nearest “real sample” neighbors of the augmented examples. We train data augmentation methods
using the base classes and search for the nearest-neighbors
of the generated samples in the novel classes of the CUB
dataset. The input images are shown in the first column.
Each row shows the nearest neighbors of some augmented
features computed from: ∆-encoder [38] (1st and 2nd rows)
and our method (3rd and 4th rows). Green borders indicate
that the images have the same class as the input image and
red borders indicate otherwise.

tional data is a straightforward way to mitigate issues of
overfitting in FSL. Nevertheless, generating diverse data
reliably remains an open question [19, 40]. The generated samples should contain the class-discriminative features while exhibiting high intra-class diversity. A typical
data synthesis approach is generating new samples based
on adversarial frameworks [45, 25, 11, 55, 2, 20, 21, 22].
However, these methods suffer from a lack of diversity in
the generated samples as adversarial training often modecollapses. Another approach is the feature transfer that
transfers the intra-class variance from the base classes,
which have many training samples, to augment features for
the novel classes, in which only few samples are available
[38, 52, 12]. These methods are based on a common assumption that intra-class variations induced by poses, back-

8812

