Learning to Estimate Hidden Motions with Global Motion Aggregation
Shihao Jiang1,2
1

Dylan Campbell3

Yao Lu1,2

Australian National University

2

ACRV

Hongdong Li1,2
3

Richard Hartley1,2

University of Oxford

Figure 1. Global motion aggregation helps resolve ambiguities caused by occlusions. Occlusions—a term we extend to include any
parts of a scene that disappear in the next frame—cause large ambiguities in the optical flow estimation problem that cannot be resolved
by local approaches. Based on the assumption that points on an object have homogeneous motions, which often holds approximately, we
propose to globally aggregate motion features of pixels that are likely to belong to the same object. In this example, most pixels on the
blade move out-of-frame from frame 2 to frame 3. When only these two frames are provided, global aggregation allows motion information
to be passed from non-occluded pixels to occluded pixels, which helps resolve ambiguities caused by occlusions.

Abstract
Occlusions pose a significant challenge to optical flow
algorithms that rely on local evidences. We consider an occluded point to be one that is imaged in the reference frame
but not in the next, a slight overloading of the standard definition since it also includes points that move out-of-frame.
Estimating the motion of these points is extremely difficult,
particularly in the two-frame setting. Previous work relies on CNNs to learn occlusions, without much success,
or requires multiple frames to reason about occlusions using temporal smoothness. In this paper, we argue that the
occlusion problem can be better solved in the two-frame
case by modelling image self-similarities. We introduce
a global motion aggregation module, a transformer-based
approach to find long-range dependencies between pixels
in the first image, and perform global aggregation on the
corresponding motion features. We demonstrate that the
optical flow estimates in the occluded regions can be significantly improved without damaging the performance in
non-occluded regions. This approach obtains new state-ofthe-art results on the challenging Sintel dataset, improving the average end-point error by 13.6% on Sintel Final
and 13.7% on Sintel Clean. At the time of submission,
our method ranks first on these benchmarks among all published and unpublished approaches. Code is available at
https://github.com/zacjiang/GMA.

1. Introduction
How can we estimate the 2D motion of a point we only
see once? This is the problem faced by optical flow algorithms for points that become occluded between frames.
Estimating the optical flow, that is, the apparent motion of
pixels in an image as the camera and scene move, is a classic problem in computer vision studied since the seminal
work of Horn and Schunck [14]. There are many factors
that make optical flow prediction a hard problem, including
large motions, motion and defocus blur, and featureless regions. Among these challenges, occlusion is one of the most
difficult and under-explored. In this paper, we propose an
approach that specifically targets the occlusion problem in
the case of two-frame optical flow prediction.
We first define what we mean by occlusion in the context of optical flow estimation. In this paper, an occluded
point is defined as a 3D point that is imaged in the reference
frame but is not visible in the matching frame. This definition incorporates several different scenarios, such as the
query point moving out-of-frame or behind another object
(or itself), or another object moving in front of the query
point, in the active sense. One particular case of occlusion
is shown in Figure 1, where part of the blade moves out-offrame.
The challenge posed by occlusions can be understood by
looking at the underlying assumptions of optical flow algorithms. Traditional optical flow algorithms apply the bright-

9772

