Non-Rigid Neural Radiance Fields: Reconstruction and Novel View Synthesis of
a Dynamic Scene From Monocular Video
Edgar Tretschk
MPI for Informatics, SIC

Ayush Tewari
MPI for Informatics, SIC

Vladislav Golyanik
MPI for Informatics, SIC

Michael Zollhöfer
Facebook Reality Labs Research

Christoph Lassner
Facebook Reality Labs Research

Christian Theobalt
MPI for Informatics, SIC

Figure 1. Given a monocular image sequence, NR-NeRF reconstructs a single canonical neural radiance field to represent geometry and
appearance, and a per-time-step deformation field. We can render the scene into a novel spatio-temporal camera trajectory that significantly
differs from the input trajectory. NR-NeRF also learns rigidity scores and correspondences without direct supervision on either. We can
use the rigidity scores to remove the foreground, we can supersample along the time dimension, and we can exaggerate or dampen motion.

Abstract
We present Non-Rigid Neural Radiance Fields (NRNeRF), a reconstruction and novel view synthesis approach
for general non-rigid dynamic scenes. Our approach takes
RGB images of a dynamic scene as input (e.g., from a
monocular video recording), and creates a high-quality
space-time geometry and appearance representation. We
show that a single handheld consumer-grade camera is sufficient to synthesize sophisticated renderings of a dynamic
scene from novel virtual camera views, e.g. a ‘bullet-time’
video effect. NR-NeRF disentangles the dynamic scene into
a canonical volume and its deformation. Scene deformation is implemented as ray bending, where straight rays are
deformed non-rigidly. We also propose a novel rigidity network to better constrain rigid regions of the scene, leading
to more stable results. The ray bending and rigidity network are trained without explicit supervision. Our formulation enables dense correspondence estimation across views
and time, and compelling video editing applications such as
motion exaggeration. Our code will be open sourced.

1. Introduction
Free viewpoint rendering is a well-studied problem
due to its wide range of applications in movies and virtual/augmented reality [72, 9, 47]. In this work, we are interested in dynamic scenes, which change over time, from
novel user-controlled viewpoints. Traditionally, multi-view
recordings are required for free viewpoint rendering of dynamic scenes [94, 82, 55]. However, such multi-view captures are expensive and cumbersome. We would like to enable the setting in which a casual user records a dynamic
scene with a single, moving consumer-grade camera. Access to only a monocular video of the deforming scene leads
to a severely under-constrained problem. Most existing approaches thus limit themselves to a single object category,
such as the human body [23, 87, 31] or face [12]. Some approaches allow for the reconstruction of general non-rigid
objects [99, 17, 32, 68], but most methods only reconstruct
the geometry without the appearance of the objects in the
scene. In contrast, our objective is to reconstruct a general
dynamic scene, including its appearance, such that it can be
rendered from novel spatio-temporal viewpoints.

12959

