Contrast and Classify: Training Robust VQA Models
Yash Kant1 * Abhinav Moudgil1 Dhruv Batra1,2 Devi Parikh1,2 Harsh Agrawal1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Recent Visual Question Answering (VQA) models have
shown impressive performance on the VQA benchmark but
remain sensitive to small linguistic variations in input questions. Existing approaches address this by augmenting the
dataset with question paraphrases from visual question generation models or adversarial perturbations. These approaches use the combined data to learn an answer classifier by minimizing the standard cross-entropy loss. To more
effectively leverage augmented data, we build on the recent
success in contrastive learning. We propose a novel training paradigm (ConClaT) that optimizes both cross-entropy
and contrastive losses. The contrastive loss encourages representations to be robust to linguistic variations in questions while the cross-entropy loss preserves the discriminative power of representations for answer prediction.
We find that optimizing both losses – either alternately
or jointly – is key to effective training. On the VQARephrasings [44] benchmark, which measures the VQA
model’s answer consistency across human paraphrases of
a question, ConClaT improves Consensus Score by 1.63%
over an improved baseline. In addition, on the standard
VQA 2.0 benchmark, we improve the VQA accuracy by
0.78% overall. We also show that ConClaT is agnostic to
the type of data-augmentation strategy used.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) refers to the task of
automatically answering free-form natural language questions about an image. For VQA systems to work reliably
when deployed in the wild, for applications such as assisting visually impaired users, they need to be robust to different ways a user might ask the same question. For example,
VQA models should produce the same answer for two paraphrased questions – “What is in the basket?” and “What is
contained in the basket?” since their semantic meaning is
the same. While significant progress has been made towards
building more accurate VQA systems, these models remain
brittle to minor linguistic variations in the input question.
* Correspondence to ysh.kant@gmail.com

Figure 1: We make VQA model robust to question paraphrases using a training paradigm ConClaT that minimizes
contrastive and cross-entropy losses together. Contrastive
learning step pulls representations of positive samples corresponding to paraphrased questions closer together while
pushing those with different answers farther apart. Crossentropy step makes these representations discriminative to
help model answer visual questions accurately.
To make VQA systems robust, existing approaches [44,
47] have trained VQA systems [24] by augmenting the
training data with different variations of the input question.
For instance, VQA-CC [44] use a visual question generation (VQG) model to generate paraphrased question given
an image and answer. Generally, these models fuse image and question features into a joint vision and language
(V+L) representation followed by a standard softmax classifier to produce answer probabilities and are optimized by
minimizing the cross-entropy loss. Unfortunately, crossentropy loss treats every image-question pair independently
and fails to exploit the information that some questions in
the augmented dataset are paraphrases of each other.
We overcome this limitation by using a contrastive loss
InfoNCE [36] that encourages joint V+L (Vision and Language) representations obtained from samples whose questions are paraphrases of each other to be closer while pulling
apart the V+L representations of samples with different an-

1604

