Not All Operations Contribute Equally: Hierarchical Operation-adaptive
Predictor for Neural Architecture Search
Ziye Chen1,2 Yibing Zhan2 Baosheng Yu3 Mingming Gong4 * Bo Du1 *
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
JD Explore Academy, China 3 The University of Sydney, Australia
4
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Australia
ziyechen@whu.edu.cn, zhanyibing@jd.com, baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au,
mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au, dubo@whu.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Graph-based predictors have recently shown promising
results on neural architecture search (NAS). Despite their
efficiency, current graph-based predictors treat all operations equally, resulting in biased topological knowledge of
cell architectures. Intuitively, not all operations are equally
significant during forwarding propagation when aggregating information from these operations to another operation. To address the above issue, we propose a Hierarchical Operation-adaptive Predictor (HOP) for NAS. HOP
contains an operation-adaptive attention module (OAM) to
capture the diverse knowledge between operations by learning the relative significance of operations in cell architectures during aggregation over iterations. In addition, a cellhierarchical gated module (CGM) further refines and enriches the obtained topological knowledge of cell architectures, by integrating cell information from each iteration of
OAM. The experimental results compared with state-of-theart predictors demonstrate the capability of our proposed
HOP.

1. Introduction
Recently, neural architecture search (NAS) has aroused
significant interest due to its capability to automate the
* Corresponding Author. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 61822113,
the Science and Technology Major Project of Hubei Province (NextGeneration AI Technologies) under Grant 2019AEA170, and supported
by project 62002090. GM was supported by Australian Research Council
Project DE210101624. Dr Baosheng Yu is supported by ARC project FL170100117. This work was done by Ziye Chen when he was an intern in
JD Explore Academy, China.

architecture engineering process [43, 17]. NAS has obtained competitive results compared with hand-crafted architectures in various tasks, such as image classification
[18, 28], object detection [31, 25], and semantic segmentation [10, 38]. Current NAS algorithms can be roughly classified into four categories: reinforcement learning-based
methods, evolution-based methods, gradient-based methods, and predictor-based methods.
Reinforcement learning-based methods [48, 2] construct
an architecture by deriving discrete components with validation accuracy as a reward. Evolution-based methods
[12, 14] utilize mutations and combinations of components
to generate architectures. Gradient-based methods [13, 34]
construct a continuous search space where the architectures
share parameters in a super-network. However, the above
three types of methods are either time-consuming or spaceconsuming. In contrast, predictor-based methods aim to
train a predictor that directly predicts the performance of
given network architectures concerning network architectures’ topological knowledge. Due to the flexibility and low
computational cost, predictor-based methods have attracted
increasing attention recently. Current predictor-based methods mainly have two types: the sequence-based predictor
[16, 30] and the graph-based predictor [6, 24]. We focus on
exploring graph-based predictors for cell search.
The graph-based predictors model cell architectures as
directed acyclic graphs (DAG) [8, 18] and accordingly use
graph neural networks (GNNs) [22] to encode the architectures’ topological knowledge. However, current graphbased predictors generally treat all operations equally. They
consequently fail to capture the diverse knowledge in the
details of architectures, i.e., not all operations are equally
significant during forwarding propagation when aggregating information from these operations to another operation.

10508

