Pixel-Perfect Structure-from-Motion with Featuremetric Refinement
Philipp Lindenberger1 * Paul-Edouard Sarlin2 * Viktor Larsson2 Marc Pollefeys2,3
Departments of 1 Mathematics and 2 Computer Science, ETH Zurich 3 Microsoft

Abstract
Finding local features that are repeatable across multiple
views is a cornerstone of sparse 3D reconstruction. The classical image matching paradigm detects keypoints per-image
once and for all, which can yield poorly-localized features
and propagate large errors to the final geometry. In this paper, we refine two key steps of structure-from-motion by a
direct alignment of low-level image information from multiple views: we first adjust the initial keypoint locations prior
to any geometric estimation, and subsequently refine points
and camera poses as a post-processing. This refinement is
robust to large detection noise and appearance changes, as
it optimizes a featuremetric error based on dense features
predicted by a neural network. This significantly improves
the accuracy of camera poses and scene geometry for a wide
range of keypoint detectors, challenging viewing conditions,
and off-the-shelf deep features. Our system easily scales
to large image collections, enabling pixel-perfect crowdsourced localization at scale. Our code is publicly available at github.com/cvg/pixel-perfect-sfm as
an add-on to the popular SfM software COLMAP.

1. Introduction
Mapping the world is an important requirement for spatial
intelligence applications in augmented reality or robotics.
Tasks like visual localization or path planning can benefit from accurate sparse or dense 3D reconstructions of
the environment. These can be built from images using
Structure-from-Motion (SfM), which associates observations across views to estimate camera parameters and 3D
scene geometry. Sparse reconstruction based on matching
local image features [10, 20, 22, 32, 48, 54, 56, 62] is the
most common due to its scalability and its robustness to
appearance changes introduced by varying devices, viewpoints, and temporal conditions found in crowdsourced scenarios [2, 28, 33, 39, 45, 47, 55].
SfM assumes that sparse interest points [10, 20, 22, 32, 48,
56, 59, 81, 88] can be reliably detected across views. It typi* indicates equal contributions

Structure
from
Motion

refined

featuremetric refinement
Figure 1: From sparse to dense. We improve the accuracy of sparse Structure-from-Motion by refining 2D keypoints, camera poses, and 3D points using the direct alignment of deep features. This featuremetric optimization leverages dense image information but can scale to scenes with
thousands of images. Such refinement results in subpixelaccurate reconstructions, even in challenging conditions.

cally selects such points for each image independently and
relies on these initial detections for the remainder of the
reconstruction process. However, detecting keypoints from
a single view is inherently inaccurate due to appearance
changes and discrete image sampling [30]. The advent of
convolutional neural network (CNNs) for detection has magnified this issue, as they generally do not retain local image
information and instead favor global context.
Multi-view geometric optimization with bundle adjustment [4, 40, 79] is commonly used to refine cameras and
points using reprojection errors. Dusmanu et al. [23] proposed to refine keypoint locations prior to SfM via an analogous geometric cost constrained with local optical flow. This
can improve SfM, but has limited accuracy and scalability.
In this work, we argue that local image information is
valuable throughout the SfM process to improve its accuracy. We adjust both keypoints and bundles, before and after
reconstruction, by direct image alignment [18, 25, 49] in a
learned feature space. Exploiting this locally-dense informa-

5987

