In-the-Wild Single Camera 3D Reconstruction Through Moving Water Surfaces
Jinhui Xiong

Wolfgang Heidrich
KAUST

Flow Computation Module

Video Sequence
Ti
m

%+1

%+2

%+3

e

%

#

%

%+1

%+2

%+3

$
"!
""

!!

!"

#!
#"

Ray Casting

Snell’s Law

##

Multi-view Triangulation

Differentiable Framework

Recovered Dynamic Water Surfaces and Scene Geometry

Figure 1: We propose a differentiable framework to estimate underwater scene geometry along with the time-varying water
surface. The inputs to our model are a video sequence captured by a fixed camera. Dense correspondence from each frame
to a world reference frame (selected from the input sequences) is pre-computed, ensuring the reconstruction is performed
in a unified coordinate system. We feed the flow fields, together with initialized water surfaces and scene geometry (all are
initialized as planar surfaces), into the framework, which incorporates ray casting, Snell’s law and multi-view triangulation.
The gradients of the specially designed losses with respect to water surfaces and scene geometry are back-propagated, and
all parameters are simultaneously optimized. The final result is a quality reconstruction of the underwater scene, along with
an estimate of the time-varying water-air interface. The data shown here was captured in a public fountain environment.

Abstract
We present a method for reconstructing the 3D shape of
underwater environments from a single, stationary camera
placed above the water. We propose a novel differentiable
framework, which, to our knowledge, is the first singlecamera solution that is capable of simultaneously retrieving
the structure of dynamic water surfaces and static underwater scene geometry in the wild. This framework integrates
ray casting of Snell’s law at the refractive interface, multiview triangulation and specially designed loss functions.
Our method is calibration-free, and thus it is easy to collect data outdoors in uncontrolled environments. Experimental results show that our method is able to realize robust
and quality reconstructions on a variety of scenes, both in a
laboratory environment and in the wild, and even in a salt
water environment. We believe the method is promising for
applications in surveying and environmental monitoring.

1. Introduction
Shallow waters in rivers, lakes, and oceanfronts are important sites both for their ecosystems, as well as for their
economic significance. Environmental monitoring and surveying of these shallow water regions is therefore a task of
comparable importance. Unfortunately, detailed 3D scanning of such environments is currently cumbersome, since it
requires placing cameras or 3D scanners under water, which
incurs significant equipment costs, and results in slow acquisition time.
A more convenient solution would be to 3D image the
environment directly from above water. This is a rather
challenging problem, since the fluid, acting as a transmitting medium, is unknown and usually non-stationary. The
refraction changes dynamically, and causes a time-varying
distortion of the underwater scene. While there has been
some work on this problem over the years [26, 36, 1, 11],
the state of the art methods require extensive calibration and

12558

