SurfaceNet: Adversarial SVBRDF Estimation from a Single Image
Giuseppe Vecchio

Simone Palazzo
Concetto Spampinato
PeRCeiVe Lab
Department of Electrical, Electronics and Computer Engineering – University of Catania, Italy
giuseppe.vecchio@phd.unict.it, {simone.palazzo,concetto.spampinato}@unict.it

Abstract
In this paper we present SurfaceNet, an approach for
estimating spatially-varying bidirectional reflectance distribution function (SVBRDF) material properties from a single image. We pose the problem as an image translation
task and propose a novel patch-based generative adversarial network (GAN) that is able to produce high-quality,
high-resolution surface reflectance maps. The employment
of the GAN paradigm has a twofold objective: 1) allowing
the model to recover finer details than standard translation
models; 2) reducing the domain shift between synthetic and
real data distributions in an unsupervised way.
An extensive evaluation, carried out on a public benchmark
of synthetic and real images under different illumination
conditions, shows that SurfaceNet largely outperforms existing SVBRDF reconstruction methods, both quantitatively
and qualitatively. Furthermore, SurfaceNet exhibits a remarkable ability in generating high-quality maps from real
samples without any supervision at training time.
Source code available at https://github.com/
perceivelab/surfacenet.

1. Introduction
Computer-generated imagery (CGI) and 3D graphics
play an important role in a variety of applications, including
visual effects, architectural modeling, simulators, cultural
heritage, video games, virtual or augmented reality and automotive design. The increasing computational power of
both professional and consumer hardware has led to a growing interest in high-quality CGI, whose basic requirement
for creating realistic images is the definition and implementation of robust digital models that describe how real-world
materials interact with light [12, 13]. This task is easily
carried out by humans, who are able to intuitively identify
materials’ physical properties by analyzing how light is reflected, transmitted and absorbed before reaching the observer’s eyes. Artificially emulating this process would require a physically-accurate simulation of how generic ma-

terials interact with light, but the complexity of such task
and the needed level of surface details make this approach
computationally unfeasible.
In practice, most approximations for rendering reflections over surfaces simplify the task by defining a model
that describes how light interacts with pixel-level elements
of a material depicted in a digital image: the properties
of the material are modeled by a spatially-varying bidirectional reflectance distribution function (SVBRDF) that is
parameterized by a set of properties encoding color, planar
deformation and reflectivity. However, even measuring this
approximation is a major challenge in computer graphics.
Following the success of deep learning methods in computer vision, the estimation of material reflectance properties has been increasingly posed as a learning task [8, 15,
9, 10, 16]. Following this trend, we propose SurfaceNet, a
fully-convolutional network for SVBRDF estimation from
a single input image. Unlike methods that estimate material
properties from multiple input images [9, 15], our approach
better suits non-professional application scenarios, where it
is unfeasible to obtain reliable acquisitions of a surface with
a sufficiently steady view point.
More specifically, we pose SVBRDF estimation as an
image-to-image translation task and introduce a deep generative adversarial architecture, consisting of a generator that
employs a fully-convolutional multi-head encoder-decoder
network that predicts a set of SVBRDF maps, and a patchbased discriminator that is trained to distinguish between
estimated maps and ground-truth ones. We propose to use a
generative adversarial loss to compensate for the blurriness
typically introduced by L1 or L2 losses. This is an alternative approach to recent methods that perform neural rendering [8, 15] to produce output images from the estimated reflectance maps as a supervisory signal. Moreover, the GAN
framework also allows us to employ real-world images, for
which no reflectance maps are available, during the training procedure, alongside synthetic images. As a result, our
generator learns to extract features that can be shared between synthetic and real images, enforcing an implicit domain adaptation mechanism and reducing the distribution

12840

