From General to Specific: Informative Scene Graph Generation via Balance
Adjustment
Yuyu Guo1

Lianli Gao1∗

Xuanhan Wang1

Yuxuan Hu2

Heng Tao Shen1
1

Xing Xu1

Xu Lu3

Jingkuan Song1

Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2

3

Southwest University, China

Kuaishou, China

Abstract
The scene graph generation (SGG) task aims to detect
visual relationship triplets, i.e., subject, predicate, object,
in an image, providing a structural vision layout for scene
understanding. However, current models are stuck in common predicates, e.g., “on” and “at”, rather than informative ones, e.g., “standing on” and “looking at”, resulting
in the loss of precise information and overall performance.
If a model only uses “stone on road” rather than “blocking” to describe an image, it is easy to misunderstand the
scene. We argue that this phenomenon is caused by two
key imbalances between informative predicates and common ones, i.e., semantic space level imbalance and training sample level imbalance. To tackle this problem, we propose BA-SGG, a simple yet effective SGG framework based
on balance adjustment but not the conventional distribution fitting. It integrates two components: Semantic Adjustment (SA) and Balanced Predicate Learning (BPL),
respectively for adjusting these imbalances. Benefited from
the model-agnostic process, our method is easily applied to
the state-of-the-art SGG models and significantly improves
the SGG performance. Our method achieves 14.3%, 8.0%,
and 6.1% higher Mean Recall (mR) than that of the Transformer model at three scene graph generation sub-tasks on
Visual Genome, respectively. Codes are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to detect instancesof-interest and their relationships in an image. It provides
a structural vision layout, as an auxiliary tool, to bridge the
∗ Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. A confusion matrix of a baseline model (a) and two
searching results for “stone on road” in Google (b). The element
ci,j means the number of samples labeled as i but predicted as j.
The results of the model concentrate on the left side, e.g., “on” and
“near”. If the model directly uses the common predicate “on” to
describe the first image like the second image in (b), it may cause
serious consequences.

gap from computer vision to natural language, supporting
many high-level tasks such as visual captioning [35, 1] and
visual question answering [27, 15].

1 https://github.com/ZhuGeKongKong/SGG-G2S

A good scene graph can provide sufficient and informa-

16383

