Rethinking Coarse-to-Fine Approach in Single Image Deblurring
Sung-Jin Cho* , 1
1

Seo-Won Ji*, 1
Jun-Pyo Hong1
Seung-Won Jung† , 2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea University

Sung-Jea Ko2

{sjcho, swji, jphong}@dali.korea.ac.kr, 2 {swjung83, sjko}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Coarse-to-fine strategies have been extensively used for
the architecture design of single image deblurring networks. Conventional methods typically stack sub-networks
with multi-scale input images and gradually improve sharpness of images from the bottom sub-network to the top subnetwork, yielding inevitably high computational costs. Toward a fast and accurate deblurring network design, we revisit the coarse-to-fine strategy and present a multi-input
multi-output U-net (MIMO-UNet). The MIMO-UNet has
three distinct features. First, the single encoder of the
MIMO-UNet takes multi-scale input images to ease the
difficulty of training. Second, the single decoder of the
MIMO-UNet outputs multiple deblurred images with different scales to mimic multi-cascaded U-nets using a single U-shaped network. Last, asymmetric feature fusion
is introduced to merge multi-scale features in an efficient
manner. Extensive experiments on the GoPro and RealBlur datasets demonstrate that the proposed network outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms of both accuracy and computational complexity. Source code is available for research purposes at https://github.com/
chosj95/MIMO-UNet.

1. Introduction
Single image deblurring aims to recover a latent sharp
image from a blurry image [3]. Even with the rapid development of camera modules in the last few decades, blur artifact still exists when camera and/or objects move. Blurry
images are not only visually unpleasant but significantly degrade the performance of vision systems including surveillance [32] and autonomous driving systems [4], necessitating accurate and efficient image deburring techniques.
Owing to the success of deep learning, convolutional
neural network (CNN)-based image deblurring methods
have been extensively studied and showed promising performance. Early CNN-based image deblurring meth* equal contribution
† corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison between the proposed and conventional
methods in terms of the PSNR and runtime. The runtime of the
methods is reported as the runtime measured using the released
test code of each method on our environment (filled) and the runtime provided in each paper (blank).

ods [30, 7, 1, 27] commonly exploit CNN as a blur kernel
estimator and construct two-stage image deblurring framework, i.e., CNN-based blur kernel estimation stage and
kernel-based deconvoltion stage. On the other hand, recent
CNN-based image deblurring methods [20, 22, 23, 31, 5]
aim to directly learn the complicated relationship between
blurry-sharp image pairs in an end-to-end manner. As a pioneering technique, a deep multi-scale CNN for dynamic
scene deblurring (DeepDeblur) [20] is introduced to directly
regress a sharp image from a blurry image. DeepDeblur
consists of multiple stacked sub-networks to handle multiscale blur, where each sub-network takes a down-scaled image and gradually recovers a sharp image in a coarse-tofine manner. Motivated by the success of DeepDeblur, various CNN-based image deblurring methods [22, 23, 31, 5]
have been introduced with remarkable performance improvements. Although these methods try to improve the
deblurring performance in different aspects, their coarse-tofine strategies are similar in that multiple sub-networks are
stacked. In other words, a coarse-to-fine network design
principle has proven to be effective in image deblurring.

4641

