Omnidata: A Scalable Pipeline for Making
Multi-Task Mid-Level Vision Datasets from 3D Scans
Ainaz Eftekhar†∗
†

Alexander Sax‡∗

Jitendra Malik‡
‡

Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)

Amir Zamir†

University of California, Berkeley

https://omnidata.vision
Output Image-Wise Mid-Level Cues

Input 3D Scan
RGB Image

Re(shading)

Semantic Segm.

Texture Edges

Occlusion Edges

Frags. (Flow)

Van. Points

Curvature

Keypoints 2D

Keypoints 3D

Normals

2D Segm.

2.5D Segm.

Class Presence
Couch
Chair
Table
Plant
…
Stool

Point Matching

Cam. Extrinsics Cam. Intrinsics

Z-Buf. Depth

Eucl. Depth

Instance Segm.
4 3
1 2

: Sampled Camera
Location

231
1

Panoptic Segm.
4 3
1 2

231
1

Figure 1: Generating mid-level cues from real-world 3D scans. (Left:) The proposed pipeline generates dense camera positions and points-of-interest
in the input space and (right) renders 21 image-wise mid-level cues by default. Models trained on a starter dataset of this programmatically generated data
roughly matches human performance for surface normal estimation on OASIS [12] (see Sec. 4).

Abstract
This paper introduces a pipeline to parametrically sample and render static multi-task vision datasets from comprehensive 3D scans from the real-world. In addition to
enabling interesting lines of research, we show the tooling
and generated data suffice to train robust vision models. Familiar architectures trained on a generated starter dataset
reached state-of-the-art performance on multiple common
vision tasks and benchmarks, despite having seen no benchmark or non-pipeline data. The depth estimation network
outperforms MiDaS and the surface normal estimation network is the first to achieve human-level performance for inthe-wild surface normal estimation—at least according to
one metric on the OASIS benchmark.
The Dockerized pipeline with CLI, the (mostly python)
code, PyTorch dataloaders for the generated data, the generated starter dataset, download scripts and other utilities
are all available through our project website.

∗ Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
This paper introduces a pipeline to bridge the gap between comprehensive 3D scans and static vision datasets.
Specifically, we implement and provide a platform that
takes as input one of the following:
• a textured mesh,
• a mesh with images from an actual camera/sensor,
• a 3D pointcloud and aligned RGB images,
and generates a multi-task dataset with as many cameras
and images as desired to densely cover the space. For each
image, there are 21 different default mid-level cues, shown
in Fig. 1. The software makes use of Blender [16], a powerful physics-based 3D rendering engine to create the labels,
and exposes complete control over the sampling and generation process. With the proliferation of reasonably-priced 3D
sensors (e.g. Kinect, Matterport, and the newest iPhone),
we anticipate an increase in such 3D-annotated data.
In order to establish the soundness for training computer vision models, we used our pipeline to annotate several existing 3D scans and produce a medium-size starter
dataset of mid-level cues. Samples of the data and different cues are shown in Fig. 5. Standard models trained on

10786

