TransFER: Learning Relation-aware Facial Expression Representations
with Transformers
†

Fanglei Xue1,2 *, Qiangchang Wang3 *, Guodong Guo4,5,3
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Space Utilization, Technology and Engineering Center for Space Utilization,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
West Virginia University, Morgantown, USA
4
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, Beijing, China
5
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing, China
xuefanglei19@mails.ucas.ac.cn, qw0007@mix.wvu.edu, guoguodong01@baidu.com

Abstract
Facial expression recognition (FER) has received increasing interest in computer vision. We propose the TransFER model which can learn rich relation-aware local representations. It mainly consists of three components: MultiAttention Dropping (MAD), ViT-FER, and Multi-head SelfAttention Dropping (MSAD). First, local patches play an
important role in distinguishing various expressions, however, few existing works can locate discriminative and diverse local patches. This can cause serious problems when
some patches are invisible due to pose variations or viewpoint changes. To address this issue, the MAD is proposed
to randomly drop an attention map. Consequently, models
are pushed to explore diverse local patches adaptively. Second, to build rich relations between different local patches,
the Vision Transformers (ViT) are used in FER, called ViTFER. Since the global scope is used to reinforce each local
patch, a better representation is obtained to boost the FER
performance. Thirdly, the multi-head self-attention allows
ViT to jointly attend to features from different information
subspaces at different positions. Given no explicit guidance, however, multiple self-attentions may extract similar
relations. To address this, the MSAD is proposed to randomly drop one self-attention module. As a result, models are forced to learn rich relations among diverse local
patches. Our proposed TransFER model outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on several FER benchmarks, showing its effectiveness and usefulness.

* The first two authors contributed equally. This work was done when
Fanglei Xue and Qiangchang Wang were interns at IDL, Baidu Research.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Attention visualizations [5] on two example images: Surprise (Row 1) and Anger (Row 2). Column 1: Original images.
Column 2: Attention visualizations of our ViT-FER model. Column 3: Attention visualization of our TransFER model.

1. Introduction
In the past several decades, facial expression recognition
(FER) has received increasing interest in the computer vision research community, as it is important to make computers understand human emotions and interact with humans.
Despite it had obtained excellent performance recently,
FER is still a challenging task mainly due to two reasons:
1) Large inter-class similarities. Expressions from different classes may only exhibit some minor differences. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, Surprise (Row 1) and Anger (Row 2)
share a similar mouth. Critical clues to distinguish them lie
in both eyes and areas between eyes; 2) Small intra-class
similarities. Expressions belonging to the same class may
have dramatically different appearances, varying with races,
genders, ages to cultural backgrounds.
Existing works can be divided into two categories:
global-based and local-based approaches. For the former,

3601

