Three Steps to Multimodal Trajectory Prediction: Modality Clustering,
Classification and Synthesis
Jianhua Sun, Yuxuan Li, Hao-Shu Fang, Cewu Lu§
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{gothic,yuxuan li,lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn fhaoshu@gmail.com

Abstract
Multimodal prediction results are essential for trajectory prediction task as there is no single correct answer
for the future. Previous frameworks can be divided into
three categories: regression, generation and classification
frameworks. However, these frameworks have weaknesses
in different aspects so that they cannot model the multimodal prediction task comprehensively. In this paper, we
present a novel insight along with a brand-new prediction
framework by formulating multimodal prediction into three
steps: modality clustering, classification and synthesis,
and address the shortcomings of earlier frameworks. Exhaustive experiments on popular benchmarks have demonstrated that our proposed method surpasses state-of-the-art
works even without introducing social and map information. Specifically, we achieve 19.2% and 20.8% improvement on ADE and FDE respectively on ETH/UCY dataset.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction is one of the cornerstones of autonomous driving and robot navigation [22, 9, 27, 28, 35,
37, 12], which investigates reasonable future states of traffic agents for the following decision-making process. Considering the uncertainty of human behaviors and the multimodal nature of the future [8, 14], one great challenge of
trajectory prediction lies in predicting all possible future trajectories of high probabilities.
To tackle this problem, previous research mainly follows three lines. The first line adds extra randomness for
regression frameworks [36, 18], while the second generation line [8, 14, 21, 29] models the multimodal nature by
learning a distribution of the future. But both lines have
two defects as shown in Fig. 1: i) lack of probability cor§ Cewu Lu is corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

responding to each modality which may leave the decision
process confusing, and ii) the prediction results are not deterministic which may leave potential safety risks.
The third line of classification frameworks [4, 26] gets
rid of the two defects by classifying the observation to
predefined future trajectories, as the classification operation can give probabilities and ensure determinacy. However, the classification frameworks still face certain weaknesses. First, the predefined trajectories are obtained by
hand-crafted principles, thus it is difficult to capture comprehensive representations for future behaviors. Second,
the predicted deterministic trajectories will be the same for
different inputs classified to a same class, which fails to
explore fine-grained motions for traffic agents deterministically. Due to these weaknesses, the performance of a classification framework lags behind state-of-the-art regression
and generation models. Further, a highly annotated scene
raster is required as the input of classifier which is difficult
to access in many cases.
In this paper, we aim to explore a distinct formulation
for trajectory prediction framework to address the shortcomings discussed above. We present the insight of Prediction via modality Clustering, Classification and Synthesis (PCCSNet) by solving multimodal prediction with
a classification-regression approach. In our vision, the
modalities of the future are usually centralized around a
few different behaviors which can be revealed by a series
of learned modality representations. We can apply a deep
clustering process [3] on training samples and each center
of clusters could represent a modality. Naturally, such a
modality can be formulated into a class, and a classification network can be adopted to distinguish and score the
modalities according to the observed trajectory in this manner. Finally, a synthesis process is used to regress prediction
results for highly probable modalities with historical states
and the modality representations.
We propose a modular designed framework to model this
novel insight summarized in Fig. 2. States of agents are first
fed into feature encoders to get deep historical and future
representations for better clustering, classification and syn-

13250

