Disentangled Lifespan Face Synthesis
Sen He1,2 ,* Wentong Liao3 * , Michael Ying Yang4 , Yi-Zhe Song1,2 , Bodo Rosenhahn3 , Tao Xiang1,2
1
CVSSP, University of Surrey, 2 iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence,
3
TNT, Leibniz University Hannover, 4 SUG, University of Twente

InGan

LATS
Reference
Age group 5
Ours
Age group 0
(0-2)

Age group 1
(3-6)

Age group 2 Age group 3
(7-9)
(15-19)

Age group 4
(30-39)

Age group 5
(50-69)

Figure 1: Examples of generated face images using our lifespan face synthesis model and two state-of-the-art alternatives.
InGAN [43] generates valid texture transformation but fails in shape transformation and identity preservation. LATS [24]
improves on shape transformation and identity preservation, but is poor in reconfiguration (the re-generated image in the
same age group 5 as the reference looks very different). In contrast, our model overcomes all these limitations, yielding the
most plausible effects of aging whilst being identity-preserving.

Abstract
A lifespan face synthesis (LFS) model aims to generate
a set of photo-realistic face images of a person’s whole
life, given only one snapshot as reference. The generated
face image given a target age code is expected to be agesensitive reflected by bio-plausible transformations of shape
and texture, while being identity preserving. This is extremely challenging because the shape and texture characteristics of a face undergo separate and highly nonlinear transformations w.r.t. age. Most recent LFS models are
based on generative adversarial networks (GANs) whereby
age code conditional transformations are applied to a latent face representation. They benefit greatly from the recent advancements of GANs. However, without explicitly disentangling their latent representations into the texture, shape and identity factors, they are fundamentally limited in modeling the nonlinear age-related transformation
on texture and shape whilst preserving identity. In this
work, a novel LFS model is proposed to disentangle the
* Equal contribution

key face characteristics including shape, texture and identity so that the unique shape and texture age transformations can be modeled effectively. This is achieved by extracting shape, texture and identity features separately from
an encoder. Critically, two transformation modules, one
conditional convolution based and the other channel attention based, are designed for modeling the nonlinear shape
and texture feature transformations respectively. This is
to accommodate their rather distinct aging processes and
ensure that our synthesized images are both age-sensitive
and identity preserving. Extensive experiments show that
our LFS model is clearly superior to the state-of-the-art alternatives. Codes and demo are available on our project
website: https://senhe.github.io/projects/
iccv_2021_lifespan_face.

1. Introduction
What would a young adult look like as an infant and what
will she/he resemble in 20 or even 40 years time? Lifespan
face synthesis or face aging and rejuvenation aims to answer
these questions by synthesizing the face of a person’s whole

3877

