Gait Recognition via Effective Global-Local Feature Representation and Local
Temporal Aggregation
Beibei Lin1 , Shunli Zhang1 * and Xin Yu2
1
Beijing Jiaotong University,
2
University of Technology Sydney
{18126289, slzhang}@bjtu.edu.cn, xin.yu@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Gait recognition is one of the most important biometric
technologies and has been applied in many fields. Recent
gait recognition frameworks represent each gait frame by
descriptors extracted from either global appearances or local regions of humans. However, the representations based
on global information often neglect the details of the gait
frame, while local region based descriptors cannot capture the relations among neighboring regions, thus reducing their discriminativeness. In this paper, we propose a
novel feature extraction and fusion framework to achieve
discriminative feature representations for gait recognition.
Towards this goal, we take advantage of both global visual information and local region details and develop a
Global and Local Feature Extractor (GLFE). Specifically,
our GLFE module is composed of our newly designed multiple global and local convolutional layers (GLConv) to
ensemble global and local features in a principle manner.
Furthermore, we present a novel operation, namely Local
Temporal Aggregation (LTA), to further preserve the spatial information by reducing the temporal resolution to obtain higher spatial resolution. With the help of our GLFE
and LTA, our method significantly improves the discriminativeness of our visual features, thus improving the gait
recognition performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms state-of-theart gait recognition methods on two popular datasets.

1. Introduction
Gait recognition is a biometric technology depending on
the uniqueness of human walking posture. Since human gait
can be captured in long-distance conditions and the recognition process does not need the subject’s cooperation, gait
recognition can be widely applied in many fields, such as
video surveillance, intelligent transportation, etc. However,
* Shunli Zhang is the corresponding author.

the performance of gait recognition suffers from many conditions, e.g. changing clothing, carrying conditions, crossview, speed change, and resolution [4, 14, 24]. Therefore,
improving the performance of gait recognition in a complex
external environment is still highly desirable.
Recently, many existing gait recognition methods employ convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to generate gait
feature representations and achieve better recognition performance than the traditional approaches. In general, the
feature representations can be divided into two categories:
global and local feature based representation. Global feature based representation methods extract gait features from
whole gait frames. Shiraga et al. [18] use 2D CNNs to extract global gait features from Gait Energy Image (GEI).
Chao et al. [3] also use 2D CNNs to extract global features
at the frame-level. Local feature based representation methods extract and combine local gait features from local gait
parts. Zhang et al. [27] partition human gaits into different
local parts and use multiple separate 2D CNNs to extract local features. Fan et al. [5] design a focal convolution layer
to further extract local features from feature maps.
However, the aforementioned methods only utilize either
global or local feature for representation, thus limiting the
recognition performance. In particular, the global feature
representations may not pay enough attention to the details
of the gait, while the local feature representations may lose
the global context information of the gait and neglect the
relations among local regions. Moreover, Wolf et al.[20]
introduce 3D CNNs to extract the robust spatial-temporal
gait features. However, traditional 3D CNNs requires fixedlength gait sequences for classification and thus are not able
to address different length of videos directly.
To address the above issues, in this paper, we propose
a novel cross-view gait recognition framework by learning effective representations from global and local features.
Specifically, we build a new feature extraction module,
called Global and Local Feature Extractor(GLFE), in the
3D CNNs framework to attain discriminative representations from both global and local information of gait frames.

14648

