Divide and Contrast: Self-supervised Learning from Uncurated Data
Yonglong Tian
MIT

Olivier J. Hénaff
DeepMind

Aaron van den Oord
DeepMind

Abstract
Self-supervised learning holds promise in leveraging
large amounts of unlabeled data, however much of its
progress has thus far been limited to highly curated pretraining data such as ImageNet. We explore the effects
of contrastive learning from larger, less-curated image
datasets such as YFCC, and find there is indeed a large difference in the resulting representation quality. We hypothesize that this curation gap is due to a shift in the distribution of image classes—which is more diverse and heavytailed—resulting in less relevant negative samples to learn
from. We test this hypothesis with a new approach, Divide
and Contrast (DnC), which alternates between contrastive
learning and clustering-based hard negative mining. When
pretrained on less curated datasets, DnC greatly improves
the performance of self-supervised learning on downstream
tasks, while remaining competitive with the current stateof-the-art on curated datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent developments in self-supervised learning have
shown that it is possible to learn high-level representations of object categories from unlabeled images [39, 43,
88, 12, 97], phonetic information from speech [69, 79]
and language understanding from raw text [21, 101]. The
most studied benchmark in self-supervised learning is ImageNet [20], where representations learned from unlabeled
images can surpass supervised representations, both in
terms of their data-efficiency and transfer-learning performance [13, 34].
One of the caveats with self-supervised learning on ImageNet is that it is not completely “self-supervised”. The
training set of ImageNet, on which the representations are
learned, is heavily curated and required extensive human effort to create [20]. In particular, ImageNet contains many
fine-grained classes (such as subtly different dog breeds),
each one containing roughly the same number of images.
While this consistency may facilitate the learning of highlevel visual representations, limiting self-supervised learning to such curated datasets risks biasing their development

Figure 1. Linear evaluation on ImageNet of representations
learned from a large-scale uncurated dataset using ResNet-50.
Divide and Contrast (DnC) is better able to handle the diverse
and long-tailed distribution of images and improves more with
longer training. X-axis represents total computation, in ImageNetequivalent epochs.

towards methods which require this consistency, limiting
their applicability to more diverse downstream tasks and
larger datasets for pre-training.
In this paper we assess how well recent self-supervised
learning methods perform on downstream tasks (including
ImageNet) when they are pre-trained on significantly less
curated datasets, such as YFCC100M [87]. We observe a
notable drop in performance of over 9% Top-1 accuracy
(from 74.3% to 65.3%) for a ResNet50 model trained with
the current state-of-the-art in self-supervised learning.
We hypothesize that this curation gap is due to the
heavy-tailed nature of images collected in the wild, which
present much more diverse content, breaking the global
consistency exploited in previous datasets. We test this hypothesis with a new method, Divide and Contast (DnC),
which attempts to recover local consistency in subsets of the
larger, uncurated dataset, such that self-supervised learning
methods can learn high-level features that are specific to
each subset. We find that such semantically coherent subsets can be straightforwardly obtained by clustering the representations of standard self-supervised models.
Divide and Contrast (DnC) proceeds by training individual “expert” models on each subset and distilling them into

10063

