AdaSGN: Adapting Joint Number and Model Size for Efficient Skeleton-Based
Action Recognition
Jian Cheng1,3
Hanqing Lu1,3
Lei Shi1,2,3
Yifan Zhang1,3 *
1
NLPR & AIRIA, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Meituan
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
shilei53@meituan.com, {yfzhang, jcheng, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
91

1. Introduction
Action recognition is a popular research topic due to
its wide range of application scenarios such as humancomputer interaction and video surveillance [2, 29, 7, 25].
Recently, different with conventional approaches that use
RGB sequences for input, exploiting the skeleton data
for action recognition has drawn increasingly more attention [38, 4, 27, 19]. Biologically, human is able to recognize
* Corresponding Author

90

Accuracy (%)

Existing methods for skeleton-based action recognition mainly focus on improving the recognition accuracy,
whereas the efficiency of the model is rarely considered. Recently, there are some works trying to speed up the skeleton
modeling by designing light-weight modules. However, in
addition to the model size, the amount of the data involved
in the calculation is also an important factor for the running
speed, especially for the skeleton data where most of the
joints are redundant or non-informative to identify a specific skeleton. Besides, previous works usually employ one
fix-sized model for all the samples regardless of the difficulty
of recognition, which wastes computations for easy samples. To address these limitations, a novel approach, called
AdaSGN, is proposed in this paper, which can reduce the
computational cost of the inference process by adaptively
controlling the input number of the joints of the skeleton
on-the-fly. Moreover, it can also adaptively select the optimal model size for each sample to achieve a better trade-off
between the accuracy and the efficiency. We conduct extensive experiments on three challenging datasets, namely,
NTU-60, NTU-120 and SHREC, to verify the superiority of
the proposed approach, where AdaSGN achieves comparable or even higher performance with much lower GFLOPs
compared with the baseline method.

89
88
87

Ours
SGN [40]
Shift-GCN [3]

86
85

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

2.5

5.0

7.5

10

GFLOPs/A

Figure 1. GFLOPs v.s. accuracy on NTU-60 (CS) dataset for stateof-the-art methods.

the action category by observing only the motion of joints
even without the appearance information [10]. Skeleton is
such a data modality that consists of only the 2D/3D positions of the human key joints. Compared with the RGB
data, it has smaller amount of data, higher-level semantic
information and stronger robustness for complicated environment.
In early stage, approaches for skeleton-based action
recognition mainly focus on designing various hand-crafted
features [33]. With the success of the deep learning, various deep networks have been proposed for skeleton-based
action recognition [39, 14, 12, 1, 38, 27]. However, the
computational complexity of the state-of-the-art deep networks are too heavier, most of which are higher than 15
GFLOPs [3]. For example, the representative GCN-based
work, i.e., ST-GCN [38], costs 16.2 GFLOPs for one action
sample. In the practical application scenario, speed is an
important factor. Thus, how to speed up the current methods is a valuable-researched topic.
Recently, some works propose to speed up the skeleton
modeling by designing light-weight models, such as ShiftGCN [3] and SGN [40]. However, in addition to the model
size, the amount of the data involved in the calculation is
also an important factor affecting the running time, which
is rarely considered in previous works. Especially for the

13413

