An Asynchronous Kalman Filter for Hybrid Event Cameras
Ziwei Wang Yonhon Ng Cedric Scheerlinck Robert Mahony
The Australian National University Systems Theory and Robotics Group
ziwei.wang1@anu.edu.au

{firstname.lastname}@anu.edu.au

https://github.com/ziweiWWANG/AKF

Abstract
Event cameras are ideally suited to capture HDR visual information without blur but perform poorly on static
or slowly changing scenes. Conversely, conventional image sensors measure absolute intensity of slowly changing scenes effectively but do poorly on high dynamic range
or quickly changing scenes. In this paper, we present
an event-based video reconstruction pipeline for High Dynamic Range (HDR) scenarios. The proposed algorithm includes a frame augmentation pre-processing step that deblurs and temporally interpolates frame data using events.
The augmented frame and event data are then fused using
a novel asynchronous Kalman filter under a unifying uncertainty model for both sensors. Our experimental results
are evaluated on both publicly available datasets with challenging lighting conditions and fast motions and our new
dataset with HDR reference. The proposed algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both absolute intensity
error (48% reduction) and image similarity indexes (average 11% improvement).

1. Introduction
Event cameras offer distinct advantages over conventional frame-based cameras: high temporal resolution, high
dynamic range (HDR) and minimal motion blur [24]. However, event cameras provide poor imaging capability in
slowly varying or static scenes, where despite some efforts
in ‘gray-level’ event cameras that measure absolute intensity [35, 6], most sensors predominantly measure only the
relative intensity change. Conventional imaging technology, conversely, is ideally suited to imaging static scenes
and measuring absolute intensity. Hybrid sensors such as
the Dynamic and Active Pixel Vision Sensor (DAVIS) [4]
or custom-built systems [53] combine event and framebased cameras, and there is an established literature in video
reconstruction fusing conventional and event camera data
[43, 32, 31, 53]. The potential of such algorithms to enhance conventional video to overcome motion blur and increase dynamic range has applications from robotic vision

(a) Input LDR Image

(b) E2VID [39]

(c) CF [43]

(d) Our AKF Reconstruction

Figure 1. An example with over exposure and fast camera motion causing blur taken from the open-source event camera dataset
IJRR [29]. Image (a) is the low dynamic range (LDR) and blurry
input image. Image (b) is the result of state-of-the-art method
E2VID [39] (uses events only). Image (c) is the result of filterbased image reconstruction method CF [43] that fuses events and
frames. Our AKF (d) generates sharpest textured details in the
overexposed areas.

systems (e.g., autonomous driving), through film-making to
smartphone applications for everyday use.
In this paper, we propose an Asynchronous Kalman
Filter (AKF) to reconstruct HDR video from hybrid
event/frame cameras. The key contribution is based on
an explicit noise model we propose for both events and
frames. This model is exploited to provide a stochastic
framework in which the pixel intensity estimation can be
solved using an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) algorithm
[17, 18]. By exploiting the temporal quantisation of the
event stream, we propose an exact discretisation of the EKF
equations, the Asynchronous Kalman Filter (AKF), that is
computed only when events occur. In addition, we propose
a novel temporal interpolation scheme and apply the established de-blurring algorithm [31] to preprocess the data in
a step called frame augmentation. The proposed algorithm
demonstrates state-of-the-art hybrid event/frame image reconstruction as shown in Fig. 1.

448

