Learning Anchored Unsigned Distance Functions with Gradient Direction
Alignment for Single-view Garment Reconstruction
Ling Shao1,3
Fang Zhao1
Wenhao Wang2
Shengcai Liao1 *
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
While single-view 3D reconstruction has made significant progress benefiting from deep shape representations
in recent years, garment reconstruction is still not solved
well due to open surfaces, diverse topologies and complex
geometric details. In this paper, we propose a novel learnable Anchored Unsigned Distance Function (AnchorUDF)
representation for 3D garment reconstruction from a single image. AnchorUDF represents 3D shapes by predicting unsigned distance fields (UDFs) to enable open garment surface modeling at arbitrary resolution. To capture
diverse garment topologies, AnchorUDF not only computes
pixel-aligned local image features of query points, but also
leverages a set of anchor points located around the surface
to enrich 3D position features for query points, which provides stronger 3D space context for the distance function.
Furthermore, in order to obtain more accurate point projection direction at inference, we explicitly align the spatial gradient direction of AnchorUDF with the ground-truth
direction to the surface during training. Extensive experiments on two public 3D garment datasets, i.e., MGN and
Deep Fashion3D, demonstrate that AnchorUDF achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on single-view garment reconstruction. Code is available at https://github.
com/zhaofang0627/AnchorUDF.

1. Introduction
3D garment reconstruction has a wide range of applications in clothed human digitization, virtual try-on, online
shopping and so on. Recently, image based 3D reconstruction has made significant progress benefiting from shape
representation learning with deep neural networks [14, 16,
19, 35, 26]. Compared to voxels, points and meshes, implicit functions, which define a surface as a level set of
a function, can represent 3D surfaces at arbitrary resolu* Corresponding author.

tion and produce fine-scale detailed surfaces in a memoryefficient way, and have been successfully applied to singleview human reconstruction [32, 33]. However, recovering
3D garment shape from a single image is still a challenging task because garments have open surfaces and diverse
topologies in addition to complex geometric details like
clothed humans.
Existing methods usually use parametric models to provide shape priors of garments [11, 22, 40]. BCNet [22]
introduces a layered garment representation on top of the
SMPL body model [25] and a generic skinning weights generating network to improve the expression ability of the garment model. Deep Fashion3D [40] proposes adaptable template meshes to fit garment shapes and incorporates implicit
representations to refine surface details. These methods rely
on pre-defined category-specific templates and have poor
scalability to new garment categories.
In this paper, we propose Anchored Unsigned Distance Function (AnchorUDF), a learnable unsigned distance function that enriches 3D position features of query
points by anchor points around 3D surfaces. With AnchorUDF, we establish a unified shape learning framework to
reconstruct 3D garment from a single image. As shown in
Fig. 1, our method can handle non-closed garment surfaces,
capture multiple topologies of different garment categories
while retaining fine-scale geometric details.
Specifically, for a 3D query point, like PIFu [32], we
first compute its pixel-aligned local image features. However, instead of using an absolute depth value to encode the
3D position of the query point, we leverage a set of anchor
points representing 3D shape profile to enrich its position
feature to make the distance function better sense the garment topologies. To obtain a small number of anchor points
which can adequately cover the surface, we cluster points
sampled from the surface with k-means and use clustering centers as targets to learn a regression network on top
of the backbone to predict anchor points. Note that compared to the full shape, these few anchor points (typically a
few hundred) are easier to estimate. A 3D convolutional

12674

