SIGNET: Efficient Neural Representation for Light Fields
Brandon Yushan Feng, Amitabh Varshney
University of Maryland, College Park
{yfeng97, varshney}@umd.edu

Abstract
We present a novel neural representation for light field
content that enables compact storage and easy local reconstruction with high fidelity. We use a fully-connected neural
network to learn the mapping function between each light
field pixel’s coordinates and its corresponding color values. Since neural networks that simply take in raw coordinates are unable to accurately learn data containing fine
details, we present an input transformation strategy based
on the Gegenbauer polynomials, which previously showed
theoretical advantages over the Fourier basis. We conduct
experiments that show our Gegenbauer-based design combined with sinusoidal activation functions leads to a better light field reconstruction quality than a variety of network designs, including those with Fourier-inspired techniques introduced by prior works. Moreover, our SInusoidal
Gegenbauer NETwork, or SIGNET, can represent light field
scenes more compactly than the state-of-the-art compression methods while maintaining a comparable reconstruction quality. SIGNET also innately allows random access
to encoded light field pixels due to its functional design. We
further demonstrate that SIGNET’s super-resolution capability without any additional training.

1. Introduction
Light fields offer an information-rich medium for static
and dynamic scenes. However, a significant barrier to their
widespread adoptions is a lack of sufficiently compact representations of such high-dimensional data, making it impractical for efficient storage, editing, and streaming. For
example, a 1080p 60-fps light field video captured on a
10 × 10 camera grid easily requires several gigabytes of
storage space for every second of content.
A straightforward solution to compressing light fields is
to apply existing, widely used compression methods such
as JPEG and MPEG. However, due to the sheer amount
of images captured in a light field, the compression rate
of these single-view-based methods are far from satisfactory [48, 49]. Therefore, it is imperative to have a compact

Figure 1: Overview of SIGNET. We train a MLP to approximate the mapping function from each pixel’s coordinates
to its color values. Our input transformation strategy based
on the Gegenbauer polynomials enables the MLP to more
accurately learn the high-dimensional mapping function.
way to represent light fields by taking advantage of the overlapping and repetitive visual patterns in light fields.
Extensive research has been devoted to designing compact light field representations based on the patch-based
compression strategy manifest in the JPEG standard. These
methods represent each image patch as a weighted sum of
a small dictionary of basis functions, and the goal is finding new ways to construct dictionaries of basis functions
that achieve better compression results. Yet, previous efforts have limited success in enabling easy transmission and
manipulation of light field content.
Recent advances in deep learning have led to impressive
results in representing data like images and volumes [31, 43,
47] with neural networks. A common thread among these
methods is incorporating Fourier-inspired modifications to
the classical neural network design called multilayer perceptron (MLP). Specifically, the SIREN network [43] uses

14224

