Incorporating Convolution Designs into Visual Transformers
Kun Yuan1 , Shaopeng Guo2 , Ziwei Liu3 , Aojun Zhou1 , Fengwei Yu1 and Wei Wu1
1
SenseTime Research, 2 HKUST, 3 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
yuankunbupt@gmail.com, sguoad@connect.ust.hk, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Transformers [37] have become the de-facto standard for
natural language processing (NLP) tasks due to their abilities to model long-range dependencies and to train in parallel. Recently, there exist some attempts to apply Trans1 Code is available at: https://github.com/coeusguo/ceit

70
60

Top-1 Acc

Motivated by the success of Transformers in natural language processing (NLP) tasks, there emerge some attempts
(e.g., ViT and DeiT) to apply Transformers to the vision
domain. However, pure Transformer architectures often
require a large amount of training data or extra supervision to obtain comparable performance with convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). To overcome these limitations,
we analyze the potential drawbacks when directly borrowing Transformer architectures from NLP. Then we propose
a new Convolution-enhanced image Transformer (CeiT)
which combines the advantages of CNNs in extracting lowlevel features, strengthening locality, and the advantages
of Transformers in establishing long-range dependencies.
Three modifications are made to the original Transformer:
1) instead of the straightforward tokenization from raw input images, we design an Image-to-Tokens (I2T) module
that extracts patches from generated low-level features; 2)
the feed-froward network in each encoder block is replaced
with a Locally-enhanced Feed-Forward (LeFF) layer that
promotes the correlation among neighboring tokens in the
spatial dimension; 3) a Layer-wise Class token Attention
(LCA) is attached at the top of the Transformer that utilizes
the multi-level representations.
Experimental results on ImageNet and seven downstream tasks show the effectiveness and generalization ability of CeiT compared with previous Transformers and stateof-the-art CNNs, without requiring a large amount of training data and extra CNN teachers. Besides, CeiT models
demonstrate better convergence with 3× fewer training iterations, which can reduce the training cost significantly 1 .

80

50
CeiT-T(100)
DeiT-T(100)

40
30

CeiT-T(300)
DeiT-T(300)

20
10
0

0

50

100

150

Epochs

200

250

300

Figure 1: The fast convergence ability of CeiT models.
CeiT models trained with 100 epochs obtain comparable
results with DeiT models trained with 300 epochs. Other
settings are given in Table 8.

formers to vision domains [7, 10, 35, 5, 52, 6, 50], leading
promising results in different tasks. Among them, Vision
Transformer (ViT) [10] is the first pure Transformer architecture that is directly inherited from NLP, and applied to
image classification. It obtains promising results compared
to many state-of-the-art CNNs [25, 43, 19]. But it relies
heavily on the large amount of dataset of JFT-300M [33],
which limits the application in the scenarios with limited
computing resources or labeled training data. To alleviate
the dependence on a large amount of data, the Data-efficient
image Transformers (DeiT) [35] introduce a CNN model as
a teacher and applies knowledge distillation [14] to improve
the student model of ViT. Thus DeiT that is only trained on
ImageNet can obtain satisfactory results. But the requirement of trained high-performance CNN models is a potential computation burden. Besides, the choice of teacher
models, distillation types may affect the final performance.
Therefore, we intend to design a new visual Transformer
that can overcome these limitations.
Some existing observations in these work can help us design desired architectures. In ViT, Transformer-based models underperform CNNs in the realm of ∼10M training samples. It claims that “Transformers lack some of the inductive

579

