Single Image 3D Shape Retrieval via
Cross-Modal Instance and Category Contrastive Learning
Ming-Xian Lin1,3 Jie Yang1,3 He Wang4 Yu-Kun Lai5
Rongfei Jia6 Binqiang Zhao6 Lin Gao1,2,3 *
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Zhejiang Lab 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
5
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University
6
Tao Technology Department, Alibaba Group
{linmingxian20g, yangjie01, gaolin}@ict.ac.cn
LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the problem of single imagebased 3D shape retrieval (IBSR), where we seek to find
the most matched shape of a given single 2D image from
a shape repository. Most of the existing works learn to
embed 2D images and 3D shapes into a common feature
space and perform metric learning using a triplet loss. Inspired by the great success in recent contrastive learning
works on self-supervised representation learning, we propose a novel IBSR pipeline leveraging contrastive learning.
We note that adopting such cross-modal contrastive learning between 2D images and 3D shapes into IBSR tasks is
non-trivial and challenging: contrastive learning requires
very strong data augmentation in constructed positive pairs
to learn the feature invariance, whereas traditional metric
learning works do not have this requirement. Moreover, object shape and appearance are entangled in 2D query images, thus making the learning task more difficult than contrasting single-modal data. To mitigate the challenges, we
propose to use multi-view grayscale rendered images from
the 3D shapes as a shape representation. We then introduce
a strong data augmentation technique based on color transfer, which can significantly but naturally change the appearance of the query image, effectively satisfying the need for
contrastive learning. Finally, we propose to incorporate a
novel category-level contrastive loss that helps distinguish
similar objects from different categories, in addition to classic instance-level contrastive loss. Our experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves the best performance on
*

Corresponding Author is Lin Gao

hewang@pku.edu.cn

{rongfei.jrf, binqiang.zhao}@alibaba-inc.com

all the three popular IBSR benchmarks, including Pix3D,
Stanford Cars, and Comp Cars, outperforming the previous
state-of-the-art from 4% - 15% on retrieval accuracy.

1. Introduction
Multimedia retrieval including image retrieval and 3D
shape retrieval is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. Thanks to the development of deep learning
and 3D shape datasets with rich object categories such as
ShapeNet [7], 3D shape retrieval from single realistic images has recently gained more attention, owing to its wide
range of applications, including scene reconstruction, 3D
printing, virtual reality and e-commerce platforms.
However, despite significant progress achieved with pioneering works, using single images to retrieve the corresponding 3D shapes is still a challenging problem because
of the domain gap. In order to handle this gap, one common
direction in previous works is to address the retrieval task by
mapping 3D shapes and query images into a common embedding space. [15] embeds 3D shapes and 2D images into
a common low-level representation space using location
fields. [12] assigns a texture to a 3D shape based on a texture code encoded from the 2D image to generate hard samples. Both [15, 12] are modified from triplet loss [56] for
metric learning, which nearly always requires hard-negative
mining for good performance, as proved by [48].
[30] proves that triplet loss is a special case of the
contrastive loss when the numbers of positives and negatives are both one, which means that batch contrastive approaches subsume or significantly outperform traditional

11405

