CanvasVAE: Learning to Generate Vector Graphic Documents
Kota Yamaguchi
CyberAgent
yamaguchi kota@cyberagent.co.jp

Abstract
Vector graphic documents present visual elements in a
resolution free, compact format and are often seen in creative applications. In this work, we attempt to learn a generative model of vector graphic documents. We define vector graphic documents by a multi-modal set of attributes
associated to a canvas and a sequence of visual elements
such as shapes, images, or texts, and train variational autoencoders to learn the representation of the documents. We
collect a new dataset of design templates from an online
service that features complete document structure including occluded elements. In experiments, we show that our
model, named CanvasVAE, constitutes a strong baseline for
generative modeling of vector graphic documents.

1. Introduction
In creative workflows, designers work on visual presentation via vector graphic formats. 2D vector graphics represent images in a compact descriptive structure; instead of
spatial array of pixels, graphic documents describe a canvas
and arrangement of visual elements such as shapes or texts
in a specific format like SVG or PDF. Vector graphics are
crucial in creative production for its resolution-free representation, human interpretability, and editability. Because
of its importance in creative applications, there has been a
long but active history of research on tracing vector graphic
representation from a raster image [28, 14, 2, 20, 26].
In this work, we study a generative model of vector
graphic documents. While raster-based generative models
show tremendous progress in synthesizing high-quality images [10, 24, 12], there has been relatively scarce studies
on vector graphic documents [33, 3, 17]. Although both
raster and vector graphics deal with images, vector graphics
do not have canvas pixels and cannot take advantage of the
current mainstream approach of convolutional neural networks without rasterization, which is typically not differentiable [19]. Learning a generative model of vector graphics
therefore imposes us unique challenges in 1) how to represent complex data structure of vector graphic formats in a

unified manner, 2) how to formulate the learning problem,
and 3) how to evaluate the quality of documents.
We address the task of generative learning of vector graphics using a variational auto-encoder (VAE) [13],
where we define documents by a multi-modal combination
of canvas attributes and a sequence of element attributes.
Unlike conditional layout inference [33, 15, 17], we consider unconditional document generation including both a
canvas and variable number of elements. Our architecture,
named CanvasVAE, learns an encoder that projects a given
graphic document into a latent code, and a decoder that reconstructs the given document from the latent code. We
adopt Transformer-based network [5] in both the encoder
and the decoder to process variable-length sequence of elements in a document. The learned decoder can take randomly sampled latent code to generate a new vector graphic
document. For our study, we collect a large-scale dataset
of design templates for our study that offers complete document structure and content information. In evaluation, we
propose to combine normalized metrics for all attributes to
measure the overall quality of reconstruction and generation. We compare several variants of CanvasVAE architecture and show that a Transformer-based model constitutes a
strong baseline for the vector graphic generation task.
We summarize our contributions in the following.
1. We propose the CanvasVAE architecture for the task
of unconditional generative learning of vector graphic
documents, where we model documents by a structured, multi-modal set of canvas and element attributes.
2. We build Crello dataset, which is a dataset consisting
of large number of design templates and features complete vector information including occluded elements.
3. We empirically show that our Transformer-based variant of CanvasVAE achieves a strong performance in
both document reconstruction and generation.

2. Related work
Generative layout modeling There has been several attempts at conditional layout modeling where the goal is

5481

