Location-aware Single Image Reflection Removal
Zheng Dong1 Ke Xu2,4 Yin Yang3 Hujun Bao1 Weiwei Xu∗1 Rynson W.H. Lau4
1

2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
4
Clemson University
City University of Hong Kong

zhengdong@zju.edu.cn, kkangwing@gmail.com, yin5@clemson.edu, {bao, xww}@cad.zju.edu.cn, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel location-aware deeplearning-based single image reflection removal method.
Our network has a reflection detection module to regress
a probabilistic reflection confidence map, taking multiscale Laplacian features as inputs. This probabilistic map
tells if a region is reflection-dominated or transmissiondominated, and it is used as a cue for the network to control
the feature flow when predicting the reflection and transmission layers. We design our network as a recurrent network to progressively refine reflection removal results at
each iteration. The novelty is that we leverage Laplacian
kernel parameters to emphasize the boundaries of strong
reflections. It is beneficial to strong reflection detection
and substantially improves the quality of reflection removal
results. Extensive experiments verify the superior performance of the proposed method over state-of-the-art approaches. Our code and the pre-trained model can be found
at https://github.com/zdlarr/Location-aware-SIRR.

1. Introduction
Reflections often occur when images are photographed
through reflective and transparent media (e.g., glass). Removing undesired reflections enhances the image quality
and benefits many follow-up computer vision tasks, such as
image classification. In reflection removal, an image I with
reflections can be modeled as the weighted additive composition of a transmission layer T and a reflection layer R.
Precisely, following the alpha blending model in [4, 23, 57],
we express the composition procedure as:
I = W ◦ T + R,

(1)

where W here is an alpha blending mask and ◦ indicates
the element-wise multiplication. This model is designed to
approximate the complex physical mechanisms involved in
forming images with reflections.
The task of single image reflection removal (SIRR) is to
recover T from a given image I. It is an ill-posed prob∗ Corresponding author.

(a) Input

(b) Zhang et al. [57]

(c) RMNet [47]

(d) ERRNet [46]

(e) CoRRN [44]

(f) IBCLN [23]

(g) RCMap

(h) Ours

(i) Ground truth

Figure 1. State-of-the-art methods (b,c,d,e,f) typically fail to recover high-quality transmission layers from strong reflections,
e.g., the highlights. Our method addresses this problem by learning the reflection confidence map (RCMap) for the detection of the
reflection-dominated regions (g) and reflection removal (h). Images (a) and (i) are from [46].

lem since the number of unknowns is much more than
the number of equations derived from Eq. 1. Therefore,
priors are necessary to constrain the solution space, such
as natural image gradient sparsity [21, 22], ghosting cues
for thick glasses [34], and relative smoothness that assumes the refection layer is smoother than the transmission layer [24, 52]. To disambiguate the restoration of
T and R in the gradient domain, several works propose
first to determine the locations of reflection-dominated and
transmission-dominated pixels, and then exploit different
constraints at different locations to improve the reflection
removal results [21, 40, 42]. While these methods are sensitive to the selection of hyperparameters, for instance, the
commonly used gradient magnitude threshold, the detected
location information is proven to be useful to handle strong
reflections. Therefore, such location information is expected to be beneficial for the neural networks to learn how
the reflection information is encoded in the features. However, it is rarely investigated in deep learning-based SIRR

5017

