Collaging Class-specific GANs for Semantic Image Synthesis
Yuheng Li1

Yijun Li2
1

Jingwan Lu2

Eli Shechtman2

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Ours CollageGAN

Ours Base

Yong Jae Lee1
2

Krishna Kumar Singh2

Adobe Research
SPADE

Figure 1. High resolution image generation conditioned on a segmentation map (yellow inset). Our base model (1st column) generates
more realistic results than SPADE [24] (4-5th column). We further improve the quality of results by using our class-specific generators to
generate foreground objects or parts and compose them on the image generated by our base model. The segmentation maps in 2nd column
(blue insets) show the parts that are modified by our bank of GANs and the zoomed-in results are shown next to each image.

Abstract

1. Introduction

33, 17, 3, 24] settings. In the unconditional setting, an
image is generated by randomly sampling a latent code.
With the advent of StyleGAN2 [32], for some classes such
as faces, the generated images are almost indistinguishable from real images. In the conditional setting, an image is generated based on some input conditioning signal
such as another image, a segmentation map, or other priors. Most notably, SPADE [24] (i.e., spatially-adaptive normalization) significantly boosted image quality for semantic image generation. This normalization and its variants
have been used as standard building blocks in many following works [35, 25, 31, 30]. However, the image quality of
conditional GANs is still inferior to that of unconditional
GANs, especially StyleGAN2. Also, most approaches output 256 × 256 resolution images, which is not high enough
for many real world applications, and their generation quality is inferior for higher resolutions.

Image generation has been explored extensively in both
the unconditional [8, 18, 19, 32] and conditional [15, 37,

In this work, we target high resolution image generation
conditioned on input segmentation maps (yellow insets in

We propose a new approach for high resolution semantic image synthesis. It consists of one base image generator
and multiple class-specific generators. The base generator generates high quality images based on a segmentation
map. To further improve the quality of different objects, we
create a bank of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
by separately training class-specific models. This has several benefits including – dedicated weights for each class;
centrally aligned data for each model; additional training
data from other sources, potential of higher resolution and
quality; and easy manipulation of a specific object in the
scene. Experiments show that our approach can generate
high quality images in high resolution while having flexibility of object-level control by using class-specific generators.

14418

