TRiPOD: Human Trajectory and Pose Dynamics Forecasting in the Wild
Vida Adeli1 , Mahsa Ehsanpour2 , Ian Reid2 , Juan Carlos Niebles3 ,
Silvio Savarese3 , Ehsan Adeli3 , Hamid Rezatofighi4
1
Ferdowsi University of Mashhad 2 University of Adelaide
3
Stanford University 4 Monash University
https://somof.stanford.edu

Past

Abstract
Joint forecasting of human trajectory and pose dynamics is a fundamental building block of various applications
ranging from robotics and autonomous driving to surveillance systems. Predicting body dynamics requires capturing subtle information embedded in the humans’ interactions with each other and with the objects present in the
scene. In this paper, we propose a novel TRajectory and
POse Dynamics (nicknamed TRiPOD) method based on
graph attentional networks to model the human-human and
human-object interactions both in the input space and the
output space (decoded future output). The model is supplemented by a message passing interface over the graphs
to fuse these different levels of interactions efficiently. Furthermore, to incorporate a real-world challenge, we propound to learn an indicator representing whether an estimated body joint is visible/invisible at each frame, e.g.
due to occlusion or being outside the sensor field of view.
Finally, we introduce a new benchmark for this joint task
based on two challenging datasets (PoseTrack and 3DPW)
and propose evaluation metrics to measure the effectiveness
of predictions in the global space, even when there are invisible cases of joints. Our evaluation shows that TRiPOD outperforms all prior work and state-of-the-art specifically designed for each of the trajectory and pose forecasting tasks.

1. Introduction
The ability to forecast human movements (pose dynamics and trajectory) in time is an essential component for
many real-world applications, including robotics [38, 48],
healthcare [32], detection of perilous behavioral patterns in
surveillance systems [37, 53].
While this problem sounds interesting, it is extremely
challenging in real-world scenes due to the different factors
involved. Humans are intuitively social agents, able to effortlessly conceive a detailed level of semantics from the

Future
Future
Future

Future

Future

Future

Figure 1. An example of a real-world scene containing different levels of
interactions (human to human and human to objects). The top-left graph
shows the weighted interaction graphs between humans (blue edges) and
between humans and objects in the scene (green edges). The top-right
graph illustrates the evolved social interactions over time in the future. The
red arrows indicate an example of a relation being intensified over time.

scene, which contributes to making swift decisions for their
next movements. To accurately forecast their trajectory and
pose dynamics, one primary factor is the interactions between people in the scene and the influences their joints
have on each other. For example, consider a tennis-playing
scene, when the opponent starts serving and hits a stroke,
the other person is probable to take a ready position in the
near future (e.g. see the purple agent in Fig. 1). Besides,
the objects involved in the scene can provide informative
clues for future prediction. For instance, when the person
observes the ball in the tennis example, he/she would take
a striking pose to return it. However, the movements of all
the persons in the scene are not always highly correlated
with each other nor the humans to objects. For instance,
in Fig. 1, the pose and motion of tennis players will be

13390

