Event-based Video Reconstruction Using Transformer
Wenming Weng Yueyi Zhang* Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Event cameras, which output events by detecting spatiotemporal brightness changes, bring a novel paradigm to
image sensors with high dynamic range and low latency.
Previous works have achieved impressive performances on
event-based video reconstruction by introducing convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, intrinsic locality of convolutional operations is not capable of modeling long-range dependency, which is crucial to many
vision tasks. In this paper, we present a hybrid CNNTransformer network for event-based video reconstruction
(ET-Net), which merits the fine local information from CNN
and global contexts from Transformer. In addition, we further propose a Token Pyramid Aggregation strategy to implement multi-scale token integration for relating internal
and intersected semantic concepts in the token-space. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method
achieves superior performance over state-of-the-art methods on multiple real-world event datasets. The code is
available at https://github.com/WarranWeng/
ET-Net.

1. Introduction
Event cameras, also known as neuromorphic cameras
[45], are novel bio-inspired visual sensors, providing researchers with a radically different sensing paradigm.
Rather than directly reporting frame-based representation
at a fixed rate in conventional cameras, event cameras are
specifically designed to detect and record spatio-temporal
changes for each pixel. Compared with frame-based counterparts, event cameras possess several superior properties:
high temporal resolution (about 1 µs), high dynamic range
(140 dB) and low power consumption (5 mW) [24], which
are suitable in scenarios that are challenging for conventional cameras, such as HDR scenes and high speed moving scenes. However, the event streams are not convenient
for observation and post-processing due to their sparse, irregular and unstructured properties. To better utilize the
* Correspondence should be addressed to zhyuey@ustc.edu.cn

advantages of event cameras, an intuitive way is to convert event streams to video composed of sequential intensity
frames, which serves as a bridge that connects the off-theshelf frame-based algorithms [12, 13, 11, 26, 42, 41, 44, 43]
to event cameras.
Deep learning techniques, especially convolutional neural networks, have achieved great successes in the area of
computer vision. Recently, several works performed eventbased video reconstruction via deep learning methods and
demonstrated impressive performance. Using supervised
learning, Rebecq et al. [29, 28] first proposed the E2VID
CNN-based model, achieving significant performance boost
in terms of image quality and temporal consistency against
hand-crafted methods [4, 21, 32]. Based on E2VID, Scheerlinck et al. [33] reduced inference time and model capacity using a light-weight network FireNet with only a minor
drop in accuracy incurring. Further, Stoffregen et al. [35]
presented that these supervised training methods showed
a strong dependence on the synthetic data generated by
event camera simulators, such as ESIM [27]. Consequently,
for relaxing this data dependency, Federico et al. [22] approached, for the first time, the reconstruction problem from
a self-supervised learning perspective via combining estimated optical flow and the event-based photometric constancy to train neural networks without ground-truth.
These CNN-based architectures [29, 28, 35, 22] show the
preponderance in video reconstruction for event cameras.
However, classic CNN-based models are not capable of
modeling the long-range dependency due to the essential locality of convolution operations. Actually, capturing longrange dependency plays a crucial role in deep neural networks for both sequential data in NLP tasks and image data
in vision tasks. Especially, CNN-based models are not effective to deal with structures that show large internal variation in terms of texture, shape and size. In order to tackle
this limitation, some works have been proposed recently.
Wang et al. [39] proposed a non-local operation, which can
be plugged into multiple existing CNN models. Schlemper
et al. [34] integrated additive attention gate modules into the
skip-connections for global contexts. More recently, Transformer [36], designed for sequence-to-sequence prediction,
has emerged as a popular architecture in both NLP and vi-

2563

