Lucas-Kanade Reloaded: End-to-End Super-Resolution from Raw Image Bursts
Bruno Lecouat1,2 Jean Ponce1,3 Julien Mairal2
1

2

Inria and DIENS (ENS-PSL, CNRS, Inria), Paris, France
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
3
Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, USA
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Output of Dcraw

Camera’s ISP (hi-quality jpeg) Joint demosaick+single-image SR

Proposed method

Figure 1: ×4 super-resolution results obtained from a burst of 30 raw images acquired with a handheld Panasonic Lumix
GX9 camera at 12800 ISO for the top image and 25600 for the bottom image. Dcraw performs basic demosaicking.

Abstract
This presentation addresses the problem of reconstructing a high-resolution image from multiple lower-resolution
snapshots captured from slightly different viewpoints in
space and time. Key challenges for solving this superresolution problem include (i) aligning the input pictures
with sub-pixel accuracy, (ii) handling raw (noisy) images
for maximal faithfulness to native camera data, and (iii)
designing/learning an image prior (regularizer) well suited
to the task. We address these three challenges with a hybrid algorithm building on the insight from [45] that aliasing is an ally in this setting, with parameters that can be
learned end to end, while retaining the interpretability of
classical approaches to inverse problems. The effectiveness
of our approach is demonstrated on synthetic and real image bursts, setting a new state of the art on several benchmarks and delivering excellent qualitative results on real

raw bursts captured by smartphones and prosumer cameras. Our code is available at https://github.com/
bruno-31/lkburst.git.

1. Introduction
The problem of reconstructing high-resolution (HR) images from lower-resolution (LR) ones comes in multiple flavors, that may significantly differ from each other in both
technical detail and overall objectives. When a single LR
image is available, the corresponding inverse problem is
severely ill-posed, requiring very strong priors about the
type of picture under consideration [18, 47]. For natural
images, data-driven methods based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have proven to be very effective [26, 44].
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have also been
used to synthesize impressive HR images that may, how12370

