Action-Conditioned 3D Human Motion Synthesis with Transformer VAE
Mathis Petrovich1 Michael J. Black2 Gül Varol1
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
1

{mathis.petrovich,gul.varol}@enpc.fr, black@tue.mpg.de
https://imagine.enpc.fr/˜petrovim/actor

Abstract
We tackle the problem of action-conditioned generation
of realistic and diverse human motion sequences. In contrast to methods that complete, or extend, motion sequences,
this task does not require an initial pose or sequence. Here
we learn an action-aware latent representation for human
motions by training a generative variational autoencoder
(VAE). By sampling from this latent space and querying
a certain duration through a series of positional encodings, we synthesize variable-length motion sequences conditioned on a categorical action. Specifically, we design
a Transformer-based architecture, ACTOR, for encoding
and decoding a sequence of parametric SMPL human body
models estimated from action recognition datasets. We evaluate our approach on the NTU RGB+D, HumanAct12 and
UESTC datasets and show improvements over the state of
the art. Furthermore, we present two use cases: improving action recognition through adding our synthesized data
to training, and motion denoising. Code and models are
available on our project page [53].

1. Introduction

Fig. 1: Goal: Action-Conditioned TransfORmer VAE (ACTOR)
learns to synthesize human motion sequences conditioned on a
categorical action and a duration, T . Sequences are generated by
sampling from a single motion representation latent vector, z, as
opposed to the frame-level embedding space in prior work.

Despite decades of research on modeling human motions
[4, 5], synthesizing realistic and controllable sequences remains extremely challenging. In this work, our goal is to
take a semantic action label like “Throw” and generate an
infinite number of realistic 3D human motion sequences, of
varying length, that look like realistic throwing (Figure 1).
A significant amount of prior work has focused on taking
one pose, or a sequence of poses, and then predicting future
motions [3, 6, 21, 67, 70]. This is an overly constrained
scenario because it assumes that one already has a motion
sequence and just needs more of it. On the other hand,
many applications such as virtual reality and character control [26, 57] require generating motions of a given type (semantic action label) with a specified duration.
We address this problem by training an action-conditioned generative model with 3D human motion data that

has corresponding action labels. In particular, we construct
a Transformer-based encoder-decoder architecture and train
it with the VAE objective. We parameterize the human body
using SMPL [43] as it can output joint locations or the body
surface. This paves the way for better modeling of interaction with the environment, as the surface is necessary to
model contact. Moreover, such a representation allows the
use of several reconstruction losses: constraining part rotations in the kinematic tree, joint locations, or surface points.
The literature [37] and our results suggest that a combination of losses gives the most realistic generated motions.
The key challenge of motion synthesis is to generate sequences that are perceptually realistic while being diverse.
Many approaches for motion generation have taken an autoregressive approach such as LSTMs [15] and GRUs [46].
However, these methods typically regress to the mean pose

10985

