Scene Context-Aware Salient Object Detection
Avishek Siris1 , Jianbo Jiao2 , Gary K.L. Tam1 , Xianghua Xie1 , Rynson W.H. Lau3
Department of Computer Science, Swansea University1
University of Oxford2 , and City University of Hong Kong3
a.siris.789605@swansea.ac.uk, jianbo@robots.ox.ac.uk,
{k.l.tam, x.xie}@swansea.ac.uk, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Salient object detection identifies objects in an image
that grab visual attention. Although contextual features
are considered in recent literature, they often fail in
real-world complex scenarios. We observe that this is
mainly due to two issues: First, most existing datasets
consist of simple foregrounds and backgrounds that hardly
represent real-life scenarios. Second, current methods
only learn contextual features of salient objects, which
are insufficient to model high-level semantics for saliency
reasoning in complex scenes. To address these problems,
we first construct a new large-scale dataset with complex
scenes in this paper. We then propose a context-aware
learning approach to explicitly exploit the semantic scene
contexts. Specifically, two modules are proposed to achieve
the goal: 1) a Semantic Scene Context Refinement module to enhance contextual features learned from salient
objects with scene context, and 2) a Contextual Instance
Transformer to learn contextual relations between objects
and scene context. To our knowledge, such high-level
semantic contextual information of image scenes is underexplored for saliency detection in the literature. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed approach
outperforms state-of-the-art techniques in complex scenarios for saliency detection, and transfers well to other
existing datasets. The code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/SirisAvishek/Scene_
Context_Aware_Saliency.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection explores the problem of identifying objects that “pop-out” and grab visual attention in an
image or video. The task has been widely used as a preprocessing step for many vision applications such as image/video compression [59, 11], video object segmentation
[50], image captioning [56], and image parsing [21]. All
these vision tasks are proposed for real-world images with

Image

GT

CPD-R [54]

EGNet [68]

Ours

Figure 1: Examples of real-world complex scenarios where existing methods (e.g. [54, 68]) may not capture semantic scene contexts well, leading to incorrect detection of distractors. Whereas
our model is able to capture semantic contexts of the scenes.

complex scenes.
Recently, saliency research has grown rapidly through
the success of CNNs, which are able to capture better
feature representations compared to hand-crafted features
[32, 5, 57]. State-of-the-art saliency models mainly extract
and aggregate contextual information from spatial relations,
including multi-scale and local-global features in various
manners [67, 30, 37]. Although good performance has been
demonstrated, these models are mainly trained on binary
saliency labels that are class-agnostic. Training on such labels only can limit the ability of networks to learn semantic
contextual features (higher-level understanding) that would
otherwise help model various relationship of objects within
complex image scenes [29, 65]. Fig. 1 shows two examples of real-world complex scenarios where existing models
perform poorly. The top row shows a kitchen scene with a
salient person and a distractor (e.g., fridge with similar texture). Existing models can not capture the semantic knowledge of the distractor and are unable to differentiate it from
the person’s attire, resulting in incorrect saliency for that
distractor. It is a similar case for the bottom row which involves a bedroom scene with a salient person surrounded by
many distractors (e.g., clothes and objects with similar texture). The above observations motivate us to ask the question: Can we learn and use discriminative semantic context to improve saliency modeling in challenging complex
scenes with rich context?
Further to our observations, we find that most of the ex-

4156

