STRIVE: Scene Text Replacement In Videos
Vijay Kumar B G * 1 , Jeyasri Subramanian2 , Varnith Chordia3 , Eugene Bart2 , Shaobo Fang4 , Kelly
Guan5 , and Raja Bala3
1

NEC Laboratories, America
Palo Alto Research Center
3
Amazon
4
Work done at PARC
5
Stanford University

2

Abstract
We propose replacing scene text in videos using deep
style transfer and learned photometric transformations.
Building on recent progress on still image text replacement,
we present extensions that alter text while preserving the appearance and motion characteristics of the original video.
Compared to the problem of still image text replacement,
our method addresses additional challenges introduced by
video, namely effects induced by changing lighting, motion
blur, diverse variations in camera-object pose over time,
and preservation of temporal consistency. We parse the
problem into three steps. First, the text in all frames is
normalized to a frontal pose using a spatio-temporal transformer network. Second, the text is replaced in a single
reference frame using a state-of-art still-image text replacement method. Finally, the new text is transferred from the
reference to remaining frames using a novel learned image
transformation network that captures lighting and blur effects in a temporally consistent manner. Results on synthetic and challenging real videos show realistic text transfer, competitive quantitative and qualitative performance,
and superior inference speed relative to alternatives. We introduce new synthetic and real-world datasets with paired
text objects. To the best of our knowledge this is the first
attempt at deep video text replacement.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of realistically altering scene
text in videos. Our primary application is to create personalized content for marketing and promotional purposes. An
example would be to replace a word on a store sign with a
personalized name or message, as shown in Figure 1. Other
applications include language translation, text redaction for
* Corresponding author: bg.vijay.k@gmail.com

Figure 1: Our method replaces the scene text in the original
video (”COFFEE” in upper row) with a personalized string
(”ROBERT” in bottom row) while preserving the original
geometry, appearance, and temporal properties.
privacy, and augmented reality. For research purposes, the
ability to realistically manipulate scene text also enables
augmentation of datasets for training text detection, recognition, tracking, erasure, and adversarial attack detection.
Traditionally text editing in images is performed manually
by graphic artists, a process that typically entails a long
painstaking process to ensure the original geometry, style
and appearance are preserved. For videos, this effort would
be considerably more arduous.
Recently several attempts have been made to automate text
replacement in still images based on principles of deep
style transfer ([22], [1], [31], [26], [29]). We leverage this
progress to tackle the problem of text replacement in videos.
In addition to the challenges faced in the still image case,
video text replacement must respect temporal consistency
and model effects such as lighting changes, blur induced by
camera and object motion. Furthermore, over the course of
the video, the pose of the camera relative to the text object
can vary widely, and hence text replacement must be able to
handle diverse geometries. A logical method to solving the
problem would be to train an image-based text style trans14549

