Neural Radiance Flow for 4D View Synthesis and Video Processing
Yilun Du
MIT CSAIL

Yinan Zhang
Stanford University

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL, BCS, CBMM

Hong-Xing Yu
Stanford University
Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Abstract
We present a method, Neural Radiance Flow (NeRFlow),
to learn a 4D spatial-temporal representation of a dynamic
scene from a set of RGB images. Key to our approach is
the use of a neural implicit representation that learns to
capture the 3D occupancy, radiance, and dynamics of the
scene. By enforcing consistency across different modalities,
our representation enables multi-view rendering in diverse
dynamic scenes, including water pouring, robotic interaction,
and real images, outperforming state-of-the-art methods for
spatial-temporal view synthesis. Our approach works even
when being provided only a single monocular real video.
We further demonstrate that the learned representation can
serve as an implicit scene prior, enabling video processing
tasks such as image super-resolution and de-noising without
any additional supervision.

1. Introduction
We live in a rich and dynamic world, consisting of scenes
that rapidly change their appearance across both time and
view angle. To accurately model the world around us, we
need a scene representation that captures underlying lighting,
physics, and 3D structure of the scene. Such representations
have diverse applications: they can enable interactive exploration in both space and time in virtual reality, the capture of
realistic motions for game design, and robot perception and
navigation in the environment around them.
Traditional approaches, such as those used in state-ofthe-art motion capture systems, typically are specialized
to specific phenomena [1, 19] and fail to handle complex
occlusions and fine details of motion. A core difficulty is
that high resolution coverage of information requires a prohibitive amount of memory. Recent work has addressed this
by using a neural network as a parametrization for scene deCode at https://yilundu.github.io/nerflow/.

Depth

4D View
Synthesis
Training Views / Timestamps

Flow

Figure 1: Given a set of training images captured from different
views and timestamps, NeRFlow learns a spatial-temporal representation that captures the underlying 3D structure and dynamics
and, in turn, enables 4D view synthesis.

tails [41, 62, 42]. However, these scene representation often
require a static scene and a large number of images captured
from many cameras, which are not generally available in
real-world scenarios.
In this work, we aim to learn a dynamic scene representation which allows photorealistic novel view synthesis in
complex dynamics, observed by only a limited number of
(as few as one) cameras with known camera parameters. The
key challenge is that the observations at each moment are
sparse, restricting prior approaches [41, 62] from fitting a
complex scene. To address this problem, we present a novel
approach, Neural Radiance Flow (NeRFlow), that can effectively aggregate partial observations across time to learn a
coherent spatio-temporal scene representation. We achieve
this by formulating a radiance flow field, which encourages
temporal consistency of appearance, density, and motion.
The radiance flow field is represented by two continuous implicit neural functions: a 6D (spatial position x, y, z,
timestamp t and viewing direction θ, ϕ) radiance function for
appearance and density, and a 4D (spatio-temporal position
x, y, z, t) flow function for scene dynamics. Our representation enables joint learning of both modules, which is critical
given only sparse observations at each moment. Specifically,
the flow field provides temporal correspondences for spatial
14324

