Self-Supervised 3D Hand Pose Estimation from monocular RGB via Contrastive
Learning
Adrian Spurr* Aneesh Dahiya* Xi Wang Xucong Zhang Otmar Hilliges
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D pose of human hands from monocular
images alone has many important applications in robotics,
Human-Computer Interaction and AR/VR. As such the
problem has received significant attention in computer vision literature [12, 14, 15, 26, 31–33, 41]. However, estimating the location of 3D hand joints within an RGB image
is a challenging structured regression problem with difficulties that arise from a large diversity in backgrounds, lighting conditions, hand appearances, as well as self-occlusion
caused by the high degrees of freedom of the human hand.
Annotated datasets that cover a larger diversity of en*Denotes equal contribution

...

Projection
head

Encoder

Equivariant
contrastive
loss

Tied weights

Encoder

Linear
head

Encouraged by the success of contrastive learning on image classification tasks, we propose a new self-supervised
method for the structured regression task of 3D hand pose
estimation. Contrastive learning makes use of unlabeled
data for the purpose of representation learning via a loss
formulation that encourages the learned feature representations to be invariant under any image transformation. For
3D hand pose estimation, it too is desirable to have invariance to appearance transformation such as color jitter. However, the task requires equivariance under affine
transformations, such as rotation and translation. To address this issue, we propose an equivariant contrastive objective and demonstrate its effectiveness in the context of
3D hand pose estimation. We experimentally investigate
the impact of invariant and equivariant contrastive objectives and show that learning equivariant features leads to
better representations for the task of 3D hand pose estimation. Furthermore, we show that standard ResNets with
sufficient depth, trained on additional unlabeled data, attain improvements of up to 14.5% in PA-EPE on FreiHAND
and thus achieves state-of-the-art performance without any
task specific, specialized architectures. Code and models
are available at https://ait.ethz.ch/projects/2021/PeCLR/

I) Self-supervised representation learning

...

Abstract

Supervised
loss

II) Supervised hand pose estimation
FreiHAND

II)

I) + II) (ours)

YouTube3DHands

II)

I) + II) (ours)

Figure 1: We propose a two-stage framework for 3D
hand pose estimation. I) An encoder is trained in a selfsupervised manner on a large set of unlabeled data using a
novel equivariant contrastive objective. II) The pre-trained
encoder is fine-tuned with little labeled data. The resulting
network is more accurate across datasets.

vironments and settings are one possibility to alleviate this
issue. However, acquiring 3D labeled data is laborious, cost
intensive and typically requires multi-view imagery or some
form of user instrumentation. Data collected under such circumstances is often difficult to transfer well to in-the-wild
imagery [20, 42]. Therefore, much interest is given to approaches that can leverage auxiliary data, which has either
no or only 2D joint annotations. For example, such data
can be used to outperform many supervised approaches via
making use of weak-supervision [3, 4], the integration of

11230

