On Exposing the Challenging Long Tail in Future Prediction of Traffic Actors
Osama Makansi

Özgün Çiçek
Yassine Marrakchi
University of Freiburg

Thomas Brox

makansio,cicek,marrakch,brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Predicting the states of dynamic traffic actors into the future is important for autonomous systems to operate safely
and efficiently. Remarkably, the most critical scenarios are
much less frequent and more complex than the uncritical
ones. Therefore, uncritical cases dominate the prediction.
In this paper, we address specifically the challenging scenarios at the long tail of the dataset distribution. Our analysis shows that the common losses tend to place challenging cases sub-optimally in the embedding space. As a consequence, we propose to supplement the usual loss with a
loss that places challenging cases closer to each other. This
triggers sharing information among challenging cases and
learning specific predictive features. We show on four public datasets that this leads to improved performance on the
challenging scenarios while the overall performance stays
stable. The approach is agnostic w.r.t. the used network
architecture, input modality or viewpoint, and can be integrated into existing solutions easily. Code is available at
github.

1. Introduction
Future prediction in traffic scenarios aims to foresee the
future location of dynamic actors based on their current and
previous locations and possibly other information about the
environment. For an actor in interaction with others, reasoning about possible future locations of the other actors is
necessary for path planning and to avoid collisions. Given
enough data, some recent prediction methods [48, 60, 47]
also not just predict a single location of the actor in the future but a multimodal distribution over possible future locations.
The average prediction errors of such methods look
promising, but they hide that the training and test data is
dominated by simple scenarios, where the trajectory can be
smoothly propagated into the future. Such scenarios can
be handled with a simple Kalman filter or other autoregressive models. However, the most safety-critical scenarios are
those that involve close-by dynamic obstacles and require

agent-of-interest

1750

other agents

Easy Scenario

history
future-GT

1500

Kalman filter
Traj++ EWTA
Ours

1250

Challenging Scenario

1000

750

500

250

2

4

6

8

10

12

Figure 1. Histogram of the ETH-UCY dataset based on the difficulty of the sample (based on displacement error of a Kalman filter [31]). An easy scenario (belongs to the head blue class) and a
challenging scenario (belongs to the tail red class) are shown along
the prediction of the state-of-the-art (Traj++ EWTA) and our approach. Our approach targets those challenging scenarios (from
the tail) and improves their performance while maintaining a good
performance on the easy scenarios.

an evasive maneuver. Such scenarios are rare in both the
training and the test data. The more complex and safetycritical they are, the less frequent they are. Fatal cases with
a collision are not part of the dataset at all.
As an example, the ETH-UCY dataset is often used to
benchmark methods for future trajectory prediction. It is
considered a challenging dataset, as it includes interacting
pedestrians in crowded scenes. Figure 1 shows the histogram of samples in this dataset based on their difficulty
approximated by the prediction error of a Kalman filter. The
large majority of scenarios can be well modeled by linear
extrapolation, whereas scenarios that require more complex
modeling are rare. The depicted challenging scenario showcases a pedestrian (red box), who will turn right in the future
to avoid a collision with the stationary pedestrians (black
boxes) in front of them.

13147

