An Empirical Study of the Collapsing Problem in Semi-Supervised
2D Human Pose Estimation
Rongchang Xie1 , Chunyu Wang2 , Wenjun Zeng2 , Yizhou Wang3
1

2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, CS Dept., Peking University

{rongchangxie, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, {chnuwa, wezeng}@microsoft.com

Images under
Augmentations

Abstract
Most semi-supervised learning models are consistencybased, which leverage unlabeled images by maximizing the
similarity between different augmentations of an image. But
when we apply them to human pose estimation that has extremely imbalanced class distribution, they often collapse
and predict every pixel in unlabeled images as background.
We ﬁnd this is because the decision boundary passes the
high-density areas of the minor class so more and more
pixels are gradually mis-classiﬁed as background. In this
work, we present a surprisingly simple approach to drive
the model to learn in the correct direction. For each image,
it composes a pair of easy-hard augmentations and uses the
more accurate predictions on the easy image to teach the
network to learn pose information of the hard one. The accuracy superiority of teaching signals allows the network
to be “monotonically” improved which effectively avoids
collapsing. We apply our method to the state-of-the-art
pose estimators and it further improves their performance
on three public datasets.

1. Introduction
2D human pose estimation has many practical applications such as 3D pose modeling [48, 35, 23] and action
recognition [37, 38]. The early works in deep learning try
to regress joint coordinates from images directly [34, 5].
But most recent ones adopt the heatmap-based framework
[33, 39, 24, 30, 41] because it provides better supervision.
But there is a more important but less explored problem of
learning robust models that perform well on unseen wild
images. One solution is to ﬁt the “whole” world by inﬁnitely increasing training images. The other is to transfer
pre-trained models to new domains by unsupervised ﬁnetuning. The common basis behind the two approaches is
Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL)— how to leverage unlabeled images to obtain a generalizable model?

Images

Network

Heatmap

ܶ௘

‫ܫ‬௘

݂ఏ

‫ܪ‬ఏǡ௘

ܶ௛

‫ܫ‬௛

݂ఏ

‫ܪ‬ఏǡ௛

7UDQVIRUPHG+HDWPDS

ܶ௘՜௛

ܶ௘՜௛ ሺ‫ܪ‬ఏǡ௘ ሻ

Teacher

‫ܫ‬

Student
݉݅݊ $ఏ

Figure 1. Our approach to avoid “collapsing” in semi-supervised
human pose estimation. For each unlabeled image, we compose
an easy and hard image pair Ie and Ih using two augmentation
methods Te and Th , respectively, and feed them to the network
fθ . We use the heatmaps Te→h (Hθ,e ) on the easy image to teach
the network to learn about the hard image. Te→h maps the two
heatmaps of the augmented images. Lθ represents the consistency
loss. The accuracy superiority allows the network to be “monotonically” improved which avoids collapsing.

The previous SSL works have primarily focused on the
classiﬁcation task. In general, there are two strategies to explore unlabeled images. The ﬁrst is Pseudo labeling [26, 42]
which ﬁrst learns an initial model on only labeled images in
a supervised way. Then, for each unlabeled image, it applies
the initial model to obtain hard or soft pseudo labels representing its category. Finally, it learns the ultimate model
on the combined dataset of labeled and pseudo-labeled images. However, the performance of the method is largely
limited by that of the initial model which is learned only on
the labeled images and ﬁxed thereafter.
The second class of methods [2, 19, 27, 28, 31] learn
about unlabeled images by requiring the network to have
similar predictions for different augmentations of the same
image. They are better than the pseudo labeling methods
because the accuracy is not limited by the ﬁxed labeling
network. However, when we apply them to 2D pose estimation, we ﬁnd that all of them encounter the collapsing
problem meaning that, within few training iterations, the
models begin to predict every pixel in unlabeled images as
background. As a result, the prediction accuracy becomes
even worse than the initial supervised model.

11240

