Scribble-Supervised Semantic Segmentation Inference
Jingshan Xu1 *, Chuanwei Zhou1 *, Zhen Cui1†, Chunyan Xu1†, Yuge Huang2 ,
Pengcheng Shen2 , Shaoxin Li2 , Jian Yang1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science
and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Tencent, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a progressive segmentation inference (PSI) framework to tackle with scribble-supervised
semantic segmentation. In virtue of latent contextual dependency, we encapsulate two crucial cues, contextual pattern
propagation and semantic label diffusion, to enhance and
refine pixel-level segmentation results from partially known
seeds. In contextual pattern propagation, different-granular
contextual patterns are correlated and leveraged to properly diffuse pattern information based on graphical model,
so as to increase the inference confidence of pixel label prediction. Further, depending on high-confidence scores of
estimated pixels, the initial annotated seeds are progressively spread over the image through dynamically learning an adaptive decision strategy. The two cues are finally
modularized to form a close-looping update process during
pixel-wise label inference. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed progressive segmentation inference
can benefit from the combination of spatial and semantic
context cues, and meantime achieve the state-of-the-art performance on two public scribble segmentation datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one fundamental topic in computer vision. Numerous deep learning based methods have
sprung up to deal with this task [5, 6, 28, 10, 43]. They usually require a vast quantity of fully annotated samples to facilitate the training of deep neural networks. But the annotation of image segmentation often suffers massive workload
because of fully flexible/irregular polygons of segmentation
regions. To bypass the dependency on high-expensive annotations, weakly supervised semantic segmentation is much
desirable due to more convenient annotations. Broadly
speaking, the annotation ways mainly contain four cate* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors: zhen.cui@njust.edu.cn, cyx@njust.edu.cn.

gories: image-level labels [9, 18, 24, 41], clicks [4], bounding boxes [7, 30, 19] and scribbles [26, 34, 35, 38]. The
image-level labels and clicks only provide very limited supervision information, thus making them hard to train highaccuracy semantic segmentation models. Although bounding boxes can provide more supervision information, they
tend to overlap with each other and thus result into many
disturbances from confusion labels during training. In contrast, the scribble annotations are more flexible to reflect the
distribution of semantic classes, and their operation is easily
controllable. Due to its potential advantages, here we focus
on the case of scribble-supervised semantic segmentation.
The scribble-supervised semantic segmentation has been
studied over the past decade. Early methods [33, 12] may
be dated to interactive segmentation which uses graphical
models to directly expand semantic labels to unlabeled regions. With the popularity of deep neural networks, many
recent methods attempted to introduce deep feature learning into traditional graphical models, e.g., CRF [26] and
random-walks [37] based on scribbles [26], and generated more confident pseudo labels for those unlabeled regions to guide model update. Further, due to the difficulty of boundary estimation, some methods [38] employed
auxiliary networks to aid segmentation refinement, or introduced topology-constrained loss functions [34, 35] to
smooth prediction results. Although these methods endeavored to utilize more robust features or external information
to improve segmentation performance, the crucial problems
about what/how to infer from known seeds to unknown regions especially in the deep feature pattern space are still
under studied.
To address the above problems, we propose a progressive segmentation inference (PSI) framework by adaptively
diffusing contextual patterns as well as label information for
scribble-supervised semantic segmentation. Inspired by the
observation [27] that the patterns from low-level visions to
high-level semantics are mutually dependent/correlated in
spatial domain or semantic domain, we attempt to leverage the pattern dependency to fulfill segmentation infer-

15354

