DepthTrack: Unveiling the Power of RGBD Tracking
Song Yan1,† , Jinyu Yang2,3,† , Jani Käpylä1,† , Feng Zheng2 , Aleš Leonardis3 , Joni-Kristian Kämäräinen1
1

Tampere University

2

Southern University of Science and Technology

3

University of Birmingham

{song.yan,jani.kapyla,joni.kamarainen}@tuni.fi, jinyu.yang96@outlook.com,
zhengf@sustech.edu.cn, a.leonardis@cs.bham.ac.uk

Abstract
RGBD (RGB plus depth) object tracking is gaining momentum as RGBD sensors have become popular in many
application fields such as robotics. However, the best
RGBD trackers are extensions of the state-of-the-art deep
RGB trackers. They are trained with RGB data and the
depth channel is used as a sidekick for subtleties such as
occlusion detection. This can be explained by the fact that
there are no sufficiently large RGBD datasets to 1) train
“deep depth trackers” and to 2) challenge RGB trackers
with sequences for which the depth cue is essential. This
work introduces a new RGBD tracking dataset - DepthTrack - that has twice as many sequences (200) and scene
types (40) than in the largest existing dataset, and three
times more objects (90). In addition, the average length
of the sequences (1473), the number of deformable objects (16) and the number of annotated tracking attributes
(15) have been increased. Furthermore, by running the
SotA RGB and RGBD trackers on DepthTrack, we propose a new RGBD tracking baseline, namely DeT, which
reveals that deep RGBD tracking indeed benefits from genuine training data. The code and dataset is available at
https://github.com/xiaozai/DeT.

1. Introduction
The goal of generic object tracking is to localize an unknown object in a video sequence given its position in the
first frame. The most popular tracking modality is color
vision in the terms of RGB image frames as the input. Furthermore, the problem of visual object tracking (VOT) can
be divided into short-term and long-term tracking which
are evaluated differently [13, 14]. The short-term evaluation protocol focuses on the tracker itself by measuring its
accuracy and robustness. If a tracker loses the target, it af† Equal contribution.

Figure 1: Comparison of the properties of the proposed
DepthTrack and the previous RGBD tracking datasets.

fects to the robustness metric, but the tracker is re-initialized
and then evaluation continues. In the long-term (LT) protocol the tracker is not re-initialized and thus the LT trackers need special procedures for detecting whether the target
is present or not and re-detection in the target-not-present
operation mode. The two latest VOT challenges [13, 14]
include additional tracks for RGBT (RGB plus Thermal infrared) and RGBD (RGB plus Depth) object tracking. Interestingly, there are no trackers specialized on thermal features or depth features, but the top performing RGBT and
RGBD trackers all use RGB features learned by the leading deep tracker architectures, MDNet [22], ATOM [7] and
DiMP [3]. The additional modality T or D is used only as a
“sidekick” to help in various special cases such as occlusion
detection. Therefore it remains unclear what are the potential applications of RGBD and RGBT tracking and whether
T and D channels have their own powerful features.
In this work we focus on RGBD tracking. RGBD tracking has been investigated in a number of recent works
(e.g., [11, 12, 17]), but these use conventional RGB and
depth features and are inferior to the deep RGB tracker
based methods in the VOT 2019 and 2020 RGBD challenges [13, 14]. The top performing trackers in VOT

10725

