Physics-based Differentiable Depth Sensor Simulation
Benjamin Planche
Rajat Vikram Singh‡
Siemens Technology
benjamin.planche@siemens.com, rajats@alumni.cmu.edu
LineMOD

Abstract
Gradient-based algorithms are crucial to modern computer-vision and graphics applications, enabling learningbased optimization and inverse problems. For example,
photorealistic differentiable rendering pipelines for color
images have been proven highly valuable to applications
aiming to map 2D and 3D domains. However, to the best of
our knowledge, no effort has been made so far towards extending these gradient-based methods to the generation of
depth (2.5D) images, as simulating structured-light depth
sensors implies solving complex light transport and stereomatching problems. In this paper, we introduce a novel endto-end differentiable simulation pipeline for the generation
of realistic 2.5D scans, built on physics-based 3D rendering
and custom block-matching algorithms. Each module can
be differentiated w.r.t. sensor and scene parameters; e.g.,
to automatically tune the simulation for new devices over
some provided scans or to leverage the pipeline as a 3Dto-2.5D transformer within larger computer-vision applications. Applied to the training of deep-learning methods for
various depth-based recognition tasks (classification, pose
estimation, semantic segmentation), our simulation greatly
improves the performance of the resulting models on real
scans, thereby demonstrating the fidelity and value of its
synthetic depth data compared to previous static simulations and learning-based domain adaptation schemes.

1. Introduction
Progress in computer vision has been dominated by deep
neural networks trained over large amount of data, usually labeled. The deployment of these solutions into realworld applications is, however, often hindered by the cost
(time, manpower, access, etc.) of capturing and annotating exhaustive training datasets of target objects or scenes.
To partially or completely bypass this hard data requirement, an increasing number of solutions are relying on synthetic images rendered from 3D databases for their training [15, 51, 36, 46, 61, 45], leveraging advances in com‡ Now at NVIDIA.

real/synthetic depth scans

real

DDS

real

DDS

Figure 1: Differentiable Depth Sensor Simulation (DDS)
for the generation of highly-realistic depth scans. DDS
works off-the-shelf, but can be further optimized unsupervisedly against real data, yielding synthetic depth scans
valuable to the training of recognition algorithms (demonstrated here on LineMOD dataset [21]).
puter graphics [50, 44]. Indeed, physics-based rendering
methods are slowly but surely closing the visual gap between real and synthetic color image distributions, simulating complex optical phenomena (e.g., realistic light transport, lens aberrations, Bayer demosaicing, etc.). While
these extensive tools still require domain knowledge to be
properly parameterized for each new use-case (w.r.t. scene
content, camera properties, etc.), their positive impact on
the training of color-based visual recognition algorithms has
been well documented already [9, 22].
The same cannot be said about depth-based applications. Unlike color camera that captures light intensity,
structured-light depth sensors rely on stereo-vision mechanisms to measure the per-pixel distance between their focal plane and elements in the scene. They are useful for
geometry-sensitive applications (e.g., robotics), but little effort has been made towards closing the realism gap w.r.t.
synthetic depth (2.5D) scans or understanding their impact on the training of depth-based recognition methods.
Some simulation pipelines [19, 33, 46] and domain adaptation schemes [55, 16, 54, 5, 63, 61] have been proposed;
but the former methods require extensive domain knowledge [46, 63] to be set up whereas some of the latter need
relevant real images for their training [55, 16, 54, 4], and all
fail to generalize to new sensors [19, 33] or scenes [4, 63].
Borrowing from both simulation and learning-based
principles, we propose herein a novel pipeline that virtually
replicates depth sensors and can be optimized for new usecases either manually (e.g., providing known intrinsic pa14387

