With a Little Help from My Friends:
Nearest-Neighbor Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations
Debidatta Dwibedi 1 , Yusuf Aytar 2 , Jonathan Tompson 1 , Pierre Sermanet 1 , and Andrew Zisserman 2
1

Google Research, 2 DeepMind

{debidatta, yusufaytar, tompson, sermanet, zisserman}@google.com

Contrastive Loss

Abstract
Self-supervised learning algorithms based on instance
discrimination train encoders to be invariant to pre-defined
transformations of the same instance. While most methods treat different views of the same image as positives
for a contrastive loss, we are interested in using positives
from other instances in the dataset. Our method, NearestNeighbor Contrastive Learning of visual Representations
(NNCLR), samples the nearest neighbors from the dataset in
the latent space, and treats them as positives. This provides
more semantic variations than pre-defined transformations.
We find that using the nearest-neighbor as positive in
contrastive losses improves performance significantly on
ImageNet classification using ResNet-50 under the linear
evaluation protocol, from 71.7% to 75.6%, outperforming previous state-of-the-art methods. On semi-supervised
learning benchmarks we improve performance significantly
when only 1% ImageNet labels are available, from 53.8%
to 56.5%. On transfer learning benchmarks our method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods (including supervised
learning with ImageNet) on 8 out of 12 downstream
datasets. Furthermore, we demonstrate empirically that our
method is less reliant on complex data augmentations. We
see a relative reduction of only 2.1% ImageNet Top-1 accuracy when we train using only random crops.

1. Introduction
How does one make sense of a novel sensory experience? What might be going through someone’s head when
they are shown a picture of something new, say a dodo?
Even without being told explicitly what a dodo is, they will
likely form associations between the dodo and other similar semantic classes; for instance a dodo is more similar to
a chicken or a duck than an elephant or a tiger. This act
of contrasting and comparing new sensory inputs with what
one has already experienced happens subconsciously and

NN(z1)
nearest
neighbor

in support set

support
set

z1

z2

encoder

x1

encoder
random augmentations

x2

image

Figure 1: NNCLR Training. We propose a simple selfsupervised learning method that uses similar examples from
a support set as positives in a contrastive loss.

might play a key role [22] in how humans are able to acquire concepts quickly. In this work, we show how an ability to find similarities across items within previously seen
examples improves the performance of self-supervised representation learning.
A particular kind of self-supervised training – known as
instance discrimination [9, 30, 54] – has become popular
recently. Models are encouraged to be invariant to multiple transformations of a single sample. This approach has
been impressively successful [9, 25] at bridging the performance gap between self-supervised and supervised models.
In the instance discrimination setup, when a model is shown
a picture of a dodo, it learns representations by being trained
to differentiate between what makes that specific dodo image different from everything else in the training set. In this
work, we ask the question: if we empower the model to also
find other image samples similar to the given dodo image,
does it lead to better learning?
Current state-of-the-art instance discrimination methods

9588

