RangeDet: In Defense of Range View for LiDAR-based 3D Object Detection
Lue Fan1,3,4,6 * Xuan Xiong2 * Feng Wang2 Naiyan Wang2 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3,4,5
1
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
TuSimple
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
5
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
6
School of Future Technology, UCAS
{fanlue2019, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn {xiongxuan08, feng.wff, winsty}@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an anchor-free single-stage
LiDAR-based 3D object detector – RangeDet. The most notable difference with previous works is that our method is
purely based on the range view representation. Compared
with the commonly used voxelized or Bird’s Eye View (BEV)
representations, the range view representation is more compact and without quantization error. Although there are
works adopting it for semantic segmentation, its performance in object detection is largely behind voxelized or
BEV counterparts. We first analyze the existing range-viewbased methods and find two issues overlooked by previous works: 1) the scale variation between nearby and far
away objects; 2) the inconsistency between the 2D range
image coordinates used in feature extraction and the 3D
Cartesian coordinates used in output. Then we deliberately design three components to address these issues in
our RangeDet. We test our RangeDet in the large-scale
Waymo Open Dataset (WOD). Our best model achieves
72.9/75.9/65.8 3D AP on vehicle/pedestrian/cyclist. These
results outperform other range-view-based methods by a
large margin, and are overall comparable with the state-ofthe-art multi-view-based methods. Codes will be released at
https://github.com/TuSimple/RangeDet.

1. Introduction
LiDAR-based 3D object detection is an indispensable
technology in the autonomous driving scenario. Though
shared some similarities, object detection in the 3D sparse
point cloud is fundamentally different from its 2D counterpart. The key is to efficiently represent the sparse and
unordered point clouds for subsequent processing. Several
*The first two authors contribute equally to this work and are listed in
the alphabetical order.

Range View

Bird’s Eye View

Point View

Figure 1. Different views in LiDAR-based 3D object detection.

popular representations include Bird’s Eye View (BEV) [9,
38, 37], Point View (PV) [25], Range View (RV) [11, 18]
and fusion of them [24, 44, 33], which are shown in Fig.1.
Among them, BEV is the most popular one. However, it introduces quantization error when dividing the space into the
voxels or pillars, which is unfriendly for the distant objects
that may only have few points. To overcome this drawback,
the point view representation is usually incorporated. Point
view operators [22, 23, 34, 31, 35, 30, 17] can extract effective features from unordered point clouds, but they are difficult to scale up to large-scale point cloud data efficiently.
The range view is widely adopted in semantic segmentation task [19, 36, 42, 43], but it is rarely used in object
detection individually. However, in this paper, we argue
that the range view itself is the most compact and informative way for representing the LiDAR point clouds because
it is generated from a single viewpoint. It essentially forms
a 2.5D [7] scene instead of a full 3D point cloud. Consequently, organizing the point cloud in range view misses no

2918

