Consistency-Aware Graph Network for Human Interaction Understanding
Zhenhua Wang† , Jiajun Meng† , Dongyan Guo† , Jianhua Zhang♯∗, Javen Qinfeng Shi‡ , Shengyong Chen♯
†

Zhejiang University of Technology, ♯ Tianjin University of Technology, ‡ The University of Adelaide

{zhhwang, guodongyan, 1112012021}@zjut.edu.cn, {zjh, sy}@ieee.org, javen.shi@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Compared with the progress made on human activity
classification, much less success has been achieved on human interaction understanding (HIU). Apart from the latter
task is much more challenging, the main cause is that recent approaches learn human interactive relations via shallow graphical models, which is inadequate to model complicated human interactions. In this paper, we propose a
consistency-aware graph network, which combines the representative ability of graph network and the consistencyaware reasoning to facilitate HIU. Our network consists of
three components, a backbone CNN to extract image features, a factor graph network to learn third-order interactive relations among participants, and a consistency-aware
reasoning module to enforce labeling and grouping consistencies. Our key observation is that the consistency-awarereasoning bias for HIU can be embedded into an energy,
minimizing which delivers consistent predictions. An efficient mean-field inference algorithm is proposed, such that
all modules of our network could be trained jointly in an
end-to-end manner. Experimental results show that our approach achieves leading performance on three benchmarks.
Code is available at https://git.io/CAGNet.

1. Introduction
Analyzing human activities in natural scenes is a fundamental task to many potential applications like video
surveillance [35], key-event retrieval [12], social behavior
interpretation [2] and sports analysis [28]. Abundant techniques have been developed for human activity recognition
(HAR, where the goal is to assign an activity label to each
image or video) [7, 25, 16, 33, 21, 43, 43, 27], which have
gained impressive progress on recognition accuracy. However, the task of human interaction understanding (HIU) is
much less successful mainly because current methods learn
∗ Jianhua Zhang {zjh@ieee.org} is the corresponding author.

BK

A
A

KK

B

BK

A

KK

B

BC
C NI

A scene with 3 people

Groundtruth

C HG
Inconsistent prediction

Figure 1. The graphical representation of HIU in a scene with
three people. We decompose HIU into two sub-tasks: recognizing
person-wise actions (as denoted by the node labels, with KK, BK,
HG, NI indicating kick, be-kicked, hug, no-interaction, respectively) and predicting if any pair of people are interacting (solid edges)
or not (dashed edges). Applying consistency-unaware models to
such cases can lead to inconsistent predictions as highlighted by
the red edges and labels (see Section 1 for details). We address
such issue by presenting a consistency-aware graph network with
two types of third-order dependencies incorporated.

human interactive relations via shallow graphical representations [42, 41, 40, 25, 7, 46], which is inadequate to model
complicated human interactions, e.g. fighting and chasing
as two concurrent activities happening in the same scene.
As commonly done in literature [25, 42, 40, 41], we
decompose HIU into two sub-tasks illustrated by Figure 1
middle: 1) The individual action prediction task assigning
each participant an action label; 2) The pairwise interactive prediction task determining if any pair of participants
are interacting or not. Solving the two sub-tasks provides a
way to disentangle concurrent human activities with multiple participants, as well as a comprehensive understanding
to surveillance scenes. Also note that natural scene may include either/both physical interactions (e.g., handshaking,
hugging and punching) and non-physical interactions (e.g.,
chasing, talking and queuing). People performing such interactions naturally form a group. In this sense, the action of
a person can be defined as “what is she/he doing under such
interactive circumstances?”, which is challenging to answer
if only considering the local representations. Though HIU performance had been lifted a lot by a conjunctive usage of deep features and rich contextual information, there
still exist two main challenges. Since most existing work-

13369

