Influence Selection for Active Learning
Zhuoming Liu* †1 , Hao Ding* †2 , Huaping Zhong3 , Weijia Li‡3,4 , Jifeng Dai3 , and Conghui He3
1

University Southern California
2
Johns Hopkins University
3
SenseTime Research
4
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
liuzhuom@usc.edu, hding15@jhu.edu, wjli@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Active learning is a kind of sampling algorithm that
aims to reduce the annotation cost by helping the model
to achieve better performance with fewer labeled training
samples. In those areas with a limited annotation budget or
the areas that need large amounts of labeled samples, active
learning plays an important and irreplaceable role. However, unlike the rapid progress of weakly supervised learning and semi-supervised learning, the development of active
* This work was done during their internship at SenseTime Research.
† Equal contribution.
‡ Corresponding author

෡
𝜽

Bird Pred Acc: + 0.5
Dog Pred Acc: + 0.1
Cat Pred Acc: + 0.2
Loss on 𝑹: −𝟏.7

Positive
Influence

Bird Pred Acc: − 0.6
Dog Pred Acc: − 0.3 Negative
Cat Pred Acc: − 0.1 Influence
Loss on 𝑹: +𝟐.7
෡ −𝟏
−𝑯−𝟏
෡ 𝑮𝒛𝟐 = 1.1
෡ 𝑮𝒛𝟐 = [−𝟎. 𝟐, −𝟎. 𝟗, ⋯ , −𝟎. 𝟑] −𝜵𝜽 𝒍(𝑹, 𝜽)𝑯𝜽
𝜽

෡
𝜽

sample 𝒛𝟐

෡ −𝟏
−𝜵𝜽 𝒍(𝑹, 𝜽)𝑯
෡ 𝑮𝒛𝟏 = − 1.9
𝜽

classifier

1. Introduction

−𝑯−𝟏
෡ 𝑮𝒛𝟏 = [𝟎. 𝟏, 𝟏. 𝟐, ⋯ , 𝟎. 𝟒]
𝜽

classifier

The existing active learning methods select the samples
by evaluating the sample’s uncertainty or its effect on the
diversity of labeled datasets based on different task-specific
or model-specific criteria. In this paper, we propose the Influence Selection for Active Learning(ISAL) which selects
the unlabeled samples that can provide the most positive influence on model performance. To obtain the influence of
the unlabeled sample in the active learning scenario, we
design the Untrained Unlabeled sample Influence Calculation(UUIC) to estimate the unlabeled sample’s expected
gradient with which we calculate its influence. To prove
the effectiveness of UUIC, we provide both theoretical and
experimental analyses. Since the UUIC just depends on
the model gradients, which can be obtained easily from
any neural network, our active learning algorithm is taskagnostic and model-agnostic. ISAL achieves state-of-theart performance in different active learning settings for different tasks with different datasets. Compared with previous
methods, our method decreases the annotation cost at least
by 12%, 13% and 16% on CIFAR10, VOC2012 and COCO,
respectively.

sample 𝒛𝟏

Influence on model
parameters

Influence on model
performance

Figure 1: Using UUIC to calculate the influence of unlabeled samples. These two samples will be annotated as
’Bird’ if they are selected. In UUIC, we calculate the influence of the sample by calculating −∇θ l(R, θ̂)T Hθ̂−1 Gzi .
The more negative the influence value is, the more positive
influence on model performance the sample provides. Base
on the result from UUIC, our ISAL algorithm selects the
sample z1 for annotation.
learning is limited. Especially in the computer vision area,
most of the existing active learning algorithms are restricted
to the image classification problem.
Given a pool of unlabeled images, different active
learning algorithms evaluate the importance of each image with different criteria, which can be divided into
uncertainty-based methods and diversity-based methods.
The uncertainty-based methods [19, 14, 34, 8, 40] use
different criteria to evaluate the uncertainty of an image
and select the images that the trained model is less confident about. However, the neural network shows overconfidence [13] toward the unfamiliar samples, indicating
that using the uncertainty to estimate the samples’ importance may not be accurate, deteriorating the performance of
the active learning algorithm.
The diversity-based methods [24, 39, 10, 31] aim to select a subset from the whole unlabeled dataset with the

9274

