Group-wise Inhibition based Feature Regularization for Robust Classification
Haozhe Liu† , Haoqian Wu† , Weicheng Xie∗ , Feng Liu∗ , Linlin Shen
Computer Vision Institute, College of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
2
SZU Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China

1

{liuhaozhe2019, wuhaoqian2019}@email.szu.edu.cn, {wcxie,feng.liu,llshen}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advances in convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have led to far-reaching improvements in computer
vision tasks [11, 20]. However, vulnerability of CNNs to
image variations, including image corruptions [10] and adversarial samples [8], has not been well resolved yet. Researchers are thus exploring various ways to improve the
network robustness against these variations.
Adversarial training [10, 30, 32] is a typical solution to
improve the robustness of CNNs, which includes the at† Equal Contribution
∗ Corresponding Author

H

Plane-1

H

H

Plane-1

Plane-1

(a) Regular Training (b) Adversarial Training (c) Aug. & Regularization
Plane-3

The convolutional neural network (CNN) is vulnerable
to degraded images with even very small variations (e.g.
corrupted and adversarial samples). One of the possible
reasons is that CNN pays more attention to the most discriminative regions, but ignores the auxiliary features when
learning, leading to the lack of feature diversity for final
judgment. In our method, we propose to dynamically suppress significant activation values of CNN by group-wise
inhibition, but not fixedly or randomly handle them when
training. The feature maps with different activation distribution are then processed separately to take the feature
independence into account. CNN is finally guided to learn
richer discriminative features hierarchically for robust classification according to the proposed regularization. Our
method is comprehensively evaluated under multiple settings, including classification against corruptions, adversarial attacks and low data regime. Extensive experimental
results show that the proposed method can achieve significant improvements in terms of both robustness and generalization performances, when compared with the state-of-theart methods. Code is available at https://github.
com/LinusWu/TENET_Training.

Extracted
Features
Map to
Feature Space

Plane-1

H

Trained with
Proposed Method
Class A

Class B

Adversarial Samples
Corrupted Sample
H

(d1) Feature Space

H
H

Hard Adversarial Sample
Decision Boundary

(d2) Projection on Plane-3 (d3) Projection on Plane-2

(d) Feature Regularization Motivation of the Proposed Method

Figure 1. Some solutions to improve the robustness of CNN. Unlike with the regular training (a), adversarial training (b) widely
utilizes adversarial samples to train a robust CNN. Data augmentation and regularization based method (c) improves the robustness
performance by filling up new samples surrounding the decision
boundary. The proposed regularization method (d) enables network to increase the representation space (e.g. red auxiliary axis
in d1) of the features learned by the CNN, and achieves better robustness against corrupted and adversarial samples, with various
projections on new planes (e.g. d2 and d3). Best viewed in color.

tacked samples into the training data, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
Since adversarial training may impair the generalization
performance, there is often an inherent trade-off between
classification accuracy and adversarial robustness [29, 30].
In order to improve the robustness and generalization simultaneously, data augmentation and regularization methods (e.g. Random Erasing [33], Augmix [14], Cutout[7],

478

