Image Synthesis from Layout with Locality-Aware Mask Adaption
Zejian Li1 , Jingyu Wu1 , Immanuel Koh2 , Yongchuan Tang1 , Lingyun Sun1,3
1
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, Zhejiang University
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design
3
Collaborative Innovation Center of AI by MOE and Zhejiang Provincial Government
{zejianlee, wujingyu}@zju.edu.cn, immanuel koh@sutd.edu.sg, {yctang, sunly}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper is concerned with synthesizing images conditioned on a layout (a set of bounding boxes with object categories). Existing works construct a layout-maskimage pipeline. Object masks are generated separately and
mapped to bounding boxes to form a whole semantic segmentation mask (layout-to-mask), with which a new image
is generated (mask-to-image). However, overlapped boxes
in layouts result in overlapped object masks, which reduces
the mask clarity and causes confusion in image generation.
We hypothesize the importance of generating clean and semantically clear semantic masks. The hypothesis is supported by the finding that the performance of state-of-theart LostGAN decreases when input masks are tainted. Motivated by this hypothesis, we propose Locality-Aware Mask
Adaption (LAMA) module to adapt overlapped or nearby
object masks in the generation. Experimental results show
our proposed model with LAMA outperforms existing approaches regarding visual fidelity and alignment with input
layouts. On COCO-stuff in 256×256, our method improves
the state-of-the-art FID score from 41.65 to 31.12 and the
SceneFID from 22.00 to 18.64.

(a) Input layout

(b) Generated masks

Mask
Generation

(c) Generated images

Image
Generation

1. Introduction

(d) Generation process

This paper is concerned with image generation from layouts, a specific task of conditional image synthesis. A layout is a set of bounding boxes with object categories, representing the positions, sizes and classes of objects in an image. The layout-to-image generation task is to convert the
bounding boxes to a photorealistic image without segmentation annotation [37]. This task remains a challenging problem but provides a promising approach to understanding visual relations in images via analysis-by-synthesis. It also
has a wide range of applications such as human-computer
collaborative creation, where a potentially desired picture is
generated according to the layout given by a human.
Existing works construct an effective layout-mask-image

Figure 1. An illustration of image generation from layouts
(bounding boxes with categories). Based on the input layout as
shown in column (a), the generator first synthesizes a semantic
mask in (b) and then translates the mask to an image in (c). (d)
summarizes the generation process. Masks and images are generated by our model with the Locality-Aware Mask Adaption.

pipeline [32, 38]. As a layout only provides a coarse configuration of the desired image, a semantic segmentation
mask is generated first and then translated to the final image
(Fig. 1). A semantic segmentation mask specifies the category distribution of each pixel [7]. In the degraded and simple case, each pixel belongs to only a single category. How-

13819

