D2-Net: Weakly-Supervised Action Localization via Discriminative Embeddings
and Denoised Activations
Sanath Narayan1
1

Hisham Cholakkal2 Munawar Hayat3 Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,4
Ming-Hsuan Yang5,6,7 Ling Shao1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
4

Linköping University

5

2

Mohamed Bin Zayed University of AI

University of California, Merced

Abstract
This work proposes a weakly-supervised temporal action
localization framework, called D2-Net, which strives to
temporally localize actions using video-level supervision.
Our main contribution is the introduction of a novel loss
formulation, which jointly enhances the discriminability of
latent embeddings and robustness of the output temporal
class activations with respect to foreground-background
noise caused by weak supervision. The proposed formulation comprises a discriminative and a denoising loss term
for enhancing temporal action localization. The discriminative term incorporates a classification loss and utilizes
a top-down attention mechanism to enhance the separability of latent foreground-background embeddings. The
denoising loss term explicitly addresses the foregroundbackground noise in class activations by simultaneously
maximizing intra-video and inter-video mutual information
using a bottom-up attention mechanism. As a result, activations in the foreground regions are emphasized whereas
those in the background regions are suppressed, thereby
leading to more robust predictions. Comprehensive experiments are performed on multiple benchmarks, including
THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.2. Our D2-Net performs
favorably in comparison to the existing methods on all
datasets, achieving gains as high as 2.3% in terms of mAP
at IoU=0.5 on THUMOS14. Source code is available at
https://github.com/naraysa/D2-Net.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization is a challenging problem,
which aims to jointly classify and localize the temporal boundaries of actions in videos. Most existing approaches [37, 5, 36, 30, 43, 32] are based on strong supervision, requiring manually annotated temporal boundaries
of actions during training. In contrast to these strong framelevel supervision based methods, weakly-supervised action

6

Google Research

7

3

Monash University

Yonsei University

localization learns to localize actions in videos, leveraging
only video-level supervision. Weakly-supervised action localization is therefore of greater importance since the manual
annotation of temporal boundaries in videos is laborious, expensive and prone to large variations [28, 27].
Existing methods [33, 34, 23, 25, 31] for weaklysupervised action localization typically use video-level annotations in the form of action classes and learn a sequence of
class-specific scores, called temporal class activation maps
(TCAMs). In general, a classification loss is used to obtain
the discriminative foreground regions in TCAMs. Some approaches [23, 25, 22, 24] learn TCAMs using action labels
and obtain temporal boundaries via a post-processing step,
while others [31, 15] use a TCAM-generating video classification branch along with an explicit localization branch
to directly regress action boundaries. Nevertheless, the localization performance is heavily dependent on the quality of the TCAMs. The quality of TCAMs is likely to improve in fully-supervised settings where frame-level annotations are available. Such frame-level information (true
foreground and background regions) are unavailable in the
weakly-supervised paradigm. In such a paradigm, the predicted foreground regions often overlap with the groundtruth background regions, while predicted background regions are likely to overlap with the ground-truth foreground
regions. This leads to noisy activations, i.e., false positives
and false negatives, in the learned TCAMs. Most existing
weakly-supervised action localization methods that learn
TCAMs typically rely on separating foreground and background regions (foreground-background separation) and do
not explicitly handle its noisy outputs.
In this work, we address the problem of foregroundbackground separation along with explicit tackling of noise
in TCAMs for weakly-supervised action localization. We
propose a unified loss formulation that is jointly optimized
to classify and temporally localize action snippets (group
of frames) in videos. Our loss formulation comprises a discriminative and a denoising loss term. The discriminative
loss seeks to maximally separate backgrounds from actions

13608

