Extreme-Quality Computational Imaging via Degradation Framework
Shiqi Chen, Huajun Feng, Keming Gao, Zhihai Xu, Yueting Chen
State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{chenshiqi, fenghj, gaokeming, xuzh, chenyt}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
To meet the space limitation of optical elements, freeform surfaces or high-order aspherical lenses are adopted
in mobile cameras to compress volume. However, the application of free-form surfaces also introduces the problem of
image quality mutation. Existing model-based deconvolution methods are inefﬁcient in dealing with the degradation
that shows a wide range of spatial variants over regions.
And the deep learning techniques in low-level and physicsbased vision suffer from a lack of accurate data. To address
this issue, we develop a degradation framework to estimate
the spatially variant point spread functions (PSFs) of mobile cameras. When input extreme-quality digital images,
the proposed framework generates degraded images sharing a common domain with real-world photographs. Supplied with the synthetic image pairs, we design a Field-OfView shared kernel prediction network (FOV-KPN) to perform spatial-adaptive reconstruction on real degraded photos. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
approach achieves extreme-quality computational imaging
and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore,
we illustrate that our technique can be integrated into existing postprocessing systems, resulting in signiﬁcantly improved visual quality.

1. Introduction
Combined with powerful hardware and manual-made
image signal processing (ISP) systems, mobile cameras
have achieved great success. Recently, smartphones have
become the primary source of photographs, and the pursuit
of better imaging results has increased even more. However,
to meet the space limitation of lenses, high-order aspherical
lenses or free-form surfaces are applied in mobile cameras.
Most of them aim to compress the volume of wide-angle
lenses [17], but in the meanwhile, they also introduce the
problem of image quality mutation (as shown in Fig. 2).
Recent cameras have shifted some of these correction
tasks from lens design to ISP systems to correct this abrupt

(b) Degraded

(a) Image captured by HUAWEI HONOR 20

(d) ZMX+ FOV-KPN (e) DF + SelfDeblur

(f) DF + KPN

(c) HUAWEI ISP

(g) DF + FOV-KPN

Figure 1. The reconstructions of a real-world image (a) captured
by HUAWEI HONOR 20. (b) is the primary degradation, (c) is the
output of HUAWEI ISP. Results of the proposed FOV-KPN model
trained using image pairs simulated by (d) Zemax (ZMX). (e),
(f), and (g) are the restorations of SelfDeblur [39], KPN [31], and
FOV-KPN model (Ours), respectively, all of them trained on the
data generated by our degradation framework (DF).

degradation. However, different steps of the traditional ISP
are independent of each other, where errors accumulate and
magnify in the following steps. So for the postprocessing
pipeline, how to accurately estimate the abrupt degradation
and correct it are the keys to reconstruction.
One approach is to estimate the camera intrinsic degradation kernel through iterative optimization [33]. However,
for the PSFs that show a wide range of spatial variation
over regions, optimization methods have difﬁculty converging. The other way is reconstructing the degraded image
with deep learning method [20], which depends heavily on
the accuracy of data pairs. Moreover, because the degradation of diverse cameras is different, it is urgent to develop
feasible and convenient approaches to generate the training data designed for each camera. In [37], the researchers

2632

