Objects as Cameras: Estimating High-Frequency Illumination from Shadows

Tristan Swedish, Connor Henley, and Ramesh Raskar
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
{tswedish, co24401, raskar}@mit.edu

Abstract
We recover high-frequency information encoded in the
shadows cast by an object to estimate a hemispherical photograph from the viewpoint of the object, effectively turning objects into cameras. Estimating environment maps is
useful for advanced image editing tasks such as relighting,
object insertion or removal, and material parameter estimation. Because the problem is ill-posed, recent works
in illumination recovery have tackled the problem of lowfrequency lighting for object insertion, rely upon specular
surface materials, or make use of data-driven methods that
are susceptible to hallucination without physically plausible constraints. We incorporate an optimization scheme
to update scene parameters that could enable practical
capture of real-world scenes. Furthermore, we develop a
methodology for evaluating expected recovery performance
for different types and shapes of objects.

1. Introduction
Consider a small object sitting on a desk in your living
room. The object is illuminated by light sources from all
directions—this includes direct sources such as the sun or
overhead lights, but also indirect sources, like the foliage
outside that scatters sunlight through your window. The appearance of the object and the surface that it rests upon results from the complex interaction between the incident illumination and the geometry and material properties of the
object and the desk. In this paper we ask the question—if
the geometry and material properties of the observed scene
are known, how well can we reconstruct the incident illumination pattern?
If we assume that the illumination sources are distant relative to the size of the observed object, then we can represent this illumination as a hemispherical photograph taken
from the perspective of the object. Thus, by using our

Figure 1. (Top) Observing the area around a small, bunny-shaped
object (top-left), can we recover occluded viewpoints only visible
from the bunny’s perspective? (Bottom) Given the surface geometry of an object (bottom-left), we estimate the incident illumination, and in some cases, the unknown diffuse albedo of the surface
surrounding the object.

knowledge about an object to accurately estimate the illumination incident upon it, we effectively turn the object into
a camera.
In this paper, we primarily make use of shadows cast by
an object onto nearby surfaces. Cast shadows are particularly easy to interpret when an object is illuminated from a
single direction. For example, one can immediately determine the position of the sun by looking at a sundial. Estimating the illumination incident from all directions simultaneously is more challenging, and is a linear but ill-posed
inverse problem.

2593

