ReconfigISP: Reconfigurable Camera Image Processing Pipeline
Ke Yu1,2
1

Zexian Li1,3

SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
3

Beihang University

4

Yue Peng1
2

Chen Change Loy4

Jinwei Gu1,5

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

ericyu16@hotmail.com

Image Signal Processor (ISP) is a crucial component
in digital cameras that transforms sensor signals into images for us to perceive and understand. Existing ISP designs always adopt a fixed architecture, e.g., several sequential modules connected in a rigid order. Such a fixed
ISP architecture may be suboptimal for real-world applications, where camera sensors, scenes and tasks are diverse.
In this study, we propose a novel Reconfigurable ISP (ReconfigISP) whose architecture and parameters can be automatically tailored to specific data and tasks. In particular, we implement several ISP modules, and enable backpropagation for each module by training a differentiable
proxy, hence allowing us to leverage the popular differentiable neural architecture search and effectively search for
the optimal ISP architecture. A proxy tuning mechanism is
adopted to maintain the accuracy of proxy networks in all
cases. Extensive experiments conducted on image restoration and object detection, with different sensors, light conditions and efficiency constraints, validate the effectiveness
of ReconfigISP. Only hundreds of parameters need tuning
for every task1 .

1. Introduction
A digital camera uses an ISP to transform original
RAW images to high-quality RGB images that can be displayed on screen. Existing ISP systems typically adopt
a human-designed pipeline [16] comprised of specialized
modules, each of which addresses a subtask, such as denoising [12, 22], demosaicing [11, 17], white balancing [13],
etc. Traditional ISP is highly modular and efficient. However, once the pipeline is fixed, it can hardly be adapted to
different application scenarios. A costly and manual tuning
of parameters is required.
In this study, our goal is to keep the modular design of
the traditional ISP, but learn a reconfigurable ISP architec1 Codes and models are available at https://www.mmlab-ntu.
com/project/reconfigisp/

Shanghai AI Laboratory

lizexian0427@gmail.com

{pengyue, gujinwei}@tetras.ai

Abstract

5

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

ture that can quickly adapt to various tasks (e.g., restoration
and object detection), scenes (e.g., daytime and nighttime)
and runtime constraints. To this end, we present a novel
and versatile reconfigurable ISP framework, named ReconfigISP. The proposed framework allows changes and rerouting in the ISP architecture, i.e., what basic modules should
be chosen and how they are connected, optimized towards
designated objective functions. Given the flexibility, specialized modules can be combined to generate numerous
ISP pipelines to handle various application scenarios, but
still preserving the modularity and parameters of each module. Experimental results show that our framework achieves
a significant improvement over traditional camera pipelines
(Sec. 4). Examples are shown in Fig. 1.
Searching for an optimal ISP pipeline is a new and interesting problem. In this work, we make several technical contributions to address some of the non-trivial challenges: (1) Tunable ISP modules - Most existing ISP modules are non-differentiable. As a result, the parameters of
these modules cannot be efficiently optimized with endto-end training, making the search for optimal pipeline intractable. To address this issue, we use a convolutional neural network to imitate each non-differentiable module. The
proxy network observes input images and module parameters, together with global image statistics that the module
may need. The network is trained to resemble the output
of the original non-differentiable module. With all modules differentiable, the ISP architecture can be efficiently
explored with the help of neural architecture search. (2)
Proxy tuning and online pruning - With the aforementioned
framework, we still need to resolve the gap in data distribution. In particular, the data we use for ISP architecture
search depend on the target task, and they might be unseen
to a pre-trained proxy network. To mitigate the domain gap,
we devise an effective proxy tuning approach – fine-tuning
proxy networks with the observed fresh data on the fly during ISP architecture search. Our approach updates the ISP
architecture and proxy networks alternately. And it gradually prunes modules with low performance to accelerate the

4248

