Few-shot Image Classification: Just Use a Library of Pre-trained Feature
Extractors and a Simple Classifier
Arkabandhu Chowdhury1 , Mingchao Jiang1 , Swarat Chaudhuri2 , and Chris Jermaine1
1

Rice University, 2 University of Texas, Austin

Abstract
Recent papers have suggested that transfer learning can
outperform sophisticated meta-learning methods for fewshot image classification. We take this hypothesis to its
logical conclusion, and suggest the use of an ensemble of
high-quality, pre-trained feature extractors for few-shot image classification. We show experimentally that a library of
pre-trained feature extractors combined with a simple feedforward network learned with an L2-regularizer can be an
excellent option for solving cross-domain few-shot image
classification. Our experimental results suggest that this
simple approach far outperforms several well-established
meta-learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
There has been a lot of recent interest in few-shot image
classification [5, 15, 17, 6, 7, 12, 19, 16]. Various papers
have explored different formulations of the problem, but in
one general formulation, we are given a data set Dtrn of
(image, label) pairs sampled from a distribution Ptrn . The
goal is to devise a method that uses Dtrn to learn a function
f that is itself a few-shot learner. The few-shot learner f
takes as input a new labeled data set Dfew consisting of a
set of samples from a new distribution Pfew ̸= Ptrn . f
then returns a classification function g, which is targeted at
classifying samples from the distribution Pfew .
The process of learning f is often referred to as metalearning in the literature. Learning to classify samples from
Pfew is a “few shot” problem when Dfew is small, perhaps
having only one example for each class produced by Pfew .
In the most difficult and generally applicable variant of the
few-shot problem—which we consider in this paper—Pfew
has no known relationship to Ptrn (this is “cross-domain”
few-shot learning) and Dfew is not available while learning f . Thus, the meta-learning process has no access to
information about the eventual application. The only information we have about Pfew is the set Dfew , and this is

available only when constructing g. We cannot, for example, choose any hyperparameters controlling the learning of
g using information not extracted from Dfew .
Our goal is to devise a learner f that works well, outof-the-box, on virtually any new distribution Pfew . We argue that in such a scenario, developing novel meta-learning
methods to learn f from scratch on given Dtrn may not
be the most productive direction of inquiry. Because no
information about Pfew is available during meta-learning,
it makes sense to choose a Dtrn that has many different
types of images, so it is likely to contain some images
with features similar to those produced by Pfew , whatever
form this distribution takes. Fortunately, in computer image classification, the standard benchmark data set is now
ILSVRC2012, a 1000-class version of the full ImageNet
[22]. ILSVRC2012 consists of a wide variety of images,
and it has become quite standard for researchers who design and train new image classifiers to publish classifiers
trained on ILSVRC2012. Such published artifacts represent thousands of hours of work by researchers who are
well-versed in the “black art” of wringing every last percent of accuracy out of a deep CNN. Instead of developing new meta-learning methods, it may be more productive
to simply fix Dtrn = ILSVRC2012, and attempt to leverage all of the effort that has gone into learning deep CNNs
over ILSVRC2012, by using those CNNs as the basis for
the few-shot learner f . As other, even more wide-ranging
and difficult benchmark data sets become prevalent (such as
the full, 20,000+ class ImageNet), high-quality classifiers
trained using that data set may be preferred.
We first show that it is possible to use any of a number of published, high-quality, deep CNNs, learned over
ILSVRC2012, as the basis for a few-shot learner that significantly outperforms state-of-the art methods. The way to
do this is embarrassingly simple: remove the classifier from
the top of the deep CNN, fix the weights of the remaining
deep feature extractor, and replace the classifier with a simple MLP that is trained using L2 regularization to prevent
over-fitting. We call these “library-based” learners because

9445

