Mixed SIGNals: Sign Language Production via a Mixture of Motion Primitives
Ben Saunders, Necati Cihan Camgoz, Richard Bowden
University of Surrey
{b.saunders, n.camgoz, r.bowden}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
It is common practice to represent spoken languages
at their phonetic level. However, for sign languages, this
implies breaking motion into its constituent motion primitives. Avatar based Sign Language Production (SLP) has
traditionally done just this, building up animation from sequences of hand motions, shapes and facial expressions.
However, more recent deep learning based solutions to SLP
have tackled the problem using a single network that estimates the full skeletal structure.
We propose splitting the SLP task into two distinct
jointly-trained sub-tasks. The first translation sub-task
translates from spoken language to a latent sign language
representation, with gloss supervision. Subsequently, the
animation sub-task aims to produce expressive sign language sequences that closely resemble the learnt spatiotemporal representation. Using a progressive transformer
for the translation sub-task, we propose a novel Mixture of
Motion Primitives (M O MP) architecture for sign language
animation. A set of distinct motion primitives are learnt
during training, that can be temporally combined at inference to animate continuous sign language sequences.
We evaluate on the challenging RWTH-PHOENIXWeather-2014T (PHOENIX14T) dataset, presenting extensive ablation studies and showing that M O MP outperforms
baselines in user evaluations. We achieve state-of-the-art
back translation performance with an 11% improvement
over competing results. Importantly, and for the first time,
we showcase stronger performance for a full translation
pipeline going from spoken language to sign, than from
gloss to sign.

1. Introduction
Sign languages are visual languages used for communication by the Deaf communities. Analogous to phonemes in
speech, sign languages can be broken down into cheremes,
the smallest distinctive structural units [58]. Cheremes can
be represented as motion primitives, a set of manual and

Sign Language Glosses

Transla on
Progressive
Transformer

Anima on
Mixture of
Mo on Primi ves

Spoken Language Sentence

Figure 1: An overview of the proposed SLP sub-tasks of
Translation and Animation.

non-manual motions1 that are combined to represent all sign
language utterances. Such phonetic representations are typically used by linguists for annotation [29, 62] or in graphical based avatars for sign generation.
Sign Language Production (SLP), the translation from
spoken language sentences to continuous sign language
sequences, requires both an accurate translation and expressive animation. Previous work has traditionally tackled these two sub-task as a single task with one network
[52, 59, 68], leading to under-expressive production. Although previous SLP models have used gloss2 as an intermediate representation [60], this creates an information bottleneck that disregards the contextual information available
in the original text.
In this paper, we propose to formulate SLP as two distinct but jointly-trained sub-tasks as can be seen in Figure 1:
1) An initial translation from spoken language to a sign language representation, with gloss supervision; 2) Subsequent
animation of a visual sign language sequence. This can be
viewed as analogous to a text-to-speech pipeline with an
initial translation into phonemes and a subsequent vocalisation. However, we do not force a gloss information bottleneck but instead condition learning on gloss, resulting in
1 Manual features are the hand shape and motion, whereas non-manuals
are the mouthings and facial expressions
2 Glosses are a written sign representation of sign, defined as minimal
lexical items.

1919

