Attack as the Best Defense: Nullifying Image-to-image Translation GANs
via Limit-aware Adversarial Attack
Chin-Yuan Yeh1,3 , Hsi-Wen Chen1 , Hong-Han Shuai2 , De-Nian Yang3 , Ming-Syan Chen1
1
National Taiwan University 2 National Yangming Jiaotong University 3 Academia Sinica
{d09942009, d09921004, mschen} @ntu.edu.tw hhshuai@g2.nctu.edu.tw dnyang@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Due to the great success of image-to-image (Img2Img)
translation GANs, many applications with ethics issues
arise, e.g., DeepFake and DeepNude, presenting a challenging problem to prevent the misuse of these techniques.
In this work, we tackle the problem by a new adversarial
attack scheme, namely the Nullifying Attack, which cancels the image translation process and proposes a corresponding framework, the Limit-Aware Self-Guiding Gradient Sliding Attack (LaS-GSA) under a black-box setting.
In other words, by processing the image with the proposed
LaS-GSA before publishing, any image translation functions can be nullified, which prevents the images from malicious manipulations. First, we introduce the limit-aware
RGF and the gradient sliding mechanism to estimate the
gradient that adheres to the adversarial limit, i.e., the pixel
value limitations of the adversarial example. We theoretically prove that our model is able to avoid the error caused
by the projection in both the direction and the length. Then,
an effective self-guiding prior is extracted solely from the
threat model and the target image to efficiently leverage the
prior information and guide the gradient estimation process. Extensive experiments demonstrate that LaS-GSA requires fewer queries to nullify the image translation process
with higher success rates than 4 state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13]
have achieved impressive breakthroughs on various imageto-image translation (Img2Img) tasks, including inpainting [25] and style transfer [33]. These models learn the
cross-domain mapping by ensuring that the style of translated images is close to the image style of the target domain
while the semantics of the input image are still preserved,
e.g., the identity or the layout.
1 Due to ethical reasons, the illustrative examples utilizes hairchanging model BLACK 2 BLOND, instead of DeepNude [31].

Figure 1: An illustration of nullifying attack against
Img2Img GAN. The original portrait is initially manipulated by model BLACK 2 BLOND to impaint the portrait
image with blond hair.1 After the nullifying attack, LaSGSA adds human imperceptible perturbation to the original image and generate an attacked image, which leads the
Img2Img GAN to return the nullified image with black hair
identical to the original image.

However, Img2Img GANs have also been misused to
generate fake images, i.e., DeepFake [16] and DeepNude [12]. For example, DeepNude excels in undressing
full-body shots and producing realistic nude images. Facing the threat of these immoral algorithms, a simple way is
to detect DeepFake contents [26, 31] after the fake images
are released. However, even though those post-detection
methods can catch the footprints of DeepFake, the manipulated images have already harmed each individual’s reputation. Our idea is to defend personal privacy in the first place
by nullifying the translation process of misused Img2Img
GANs. We aim to attach human-imperceptible perturbations to input images, such that the attacked image can be
refrained from being immorally manipulated (to produce
obscene images with DeepFake). Thus, our goal is to conduct adversarial attacks against misused Img2Img GANs.

16188

