Visual Transformers: Where Do Transformers Really Belong in Vision Models?
Bichen Wu1 , Chenfeng Xu2 , Xiaoliang Dai1 , Alvin Wan2 , Peizhao Zhang1 , Zhicheng Yan1 ,
Masayoshi Tomizuka2 , Joseph Gonzalez2 , Kurt Keutzer2 , Peter Vajda1
Facebook Inc, 2 University of California, Berkeley
{wbc, xiaoliangdai, stzpz, zyan3, vajdap}@fb.com,
{xuchenfeng, alvinwan, tomizuka, jegonzal, keutzer}@berkeley.edu
1

Abstract
A recent trend in computer vision is to replace convolutions with transformers. However, the performance gain
of transformers is attained at a steep cost, requiring GPU
years and hundreds of millions of samples for training.
This excessive resource usage compensates for a misuse
of transformers: Transformers densely model relationships
between its inputs – ideal for late stages of a neural network, when concepts are sparse and spatially-distant, but
extremely inefficient for early stages of a network, when
patterns are redundant and localized. To address these issues, we leverage the respective strengths of both operations, building convolution-transformer hybrids. Critically,
in sharp contrast to pixel-space transformers, our Visual
Transformer (VT) operates in a semantic token space, judiciously attending to different image parts based on context.
Our VTs significantly outperforms baselines: On ImageNet,
our VT-ResNets outperform convolution-only ResNet by 4.6
to 7 points and transformer-only ViT-B by 2.6 points with
2.5× fewer FLOPs, 2.1× fewer parameters. For semantic segmentation on LIP and COCO-stuff, VT-based feature
pyramid networks (FPN) achieve 0.35 points higher mIoU
while reducing the FPN module’s FLOPs by 6.5x.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, visual information is captured as arrays of pixels. These pixel arrays are then processed by
convolutions, the de facto deep learning operator for computer vision. Although this convention has produced highly
successful vision models, there are critical challenges:
1) Not all pixels are created equal: Image classification
models should prioritize foreground objects over the background. Segmentation models should prioritize pedestrians
over disproportionately large swaths of sky, road, vegetation etc. Nevertheless, convolutions uniformly process all
image patches regardless of importance. This leads to spa-

tial inefficiency in both computation and representation.
2) Not all images have all concepts: Low-level features
such as corners and edges exist in all natural images, so applying low-level convolutional filters to all images is appropriate. However, high-level features such as ear shape exist
in specific images, so applying high-level filters to all images is computationally inefficient. For example, dog features may not appear in images of flowers, vehicles, aquatic
animals etc. This results in rarely-used, inapplicable filters
expending a significant amount of compute.
3) Convolutions struggle to relate spatially-distant
concepts: Each convolutional filter is constrained to operate on a small region, but long-range interactions between
semantic concepts is vital. To relate spatially-distant concepts, previous approaches increase kernel sizes, increase
model depth, or adopt new operations like dilated convolutions, global pooling, and non-local attention layers. However, by working within the pixel-convolution paradigm,
these approaches at best mitigate the problem, compensating for the convolution by adding model complexity.
To overcome the above challenges, we address the root
cause and introduce the Visual Transformer (VT) (Figure
1) to represent and process high-level concepts in images.
Our intuition is that a sentence with a few words (or visual tokens) suffices to describe high-level concepts in a
late-stage feature map. This motivates a departure from
the fixed pixel-array representation later in the network; instead, we use spatial attention to convert the feature map
into a compact set of semantic tokens. We then feed these
tokens to a self-attention module or transformer [39] to capture token interactions. The resulting visual tokens computed can be directly used for image-level prediction tasks
(e.g., classification) or be spatially re-projected to the feature map for pixel-level prediction tasks (e.g., segmentation). Unlike late-stage convolutions, our VT addresses the
three challenges: 1) judiciously allocating computation by
attending to important regions, instead of treating all pixels
equally; 2) encoding semantic concepts in a few visual to-

599

