Robust Small Object Detection on the Water Surface
through Fusion of Camera and Millimeter Wave Radar

1

Yuwei Cheng1,2 , Hu Xu2,3 , Yimin Liu1
Tsinghua University, 2 ORCA-Uboat, 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University

chengyw18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuhu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, yiminliu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) have
been experiencing growth in various applications. With the
expansion of USVs’ application scenes from the typical marine areas to inland waters, new challenges arise for the object detection task, which is an essential part of the perception system of USVs. In our work, we focus on a relatively
unexplored task for USVs in inland waters: small object
detection on water surfaces, which is of vital importance
for safe autonomous navigation and USVs’ certain missions
such as floating waste cleaning. Considering the limitations
of vision-based object detection, we propose a novel radarvision fusion based method for robust small object detection
on water surfaces. By using a novel representation format
of millimeter wave radar point clouds and applying a deeplevel multi-scale fusion of RGB images and radar data, the
proposed method can efficiently utilize the characteristics
of radar data and improve the accuracy and robustness for
small object detection on water surfaces. We test the method
on the real-world floating bottle dataset that we collected
and released. The result shows that, our method improves
the average detection accuracy significantly compared to
the vision-based methods and achieves state-of-the-art performance. Besides, the proposed method performs robustly
when single sensor degrades.

1. Introduction
In recent years, unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) have
attracted increasing attention and are gradually used for
various autonomous activities on water surfaces such as
oceanographic research [7], transportation [41], water quality monitoring [19], floating waste removal [32, 36, 1], etc.
Similar to autonomous vehicles on the road, to enable
safe navigation and efficient autonomous operation, accurate and robust environmental perception is of vital importance for USVs. Small object detection on water surfaces
is an important task for USVs environmental perception. It

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method for small object detection for USVs. Our method utilizes the fusion of RGB images
and MMW radar data for small object detection of USVs, which
can be applied for USVs’ certain missions and safe navigation.

can be applied to USVs for avoiding small obstacles like
buoys and reefs, and plays an important role in USVs’ certain missions such as autonomous floating waste detection
and cleaning. Vision can provide rich semantic information
and is widely used for object detection of USVs. However,
unlike autonomous vehicles on the road, there are three
main challenges for vision-based small objects detection on
water surfaces:
- Light reflection on the water surface. As shown in Figure 2(a), the strong light reflection on the water surface can
cause high illumination and overexposed image. The small
objects like the floating bottles can be shaded by water halos
or fused with the background due to overexposure.
- Surrounding scene reflection interference. As shown in
Figure 2(b), in some cases such like the small object detection in inland waters, the reflection of the constructions and
vegetation on banks increase the complexity of separating
the target from the background.
- A short detection range. A long detection range can
significantly improve the safety of navigation and the working efficiency of USVs. However, as the size of the target is
small, when the target is far from the camera, the number of
occupied pixels of the target in RGB images becomes much
less as shown in Figure 2(c).
With the increasing demands towards environmental perception for autonomous vehicles, in addition to the visionbased system, object detection based on other sensors like

15263

