GeomNet: A Neural Network Based on Riemannian Geometries of SPD Matrix
Space and Cholesky Space for 3D Skeleton-Based Interaction Recognition
Xuan Son Nguyen
ETIS UMR 8051, CY Cergy Paris Université, ENSEA, CNRS, F-95000, Cergy, France
xuan-son.nguyen@ensea.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method for representation and classification of two-person interactions from 3D
skeleton sequences. The key idea of our approach is to use
Gaussian distributions to capture statistics on Rn and those
on the space of symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices.
The main challenge is how to parametrize those distributions. Towards this end, we develop methods for embedding
Gaussian distributions in matrix groups based on the theory of Lie groups and Riemannian symmetric spaces. Our
method relies on the Riemannian geometry of the underlying manifolds and has the advantage of encoding highorder statistics from 3D joint positions. We show that the
proposed method achieves competitive results in two-person
interaction recognition on three benchmarks for 3D human
activity understanding.

1. Introduction
3D skeleton-based action recognition has been an active
research topic in recent years with many potential applications. In this work, we focus on 3D skeleton-based twoperson interaction recognition (3DTPIR). Compared to a
large number of general-purpose methods for 3D skeletonbased action recognition, methods for 3DTPIR are much
less studied in the literature. Recent works [46, 63] have
shown that state-of-the-art action recognition methods do
not always perform well on human interaction recognition.
This is because they lack an effective mechanism for capturing intra-person and inter-person joint relationships [46].
In two-person interactions, arm and leg movements are
highly correlated. However, these correlations are simply
encoded by distances between joints in most existing works
for 3DTPIR [17, 18, 42, 65]. This motivates us to use highorder statistics, i.e. covariance matrices to better capture
these interactions. It has been known that n × n covariance
matrices lie on a special type of Riemannian manifolds, i.e.
SPD manifolds (denoted by Sym+
n ). A large body of works

has been developed for classification of SPD-valued data.
Recently, SPD neural networks have demonstrated impressive results [13]. One of the core issues that remains open
is the finding of effective and efficient methods for modeling probability distributions on Sym+
n . Since Gaussian
distributions (abbreviated as Gaussians) on Rn are the most
popular probability distributions used in statistics, existing
works mainly focused on generalizing them to Sym+
n . Such
a generalization was first given in [43] in a more general
context of Riemannian manifolds. However, the asymptotic
formulae of Riemannian Gaussian distributions (abbreviated as Riemannian Gaussians) proposed in this work make
them hard to evaluate and apply in practice. Some works
aim to address this shortcoming by introducing notions of
Riemannian Gaussians in symmetric spaces [49, 50] and
homogeneous spaces [6]. These have been successfully applied to classification problems. In this work, we also interested in Riemannian Gaussians for classification. However,
differently from the above works, we seek methods for embedding Riemannian Gaussians in matrix groups. This allows us to perform classification of Riemannian Gaussians
without having to resort to an exact expression of their probability density function as in [6, 49, 50].
In summary, the main contributions of this work are:
• We propose an embedding method for Gaussians by
mapping them diffeomorphically to Riemannian symmetric spaces.
• We consider representing a 3D skeleton sequence by
a set of SPD matrices that leads us to the study of
statistics on Sym+
n . We show that the product space
of mean and covariance on Sym+
n can be viewed as
a Lie group with an appropriate group product. Moreover, we point out a connection between this space and
the group of lower triangular matrices with positive diagonal entries.
• Based on the theory described above, we introduce a
neural network for learning a geometric representation
from a 3D skeleton sequence.

13379

