Task-aware Part Mining Network for Few-Shot Learning
∗

Jiamin Wu, Tianzhu Zhang , Yongdong Zhang, Feng Wu
University of Science and Technology of China
jiaminwu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, zhyd73, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) aims at classifying samples
into new unseen classes with only a handful of labeled samples available. However, most of the existing methods are
based on the image-level pooled representation, yet ignore
considerable local clues that are transferable across tasks.
To address this issue, we propose an end-to-end Task-aware
Part Mining Network (TPMN) by integrating an automatic
part mining process into the metric-based model for FSL.
The proposed TPMN model enjoys several merits. First, we
design a meta filter learner to generate task-aware part filters based on the task embedding in a meta-learning way.
The task-aware part filters can adapt to any individual task
and automatically mine task-related local parts even for an
unseen task. Second, an adaptive importance generator is
proposed to identify key local parts and assign adaptive
importance weights to different parts. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work to automatically exploit the
task-aware local parts in a meta-learning way for FSL. Extensive experimental results on four standard benchmarks
demonstrate that the proposed model performs favorably
against state-of-the-art FSL methods.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
achieved tremendous success in a wide range of computer
vision tasks [43, 14, 20, 37, 29, 54, 55]. However, the training of CNNs requires large amounts of annotated images,
which are prohibitively expensive to collect [2]. Few-Shot
Learning (FSL) [12, 11, 48, 44] is promising in reducing the
need for human annotation, which aims at learning a model
with good generalization capability such that it can classify
unlabeled samples (query set) into new unseen classes with
only one or a few examples (support set). Usually, a fewshot classifier is trained to solve N -way K-shot tasks that
consist of N classes and K support samples per class.
To tackle the FSL problem, a series of previous work [44,
46, 13, 23, 22, 52] adopts a metric-based learning model,
which firstly learns a good embedding space, and then se∗ Corresponding Author

Task 1: Classifying Dog from Pig

Task 2: Classifying Dog from Tiger
(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) shows the comparison
of different local representations. The first row presents the local
patches derived by grid dividing in the previous methods. The second row shows the local parts learned in an automatic way. The latter achieves better discriminability and contains fewer background
noises. (b) shows the task-aware mechanism. For the same image
of dog, the attended local parts change with different tasks.

lects a distance metric to directly compute the distances
between the query and support images for classification.
However, most of these methods utilize the image-level
pooled representation for classification, which could lose
considerable discriminative local clues that enjoy favorable
transferability across classes [53]. Recently, several methods [24, 25, 53, 9] consider taking advantage of the local
representation for FSL. These methods decompose images
into a set of local patches by grid dividing on the feature
map. Then the image-level distance measurement between
a pair of the query and the support images is achieved by
aggregating the similarities between local patches.
By studying the previous FSL methods based on local
representations [24, 25, 53, 9], we sum up three characteristics that are imperative for building a robust few-shot
model. (1) Automaticity. In the previous methods, the local patches obtained by the pre-defined decomposition strategy suffer from large randomness. Some local patches have
high possibilities to cover only a small part of the semantic
regions of the object, or even completely the background
regions (see the first row in Figure 1 (a)). This randomness could cause misalignments when matching the local
patches. However, the human can quickly recognize a new
category by automatically segmenting the objects into mul-

8433

