FaPN: Feature-aligned Pyramid Network for Dense Image Prediction
Shihua Huang

Zhichao Lu

Ran Cheng*

Cheng He

Southern University of Science and Technology†
{shihuahuang95, luzhichaocn, ranchengcn, chenghehust}@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Dense prediction is a collection of computer vision tasks
that aim at labeling every pixel in an image with a predefined class. It plays a fundamental role in scene understanding and is of great importance to real-world applications, such as autonomous driving [7], medical imaging [44], augmented reality [1], etc. The modern solutions
for these tasks are built upon Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). With the recent advancements in CNN architectures, a steady stream of promising empirical leapforwards was reported across a wide range of dense prediction tasks, including object detection [26, 39, 40], semantic
segmentation [4, 28], instance segmentation [13, 25], and
panoptic segmentation [18, 19], to name a few.
* Corresponding author.
† Authors are with Department of Computer Science and Engineering.

2.5

Improvements over FPN

Recent advancements in deep neural networks have
made remarkable leap-forwards in dense image prediction.
However, the issue of feature alignment remains as neglected by most existing approaches for simplicity. Direct
pixel addition between upsampled and local features leads
to feature maps with misaligned contexts that, in turn, translate to mis-classifications in prediction, especially on object boundaries. In this paper, we propose a feature alignment module that learns transformation offsets of pixels
to contextually align upsampled higher-level features; and
another feature selection module to emphasize the lowerlevel features with rich spatial details. We then integrate
these two modules in a top-down pyramidal architecture
and present the Feature-aligned Pyramid Network (FaPN).
Extensive experimental evaluations on four dense prediction tasks and four datasets have demonstrated the efficacy
of FaPN, yielding an overall improvement of 1.2 - 2.6 points
in AP / mIoU over FPN when paired with Faster / Mask RCNN. In particular, our FaPN achieves the state-of-the-art
of 56.7% mIoU on ADE20K when integrated within MaskFormer. The code is available from https://github.com/EMIGroup/FaPN.

ResNet-50

ResNet-101

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

AP
(Detection)

(

AP mask
Instance

AP bbox
PQ
mIoU
Segmentation ) (Panoptic Seg.) (Semantic Seg.)

Small

2.5

0

AP
(Detection)

Medium

(

AP mask
Instance

Large objects

AP bbox
Segmentation )

Figure 1: Comparisons between FPN and FaPN: (Top
row) Qualitatively, FaPN significantly improves the performance on object boundaries as opposed to its counterpart,
i.e. FPN [23]. (Bottom row) Quantitatively, FaPN’s improvements over FPN are consistent across different tasks,
backbones, and object scales. Best view in color.
Dense prediction requires both rich spatial details for object location and strong semantics for object classification,
which most likely reside at different resolution / scale levels [28]. How to effectively generate a hierarchy of features at different scales becomes one of the key barriers to
overcome in handling dense prediction tasks [23]. Broadly
speaking, there are two common practices to address this
issue. The first kind uses atrous convolutions with different atrous rates to effectively capture long-range information (i.e. semantic context) without reducing spatial resolution [4]. The other kind builds a top-down feature pyramid
based on the default bottom-top pathway of a ConvNet [2].
More specifically, the (higher-level) spatially coarser feature maps are upsampled before merging with the corresponding feature maps from the bottom-up path-way. However, there are inaccurate correspondences (i.e. feature misalignment) between the bottom-up and upsampled features
owing to the non-learnable nature of the commonly-used
upsampling operations (e.g. nearest neighbor) and the re-

864

