MixMix: All You Need for Data-Free Compression Are Feature and Data Mixing
Yuhang Li∗†

Feng Zhu†
Ruihao Gong†
Mingzhu Shen†
Xin Dong‡
Fengwei Yu†
Shaoqing Lu†
Shi Gu∗
∗
†
‡
UESTC
SenseTime Research
Harvard University

User data confidentiality protection is becoming a rising
challenge in the present deep learning research. Without
access to data, conventional data-driven model compression faces a higher risk of performance degradation. Recently, some works propose to generate images from a specific pretrained model to serve as training data. However,
the inversion process only utilizes biased feature statistics
stored in one model and is from low-dimension to highdimension. As a consequence, it inevitably encounters the
difficulties of generalizability and inexact inversion, which
leads to unsatisfactory performance. To address these problems, we propose MixMix based on two simple yet effective
techniques: (1) Feature Mixing: utilizes various models to
construct a universal feature space for generalized inversion; (2) Data Mixing: mixes the synthesized images and
labels to generate exact label information. We prove the
effectiveness of MixMix from both theoretical and empirical perspectives. Extensive experiments show that MixMix
outperforms existing methods on the mainstream compression tasks, including quantization, knowledge distillation
and pruning. Specifically, MixMix achieves up to 4% and
20% accuracy uplift on quantization and pruning, respectively, compared to existing data-free compression work.

1. Introduction
To enable powerful deep learning models on the embedded and mobile devices without sacrificing task performance, various model compression techniques have been
discovered. For example, neural network quantization [12,
23, 27, 55] converts 32-bit floating-point models into lowbit fixed point models and benefits from the acceleration
of fixed-point computation and less memory consumption.
Network pruning [8, 14, 48] focuses on reducing the redundant neural connections and finds a sparse network. Knowledge Distillation (KD) [18, 41] transfers the knowledge in
the large teacher network to small student networks.
However, one cannot compress the neural networks aggressively without the help of data. As an example, most

Top-1 accuracy

Abstract
76
74
72
70
68
66

ResNet-50 Data
MobileNetV2 Data

66

MixMix Data
Training Data

62
58
54

ResNet-50

50

MobileNetV2

Figure 1. An overview of the results of post-training data-free
quantization. Each color bar denotes a data source. Data inverted
from ResNet-50 encounters an accuracy deficit on MobileNetV2.

full precision models can be safely quantized to 8-bit
by directly rounding the parameters to their nearest integers [26, 39]. However, when the bit-width goes down to
4, we have to perform quantization-aware training using the
data collected from users to compensate for the accuracy
loss. Unfortunately, due to the increasing privacy protection issue1 , one cannot get user data easily. Moreover, the
whole ImageNet dataset contains 1.2M images (more than
100 gigabytes), which consumes much more memory space
than the model itself. Therefore, the data-free model quantization is more demanding now.
Recently, many works [4, 15, 50] propose to invert images from a specific pretrained model. They try to match
the activations’ distribution by comparing the recorded running mean and running variance in the Batch Normalization (BN) [24] layer. Data-free model compression
with the generative adversarial network is also investigated
in [5, 11, 49]. All these works put their focus on developing a better criterion for inverting the data from a specific
model. We call this type of data as model-specific data.
We identify two problems of model-specific data. First,
the synthesized images generated by a specific model are
biased and cannot be generalized to another. For example,
in DeepInversion [50], synthesizing 215k 224×224 resolu1 https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/
data-protection_en

4410

