Unconditional Scene Graph Generation
Sarthak Garg 1, *

Helisa Dhamo 1, *

Azade Farshad 1

Sabrina Musatian 1

Nassir Navab 1

Federico Tombari 1,2

1

Technische Universität München

2

Google

Abstract
Despite recent advancements in single-domain or singleobject image generation, it is still challenging to generate complex scenes containing diverse, multiple objects and
their interactions. Scene graphs, composed of nodes as objects and directed-edges as relationships among objects, offer an alternative representation of a scene that is more semantically grounded than images. We hypothesize that a
generative model for scene graphs might be able to learn
the underlying semantic structure of real-world scenes more
effectively than images, and hence, generate realistic novel
scenes in the form of scene graphs. In this work, we explore a new task for the unconditional generation of semantic scene graphs. We develop a deep auto-regressive model
called SceneGraphGen which can directly learn the probability distribution over labelled and directed graphs using a
hierarchical recurrent architecture. The model takes a seed
object as input and generates a scene graph in a sequence
of steps, each step generating an object node, followed by
a sequence of relationship edges connecting to the previous
nodes. We show that the scene graphs generated by SceneGraphGen are diverse and follow the semantic patterns of
real-world scenes. Additionally, we demonstrate the application of the generated graphs in image synthesis, anomaly
detection and scene graph completion.

1. Introduction
Scene graphs encompass a representation that describes
a scene, where nodes are categorical object instances and
the edges describe categorical relationships between them.
This representation allows for an extended high-level understanding of the scenes, which goes beyond object-level
reasoning. The computer vision community has explored
various approaches for scene graph generation from images [38, 27] as well as tasks in which this representation
has proven to be suitable, such as image retrieval [18] and
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work

https://SceneGraphGen.github.io/

Figure 1. Method overview. a) SceneGraphGen generates scene
graphs unconditionally from a randomly sampled seed object. b)
Applications in Left: translation of a generated scene graph to an
image, using an off-the-shelf graph-to-image network Right: detection of out-of-distribution samples

VQA [11]. A scene graph allows for modular, specified,
and high-level semantic control on the image components,
which makes it a good representation for semantic-driven
image generation [17] and manipulation [7].
A less explored field has been unconditional generation
of scene graphs, i.e. generating a scene graph without any
input image, but instead, from a random input. Such scene
graph modelling can aid learning patterns from real scenes,
such as object co-occurrence, relative placements and interactions. In this paper, scene graph generation is explored
under the light of generative models, with the aim to generate novel and realistic instances of scene graphs unconditionally. Recent work explored generation of relational
graphs [35] or probabilistic grammar [19], designed for a
particular domain. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to investigate the use of a generative model for
generating semantic, language-based scene graphs [18, 21].

16362

