T EACH T EXT: CrossModal Generalized Distillation for Text-Video Retrieval
Ioana Croitoru 1,2,*
Simion-Vlad Bogolin1,2,*
Marius Leordeanu2,3
Hailin Jin4
Andrew Zisserman1
Samuel Albanie1,5,†
Yang Liu1,6,†
1

Visual Geometry Group, Univ. of Oxford
4

Adobe Research

5

2

Inst. of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
6

Dept. of Engineering, Univ. of Cambridge

3

Univ. Politehnica of Bucharest

Wangxuan Inst. of Computer Technology, Peking Univ.

Abstract
In recent years, considerable progress on the task of
text-video retrieval has been achieved by leveraging largescale pretraining on visual and audio datasets to construct
powerful video encoders. By contrast, despite the natural
symmetry, the design of effective algorithms for exploiting
large-scale language pretraining remains under-explored.
In this work, we are the first to investigate the design of
such algorithms and propose a novel generalized distillation method, T EACH T EXT, which leverages complementary
cues from multiple text encoders to provide an enhanced
supervisory signal to the retrieval model. Moreover, we
extend our method to video side modalities and show that
we can effectively reduce the number of used modalities
at test time without compromising performance. Our approach advances the state of the art on several video retrieval benchmarks by a significant margin and adds no
computational overhead at test time. Last but not least, we
show an effective application of our method for eliminating noise from retrieval datasets. Code and data can be
found at https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/
research/teachtext/.

1. Introduction
The focus of this work is text-video retrieval—the task
of identifying which video among a pool of candidates best
matches a natural language query describing its content.
Video search has a broad range of applications across domains such as wildlife monitoring, security, industrial process monitoring and entertainment. Moreover, as humanity continues to produce video at ever-increasing scale, the
ability to perform such searches effectively and efficiently
takes on critical commercial significance to video hosting
platforms such as YouTube.
A central theme of recently proposed retrieval methods
has been the investigation of how to best use multiple video
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Distilling the knowledge from multiple text encoders
for stronger text-video retrieval. Prior works [18, 28, 32] have
shown the considerable benefit of transitioning from video encoders that ingest a single modality (left) to multi-modal video encoders (centre). In this work, we show that retrieval performance
can be further significantly enhanced by learning from multiple
text encoders through the T EACH T EXT algorithm which imposes
no additional cost during inference. Text-to-video retrieval performance gain (geometric mean of R1-R5-R10) is reported for a [28]
model as well as for our method on the MSR-VTT [55] dataset.

modalities to improve performance. In particular, architectures based on mixtures-of-experts [28, 32] and multimodal transformers [18] have shown the benefit of making
use of diverse sets of pre-trained models for related tasks
(such as image classification, action recognition and ambient sound classification) as a basis for video encoding during training and testing.
In this work, we explore whether commensurate gains
could be achieved by leveraging multiple text embeddings
learned on large-scale written corpora. Different from
video embeddings using multiple modalities and pretraining tasks, it is less obvious that there is sufficient diversity
among collections of text embeddings to achieve a meaningful boost in performance. In fact, our inspiration stems
from a careful investigation of the performance of different text embeddings across a range of retrieval benchmarks
(Fig. 2). Strikingly, we observe not only that there is considerable variance in performance across text embeddings, but
also that their ranking is not consistent, strongly supporting
the idea of using multiple text embeddings.
Motivated by this finding, we propose a simple algorithm, T EACH T EXT, to effectively exploit the knowledge

11583

