SimROD: A Simple Adaptation Method for Robust Object Detection
Rindra Ramamonjison1 , Amin Banitalebi-Dehkordi1 , Xinyu Kang2 , Xiaolong Bai3 , and Yong Zhang1
1

Huawei Technologies Canada Co., Ltd
2
University of British Columbia
3
Huawei Cloud

rindranirina.ramamonjison@huawei.com, amin.banitalebi@huawei.com, xinyu.kang@alumni.ubc.ca, baixiaolong1@huawei.com,
yong.zhang3@huawei.com

Abstract
This paper presents a Simple and effective unsupervised
adaptation method for Robust Object Detection (SimROD).
To overcome the challenging issues of domain shift and
pseudo-label noise, our method integrates a novel domaincentric data augmentation, a gradual self-labeling adaptation procedure, and a teacher-guided fine-tuning mechanism. Using our method, target domain samples can be
leveraged to adapt object detection models without changing the model architecture or generating synthetic data.
When applied to image corruptions and high-level crossdomain adaptation benchmarks, our method outperforms
prior baselines on multiple domain adaptation benchmarks.
SimROD achieves new state-of-the-art on standard realto-synthetic and cross-camera setup benchmarks. On the
image corruption benchmark, models adapted with our
method achieved a relative robustness improvement of 1525% AP50 on Pascal-C and 5-6% AP on COCO-C and
Cityscapes-C. On the cross-domain benchmark, our method
outperformed the best baseline performance by up to 8%
and 4% AP50 on Comic and Watercolor respectively.1

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art object detection models are highly accurate when trained on images that have the same distribution
as the test set [39]. However, they can fail when deployed
to new environments due to domain shifts such as weather
changes (e.g. rain or fog), light condition variations, or image corruptions (e.g. blur) [25]. Such failure is detrimental for mission-critical applications such as self-driving or
automated retail checkout, in which domain shifts are inevitable. To make them reliable, it is important for detection
1 Code and notebook are available at https://marketplace.
huaweicloud.com/markets/aihub/notebook/detail/
?id=d6d7162f-32b9-483d-97d7-b16b32b148e2

models to be robust to domain shifts.
Different types of methods have been proposed to overcome domain shifts for object detection namely data augmentation [25, 14, 12], domain-alignment [6, 11, 38, 37, 27,
16,23,17], domain-mapping [3,18,23,17], and self-labeling
techniques [33, 30, 22, 18]. Augmentation methods can improve the performance on some fixed set of domain shifts
but fail to generalize to the ones that are not similar to the
augmented samples [1, 26, 32]. Domain-aligning methods
use target domain samples to align intermediate features of
networks. These methods require the addition of specialized modules such as gradient reversal layers, domain classifiers to the model. On the other hand, domain-mapping
methods translate labeled source images to new images that
look like target domain images using image-to-image translation networks. Similar to augmentation methods, they
are suboptimal since the generated images do not always
have a high similarity to real target domain images. Finally, self-labeling is a promising approach since it leverages unlabeled training samples form the target domain.
However, generating accurate pseudo-labels under domain
shift is hard; and when pseudo-labels are noisy, using target
domain samples for adaptation is ineffective.
In this paper, we propose a Simple adaptation method for
Robust Object Detection (SimROD), to mitigate the domain
shifts using domain-mixed data augmentation and teacherguided gradual adaptation. Our simple approach has three
design benefits. First, it does not require ground-truth labels
of target domain data and leverage unlabeled samples. Second, our approach requires neither complicated architecture
changes nor generative models for creating synthetic data
[18]. Third, our simple method is architecture-agnostic and
is not limited to region-based detectors. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
1. We propose a simple method to improve the robustness
of object detection models against domain shifts. Our

3570

