RetrievalFuse: Neural 3D Scene Reconstruction with a Database
Yawar Siddiqui1
1

Justus Thies1,2

Technical University of Munich

Fangchang Ma3
2

Qi Shan3

Matthias Nießner1 Angela Dai1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

3

Apple

Figure 1: We present a new approach for 3D reconstruction conditioned on sparse point clouds or low-resolution geometry. Rather than encoding the full generative process in the neural network, which can struggle to represent local detail, we
leverage an additional database of volumetric chunks from train scene data. For a given input, multiple approximate reconstructions are first created with retrieved database chunks, which are then fused together with an attention-based blending –
facilitating transfer of coherent structures and local detail from the retrieved train chunks to the output reconstruction.

Abstract
3D reconstruction of large scenes is a challenging problem due to the high-complexity nature of the solution space,
in particular for generative neural networks. In contrast
to traditional generative learned models which encode the
full generative process into a neural network and can struggle with maintaining local details at the scene level, we
introduce a new method that directly leverages scene geometry from the training database. First, we learn to synthesize an initial estimate for a 3D scene, constructed by
retrieving a top-k set of volumetric chunks from the scene
database. These candidates are then refined to a final scene
generation with an attention-based refinement that can effectively select the most consistent set of geometry from the
candidates and combine them together to create an output
scene, facilitating transfer of coherent structures and local
detail from train scene geometry. We demonstrate our neural scene reconstruction with a database for the tasks of
3D super resolution and surface reconstruction from sparse
point clouds, showing that our approach enables generation of more coherent, accurate 3D scenes, improving on
average by over 8% in IoU over state-of-the-art scene reconstruction.

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction has been a long-standing problem in computer vision and graphics, and has recently seen a
renewed flurry of developments, driven by successes in generative neural networks [29, 28, 9, 30]. In particular, developing an effective geometric reconstruction is challenging
due to the dimensionality of the problem, and the simultaneous expressibility for local details as well as coherent, complex global structures. In recent years, various approaches
have been developed for geometric reconstruction, encoding the full generative process into a neural network. This
can result in difficulty in representing large-scale, complex
scenes, as all levels of detail must be fully encoded as part
of the generative network.
We thus propose to augment geometric reconstruction
with a database which our method learns to leverage at inference time, and introduce a generative model that does
not need to encode the entire training data as part of the
network parameters. Instead, our model learns how to best
transfer structures and details from retrieved scene database
geometry.
We construct this database as geometric, cropped chunks
of 3D scenes from train scene data. Each chunk represents
clean, consistent, high-resolution geometry. We leverage

12568

