CryoDRGN2: Ab initio neural reconstruction of 3D protein structures
from real cryo-EM images
Ellen D. Zhong
MIT

Adam Lerer
Facebook AI

Joseph H. Davis
MIT

Bonnie Berger
MIT

zhonge@mit.edu

alerer@fb.com

jhdavis@mit.edu

bab@mit.edu

Abstract
Protein structure determination from cryo-EM data requires reconstructing a 3D volume (or distribution of volumes) from many noisy and randomly oriented 2D projection images. While the standard homogeneous reconstruction task aims to recover a single static structure, recentlyproposed neural and non-neural methods can reconstruct
distributions of structures, thereby enabling the study of
protein complexes that possess intrinsic structural or conformational heterogeneity. These heterogeneous reconstruction
methods, however, require fixed image poses, which are
typically estimated from an upstream homogeneous reconstruction and are not guaranteed to be accurate under highly
heterogeneous conditions.
In this work we describe cryoDRGN2, an ab initio reconstruction algorithm, which can jointly estimate image poses
and learn a neural model of a distribution of 3D structures on
real heterogeneous cryo-EM data. To achieve this, we adapt
search algorithms from the traditional cryo-EM literature,
and describe the optimizations and design choices required
to make such a search procedure computationally tractable
in the neural model setting. We show that cryoDRGN2 is
robust to the high noise levels of real cryo-EM images, trains
faster than earlier neural methods, and achieves state-of-theart performance on real cryo-EM datasets.

1. Introduction
The last decade has seen explosive growth in the development and application of single particle cryo-electron
microscopy (cryo-EM) for 3D structure determination of
proteins and other biomolecules. Driven by parallel developments in improved hardware and image processing
algorithms, many challenging structures not amenable to
crystallographic approaches have now been solved at atomic
or near-atomic resolution with cryo-EM [20, 30, 37].
Central to structure determination with cryo-EM is
the computational reconstruction of the target molecule’s

3D electron scattering potential (i.e. volume) from an
experimentally-derived dataset of microscopy images. In a
cryo-EM experiment, a purified solution of the molecule of
interest is frozen in a thin layer of vitreous ice and imaged at
cryogenic temperatures using a transmission electron microscope. After initial pre-processing of the raw micrographs,
the resulting imaging dataset contains thousands to millions
of noisy and randomly oriented 2D projection images (Fig.
1a). The goal of the cryo-EM reconstruction task is to infer the underlying 3D structure or structures present in the
recorded images.
The 3D reconstruction task is a challenging inverse problem primarily due to the unknown image poses and the high
amount of noise in the images. It is further complicated by
the potential for each molecule to adopt variable conformations. A major opportunity thus exists to use cryo-EM to
visualize and study complex distributions of dynamic protein
structures, and numerous algorithms have been proposed to
extract multiple structures from the imaging dataset, termed
heterogeneous reconstruction [44].
Recent neural methods have shown promise in instantiating expressive continuous latent variable models for structural variability in cryo-EM data. In particular, cryoDRGN
performs heterogeneous reconstruction by learning a deep
generative model for 3D cryo-EM volumes. The first instantiation of cryoDRGN performed joint optimization of pose
and heterogeneity with a branch and bound (BNB) algorithm
for pose search (referred to as cryoDRGN-BNB here) [55];
however, this version scaled poorly and could not produce
high-quality reconstructions of real cryo-EM datasets. In
follow-up work, high-quality reconstructions on real data
were achieved by modifying cryoDRGN to take previously
estimated poses from a homogeneous reconstruction as input,
hence eliding the difficult pose search procedure [54]. By
estimating the intrinsic structural heterogeneity separately
from the extrinsic pose variables, these methods are limited
to mildly heterogeneous conditions where pose inference
remains accurate.
In this work, we revisit the problem of joint optimization
of image pose and volumes in cryoDRGN. In particular, we

4066

