Robustness Certification for Point Cloud Models
Tobias Lorenz* 1 ,

Anian Ruoss2 ,

Mislav Balunović2 ,

Gagandeep Singh3 ,

Martin Vechev2

1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and VMware Research
tobias.lorenz@cispa.de, ggnds@illinois.edu
{anian.ruoss, mislav.balunovic, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
The use of deep 3D point cloud models in safety-critical
applications, such as autonomous driving, dictates the need
to certify the robustness of these models to real-world transformations. This is technically challenging, as it requires a
scalable verifier tailored to point cloud models that handles
a wide range of semantic 3D transformations. In this work,
we address this challenge and introduce 3DCertify, the first
verifier able to certify the robustness of point cloud models.
3DCertify is based on two key insights: (i) a generic relaxation based on first-order Taylor approximations, applicable to any differentiable transformation, and (ii) a precise
relaxation for global feature pooling, which is more complex than pointwise activations (e.g., ReLU or sigmoid) but
commonly employed in point cloud models. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of 3DCertify by performing an extensive
evaluation on a wide range of 3D transformations (e.g., rotation, twisting) for both classification and part segmentation tasks. For example, we can certify robustness against
rotations by ±60° for 95.7% of point clouds, and our max
pool relaxation increases certification by up to 15.6%.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in tasks
involving 3D objects such as autonomous driving [8, 9, 26].
As such applications are typically safety-critical, recent
work has investigated methods for quantifying the robustness of these systems via adversarial attacks, demonstrating the vulnerability of state-of-the-art point cloud models to semantic transformations and noise-based perturbations [28, 53, 60, 62, 66]. Another line of work introduced
defenses [62, 65, 67], aiming to improve a models’ robust* This work was done while the author was at ETH Zurich.

ness against these attacks. However, as demonstrated in the
image recognition domain, such defenses are usually broken by more powerful attacks [1, 49], resulting in an arms
race between stronger defenses and even stronger attacks.
To break this cycle, one ideally needs a proof that a deep
learning model is robust against any adversarial attack, under some threat model. This proof is usually obtained by
invoking a neural network verifier on a deep learning model
and a model input, where the verifier attempts to provide a
certificate that the model is robust to any transformation of
this input. While plenty of verifiers have been proposed in
the image recognition domain [5, 19, 42, 44, 48, 56, 64], no
such verifier exists for 3D point cloud models.
This work: certification of 3D point clouds In this work
we propose the first verifier for 3D point cloud models,
called 3DCertify. As point cloud models are too complex
for exact verification (e.g., MILP [48]), the key challenge
one must address is designing scalable and precise convex
relaxations capturing all point clouds that could result from
transforming the original (input) point cloud. In our work,
we address this challenge and introduce such relaxations
for a large family of common differentiable 3D transformations, including rotation, twisting, tapering, shearing, and
arbitrary compositions of these transformations.
Robustness certification is achieved by propagating our
3D relaxations through the network using existing verifiers
(e.g., DeepPoly [44] or LiRPA [61]). This modular design
allows our method to benefit from future advances in verification. For instance, we observe that existing verifiers
incur a significant loss of precision at the max pool layer,
often overlooked when designing verifiers for image classifiers, yet a critical feature of 3D point cloud models [36].
We address this issue by designing a more precise max pool
relaxation which is more precise than existing solutions in
practice while being applicable beyond point cloud models.

7608

