CoMatch: Semi-supervised Learning with Contrastive Graph Regularization
Junnan Li Caiming Xiong Steven C.H. Hoi
Salesforce Research
{junnan.li,cxiong,shoi}@salesforce.com

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning has been an effective
paradigm for leveraging unlabeled data to reduce the
reliance on labeled data. We propose CoMatch, a new
semi-supervised learning method that unifies dominant
approaches and addresses their limitations. CoMatch
jointly learns two representations of the training data,
their class probabilities and low-dimensional embeddings.
The two representations interact with each other to jointly
evolve. The embeddings impose a smoothness constraint
on the class probabilities to improve the pseudo-labels,
whereas the pseudo-labels regularize the structure of the
embeddings through graph-based contrastive learning.
CoMatch achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple
datasets. It achieves substantial accuracy improvements
on the label-scarce CIFAR-10 and STL-10. On ImageNet
with 1% labels, CoMatch achieves a top-1 accuracy
of 66.0%, outperforming FixMatch [32] by 12.6%.
Furthermore, CoMatch achieves better representation
learning performance on downstream tasks, outperforming both supervised learning and self-supervised
learning. Code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/salesforce/CoMatch/.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) – learning from few labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data – has
been a long-standing problem in computer vision and machine learning. Recent state-of-the-art methods mostly follow two trends: (1) using the model’s class prediction to
produce a pseudo-label for each unlabeled sample as the
label to train against [19, 2, 1, 32]; (2) unsupervised or
self-supervised pre-training, followed by supervised finetuning [5, 14, 13, 3] and pseudo-labeling [6].
However, existing methods have several limitations.
Pseudo-labeling (also called self-training) methods heavily rely on the quality of the model’s class prediction, thus
suffering from confirmation bias where the prediction mistakes would accumulate. Self-supervised learning methods
are task-agnostic, and the widely adopted contrastive learn-

ing [5, 14] may learn representations that are suboptimal
for the specific classification task. Another branch of methods explore graph-based semi-supervised learning [24, 17],
but have yet shown competitive performance especially on
larger datasets such as ImageNet [9].
We propose CoMatch, a new semi-supervised learning
method that addresses the existing limitations. A conceptual illustration is shown in Figure 1. In CoMatch, each
image has two compact representations: a class probability
produced by the classification head and a low-dimensional
embedding produced by the projection head. The two representations interact with each other and jointly evolve in a
co-training framework. Specifically, the classification head
is trained using memory-smoothed pseudo-labels, where
pseudo-labels are refined by aggregating information from
nearby samples in the embedding space. The projection
head is trained using contrastive learning on a pseudo-label
graph, where samples with similar pseudo-labels are trained
to have similar embeddings. CoMatch unifies dominant
ideas including consistency regularization, entropy minimization, contrastive learning, and graph-based SSL.
We perform experiments on multiple datasets and
compare with state-of-the-art semi-supervised and selfsupervised methods. CoMatch substantially outperforms all
baselines across all benchmarks, especially in label-scarce
scenarios. On CIFAR-10 with 4 labeled samples per class,
CoMatch outperforms FixMatch [32] by 6.11% in accuracy.
On STL-10, CoMatch outperforms FixMatch by 13.27%.
On ImageNet with only 1% of labels, CoMatch achieves a
top-1 accuracy of 66.0% (67.1% with self-supervised pretraining), whereas the best baseline (MoCov2 [7] followed
by FixMatch [32]) has an accuracy of 59.9%. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that CoMatch achieves better representation learning performance on down-stream image classification and object detection tasks, outperforming both supervised learning and self-supervised learning.

2. Background
To set the stage for CoMatch, we first introduce existing SSL methods, mainly focusing on current state-of-theart methods that are relevant. More comprehensive reviews
19475

