AutoSpace: Neural Architecture Search with Less Human Interference
Daquan Zhou1 , Xiaojie Jin 2 , Xiaochen Lian2 , Linjie Yang2 , Yujing Xue1 , Qibin Hou1 ,* Jiashi Feng1
1
National University of Singapore,2 ByteDance US AI Lab
{zhoudaquan21, xjjin0731, lianxiaochen, yljatthu, andrewhoux}@gmail.com
xueyj14@outlook.com, elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Current neural architecture search (NAS) algorithms
still require expert knowledge and effort to design a search
space for network construction. In this paper, we consider
automating the search space design to minimize human interference, which however faces two challenges: the explosive complexity of the exploration space and the expensive computation cost to evaluate the quality of different
search spaces. To solve them, we propose a novel differentiable evolutionary framework named AutoSpace, which
evolves the search space to an optimal one with following novel techniques: a differentiable ﬁtness scoring function to efﬁciently evaluate the performance of cells and a
reference architecture to speedup the evolution procedure
and avoid falling into sub-optimal solutions. The framework is generic and compatible with additional computational constraints, making it feasible to learn specialized search spaces that ﬁt different computational budgets. With the learned search space, the performance
of recent NAS algorithms can be improved signiﬁcantly
compared with using previously manually designed spaces.
Remarkably, the models generated from the new search
space achieve 77.8% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet under
the mobile setting (MAdds≤500M), outperforming previous SOTA EfﬁcientNet-B0 by 0.7%. https://github.
com/zhoudaquan/AutoSpace.git.

1. Introduction
Recently neural architecture search (NAS) algorithms
are popularly explored and applied, yielding several stateof-the-art (SOTA) deep neural network architectures [32,
31, 15, 34]. Applying a NAS algorithm typically comprises three steps: (1) designing a search space by specifying its elementary operators; (2) developing a searching
algorithm to explore the space and select operators from
it to build the candidate model; and (3) implementing an
* Corresponding author.

Expert
knowledge

Search
space

Trial &
error

Hand-crafted
search space

(a)

Evaluation/search

Candidate
block pool
Random
mutation

Selected
search space
Evolution/mutation

Ranking

Optimized
search space

Basic operators
conv, dwise conv, zero, ...

(b)
Auto-generated space

Hand-crafted space

Human interfere

High

Human interfere

Low

Searching cost

Low

Searching cost

Low

(c)

Figure 1: Comparison of different search space construction
schemes. (a) Most existing NAS methods deploy handcrafted
search spaces whose construction heavily relies on expertise and
trial-and-error. (b) Our proposed method automatically builds and
optimizes the search space by learning to form the basic operators
into candidate building blocks and using an efﬁcient approach to
evolve and evaluate these building blocks. (c) Compared with existing schemes, our proposed one involves lower human effort and
searching cost.

evaluation strategy to validate the performance of searched
models. Extensive studies have been devoted to the latter
two steps, i.e. searching algorithms and evaluation strategies [33, 2, 15, 31, 35, 34, 33, 12, 32].
To reduce the complexity of the search space to explore, the common practice of recent NAS algorithms is to
leverage human prior knowledge to design smaller search
spaces, most of which are based on well performing handcrafted building blocks and their variants, e.g., the inverted
residual block [2, 32, 33, 31, 14] and the channel shufﬂing
block [12]. On one hand, using restricted search spaces indeed enables NAS algorithms to enjoy higher efﬁciency;

337

