Track without Appearance: Learn Box and Tracklet Embedding with Local and
Global Motion Patterns for Vehicle Tracking
Gaoang Wang1 , Renshu Gu2 , Zuozhu Liu1 , Weijie Hu3 , Mingli Song1 , and Jenq-Neng Hwang4
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Hangzhou Dianzi University, 3 Guangdong University of Petrochemical
Technology, 4 University of Washington

{gaoangwang, zuozhuliu}@intl.zju.edu.cn, renshugu@hdu.edu.cn, huweijie@gdupt.edu.cn,
brooksong@zju.edu.cn, hwang@uw.edu

Abstract
Vehicle tracking is an essential task in the multi-object
tracking (MOT) field. A distinct characteristic in vehicle
tracking is that the trajectories of vehicles are fairly smooth
in both the world coordinate and the image coordinate.
Hence, models that capture motion consistencies are of high
necessity. However, tracking with the standalone motionbased trackers is quite challenging because targets could
get lost easily due to limited information, detection error
and occlusion. Leveraging appearance information to assist object re-identification could resolve this challenge to
some extent. However, doing so requires extra computation while appearance information is sensitive to occlusion
as well. In this paper, we try to explore the significance of
motion patterns for vehicle tracking without appearance information. We propose a novel approach that tackles the
association issue for long-term tracking with the exclusive
fully-exploited motion information. We address the tracklet
embedding issue with the proposed reconstruct-to-embed
strategy based on deep graph convolutional neural networks (GCN). Comprehensive experiments on the KITTIcar tracking dataset and UA-Detrac dataset show that the
proposed method, though without appearance information,
could achieve competitive performance with the state-ofthe-art (SOTA) trackers. The source code will be available
at https://github.com/GaoangW/LGMTracker.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is an important topic in the
computer vision and machine learning field. This technique is highly demanded in many tasks, such as traffic flow estimation, human behavior prediction and au-

Figure 1. The top part shows tracking with appearance information, while the bottom shows tracking using detection boxes without employing appearance. Obviously, it is more challenging for
tracking only based on motion information.

tonomous driving assistance [52, 51, 55, 25, 20]. From
unsupervised rule-based [6, 7, 5, 22, 52] and optimizationbased [66, 11, 62, 56, 32, 38, 37, 1, 24, 12] to deep learningbased trackers [13, 68, 41, 57, 40, 4, 67, 42, 63], significant
progress of the MOT techniques has been made in the recent ten years. However, some critical challenges still remain. For example, occlusion is still one of the major issues. Without occlusion handling, the targets can easily get
lost and identities may get switched. Other challenges, such
as crowded scenarios, detection errors and camera motions,
also have significant influences on a tracker’s performance.
Appearance information is widely used for MOT and
greatly improves performance. Appearance information is
employed either in an association manner [52, 67, 14] or
with regression-based approaches for joint learning of de-

9876

