Statistically Consistent Saliency Estimation
Shunyan Luo
George Washington University

Emre Barut
Amazon Alexa

Fang Jin
George Washington University

shine lsy@gwu.edu

ebarut@amazon.com

fangjin@email.gwu.edu

Abstract
The growing use of deep learning for a wide range of
data problems has highlighted the need to understand and
diagnose these models appropriately, making deep learning
interpretation techniques an essential tool for data analysts.
The numerous model interpretation methods proposed in recent years are generally based on heuristics, with little or no
theoretical guarantees. Here, we present a statistical framework for saliency estimation for black-box computer vision
models. Our proposed model-agnostic estimation procedure,
which is statistically consistent and capable of passing sanity
checks, has polynomial-time computational efficiency since
it only requires solving a linear program. An upper bound is
established on the number of model evaluations needed to
recover regions of importance with high probability through
our theoretical analysis. Furthermore, a new perturbation
scheme is presented for the estimation of local gradients that
is more efficient than commonly used random perturbation
schemes. The validity and excellence of our new method are
demonstrated experimentally via sensitivity analyses.

1. Introduction
Although deep learning models have achieved exceptional
predictive performance for many tasks, these complex and
often intractable models can be difficult to interpret and
understand. This is a major barrier hindering their wider
adoption, especially in domains such as medicine where
models need to be qualitatively understood and/or verified
for robustness.
In order to address these issues, a number of interpretation
approaches have been proposed, many of which are based
on visualizations that either quantify the effect of particular
neurons or features, or create new images that maximize the
target score for specific classes [13, 26, 33]. One popular approach is to build saliency maps by attributing the gradients
of the neural network to the input image through various
procedures, or by finding perturbations that significantly
change the output[2, 4, 12, 15, 19, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 34].
Another option is to treat the deep learner as a black-box.

Examples in this domain include Baehrens, et al. [5] who
use a Parzen window classifier to approximate the target
classifier locally, and Riberio et al. [23], who introduce the
LIME procedure that relies on a sparse linear model that
is fit to model predictions of perturbed inputs. Lundberg
and Lee [17] have proposed SHapley Additive exPlanation
(SHAP), which combines the Shapley value from game theory with additive feature attribution methods, highlighting
the connections between the SHAP procedure and existing
methods such as LRP, LIME and DeepLIFT. Similarly, Chen
et al. [10] have built L- and C-Shapley procedures that reliably approximate the Shapley values in linear time with
respect to the number of features.
The majority of the methods listed above are heuristics
constructed according to certain desirable qualities. However, in none of these methods, is it clear what the main
estimand is, whether it can be consistently estimated or if
(and how) the estimand can be computed more efficiently.
In fact, according to recent research by Adebayo et al. [1],
most methods with good visual inspection lack sensitivity
to the model and the data generating process, a theoretical
explanation for why guided back-propagation and deconvolutional methods perform image recovery is provided by Nie
et al. [20]. These findings remind us of the importance of
constructing saliency estimation methods that are founded on
solid theoretical guarantees. This motivation is not straightforward; recent work by Burns et al. [7] propose a saliency
estimation technique that includes theoretical guarantees
based on the false discovery rate, i.e. FDR control. Although their procedure is very promising from a statistical
perspective and theoretically valid under a very general set of
assumptions, it requires human input and incurs a significant
computational load as it uses a generative model to fill in
certain regions of the target image.
In this work, we propose a statistically valid technique
for model-agnostic saliency estimation, and prove its consistency under reasonable assumptions. Furthermore, our
method passes the sanity checks given by Adebayo et al. [1].
Our analysis provides valuable insights into possible ways
to improve the accuracy and reliability of our approach. Our
main contributions are as follows:

745

