Batch Normalization Increases Adversarial Vulnerability and Decreases
Adversarial Transferability: A Non-Robust Feature Perspective
Philipp Benz*

Chaoning Zhang∗

In So Kweon

pbenz@kaist.ac.kr

chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com

iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Abstract
Batch normalization (BN) has been widely used in modern deep neural networks (DNNs) due to improved convergence. BN is observed to increase the model accuracy while
at the cost of adversarial robustness. There is an increasing
interest in the ML community to understand the impact of
BN on DNNs, especially related to the model robustness.
This work attempts to understand the impact of BN on DNNs
from a non-robust feature perspective. Straightforwardly,
the improved accuracy can be attributed to the better utilization of useful features. It remains unclear whether BN
mainly favors learning robust features (RFs) or non-robust
features (NRFs). Our work presents empirical evidence that
supports that BN shifts a model towards being more dependent on NRFs. To facilitate the analysis of such a feature
robustness shift, we propose a framework for disentangling
robust usefulness into robustness and usefulness. Extensive
analysis under the proposed framework yields valuable insight on the DNN behavior regarding robustness, e.g. DNNs
first mainly learn RFs and then NRFs. The insight that RFs
transfer better than NRFs, further inspires simple techniques
to strengthen transfer-based black-box attacks.

1. Introduction
Batch normalization (BN) [18] has been considered as a
milestone technique in the development of deep neural networks (DNNs) pushing the frontier in computer vision due to
improved convergence. Numerous works have attempted to
understand the impact of BN on DNNs from various perspectives. In contrast to previous works, investigating why (or
how) BN helps the optimization [31, 1], our work focuses on
the consequence of such enhanced optimization, especially
on the model robustness. Our work is not the first one to
study BN and robustness together. Most of the previous
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Schematic of disentangling F usefulness and robustness
with ball color representing robust usefulness, i.e. the darker, the
more robustly useful. Ball size indicates usefulness while the red
line divides RFs and NRFs.

works are focusing on the covariate shift [3, 33, 43, 42]. For
example, [3] adapts the BN statistics to improve the model
robustness against common corruptions. On the contrary,
our work studies BN by focusing on its impact on adversarial
robustness from the non-robust feature perspective.
We evaluate the behavior of models with and w/o BN
on multiple datasets in Table 1. As expected, BN improves
the clean accuracy, i.e. accuracy on clean images. However, this comes at the cost of lower robust accuracy, i.e.
accuracy on adversarial images [35]. Straightforwardly, the
DNN can be seen as a set of useful features, consisting of
robust features (RFs) and non-robust features (NRFs) [17],
and the improved accuracy can be roughly interpreted as
BN facilitating utilization of more useful features. Yet, it
remains unclear whether BN mainly favors learning RFs or
NRFs. Our empirical investigation shows that BN and other
normalization variants all increase adversarial vulnerability
in standard training, suggesting BN shifts the model to rely

7818

