mDALU: Multi-Source Domain Adaptation and Label Unification with Partial
Datasets

1

Rui Gong 1 , Dengxin Dai 1,4 , Yuhua Chen 1 , Wen Li 3 , Luc Van Gool 1,2
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, 2 VISICS, KU Leuven, 3 UESTC, 4 MPI for Informatics
{gongr, dai, yuhua.chen, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch, liwenbnu@gmail.com

Abstract

Source 2
Car, Person, Bike, Truck

Source 1

One challenge of object recognition is to generalize to
new domains, to more classes and/or to new modalities.
This necessitates methods to combine and reuse existing
datasets that may belong to different domains, have partial annotations, and/or have different data modalities. This
paper formulates this as a multi-source domain adaptation and label unification problem, and proposes a novel
method for it. Our method consists of a partially-supervised
adaptation stage and a fully-supervised adaptation stage.
In the former, partial knowledge is transferred from multiple source domains to the target domain and fused therein.
Negative transfer between unmatching label spaces is mitigated via three new modules: domain attention, uncertainty
maximization and attention-guided adversarial alignment.
In the latter, knowledge is transferred in the unified label
space after a label completion process with pseudo-labels.
Extensive experiments on three different tasks - image classification, 2D semantic image segmentation, and joint 2D3D semantic segmentation - show that our method outperforms all competing methods significantly.

1. Introduction
The development of object recognition is carried by two
pillars: large-scale data annotation and deep neural networks. With new applications coming out every day, researchers need to constantly develop new methods and create new datasets. While we are able to develop novel neural networks for new tasks, the creation of new datasets
can hardly keep up due to its huge cost. In the literature, a diverse set of learning paradigms, such as selflearning [13], semi-supervised learning [17] and transfer
learning [6], have been developed to come to the rescue. We
enrich this repository by developing a method to combine
multiple existing datasets that have been annotated in different domains, for smaller-scale tasks (fewer classes), and/or
with fewer data modalities. The importance of the method

Road, Sidewalk, Vegetation, Building, Sign

Target

Road, Sidewalk, Vegetation, Building,
Sign, Car, Person, Bike, Truck

Figure 1: mDALU learns a complete-class and completemodality object recognition model for a new, unlabeled target domain, by using multiple datasets with partial-class annotation and partial data modality as source domains.
can be justified by the fact that as time goes, research goals
will become more and more ambitious, so object recognition models for more classes, new domains, and/or more
data modalities are necessary.
To address this, we propose a multi-source domain adaptation and label unification (mDALU) problem. In this setting, there are multiple source domains and an unlabeled
target domain. In each source domain, only samples (images, pixels, or LiDAR points) belonging to a subset of
classes are labeled; the rest are unlabeled. The subsets of
classes having labels can be different over different source
domains, and can have inconsistent taxonomies, e.g., truck
is labeled as “truck” in one source domain but labeled as
“vehicle” together with other types of vehicles in another.
Further, the data modalities in different source domains can
also be different, e.g., one contains images and the other
contains LiDAR point clouds. The goal is to obtain an object recognition model for all classes in the target domain.
Fig. 1 shows an exemplar setting of mDALU. A comparison to other domain adaptation settings, in Table 1, shows
that mDALU is very flexible.
This goal is challenging. Firstly, there is the notorious issue of negative transfer. While negative transfer is

8876

