R-MSFM: Recurrent Multi-Scale Feature Modulation for Monocular Depth
Estimating
Zhongkai Zhou, Xinnan Fan, Pengfei Shi∗, Yuanxue Xin
College of Internet of Things Engineering;
Hohai University, Changzhou, China
200220030004@hhu.edu.cn, fanxn@hhuc.edu.cn, {shipf, xinyx}@hhu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Recurrent Multi-Scale Feature Modulation (R-MSFM), a new deep network architecture for self-supervised monocular depth estimation. RMSFM extracts per-pixel features, builds a multi-scale feature modulation module, and iteratively updates an inverse
depth through a parameter-shared decoder at the fixed resolution. This architecture enables our R-MSFM to maintain semantically richer while spatially more precise representations and avoid the error propagation caused by
the traditional U-Net-like coarse-to-fine architecture widely used in this domain, resulting in strong generalization
and efficient parameter count. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed R-MSFM both at
model size and inference speed, and show the state-of-theart results on the KITTI benchmark. Code is available at
https://github.com/jsczzzk/R-MSFM

cent studies[13, 2, 31, 14] have demonstrated the feasibility of estimating depth from a single image as a viewsynthesis problem using a photometric reconstruction loss
in a self-supervised manner. Following this successful, new
design paradigm, recent works mostly focus on the designing of the specific loss function[28, 14] and the improvements to the currently widely used U-Net like coarse-to-fine
architecture[19, 15].
In this paper, inspired by the domain of optical flow [37],
we introduce Recurrent Multi-Scale Feature Modulation(RMSFM) , a new and effective lightweight deep learning architecture, to extend the architecture choice for monocular
depth estimation. The three most significant strengths of
R-MSFM are as follows:
• Lightweight architecture: R-MSFM reduces the parameters of Monodepth2 by 73 percent, from 14.3M to
3.8M, which is suitable for memory-limited scenarios.
• State-of-the-art accuracy: R-MSFM achieves stateof-the-art performance, which gets a 4.470 RM SE
lower than Monodepth2 (4.701) on the KITTI Eigen
split test set.

1. Introduction
The objective of depth estimation is to determine the
depth of each pixel in an image. From the early stages
of computer vision, depth estimation from images has always been one of the major challenges for researchers.
Depth estimation as a low-level task is crucial to complete
higher-level tasks, including 3-D reconstruction[23], autonomous driving[6], 3-D target detection[36], underwater
image restoration[43], and many more.
Depth estimation is traditionally regarded as a stereo
matching problem between the left and right images, which
mainly approaches as a hand-crafted optimization[18],
supervised[4] or self-supervised manner[24]. Although
decades of developments have significantly improved its
accuracy, the time-consuming matching process inevitably
limits the scope of the deployment. Inspired by the domain of traditional structure from motion (SFM)[38], re∗ Corresponding author.

• Reasonable inference speed.: R-MSFM processes
640 × 192 videos at 44 frames per second on a
RTX2060 GPU. It can flexibly choose the update number and get a trade-off between speed and accuracy with half of the overall updates, which runs on
72 frames per second while still outperforms Monodepth2.
R-MSFM consists of four main components: i) a depth
encoder that extracts the per-pixel representations from
ResNet18 except for the last two blocks, producing multiscale features; ii) a parameter-shared depth decoder that iteratively updates an inverse depth initialized at zero, avoiding the spatial imprecision at coarse level propagating to
fine part; iii) a parameter-learned upsampling module that
adaptively upsamples the estimated inverse depth, preserv-

12777

