EigenGAN: Layer-Wise Eigen-Learning for GANs
1

Zhenliang He1,2 , Meina Kan1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, ICT, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
zhenliang.he@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {kanmeina,sgshan}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Gender

Recent studies on Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) reveal that different layers of a generative CNN hold
different semantics of the synthesized images. However, few
GAN models have explicit dimensions to control the semantic attributes represented in a specific layer. This paper proposes EigenGAN which is able to unsupervisedly mine interpretable and controllable dimensions from different generator layers. Specifically, EigenGAN embeds one linear
subspace with orthogonal basis into each generator layer.
Via generative adversarial training to learn a target distribution, these layer-wise subspaces automatically discover
a set of “eigen-dimensions” at each layer corresponding to
a set of semantic attributes or interpretable variations. By
traversing the coefficient of a specific eigen-dimension, the
generator can produce samples with continuous changes
corresponding to a specific semantic attribute. Taking the
human face for example, EigenGAN can discover controllable dimensions for high-level concepts such as pose and
gender in the subspace of deep layers, as well as low-level
concepts such as hue and color in the subspace of shallow layers. Moreover, in the linear case, we theoretically
prove that our algorithm derives the principal components
as PCA does. Codes can be found in https://github.
com/LynnHo/EigenGAN-Tensorflow.

1. Introduction
Strong evidences [40, 42, 2] show that different layers
of a discriminative CNN capture different semantic concepts in terms of abstraction level, e.g., shallower layers
detect color and texture while deeper layers focus more
on objects and parts. Accordingly, we can expect that a
generative CNN also has similar property, which is confirmed by the recent studies of generative adversarial network (GAN) [18, 39, 3]. StyleGAN [18] shows that deeper
generator layers control higher-level attributes such as pose
and glasses while shallower layers control lower-level features such as color and edge. Yang et al. [39] found similar phenomenon in scene synthesis, showing that deep layers tend to determine the spatial layout while shallow layers determine the color scheme. Similar conclusion is also
made by Bau et al. [3]. All these evidences reveal a prop-

Layer: 3

Hair
Color
Layer: 5

Hue
Layer: 6

Painting
Style
Layer: 2

Pose
Layer: 3

Hue
Layer: 6

Figure 1. Example of interpretable dimensions learned by EigenGAN. The smaller the index, the deeper the layer.

erty that different generator layers hold different semantics
of the synthesized images in terms of abstraction level.
According to this property, one can identify semantic attributes from different layers of a well-trained generator by
performing post-processing algorithms [3, 12, 36, 39], and
then can manipulate these attributes on the synthesized images. For example, Bau et al. [3] identify the causal units for
a specific concept (such as “tree”) by dissection and intervention on each generator layer. Turning on or off the causal
units causes the concept to appear or disappear on the synthesized image. However, these post-processing methods
can only be applied to a well-trained and fixed generator.
As for the generator itself, it still operates as a black box
and lacks explicit dimensions to directly control the semantic attributes represented in different layers. In other words,
we do not know what attributes are represented in different generator layers or how to manipulate them, unless we
deeply inspect each layer by these post-processing methods.

14408

