NGC: A Unified Framework for Learning with Open-World Noisy Data
Zhi-Fan Wu1,2 ,* Tong Wei1 ,* Jianwen Jiang2 ,* Chaojie Mao2 , Mingqian Tang2 , Yu-Feng Li1†
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
{wuzf, weit}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liyf@nju.edu.cn
{jianwen.jjw, chaojie.mcj, mingqian.tmq}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Training phase
“cat”

The existence of noisy data is prevalent in both the training and testing phases of machine learning systems, which
inevitably leads to the degradation of model performance.
There have been plenty of works concentrated on learning
with in-distribution (IND) noisy labels in the last decade,
i.e., some training samples are assigned incorrect labels
that do not correspond to their true classes. Nonetheless,
in real application scenarios, it is necessary to consider the
influence of out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, i.e., samples that do not belong to any known classes, which has
not been sufficiently explored yet. To remedy this, we study
a new problem setup, namely Learning with Open-world
Noisy Data (LOND). The goal of LOND is to simultaneously learn a classifier and an OOD detector from datasets
with mixed IND and OOD noise. In this paper, we propose
a new graph-based framework, namely Noisy Graph Cleaning (NGC), which collects clean samples by leveraging geometric structure of data and model predictive confidence.
Without any additional training effort, NGC can detect and
reject the OOD samples based on the learned class prototypes directly in testing phase. We conduct experiments on
multiple benchmarks with different types of noise and the results demonstrate the superior performance of our method
against state of the arts.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have gained popularity
in a variety of applications. Despite their success, DNNs
often rely on the availability of large-scale labeled training datasets. In practice, data annotation inevitably introduces label noise, and it is extremely expensive and timeconsuming to clean up the corrupted labels. The existence
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work was supported
by Alibaba Group through Alibaba Innovative Research Program and the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (61772262).

“dog”

Testing phase
“cat”

“dog”

OOD samples

Figure 1: A demonstration of the LOND setup. We use
green boxes to represent clean samples while yellow and
red boxes are IND and OOD noisy samples, respectively.

of label noise can be problematic for overparameterized
deep networks, as they may overfit to label noise even on
randomly-assigned labels [54]. Therefore, mitigating the
effects of noisy labels becomes a critical issue.
When learning with noisy labels (LNL), plenty of
promising methods have been proposed to improve the generalization [39, 7, 42, 22, 40, 56, 48, 49, 47]. Many existing methods work by analyzing output predictions to identify mislabeled samples [51, 35, 21] or reweighting samples to alleviate the influence of noisy labels [36, 1]. Note
that, these methods are particularly designed to deal with
in-distribution (IND) label noise. Some other works also
consider the existence of out-of-distribution (OOD) noise
in training datasets [41, 20]. Their basic assumption is that
clean samples are clustered together while OOD samples
are widely scattered in the feature space.
Although significant performance improvement is
achieved, most existing LNL works only take account of
OOD samples in training phase, while the existence of OOD
samples in testing phase is neglected, which is crucial for
machine learning systems in real applications [10, 19, 38].
In this paper, we study this practical problem, i.e., the ex-

62

