HighlightMe: Detecting Highlights from Human-Centric Videos
Uttaran Bhattacharya* 1 , Gang Wu2 , Stefano Petrangeli2 , Viswanathan Swaminathan2 , and Dinesh
Manocha1
1
2

University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
{uttaranb|dmanocha}@umd.edu
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA, USA.
{gawu|petrange|vishy}@adobe.com

Abstract
We present a domain- and user-preference-agnostic approach to detect highlightable excerpts from human-centric
videos. Our method works on the graph-based representation of multiple observable human-centric modalities in
the videos, such as poses and faces. We use an autoencoder
network equipped with spatial-temporal graph convolutions
to detect human activities and interactions based on these
modalities. We train our network to map the activity- and
interaction-based latent structural representations of the
different modalities to per-frame highlight scores based on
the representativeness of the frames. We use these scores
to compute which frames to highlight and stitch contiguous frames to produce the excerpts. We train our network
on the large-scale AVA-Kinetics action dataset and evaluate it on four benchmark video highlight datasets: DSH,
TVSum, PHD2 , and SumMe. We observe a 4–12% improvement in the mean average precision of matching the humanannotated highlights over state-of-the-art methods in these
datasets, without requiring any user-provided preferences
or dataset-specific fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Human-centric videos focus on human activities, tasks,
and emotions [62, 50]. These videos form a major part of
the rapidly growing volume of online media [8], coming
from multiple domains, such as amateur sports and performances, lectures, tutorials, video weblogs (vlogs), and individual or group activities, e.g., cookouts and holiday trips.
However, unedited human-centric videos also tend to contain large chunks of irrelevant and uninteresting content, requiring them to be edited for efficient browsing [47].
To address this problem, researchers have developed
multiple techniques for detecting highlightable excerpts and
summarizing videos [11, 53, 42, 63, 44, 67]. Given unedited
footage, highlight detection obtains the moments of interest,
* Work done while Uttaran an intern at Adobe Research

Figure 1: Detecting highlight excerpts using humancentric modalities. Our method leverages multiple humancentric modalities, e.g., body poses and faces, observable
in videos focusing on human activities, to detect highlights.
We use a 2D or 3D interconnected point representation of
each modality to construct a spatial-temporal graph representation to compute the highlight scores.
and summarization computes the most relevant and representative set of excerpts. Detecting effective highlights not
only expedites browsing, but also improves the chances of
those highlights being shared and recommended [53]. Current methods can learn to detect these excerpts given annotated highlights [47, 11], or sets of exemplars for different
highlight categories, e.g., learning from skiing images to
detect skiing excerpts from videos [23, 25]. Other methods
obviate the need for supervision by learning the representativeness of each frame or shot with respect to the original video [36] and exploiting video metadata such as duration [53] and relevance of shots [67, 64]. All these methods
either assume or benefit from some domain-specific knowledge of the unedited footage, e.g., running and jumping
may be more relevant in a parkour video, whereas sliding
maneuvers may be more relevant in a skiing video. Alternative methods do not consider domain-specific knowledge
but consider the pre-recorded preferences of multiple users
instead to detect personalized highlights [42].
Whether they assume domain-specific knowledge or
user-preferences, existing methods work in the 2D image
space of the frames or shots constituting the videos. State-

8157

