CrossViT: Cross-Attention Multi-Scale Vision Transformer for Image
Classification
Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen, Quanfu Fan, Rameswar Panda
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
chenrich@us.ibm.com, qfan@us.ibm.com, rpanda@ibm.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
The novel transformer architecture [36] has led to a big
leap forward in capabilities for sequence-to-sequence modeling in NLP tasks [10]. The great success of transformers in NLP has sparked particular interest from the vision
community in understanding whether transformers can be a
strong competitor against the dominant Convolutional Neural Network based architectures (CNNs) in vision tasks
such as ResNet [15] and EfficientNet [34]. Previous re-

Top-1 Acc. (%)

82

The recently developed vision transformer (ViT) has
achieved promising results on image classification compared to convolutional neural networks. Inspired by this,
in this paper, we study how to learn multi-scale feature representations in transformer models for image classification.
To this end, we propose a dual-branch transformer to combine image patches (i.e., tokens in a transformer) of different sizes to produce stronger image features. Our approach processes small-patch and large-patch tokens with
two separate branches of different computational complexity and these tokens are then fused purely by attention multiple times to complement each other. Furthermore, to reduce
computation, we develop a simple yet effective token fusion
module based on cross attention, which uses a single token
for each branch as a query to exchange information with
other branches. Our proposed cross-attention only requires
linear time for both computational and memory complexity
instead of quadratic time otherwise. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our approach performs better than or on
par with several concurrent works on vision transformer,
in addition to efficient CNN models. For example, on the
ImageNet1K dataset, with some architectural changes, our
approach outperforms the recent DeiT by a large margin of
2% with a small to moderate increase in FLOPs and model
parameters. Our source codes and models are available at
https://github.com/IBM/CrossViT.

80
78
76
10M 50M 100M 200M

74
72

0

10

20

30

40

FLOPs (109)

50

Ours
DeiT
ViT

60

70

Figure 1: Improvement of our proposed approach over
DeiT [35] and ViT [11]. The circle size is proportional to
the model size. All models are trained on ImageNet1K from
scratch. The results of ViT are referenced from [45].

search efforts on transformers in vision have, until very recently, been largely focused on combining CNNs with selfattention [3, 48, 31, 32]. While these hybrid approaches
achieve promising performance, they have limited scalability in computation compared to purely attention-based
transformers. Vision Transformer (ViT) [11], which uses a
sequence of embedded image patches as input to a standard
transformer, is the first kind of convolution-free transformers that demonstrate comparable performance to CNN models. However, ViT requires very large datasets such as ImageNet21K [9] and JFT300M [33] for training. DeiT [35]
subsequently shows that data augmentation and model regularization can enable training of high-performance ViT
models with fewer data. Since then, ViT has instantly inspired several attempts to improve its efficiency and effectiveness from different aspects [35, 45, 14, 38, 19].
Along the same line of research on building stronger
vision transformers, in this work, we study how to learn
multi-scale feature representations in transformer models
for image recognition. Multi-scale feature representations

357

