EPP-MVSNet: Epipolar-assembling based Depth Prediction for
Multi-view Stereo
Xinjun Ma1 * Yue Gong1 * Qirui Wang1 Jingwei Huang1 Lei Chen2† Fan Yu1
1
Distributed and Parallel Software Lab, Huawei Technologies
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{maxinjun1, gongyue1, wangqirui1, huangjingwei6, fan.yu}@huawei.com

leichen@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we proposed EPP-MVSNet, a novel deep
learning network for 3D reconstruction from multi-view
stereo (MVS). EPP-MVSNet can accurately aggregate
features at high resolution to a limited cost volume with an
optimal depth range, thus, leads to effective and efficient
3D construction. Distinct from existing works which
measure feature cost at discrete positions which affects
the 3D reconstruction accuracy, EPP-MVSNet introduces
an epipolar-assembling-based kernel that operates on
adaptive intervals along epipolar lines for making full use
of the image resolution. Further, we introduce an entropybased refining strategy where the cost volume describes
the space geometry with the little redundancy. Moreover,
we design a light-weighted network with Pseudo-3D
convolutions integrated to achieve high accuracy and
efficiency. We have conducted extensive experiments on
challenging datasets Tanks & Temples(TNT), ETH3D
and DTU. As a result, we achieve promising results on
all datasets and the highest F-Score on the online TNT
intermediate benchmark. Code is available at https:
//gitee.com/mindspore/mindspore/tree/m
aster/model_zoo/research/cv/eppmvsnet.

1. Introduction
Dense 3D reconstruction from multi-view stereo (MVS)
is a fundamental problem that has been studied for decades,
where dense correspondences are computed among multiple images and used to determine the dense geometry. Typically, correspondences can be established for each patch of
a reference image by searching its optimal matching patch
among target images [2]. Alternatively, [10] computes mat* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Mean F-score

(b) Run-time and memory

Figure 1. Comparison between the proposed EPP-MVSNet and
state-of-the-art learning-based multi-view stereo methods [9, 19,
27] on reconstruction quality in (a) and run-time and memory requirement in (b) with input images resolution of 1920×1056 on
Tanks & Temples dataset [13].

ching costs by exhaustively sampling pixels on the epipolar
lines and storing them into a cost volume, which is used to
determine the final depth map. However, both directions encounter the challenge on how to estimate depth accurately
and efficiently, especially in the real world scenarios filled
with noises and smooth texture, existing solutions require
high computation cost, but often achieve unsatisfactory reconstruction quality. While recent deep learning-based solutions [9, 22] address these issues and further enhance reconstruction quality, they still suffer from high memory and
computation requirement for constructing and regularizing
cost volumes, which make them unable to make fully usage
of high resolution images.
In this paper, we aim at designing a deep neural network
to fully utilize the information of high resolution images.
Though high-resolution cost volume is memory consuming, patch-match-based methods can overcome this issue
by searching for the minimum cost rather than storing all
the cost at the given image resolution. We further develop
this idea and propose an epipolar-assembling module that
assembles matching cost along the epipolar line. Specifically, our epipolar-assembling module constructs a com-

5732

