Weakly Supervised Temporal Anomaly Segmentation
with Dynamic Time Warping
Dongha Lee1 *, Sehun Yu2 , Hyunjun Ju2 , Hwanjo Yu2†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), Urbana, IL, United States
2
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, South Korea
1

donghal@illinois.edu, {hunu12,hyunjunju,hwanjoyu}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Most recent studies on detecting and localizing temporal anomalies have mainly employed deep neural networks
to learn the normal patterns of temporal data in an unsupervised manner. Unlike them, the goal of our work is to
fully utilize instance-level (or weak) anomaly labels, which
only indicate whether any anomalous events occurred or
not in each instance of temporal data. In this paper, we
present WETAS, a novel framework that effectively identifies anomalous temporal segments (i.e., consecutive time
points) in an input instance. WETAS learns discriminative
features from the instance-level labels so that it infers the
sequential order of normal and anomalous segments within
each instance, which can be used as a rough segmentation
mask. Based on the dynamic time warping (DTW) alignment between the input instance and its segmentation mask,
WETAS obtains the result of temporal segmentation, and simultaneously, it further enhances itself by using the mask as
additional supervision. Our experiments show that WETAS
considerably outperforms other baselines in terms of the localization of temporal anomalies, and also it provides more
informative results than point-level detection methods.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection, which refers to the task of identifying anomalous (or unusual) patterns in data, has been extensively researched in a wide range of domains, such as fraud
detection [1], network intrusion detection [18], and medical
diagnosis [38]. In particular, detecting the anomaly from
temporal data (e.g., multivariate time-series and videos) has
gained much attention in many real-world applications, for
finding out anomalous events that resulted in unexpected
changes of a temporal pattern or context.
Recently, several studies on anomaly detection started to
* This work was done when the author was at POSTECH.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Two different strategies for localizing temporal
anomalies. Given an input instance of length T , the pointlevel and segment-level anomaly detection produce the series of binary labels of length T and length L, respectively.
localize and segment the anomalies within an input instance
based on deep neural networks [4, 5, 14], unlike conventional methods which simply classify each input instance as
positive (i.e., anomalous) or negative (i.e., normal). In this
work, we aim to precisely localize the anomalies in temporal data by detecting anomalous temporal segments, defined
as the group of consecutive time points relevant to anomalous events. Note that labeling every anomalous time point
is neither practical nor precise, similarly to other segmentation problems [7, 21, 31]. In this sense, the main challenge of temporal anomaly segmentation is to distinguish
anomalous time points from normal time points without using point-level anomaly labels for model training.
The most dominant approach to the localization of the
temporal anomalies is point-level anomaly detection based
on the reconstruction of input instances [3, 12, 15, 25, 26,
30, 35, 40]. To learn the point-level (or local) anomaly score
in an unsupervised manner, they focus on modeling the normal patterns (i.e., temporal context of each time point, usually given in a form of its past inputs [6]) from normal data,
while considering all unlabeled data as normal. Specifically,
they mainly employ variational autoencoder (VAE) to learn
normal latent vectors of temporal inputs, or train sequence
models to predict the next input by using RNNs or CNNs.

7355

