Pi-NAS: Improving Neural Architecture Search by Reducing Supernet Training
Consistency Shift
Jiefeng Peng1,2 *,
1
3

Jiqi Zhang1 *, Changlin Li3 , Guangrun Wang4†,
Xiaodan Liang1 , Liang Lin1

Sun Yat-sen University

2

DarkMatter AI Research

GORSE Lab, Dept. of DSAI, Monash University

4

University of Oxford

{jiefengpeng,wanggrun,xdliang328}@gmail.com,

zhangjq49@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, changlin.li@monash.edu, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Recently proposed neural architecture search (NAS)
methods co-train billions of architectures in a supernet and
estimate their potential accuracy using the network weights
detached from the supernet. However, the ranking correlation between the architectures’ predicted accuracy and their
actual capability is incorrect, which causes the existing NAS
methods’ dilemma. We attribute this ranking correlation
problem to the supernet training consistency shift, including feature shift and parameter shift. Feature shift is identified as dynamic input distributions of a hidden layer due
to random path sampling. The input distribution dynamic
affects the loss descent and finally affects architecture ranking. Parameter shift is identified as contradictory parameter
updates for a shared layer lay in different paths in different
training steps. The rapidly-changing parameter could not
preserve architecture ranking. We address these two shifts
simultaneously using a nontrivial supernet-⇧ model, called
⇧-NAS. Specifically, we employ a supernet-⇧ model that
contains cross-path learning to reduce the feature consistency shift between different paths. Meanwhile, we adopt a
novel nontrivial mean teacher containing negative samples
to overcome parameter shift and model collision. Furthermore, our ⇧-NAS runs in an unsupervised manner, which
can search for more transferable architectures. Extensive
experiments on ImageNet and a wide range of downstream
tasks (e.g., COCO 2017, ADE20K, and Cityscapes) demonstrate the effectiveness and universality of our ⇧-NAS compared to supervised NAS. See Codes1 .

1. Introduction
Automatic neural architecture search (NAS) has been an
intense longing in machine learning in the past four years.
* Jiefeng Peng and Jiqi Zhang are co-first authors and share equal contributions. Their names are listed in alphabetical order.
† Corresponding Author.
1 Code: https://github.com/Ernie1/Pi-NAS

input

w/o supernet-Π model

w/ supernet-Π model

path i

path i

path j

path j

(a) Feature shift. Left: Without the supernet-⇧ model, there is a
feature shift between different paths’ feature maps. Right: With
supernet-⇧ model, the feature shift is significantly reduced.

(b) Parameter shift. Different colors represent the distribution of
parameters in different iterations. Left: without our nontrivial
mean teacher, the parameter has significantly varying distributions in training. Right: with our nontrivial mean teacher, the
parameter shift is significantly reduced.
Figure 1: Illustration of supernet training consistency shift.

Early works use reinforcement learning [69] or evolutionary algorithms [40] to discover high-performance architectures in the search space. The searching procedure usually
costs thousands of GPU days for large datasets, as each
sampled architecture needs training from scratch. Recently,
to alleviate the heavy burden, weight sharing NAS methods [16, 9, 20, 54, 33, 30, 15, 36, 17, 1, 8] are widely
used, where candidate architectures share weights and train
simultaneously in a supernet2 . After training, a candidate subnet’s weights detached from the supernet are used
to predict its actual performance. Despite the remarkable
progress in efficiency, weight-sharing NAS’s effectiveness
2 A supernet is an over-parameterized network that integrates the entire
search space. Each architecture within the search space corresponds to a
supernet’s sub-net capturing the required operations.

12354

