Pathdreamer: A World Model for Indoor Navigation
Jing Yu Koh1

Honglak Lee2
1

Yinfei Yang1

Google Research

Abstract
People navigating in unfamiliar buildings take advantage of myriad visual, spatial and semantic cues to efficiently achieve their navigation goals. Towards equipping
computational agents with similar capabilities, we introduce Pathdreamer, a visual world model for agents navigating in novel indoor environments. Given one or more previous visual observations, Pathdreamer generates plausible
high-resolution 360◦ visual observations (RGB, semantic
segmentation and depth) for viewpoints that have not been
visited, in buildings not seen during training. In regions of
high uncertainty (e.g. predicting around corners, imagining
the contents of an unseen room), Pathdreamer can predict
diverse scenes, allowing an agent to sample multiple realistic outcomes for a given trajectory. We demonstrate that
Pathdreamer encodes useful and accessible visual, spatial
and semantic knowledge about human environments by using it in the downstream task of Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN). Specifically, we show that planning ahead
with Pathdreamer brings about half the benefit of looking
ahead at actual observations from unobserved parts of the
environment. We hope that Pathdreamer will help unlock
model-based approaches to challenging embodied navigation tasks such as navigating to specified objects and VLN.

1. Introduction
World models [23], or models of environments [72], are
an appealing way to represent an agent’s knowledge about
its surroundings. An agent with a world model can predict
its future by ‘imagining’ the consequences of a series of
proposed actions. This capability can be used for samplingbased planning [16, 57], learning policies directly from the
model (i.e., learning in a dream) [17, 23, 64, 25], and for
counterfactual reasoning [6]. Model-based approaches such
as these also typically improve the sample efficiency of deep
reinforcement learning [72, 62]. However, world models
that generate high-dimensional visual observations (i.e., images) have typically been restricted to relatively simple environments, such as Atari games [62] and tabletops [16].
Our goal is to develop a generic visual world model
for agents navigating in indoor environments. Specifically,

2

Jason Baldridge1

Peter Anderson1

University of Michigan

1. Input

Floorplan view (not used in the model)

3

2. Ground truth (2.3m)

2. Prediction (2.3m)

3. Ground truth (6.3m)

3. Prediction (6.3m)

2

1

Figure 1: Generating photorealistic 360◦ visual observations from an imagined 6.3m trajectory in a previously unseen building. Observations also include depth and segmentations (not shown here).
given one or more previous observations and a proposed
navigation action sequence, we aim to generate plausible
high-resolution visual observations for viewpoints that have
not been visited, and do so in buildings not seen during
training. Beyond applications in video editing and content
creation, solving this problem would unlock model-based
methods for many embodied AI tasks, including navigating
to objects [5], instruction-guided navigation [3, 66, 40] and
dialog-guided navigation [74, 26]. For example, an agent
asked to find a certain type of object in a novel building,
e.g. ‘find a chair’, could perform mental simulations using
the world model to identify navigation trajectories that are
most likely to include chair observations – without moving.
Building such a model is challenging. It requires synthesizing completions of partially visible objects, using as
few as one previous observation. This is akin to novel view
synthesis from a single image [19, 80], but with potentially
unbounded viewpoint changes. There is also the related but
considerably more extreme challenge of predicting around
corners. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, any future navigation trajectory passing the entrance of an unseen room
requires the model to plausibly imagine the entire contents

14738

