Rethinking the Truly Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation
Kyungjune Baek∗
Yonsei University

Yunjey Choi
NAVER AI Lab

Youngjung Uh
Yonsei University

bkjbkj12@yonsei.ac.kr

yunjey.choi@navercorp.com

yj.uh@yonsei.ac.kr

Jaejun Yoo
UNIST

Hyunjung Shim†
Yonsei University

jaejun.yoo@unist.ac.kr

kateshim@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Every recent image-to-image translation model inherently requires either image-level (i.e. input-output pairs) or
set-level (i.e. domain labels) supervision. However, even
set-level supervision can be a severe bottleneck for data collection in practice. In this paper, we tackle image-to-image
translation in a fully unsupervised setting, i.e., neither
paired images nor domain labels. To this end, we propose a
truly unsupervised image-to-image translation model (TUNIT) that simultaneously learns to separate image domains
and translates input images into the estimated domains. Experimental results show that our model achieves comparable or even better performance than the set-level supervised
model trained with full labels, generalizes well on various
datasets, and is robust against the choice of hyperparameters (e.g. the preset number of pseudo domains). Furthermore, TUNIT can be easily extended to semi-supervised
learning with a few labeled data.

1. Introduction
Given an image of one domain, image-to-image translation is a task to generate the plausible images of the other
domains. Based on the success of conditional generative
models [26, 31], many image translation methods have been
proposed either using image-level supervision (e.g. paired
data) [14, 12, 39, 33, 28] or using set-level supervision (e.g.
domain labels) [38, 18, 21, 13, 22, 20]. Though the latter
approach is generally called unsupervised as a counterpart
of the former, it actually assumes that the domain labels
are given a priori. This assumption can be a serious bottleneck in practice as the number of domains and samples
increases. For example, labeling individual samples of a
∗ Work done during his internship at Clova AI Research.
† Hyunjung Shim is a corresponding author.

(𝑖)

𝐱𝐴

(𝑖)

𝐱𝐵

(a) Image-level

𝛘𝐴

𝛘𝐵

(b) Set-level

𝛘𝐶

𝛘

(c) Unsupervised

Figure 1: Levels of supervision. To perform image-to-image
translation, existing methods need either (a) a dataset with inputoutput pairs or, (b) a dataset with domain information. Our method
is capable of learning mappings among multiple domains using (c)
a dataset without any supervision.
large dataset (e.g. FFHQ) is expensive, and the distinction
across domains can be vague.
We first clarify that unsupervised image-to-image translation should strictly denote the task without any supervision neither paired images nor domain labels. Under this
rigorous definition, our goal is to develop an unsupervised
translation model given a mixed set of images of many domains (Figure 1). We argue that the unsupervised translation model is valuable in three aspects. First of all, it significantly reduces the effort of data annotation for model
training. As a natural byproduct, the unsupervised model
can be robust against the noisy labels produced by the manual labeling process. More importantly, it serves as a strong
baseline to develop the semi-supervised image translation
models. To tackle this problem, we design our model having three sub-modules: 1) clustering the images by approximating the set-level characteristics (i.e. domains), 2) encoding the individual content and style of an input image,
respectively, and 3) learning a mapping function among the
estimated domains.
To this end, we introduce a guiding network. The
guiding network consists of a shared encoder with two

14154

