Learning Indoor Inverse Rendering with 3D Spatially-Varying Lighting
Zian Wang1,2,3 Jonah Philion1,2,3 Sanja Fidler1,2,3 Jan Kautz1
NVIDIA1 University of Toronto2 Vector Institute3
{zianw, jphilion, sfidler, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
In this work, we address the problem of jointly estimating
albedo, normals, depth and 3D spatially-varying lighting
from a single image. Most existing methods formulate the
task as image-to-image translation, ignoring the 3D properties of the scene. However, indoor scenes contain complex
3D light transport where a 2D representation is insufficient.
In this paper, we propose a unified, learning-based inverse
rendering framework that formulates 3D spatially-varying
lighting. Inspired by classic volume rendering techniques,
we propose a novel Volumetric Spherical Gaussian representation for lighting, which parameterizes the exitant radiance
of the 3D scene surfaces on a voxel grid. We design a physicsbased differentiable renderer that utilizes our 3D lighting
representation, and formulates the energy-conserving image
formation process that enables joint training of all intrinsic properties with the re-rendering constraint. Our model
ensures physically correct predictions and avoids the need
for ground-truth HDR lighting which is not easily accessible. Experiments show that our method outperforms prior
works both quantitatively and qualitatively, and is capable
of producing photorealistic results for AR applications such
as virtual object insertion even for highly specular objects.

1. Introduction
The task of inverse rendering, originally proposed by
Barrow and Tenenbaum [3] in 1978, aims to reverse the rendering process by estimating reflectance, shape and lighting
from a single image. Estimating these intrinsic properties
enable downstream applications in augmented and mixed
reality, such as realistic insertion of 3D objects into a given
2D image. Inverse rendering also facilitates semantic scene
analysis such as object segmentation [5].
Given only observed pixel values, the problem of disambiguating reflectance, geometry and their complex interactions with lighting is challenging and ill-posed. Classic
optimization-based methods leverage hand-crafted priors to
constrain the ill-posed nature of the problem. However, these
priors do not always hold for complex real world images and
can lead to artifacts. Indoor scenes commonly encountered
in AR applications are considered especially challenging due

(a) Input image

(b) Albedo

(c) Normals

(f) Specular / Diffuse / Transparent
Sphere Insertion

(d) Depth

(e) Lighting

(g) Specular Object Insertion

Figure 1: From a single image, our model jointly estimates albedo,
normals, depth, and the HDR lighting volume. Key to our method
is inferring continuous HDR 3D spatially-varying lighting, which
is critical in producing high quality virtual object insertion with
realistic cast shadows and angular high-frequency details.

to complex 3D light transport that occurs indoors.
In this work, we address the problem of scene-level inverse rendering, focusing specifically on producing high
dynamic range (HDR) 3D spatially-varying lighting with
high-frequency details, as shown in Fig. 1. Estimating both
HDR and 3D spatially-varying lighting is critical for photorealistic virtual object insertion; HDR enables realistic
cast shadows and 3D spatially-varying lighting enables highfrequency details. We use the HDR lighting inferred by our
model to insert highly specular objects and produce realistic
cast shadows and high-frequency details, which were not
possible in previous works [11, 22, 33, 38].
Existing learning-based methods usually exploit powerful
2D CNNs and formulate the inverse rendering problem as
image-to-image translation. Lighting is usually represented
with spherical lobes such as spherical Harmonics and spherical Gaussian [2, 41], and environment maps [10, 33], which
ignores spatially-varying effects. Recent works attempt to
predict 2D spatially-varying spherical lobes [11, 22], but
still lack one degree of freedom (depth) and compromise in
terms of angular high-frequency effects. As a consequence,
the 2D representation of the scene lighting is not sufficiently
performant for many downstream applications.
In this paper, we propose a holistic inverse rendering
framework for jointly estimating reflectance, shape and 3D

12538

