Self-supervised Video Object Segmentation by Motion Grouping
Charig Yang

Hala Lamdouar

Erika Lu

Andrew Zisserman

Weidi Xie

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{charig,lamdouar,erika,az,weidi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Our Prediction Optical Flow

RGB Image

https://charigyang.github.io/motiongroup/

Figure 1: Segmenting camouflaged animals. Motion plays a critical role in augmenting the capability of our visual system for perceptual
grouping in complex scenes – for example, in these sequences (MoCA dataset [39]), the visual appearance (RGB images) is clearly
uninformative. In this paper, we propose a self-supervised approach to segment objects using only motion, i.e. optical flow. From top to
bottom rows, we show the video frames, optical flow between consecutive frames, and the segmentation produced by our approach.

Abstract
Animals have evolved highly functional visual systems to
understand motion, assisting perception even under complex environments. In this paper, we work towards developing a computer vision system able to segment objects by exploiting motion cues, i.e. motion segmentation. To achieve
this, we introduce a simple variant of the Transformer to
segment optical flow frames into primary objects and the
background, which can be trained in a self-supervised manner, i.e. without using any manual annotations. Despite using only optical flow, and no appearance information, as
input, our approach achieves superior results compared to
previous state-of-the-art self-supervised methods on public
benchmarks (DAVIS2016, SegTrackv2, FBMS59), while being an order of magnitude faster. On a challenging camouflage dataset (MoCA), we significantly outperform other
self-supervised approaches, and are competitive with the
top supervised approach, highlighting the importance of
motion cues and the potential bias towards appearance in
existing video segmentation models.

1. Introduction
When looking around the world, we effortlessly perceive
a complex scene as a set of distinct objects. This phenomenon is referred to as perceptual grouping – the process of organizing the incoming visual information – and
is usually considered a fundamental cognitive ability that
enables understanding and interacting with the world efficiently. How do we accomplish such a remarkable perceptual achievement, given that the visual input is, in a sense,
just a spatial distribution of variously colored individual
points/pixels? In 1923, Wertheimer [80] first introduced the
Gestalt principles with the goal of formulating the underlying causes by which sensory data is organized into groups,
or Gestalten. The principles are much like heuristics with
“a bag of tricks” [58] that the visual system may exploit for
grouping, for example, proximity, similarity, closure, continuation, common fate, etc.
In computer vision, perceptual grouping is often closely
related to the problem of segmentation, i.e. extracting the
objects with arbitrary shape (pixel-wise labels) from cluttered scenes. In the recent literature of semantic or instance

7177

