COTR: Correspondence Transformer for Matching Across Images
Wei Jiang1 , Eduard Trulls2 , Jan Hosang2 , Andrea Tagliasacchi2,3 , Kwang Moo Yi1
1

University of British Columbia,

2

Google Research,

3

University of Toronto

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for finding correspondences in images based on a deep neural network that, given
two images and a query point in one of them, finds its correspondence in the other. By doing so, one has the option
to query only the points of interest and retrieve sparse correspondences, or to query all points in an image and obtain
dense mappings. Importantly, in order to capture both local
and global priors, and to let our model relate between image
regions using the most relevant among said priors, we realize our network using a transformer. At inference time, we
apply our correspondence network by recursively zooming
in around the estimates, yielding a multiscale pipeline able
to provide highly-accurate correspondences. Our method
significantly outperforms the state of the art on both sparse
and dense correspondence problems on multiple datasets
and tasks, ranging from wide-baseline stereo to optical flow,
without any retraining for a specific dataset. We commit
to releasing data, code, and all the tools necessary to train
from scratch and ensure reproducibility.

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences across pairs of images is a fundamental task in computer vision, with applications ranging
from camera calibration [22, 28] to optical flow [32, 15],
Structure from Motion (SfM) [56, 28], visual localization [55, 53, 36], point tracking [35, 68], and human pose
estimation [43, 20]. Traditionally, two fundamental research
directions exist for this problem. One is to extract sets of
sparse keypoints from both images and match them in order
to minimize an alignment metric [33, 55, 28]. The other is
to interpret correspondence as a dense process, where every pixel in the first image maps to a pixel in the second
image [32, 60, 77, 72].
The divide between sparse and dense emerged naturally
from the applications they were devised for. Sparse methods
have largely been used to recover a single global camera
motion, such as in wide-baseline stereo, using geometrical
constraints. They rely on local features [34, 74, 44, 13]

Figure 1. The Correspondence Transformer – (a) COTR
formulates the correspondence problem as a functional mapping
from point x to point x0 , conditional on two input images I and
I 0 . (b) COTR is capable of sparse matching under different motion types, including camera motion, multi-object motion, and
object-pose changes. (c) COTR generates a smooth correspondence map for stereo pairs: given (c.1,2) as input, (c.3) shows the
predicted dense correspondence map (color-coded ‘x’ channel),
and (c.4) warps (c.2) onto (c.1) with the predicted correspondences.

and further prune the putative correspondences formed with
them in a separate stage with sampling-based robust matchers [18, 3, 12], or their learned counterparts [75, 7, 76, 64,
54]. Dense methods, by contrast, usually model small temporal changes, such as optical flow in video sequences, and
rely on local smoothness [35, 24]. Exploiting context in
this manner allows them to find correspondences at arbitrary
locations, including seemingly texture-less areas.
In this work, we present a solution that bridges this divide,
a novel network architecture that can express both forms of
prior knowledge – global and local – and learn them implicitly from data. To achieve this, we leverage the inductive
bias that densely connected networks possess in representing
smooth functions [1, 4, 48] and use a transformer [73, 10, 14]
16207

