Long Short View Feature Decomposition via Contrastive Video Representation
Learning
Nadine Behrmann1
Mohsen Fayyaz2,†
Juergen Gall2
Mehdi Noroozi1
1
2
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
University of Bonn
{nadine.behrmann, mehdi.noroozi}@de.bosch.com, {fayyaz, gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Self-supervised video representation methods typically
focus on the representation of temporal attributes in videos.
However, the role of stationary versus non-stationary attributes is less explored: Stationary features, which remain
similar throughout the video, enable the prediction of videolevel action classes. Non-stationary features, which represent temporally varying attributes, are more beneficial for
downstream tasks involving more fine-grained temporal understanding, such as action segmentation. We argue that
a single representation to capture both types of features is
sub-optimal, and propose to decompose the representation
space into stationary and non-stationary features via contrastive learning from long and short views, i.e. long video
sequences and their shorter sub-sequences. Stationary features are shared between the short and long views, while
non-stationary features aggregate the short views to match
the corresponding long view. To empirically verify our approach, we demonstrate that our stationary features work
particularly well on an action recognition downstream task,
while our non-stationary features perform better on action
segmentation. Furthermore, we analyse the learned representations and find that stationary features capture more
temporally stable, static attributes, while non-stationary
features encompass more temporally varying ones.

1. Introduction
Learning rich video representations is a key challenge
for general video understanding. An ideal representation
extracts useful information that benefits numerous downstream tasks such as action recognition, retrieval and action segmentation. Learning such representations in a supervised setting is inherently biased towards static features [24]. However, in order to solve more complex down† Work done during an internship at the Bosch Center for Artificial
Intelligence.

Figure 1. Video attributes can be divided into two sections: Stationary features (shown in yellow), that are shared between long
and short views, and non-stationary features (shown in green), that
aggregate the short views to match the corresponding long view.

stream tasks, that require temporal attributes of videos such
as temporal action segmentation, we need a more diverse set
of features. As a remedy, we train our network to represent
stationary and non-stationary features. To get an intuition,
let’s consider the following example: a video of a bartender
mixing a cocktail in Figure 1 is stationary in one sense – we
see a bartender in a bar with liquor bottles in the background
– but non-stationary in another: different steps in preparing
a cocktail are shown, such as holding the bottle, pouring the
left bottle and pouring the right bottle. Here, the stationary attributes of the video enable us to predict the overall
action class, i.e. mixing cocktails. On the other hand, the
non-stationary attributes enable more fine-grained temporal
distinctions, e.g. predicting when different steps occur in
the video. Ideally, both types of attributes should be represented by video models.
Learning representations in a supervised setting, usually
involves pretraining on large-scale labeled datasets such as
Kinetics [17] with video-level annotations, inhibiting strong
static biases [24]. As a result they capture mainly the stationary features, but largely ignore non-stationary features
as the stationary features are sufficient for action recognition. Self-supervised leaning provides a promising direc-

9244

