Self-Calibrating Neural Radiance Fields
Yoonwoo Jeong1
Seokjun Ahn1
Christopher Choy2
Animashree Anandkumar2,3
Minsu Cho1
Jaesik Park1
POSTECH1

(a) Calibrating extrinsic
camera parameters

NVIDIA2

Caltech3

(c) Calibrating non-linear
distortion parameters

(b) Calibrating intrinsic
camera parameters

Figure 1. We visualize calibration processes of three different camera parameters using our method. Our method calibrates extrinsic
camera parameter (a), intrinsic camera parameters (b), non-linear camera model noise (c).

Abstract
In this work, we propose a camera self-calibration algorithm for generic cameras with arbitrary non-linear distortions. We jointly learn the geometry of the scene and the accurate camera parameters without any calibration objects.
Our camera model consists of a pinhole model, a fourth order radial distortion, and a generic noise model that can
learn arbitrary non-linear camera distortions. While traditional self-calibration algorithms mostly rely on geometric
constraints, we additionally incorporate photometric consistency. This requires learning the geometry of the scene,
and we use Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF). We also propose a new geometric loss function, viz., projected ray distance loss, to incorporate geometric consistency for complex non-linear camera models. We validate our approach
on standard real image datasets and demonstrate that our
model can learn the camera intrinsics and extrinsics (pose)
from scratch without COLMAP initialization. Also, we
show that learning accurate camera models in a differentiable manner allows us to improve PSNR over baselines.
Our module is an easy-to-use plugin that can be applied to
NeRF variants to improve performance. The code and data
are currently available at https://github.com/POSTECHCVLab/SCNeRF

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is one of the crucial steps in computer vision. Through this process, we learn how the incoming rays map to pixels and thus connect the images to the

physical world. Thus, it is a fundamental step in many applications such as autonomous driving, robotics, augmented
reality, and many more.
Camera calibration is typically done by placing calibration objects (e.g., a checkerboard pattern) in the scene and
estimating the camera parameters using the known geometry of the calibration objects. However, in many cases, calibration objects are not readily available and can interfere
with the perception tasks when cameras are deployed in the
wild. Thus, calibrating without any external objects, or selfcalibration, has been an important research topic; ﬁrst proposed in Faugeras et al. [4]. The paper has spurred many
follow-ups, some of which propose to globally optimize or
embed constraints into the self-calibration optimization process [14, 24, 1, 2].
Although there has been much progress in developing
self-calibration algorithms, all these methods have limitations: 1) the camera model used in self-calibration is a simple linear pinhole camera model. This camera-model design
cannot incorporate generic non-linear camera noise that is
prevalent in all commodity cameras resulting in less accurate camera calibration. 2) self-calibration algorithms use
only a sparse set of image correspondences, and direct photometric consistency has not been used for self-calibration.
3) they use correspondences from a non-differentiable process and do not improve the 3D geometry of the objects,
which could improve the camera model. Let us discuss each
limitation in detail.
First, a linear pinhole camera model can be formulated
15846

