Rehearsal revealed:
The limits and merits of revisiting samples in continual learning
Eli Verwimp*
KU Leuven

Matthias De Lange*
KU Leuven

Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven

eli.verwimp@kuleuven.be

matthias.delange@kuleuven.be

tinne.tuytelaars@kuleuven.be

Abstract
Learning from non-stationary data streams and overcoming catastrophic forgetting still poses a serious challenge for machine learning research. Rather than aiming to
improve state-of-the-art, in this work we provide insight into
the limits and merits of rehearsal, one of continual learning’s most established methods. We hypothesize that models
trained sequentially with rehearsal tend to stay in the same
low-loss region after a task has finished, but are at risk of
overfitting on its sample memory, hence harming generalization. We provide both conceptual and strong empirical
evidence on three benchmarks for both behaviors, bringing
novel insights into the dynamics of rehearsal and continual
learning in general. Finally, we interpret important continual learning works in the light of our findings, allowing for
a deeper understanding of their successes.1

1. Introduction
Recent advances of neural networks have shown promising results by surpassing human capabilities in a wide range
of tasks [36, 29, 35]. However, these tasks are typically
highly confined and remain static after deployment. This
stems from a major limitation in neural network optimization, namely the assumption of independent and identically
distributed (iid) training and testing distributions. When
the iid assumption is not satisfied during learning, neural
networks are prone to catastrophic forgetting [12], causing
them to completely forget previously acquired knowledge.
Continual or lifelong learning strives to overcome this
static nature of neural networks with a wide range of mechanisms [10], among which rehearsal has shown promising
results [22, 28, 7, 9]. Rehearsal aims to approximate the
observed input distributions over time and later resamples
from this approximation to avoid forgetting. Although there
are various ways to use the input distribution approximation
* Authors contributed equally.
1 Code: https://github.com/Mattdl/RehearsalRevealed

Figure 1: Illustration of our findings, visualized as the loss
values in parameter space. When using rehearsal to train
task 2 (T 2) after training task 1 (T 1), i.e. from w1 to w2 ,
the learning trajectory will first move towards a finetuned
minimum w2,F T but deflects at a high-loss ridge of T 1’s
low-loss region. The crux is w2 ending up in the striped area
where low loss for T 1 memory is in contrast to the higher
loss observed for T 1 test data. Additionally, we show empirically that linear low loss paths (a) and (c) exist between
w1 and w2 , and between two models trained with different
rehearsal memories w2 and w2′ .
(Section 2), this study focuses and refers to rehearsal in its
most direct form, i.e. by sampling the input distribution in a
limited rehearsal memory from which samples are revisited
in later training batches.
Despite the wide use of rehearsal, due to its simplicity
and effectiveness, fundamental analysis of why it works
and what its limitations are is lacking in literature. Furthermore, we believe that insights into its internal workings
might deepen our understanding of the catastrophic forgetting phenomenon in general. In this work, we make an initial attempt from the perspective of loss landscapes.
Fundamental open questions. Motivated by recent advances in continual learning literature, we define two fun-

9385

