Holistic Pose Graph: Modeling Geometric Structure among Objects in a Scene
using Graph Inference for 3D Object Prediction

1

Jiwei Xiao1,2 , Ruiping Wang1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, 100084, China
jiwei.xiao@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Due to the missing depth cues, it is essentially ambiguous to detect 3D objects from a single RGB image. Existing
methods predict the 3D pose for each object independently
or merely by combining local relationships within limited
surroundings, but rarely explore the inherent geometric relationships from a global perspective. To address this issue,
we argue that modeling geometric structure among objects
in a scene is very crucial, and thus elaborately devise the
Holistic Pose Graph (HPG) that explicitly integrates all geometric poses including the object pose treated as nodes
and the relative pose treated as edges. The inference of
the HPG uses GRU to encode the pose features from their
corresponding regions in a single RGB image, and passes
messages along the graph structure iteratively to improve
the predicted poses. To further enhance the correspondence
between the object pose and the relative pose, we propose
a novel consistency loss to explicitly measure the deviations
between them. Finally, we apply Holistic Pose Estimation
(HPE) to jointly evaluate both the independent object pose
and the relative pose. Our experiments on the SUN RGBD dataset demonstrate that the proposed method provides a
significant improvement on 3D object prediction.

1. Introduction
3D object prediction from a single RGB image is extremely challenging, which estimates 3D bounding boxes
for each object in a scene. The main difficulty of this task
is to predict the depth information that a single RGB image loses during the projection from 3D real world to the
2D image. How are humans capable of making precise estimations when looking at an image? Humans not only have
rich prior knowledge about the category-specific object, but
also can leverage the geometric relationships among differ-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The effect of using geometric relationships. (a) some
results from our baseline method [27], which make inaccurate estimation about the relative pose. (b) our model makes more reasonable prediction after using HPG.

ent objects in a scene to alleviate the uncertainties of prediction for each object. Existing methods [12,14,16,17,20,37]
consider using the prior knowledge to reason about the object pose independently but it is rough sometimes. As a
result of the inevitable deviation of prediction per object,
there will be a certain amount of inaccurate estimations, as
shown in Figure 1 (a), which cause humans’ misunderstanding about the scene. These results mainly are caused by the
improper relative pose estimation and could have been effectively avoided by using the geometric relationships.
Inspired by the above observations, we seek to leverage
the geometric relationship to add more constraints on each
object for more reasonable and precise estimation. Modeling the geometric relationships explicitly will help us exclude many impossible solutions in the 3D space. For example, as shown in top of Figure 1 (a), we should have gotten

12717

