MGNet: Monocular Geometric Scene Understanding for Autonomous Driving
Markus Schön
Michael Buchholz
Klaus Dietmayer
Institute of Measurement, Control and Microtechnology, Ulm University
{markus.schoen,michael.buchholz,klaus.dietmayer}@uni-ulm.de

Abstract
We introduce MGNet, a multi-task framework for monocular geometric scene understanding. We define monocular
geometric scene understanding as the combination of two
known tasks: Panoptic segmentation and self-supervised
monocular depth estimation. Panoptic segmentation captures the full scene not only semantically, but also on an
instance basis. Self-supervised monocular depth estimation
uses geometric constraints derived from the camera measurement model in order to measure depth from monocular
video sequences only. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to propose the combination of these two tasks
in one single model. Our model is designed with focus on
low latency to provide fast inference in real-time on a single consumer-grade GPU. During deployment, our model
produces dense 3D point clouds with instance aware semantic labels from single high-resolution camera images.
We evaluate our model on two popular autonomous driving benchmarks, i.e., Cityscapes and KITTI, and show competitive performance among other real-time capable methods. Source code is available at https://github.
com/markusschoen/MGNet.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is an essential component for autonomous driving perception systems, since it provides
necessary information for higher-level functions such as
multi-object-tracking or behavior planning. Recent advances in semantic segmentation [5, 42, 61, 67, 81, 85] and
instance segmentation [22, 25, 39, 69, 70] based on deep
neural networks show outstanding results, while fast models [9,13,26,51,78] focus on optimizing the speed-accuracy
trade-off for usage in latency-critical applications, e.g., autonomous driving. New tasks emerge regularly, bringing
perception systems a step forward towards full scene understanding, but also increasing task complexity.
One of these tasks is panoptic segmentation [32], a combination of semantic and instance segmentation. Semantic
segmentation focuses on stuff classes, i.e., amorph regions

(a) Input image

(b) Panoptic segmentation

(c) Monocular depth estimation

(d) 3D point cloud

Figure 1: Example prediction of our model, (a) the input
image which is fed to the network, (b) the panoptic prediction on top of the input image, (c) the monocular depth
estimation and (d) the final 3D point cloud generated by the
network in real-time.

like sky or road, while instance segmentation focuses on
thing classes, i.e., countable objects like cars, bicycles or
pedestrians. Panoptic segmentation handles both stuff and
thing classes, providing not only unique class label for each
pixel in the image, but also instance IDs for countable objects. Panoptic segmentation is an important step towards
scene understanding in autonomous vehicles, since it provides not only the object masks, but also interesting amorph
regions like drivable road space or sidewalks. However, the
vast majority [3, 7, 12, 31, 36, 38, 40, 46, 52–54, 58, 65, 66,
72, 73, 76] of panoptic segmentation methods focus on high
quality rather than inference speed, making them unsuitable for on-board integration into an autonomous vehicle
perception system. Only few methods [9, 13, 26, 51] have
been proposed in the low-latency regime. Additionally, the
camera-based measurement in the two-dimensional image
plane limits the capabilities of panoptic segmentation models in autonomous vehicles. The 2D pixel location is not
sufficient for higher-level systems such as behavior planning to reason about the current environment. Rather, a 3D
representation is required.

15804

