Distilling Global and Local Logits with Densely Connected Relations
Youmin Kim1,3 * Jinbae Park1 YounHo Jang1 Muhammad Ali1 Tae-Hyun Oh2 Sung-Ho Bae1†
1
Kyung Hee University, 2 POSTECH, 3 Kakao Enterprise
{rladbals0733, qkrwlsqo94}@gmail.com, {2014104142, salmanali, shbae}@khu.ac.kr
taehyun@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

Relationship

Relationship

In prevalent knowledge distillation, logits in most image
recognition models are computed by global average pooling, then used to learn to encode the high-level and taskrelevant knowledge. In this work, we solve the limitation
of this global logit transfer in this distillation context. We
point out that it prevents the transfer of informative spatial
information, which provides localized knowledge as well
as rich relational information across contexts of an input
scene. To exploit the rich spatial information, we propose
a simple yet effective logit distillation approach. We add a
local spatial pooling layer branch to the penultimate layer,
thereby our method extends the standard logit distillation
and enables learning of both finely-localized knowledge and
holistic representation. Our proposed method shows favorable accuracy improvement against the state-of-the-art
methods on several image classification datasets. We show
that our distilled students trained on the image classification task can be successfully leveraged for object detection
and semantic segmentation tasks; this result demonstrates
our method’s high transferability.

Distillation
Local Logits

Local Logits

Distillation
Global Logits

Global Logits

Teacher Classifier

Student Classifier
Spatial Pooling

Local Features

Local Features

Global Features

Global Features

Conv Layers
Teacher

Conv Layers
Student
Input Images

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation is a method of transferring
knowledge of a large network (i.e., teacher) to a smaller
neural network (i.e., student). Unlike human-designed prior
knowledge, the distillation is an optimization method that
uses the representation of the network as prior knowledge.
More specifically, the student is trained with respect to reducing a task-specific objective function, and the difference
in knowledge from the teacher.
Due to the simplicity and effectiveness of targeting the
teacher that has higher accuracy than the student, many researchers have used the distillation method to achieve the
state-of-the-art accuracy on ImageNet dataset [11] of the
* The work was done when Youmin Kim was at Kyung Hee University
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Overview of our method. The global and local
logits and their densely connected relationships are used for
the logit distillation. “Conv Layers” denote convolutional
layers of teacher and student networks.
network [53, 43]. For the same reason, the distillation has
been combined with model-compression methods such as
pruning [31, 37] and quantization [25, 4], or other optimization methods such as data augmentation [51] and ensemble
[58]. In addition, the distillation is used not only for the
image classification tasks, but also other vision tasks such
as image super-resolution [17, 30], object detection [7, 49]
and semantic segmentation [52, 36].
Depending on the representation levels of features to be
transferred, knowledge distillation methods are divided into

6290

