Uncertainty-Guided Transformer Reasoning for Camouflaged Object Detection
Fan Yang 1,‡ Qiang Zhai2,‡ Xin Li1 * Rui Huang2 Ao Luo3 Hong Cheng1 Deng-Ping Fan4
1
AIQ 2 UESTC 3 Megvii 4 IIAI
‡ Equal contributions

Positional Encoding

1. Introduction
Camouflaged object detection (COD), also known as decamouflaging, aims to discover the hidden targets from a
given scene. It is not only an important scientific topic
on understanding the relationship between visual perception
and camouflage, but also can facilitate many real-life applications, such as image synthesis [4], species discovery [41]
and medical image analysis [13]. However, body colours,
patterns and other morphological adaptations of camouflaged object(s) would significantly decrease their probability of being detected, recognized or targeted, making de* Corresponding author: Xin Li (xinli uestc@hotmail.com)

During training

(b) Uncertainty

、

[Mask]

[Mask]

Transformers

𝓝(𝝁, 𝝈)

…

Spotting objects that are visually adapted to their surroundings is challenging for both humans and AI. Conventional generic / salient object detection techniques are
suboptimal for this task because they tend to only discover
easy and clear objects, while overlooking the difficult-todetect ones with inherent uncertainties derived from indistinguishable textures. In this work, we contribute a novel
approach using a probabilistic representational model in
combination with transformers to explicitly reason under
uncertainties, namely uncertainty-guided transformer reasoning (UGTR), for camouflaged object detection. The
core idea is to first learn a conditional distribution over
the backbone’s output to obtain initial estimates and associated uncertainties, and then reason over these uncertain regions with attention mechanism to produce final
predictions. Our approach combines the benefits of both
Bayesian learning and Transformer-based reasoning, allowing the model to handle camouflaged object detection
by leveraging both deterministic and probabilistic information. We empirically demonstrate that our proposed approach can achieve higher accuracy than existing stateof-the-art models on CHAMELEON, CAMO and COD10K
datasets. Code is available at https://github.com/
fanyang587/UGTR.

Feature

Reshape

Abstract

(a) Image

[Mask]

(c) Features

(e) Output

(d) Uncertainty-Guided
Transformer Reasoning

Figure 1: Our idea is to consider object decamouflaging
as mixtures of probabilistic-deterministic procedures. The
probabilistic representational model is used to capture uncertainty (dashed line), and the Transformer-based model is
learned to exploit context for overcoming ambiguity guided
by the mined uncertainty (solid line).
camouflaging difficult for both humans and machines.
Over decades, researchers and scientists have been trying to build machine intelligence that is capable of seeing through camouflage [45, 49]. Early attempts on COD
used handcrafted features in an unsupervised way, e.g.,
colour and intensity features [21], 3D convexity [40] and
motion boundary [18]. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been used to address the COD problem. To solve the ambiguities caused by indistinguishable textures, unlike generic / salient object detection models [9,16,31,32,35,43,59,61], current COD approaches usually distill extra features from the shared context (e.g., features for identification [12], classification [29] and boundary detection [57]) and incorporate them for joint representation learning via cross-modality fusion techniques. Despite their progress, none of these approaches has explicitly
taken into account the uncertainties caused by camouflage
strategies, making the representation learning for COD not
well-targeted and even easily misguided, not to mention
the negative effects of the inherent modality difference of
auxiliary- and main-task features. Empirically, we find that
existing techniques cannot properly identify those true masters of camouflage which hide their outlines perfectly.
For better decamouflaging performance, we inject
Bayesian learning into Transformer-based reasoning, and

4146

