Few-Shot Visual Relationship Co-Localization
Revant Teotia*,

Vaibhav Mishra*, Mayank Maheshwari*, Anand Mishra
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
{trevant,mishra.4,maheshwari.2,mishra}@iitj.ac.in
∗: Contributed equally to the paper
https://vl2g.github.io/projects/vrc/

Abstract
In this paper, given a small bag of images, each containing a common but latent predicate, we are interested in localizing visual subject-object pairs connected via the common predicate in each of the images. We refer to this novel
problem as visual relationship co-localization or VRC as an
abbreviation. VRC is a challenging task, even more so than
the well-studied object co-localization task. This becomes
further challenging when using just a few images, the model
has to learn to co-localize visual subject-object pairs connected via unseen predicates. To solve VRC, we propose an
optimization framework to select a common visual relationship in each image of the bag. The goal of the optimization
framework is to find the optimal solution by learning visual
relationship similarity across images in a few-shot setting.
To obtain robust visual relationship representation, we utilize a simple yet effective technique that learns relationship
embedding as a translation vector from visual subject to visual object in a shared space. Further, to learn visual relationship similarity, we utilize a proven meta-learning technique commonly used for few-shot classification tasks. Finally, to tackle the combinatorial complexity challenge arising from an exponential number of feasible solutions, we
use a greedy approximation inference algorithm that selects
approximately the best solution.
We extensively evaluate our proposed framework on
variations of bag sizes obtained from two challenging public datasets, namely VrR-VG and VG-150, and achieve impressive visual co-localization performance.

Figure 1: Given a bag of four images as shown in the first
row, can you find the visual subjects and objects connected
via a common predicate? Our proposed model in this paper automatically does that. In this illustration, the “biting”
predicate is present in all four images in the first row. Our
proposed model localizes those visual subjects and objects
in each image that are connected via “biting” as shown in
the third row. Note that the category name “biting” is not
provided to our approach. Here, green and yellow bounding boxes indicate the localized visual subject and objects
respectively using our approach.[Best viewed in color].

1. Introduction
Localizing visual relationship (<subject, predicate,
object>) in images is a core task towards holistic scene interpretation [15, 37]. Often the success of such localization
tasks heavily relies on the availability of large-scale annotated datasets. Can we localize visual relationships in images by looking into just a few examples? In this paper, to-

wards addressing this problem, we introduce an important
and unexplored task of Visual Relationship Co-localization
(or VRC in short). VRC has the following problem setting: given a bag of b images, each containing a common
latent predicate, our goal is to automatically localize those
visual subject-object pairs that are connected via the com-

16342

