KoDF: A Large-scale Korean DeepFake Detection Dataset
Patrick Kwon* Jaeseong You* Gyuhyeon Nam Sungwoo Park
MoneyBrain Inc.
Seoul, Republic of Korea

Gyeongsu Chae

{patrick jaeseongyou ngh3053 daniel gc}@moneybrain.ai

Abstract
A variety of effective face-swap and face-reenactment
methods have been publicized in recent years, democratizing the face synthesis technology to a great extent. Videos
generated as such have come to be called deepfakes with
a negative connotation, for various social problems they
have caused. Facing the emerging threat of deepfakes,
we have built the Korean DeepFake Detection Dataset
(KoDF), a large-scale collection of synthesized and real
videos focused on Korean subjects. In this paper, we provide a detailed description of methods used to construct
the dataset, experimentally show the discrepancy between
the distributions of KoDF and existing deepfake detection datasets, and underline the importance of using multiple datasets for real-world generalization. KoDF is publicly available at https://moneybrain-research.
github.io/kodf in its entirety (i.e. real clips, synthesized clips, clips with adversarial attack, and metadata).

Figure 1. KoDF is a distribution-controlled large-scale Korean
deepfake detection dataset aimed to complement other datasets
and to accommodate elaborate augmentation techniques for better generalization to real-world deepfakes.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the fabrication of facial content in images and videos has become considerably easier and faster,
which previously required heavy computing resources and
expert knowledge. Latest deep-learning-based technologies
have made it possible to handily produce photorealistic fake
images and videos by manipulating facial expressions or
swapping faces. Soon the word deepfake became the de
facto term to indicate such facial forgeries synthesized by
deep learning models.
While mostly utilized for innocuous purposes such as
parody videos [3] and entertaining apps [2, 13], welldesigned deepfakes could be used maliciously to defame
an individual [20, 31], propagate disinformation [55, 18],
or commit fraud [51, 56]. Due to the growing concerns
over deepfakes, there is a recent surge of interest in developing deepfake detection models, and to this end, var* Equal contribution

ious public datasets [37, 48, 39, 25, 36, 26, 23] and benchmarks [8, 6, 4, 7] have been constructed. They have greatly
contributed to encouraging, facilitating, and standardizing
deepfake detection research.
In line with these efforts, we release the Korean DeepFake Detection Dataset (KoDF) featuring important differentiations from the previous deepfake detection datasets.
KoDF is the largest among publicly available deepfake detection datasets, containing 175,776 fake clips and 62,166
real clips of 403 subjects. The deepfake samples are generated with six different synthesis models. To counterbalance the Asian demographics underrepresented in the existing deepfake detection databases, the participants of KoDF
are comprised mostly of Koreans. Finally, the dataset takes
various measures to better manage the data distribution regarding the participants’ age, sex, and content. Table 1 compares KoDF with other public deepfake detection datasets in
various aspects.

10744

