3D-FRONT: 3D Furnished Rooms with layOuts and semaNTics
Huan Fu1
Bowen Cai1
Lin Gao2
Ling-Xiao Zhang2
Jiaming Wang1
Cao Li1
Qixun Zeng1
Chengyue Sun1
Rongfei Jia1
Binqiang Zhao1
Hao Zhang3
1

2

Tao Technology Department, Alibaba Group
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
GrUVi (Graphics U Vision) Lab, Simon Fraser University
{fuhuan.fh, kevin.cbw, rongfei.jrf, binqiang.zhao}@alibaba-inc.com
{gaolin, zhanglingxiao}@ict.ac.cn

haoz@sfu.ca

Figure 1: 3D-FRONT is a new, large-scale, and comprehensive repository of synthetic indoor scenes with professionally and
distinctively designed layouts, a large number (18,968) of rooms populated with 3D furniture objects that are stylistically
compatible and endowed with high-quality textures. All freely available to the academic community and beyond.

Abstract
We introduce 3D-FRONT (3D Furnished Rooms with
layOuts and semaNTics), a new, large-scale, and comprehensive repository of synthetic indoor scenes highlighted
by professionally designed layouts and a large number of
rooms populated by high-quality textured 3D models with
style compatibility. From layout semantics down to texture
details of individual objects, our dataset is freely available
to the academic community and beyond. Currently, 3DFRONT contains 6,813 CAD houses, where 18,968 rooms
diversely furnished by 3D objects, far surpassing all publicly available scene datasets. The 13,151 furniture objects
all come with high-quality textures. While the floorplans
and layout designs (i.e., furniture arrangements) are directly sourced from professional creations, the interior designs in terms of furniture styles, color, and textures have
been carefully curated based on a recommender system we

develop to attain consistent styles as expert designs. Furthermore, we release Trescope, a light-weight rendering
tool, to support benchmark rendering of 2D images and
annotations from 3D-FRONT. We demonstrate two applications, interior scene synthesis and texture synthesis, that
are especially tailored to the strengths of our new dataset.

1. Introduction
The computer vision community has invested much effort into the study of 3D indoor scenes, from 3D reconstruction, visual SLAM, and navigation, to scene understanding,
affordance analysis, and generative modeling. With datadriven and learning-based approaches receiving more and
more attention in recent years, there has been a steady accumulation of indoor scene datasets [27, 36, 43, 4, 19, 6, 9,
18, 23, 49, 24] to drive the deep learning revolution that has
10933

