Temporal Cue Guided Video Highlight Detection
with Low-Rank Audio-Visual Fusion
Qinghao Ye1,2 * † Xiyue Shen3 * Yuan Gao4 * Zirui Wang1 * Qi Bi5
1

Ping Li1† Guang Yang6

Hangzhou Dianzi University 2 University of California, San Diego 3 East China Normal University
4
University of Oxford 5 Wuhan University 6 Imperial College London

Abstract
Video highlight detection plays an increasingly important role in social media content filtering, however, it remains highly challenging to develop automated video highlight detection methods because of the lack of temporal annotations (i.e., where the highlight moments are in long
videos) for supervised learning. In this paper, we propose
a novel weakly supervised method that can learn to detect highlights by mining video characteristics with video
level annotations (topic tags) only. Particularly, we exploit audio-visual features to enhance video representation
and take temporal cues into account for improving detection performance. Our contributions are threefold: 1) we
propose an audio-visual tensor fusion mechanism that efficiently models the complex association between two modalities while reducing the gap of the heterogeneity between
the two modalities; 2) we introduce a novel hierarchical
temporal context encoder to embed local temporal clues in
between neighboring segments; 3) finally, we alleviate the
gradient vanishing problem theoretically during model optimization with attention-gated instance aggregation. Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets (YouTube
Highlights and TVSum) have demonstrated our method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods with remarkable
improvements.

1. Introduction
Recently, the rise of short-form video sharing applications (e.g., TikTok and Reels) has attracted world-wide attention on the Internet. From a content producer’s point
of view, it is not a delightful experience for them to trim
long videos and localize those highlight segments manually. Therefore, an automated method is needed desperately
to identify highlight clips from untrimmed videos.
Video highlight detection has received many interests in
the field of computer vision. Numerous methods [24, 31,
28] have been proposed to automatically tailor highlight
from untrimmed videos tagged with a specific topic or keyword, which can be generally divided into two categories,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: yuan.gao2@gmail.com

(A)

NOT Highlight

……

……

……

Clip t-k

(B)

Clip t

Clip t+k

Surfing Highlight

……
Clip t-k

Temporal
Context Encoding

End

rt
Sta

……

Temporal
Context Encoding

End

rt
Sta

……
Clip t

Clip t+k

Figure 1. Temporal relationship reasoning for highlight detection.
Part (A) contains different surfing tutorial sections with little temporal cues to infer highlight. However, in part (B), clips in the box
with dashed line contain take off and wipe out footages, which
indicate the occurrence of surfing, and they encoded contextual
features among these clips that can be used to infer the highlight.

i.e., supervised learning and weakly supervised learning
based methods. Supervised methods [22, 9, 11] generally
trained a ranker detector with frame-level annotations to
rank the highlight segments, of which scores were higher
than those of non-highlight segments. However, annotating the frame-wise highlight manually is extremely laborintensive and time-consuming. To overcome this problem,
weakly supervised methods [20, 3, 30] use weakly labeled
videos to train the model. For methods, videos are usually divided into two categories based on whether there are
topic-specific segments presented: a positive video contains
at least one highlighted snippet and a negative one should
have no highlights. The trained highlight detector needs
to learn from those topic-specific video snippets to identify highlights for unseen videos. However, these weakly
supervised methods have limited capacity in terms of: (1)
effectively capturing the complex interactions between audio and vision streams in videos while maintaining the efficiency; (2) enhancing the semantic continuity modeling by
leveraging the so-far unexplored temporal evolution among
video segments.
For the former bottleneck, previous approaches [12, 29]
tended to adopt linear fusion schemes (e.g., concatenation

7950

