EvIntSR-Net: Event Guided Multiple Latent Frames
Reconstruction and Super-resolution

1

Jin Han1 Yixin Yang2 Chu Zhou1 Chao Xu1 Boxin Shi2,3,4∗
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University
2
NELVT, Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
An event camera detects the scene radiance changes and
sends a sequence of asynchronous event streams with high
dynamic range, high temporal resolution, and low latency.
However, the spatial resolution of event cameras is limited
as a trade-off for these outstanding properties. To reconstruct high-resolution intensity images from event data, we
propose EvIntSR-Net that converts Event data to multiple
latent Intensity frames to achieve Super-Resolution on intensity images in this paper. EvIntSR-Net bridges the domain gap between event streams and intensity frames and
learns to merge a sequence of latent intensity frames in
a recurrent updating manner. Experimental results show
that EvIntSR-Net can reconstruct SR intensity images with
higher dynamic range and fewer blurry artifacts by fusing
events with intensity frames for both simulated and realworld data. Furthermore, the proposed EvIntSR-Net is
able to generate high-frame-rate videos with super-resolved
frames.

1. Introduction
Event cameras with bio-inspired silicon retina sensors
work radically different from conventional frame-based
cameras. The unconventional sensor design enables them to
measure scene radiance changes in an asynchronous manner [12, 31], instead of capturing images at a fixed frame
rate. Event cameras detect brightness changes in a scene in
log scale, and send a stream of event data that are binarysigned recordings of brightness changes (“+1” for brightness increase and “-1” for brightness decrease). The particular properties of event sensors include: very high dynamic
range (HDR, up to 140 dB), high temporal resolution (in the
order of µs), low latency, and low power consumption. The
latest Dynamic and Active Pixel Vision Sensor (DAVIS [4])
combines a conventional Active Pixel Sensor (APS) with
∗ Corresponding author: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

APS frame 4x bicubic

Ours 4x SR

eSL-Net 4x SR

Figure 1: An example of 4× super-resolution results from
eSL-Net [40] and our reconstruction on real-world data.
Both of them take APS and event data as inputs.
the event sensor, which can capture intensity frames simultaneously with event data. However, most of the available
event cameras bear low spatial resolution (e.g., 240 × 180
for DAVIS240, 346 × 260 for DAVIS346) partially due to
the consideration of data transmission efficiency.
Event data contains visual information that can be utilized for reconstructing high-quality intensity images. Previous reconstruction approaches [32, 35, 41] can only
achieve low-resolution (LR) intensity reconstruction that is
restricted by the spatial resolution of event cameras. However, high-resolution (HR) intensity images with higher
quality (more structural details, higher dynamic range,
less blurry artifacts) significantly contribute to many other
event-based vision tasks (e.g., object recognition [6],
detection[3], tracking[2], etc.). It is therefore of practical
interest to conduct super-resolution (SR) for event-guided
intensity image reconstruction.
Super-resolving intensity images for event cameras can
be achieved in several ways. One kind of approach is
first converting event data E to intensity images I [32, 35,

4882

