Motion Basis Learning for Unsupervised Deep Homography Estimation
with Subspace Projection
Nianjin Ye1

Chuan Wang1

Haoqiang Fan1

Shuaicheng Liu2,1 *

1

2

Megvii Technology
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new framework for unsupervised deep homography estimation. Our contributions
are 3 folds. First, unlike previous methods that regress 4
offsets for a homography, we propose a homography flow
representation, which can be estimated by a weighted sum
of 8 pre-defined homography flow bases. Second, considering a homography contains 8 Degree-of-Freedoms (DOFs)
that is much less than the rank of the network features, we
propose a Low Rank Representation (LRR) block that reduces the feature rank, so that features corresponding to the
dominant motions are retained while others are rejected.
Last, we propose a Feature Identity Loss (FIL) to enforce
the learned image feature warp-equivariant, meaning that
the result should be identical if the order of warp operation and feature extraction is swapped. With this constraint,
the unsupervised optimization is achieved more effectively
and more stable features are learned. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of all
the newly proposed components, and results show that our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art on the homography benchmark datasets both qualitatively and quantitatively. Code is available at https://github.com/
megvii-research/BasesHomo

1. Introduction
Homography is a fundamental and important image
alignment model that has been widely used for image registration [1]. A homography is a 3 × 3 matrix that contains
8 Degree-of-Freedoms (DOFs), with each 2 for scale, translation, rotation and perspective [9]. Traditionally, a homography is often estimated by detecting and matching image
features [16, 20], and then solving a Direct Linear Transform (DLT) [9] with outlier removal [7]. In contrast, deep
homography methods take two images as the network input,
and directly output a homography matrix [5]. Compared
* Corresponding author

Direct Linear
Transform
Network

Inputs

Offsets

Homography
Matrix

(a) Previous solution

Basis Formulation

8 Pre-computed
Flow Bases

Network

Inputs

(b) Our solution

Weights

Homography Flow

Figure 1. (a) Previous deep homography methods estimate 4 motion offsets and solve a DLT for the result. (b) We construct 8 flow
motion bases by modifying matrix elements of a homography, and
then regress 8 weights to combine the flow bases for the result.

with traditional methods that highly rely on the extracted
feature matches, deep methods are more robust.
Deep methods can be classified into two categories, supervised [5, 14] and unsupervised [28, 18]. The former one
adopts synthesized examples with ground-truth labels to
train the network while the latter one directly minimizes the
photometric or feature differences between two images. As
synthesized examples cannot reflect scene parallax and dynamic objects, unsupervised methods often generalize better than the supervised ones. For unsupervised methods,
Nguyen et al. [18] minimized error over the entire image
while Zhang et al. [28] proposed to learn a mask to skip
outlier regions during the minimization.
It is not optimal to directly regress the elements of a
homography matrix, as they are with different magnitudes.
Current solution is to regress 4 offsets [5, 14, 28, 18], which
is equivalent to a homography if feeds them to the DLT
solver (Fig. 1(a)). In this work, we start from a new direction by proposing a “homography flow” representation
(Fig. 1(b)). Specifically, we first generate 8 flow bases
by modifying the entries of a homography matrix one at

13117

