Deep Edge-Aware Interactive Colorization against Color-Bleeding Effects
Eungyeup Kim*1 Sanghyeon Lee*1 Jeonghoon Park*1 Somi Choi1
Choonghyun Seo2 Jaegul Choo1
1

1 {eykim94,

KAIST, 2 NAVER WEBTOON Corp.
shlee6825, jeonghoon park, smchoi257, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr, 2 choonghyun.seo@webtoonscorp.com

Color Bleeding

Enhanced Image

Scribble

Color Bleeding

Enhanced Image

Scribble

Figure 1: Qualitative results of edge enhancement by using our proposed method. These images are collected from https:
//unsplash.com. The first and the fourth columns show samples containing color-bleeding artifacts. Yellow boxes
represent color-bleeding regions. The second and the fifth columns have edge-enhanced samples by our proposed method.
The scribbles utilized for edge enhancement are shown in the third and the sixth columns. Please see our project webpage
for the demo video of our method.

Abstract
Deep neural networks for automatic image colorization
often suffer from the color-bleeding artifact, a problematic
color spreading near the boundaries between adjacent objects. Such color-bleeding artifacts debase the reality of
generated outputs, limiting the applicability of colorization
models in practice. Although previous approaches have attempted to address this problem in an automatic manner,
they tend to work only in limited cases where a high contrast of gray-scale values are given in an input image. Alternatively, leveraging user interactions would be a promising approach for solving this color-breeding artifacts. In
this paper, we propose a novel edge-enhancing network for

the regions of interest via simple user scribbles indicating
where to enhance. In addition, our method requires a minimal amount of effort from users for their satisfactory enhancement. Experimental results demonstrate that our interactive edge-enhancing approach effectively improves the
color-bleeding artifacts compared to the existing baselines
across various datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep image colorization methods [1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] have achieved a great performance on the generation of a realistic colorized image given

* indicates equal contribution

14667

