Deep Implicit Surface Point Prediction Networks
Rahul Venkatesh1 Tejan Karmali2 Sarthak Sharma3 Aurobrata Ghosh3
R. Venkatesh Babu2
László A. Jeni1*
Maneesh Singh3*
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3

2

Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India

Verisk Analytics, Jersey City, NJ, USA

High
Fidelity

Open
urfaces

Figure 1: Our novel implicit shape representation can model complex surfaces with high-fidelity. Row 1: Recovering visually
pleasing surfaces in comparison to prior state-of-the-art SAL [2] and NDF [9]. Row 2: Results on a representative open shape,
where we correctly model the shape, as opposed to SAL [2], which closes up regions that are meant to be open.

Abstract
Deep neural representations of 3D shapes as implicit functions have been shown to produce high fidelity models surpassing the resolution-memory trade-off faced by the explicit representations using meshes and point clouds. However, most such approaches focus on representing closed
shapes. Unsigned distance function (UDF) based approaches have been proposed recently as a promising alternative to represent both open and closed shapes. However, since the gradients of UDFs vanish on the surface, it is
challenging to estimate local (differential) geometric properties like the normals and tangent planes which are needed
for many downstream applications in vision and graphics.
There are additional challenges in computing these properties efficiently with a low-memory footprint. This paper
presents a novel approach that models such surfaces using a new class of implicit representations called the closest
surface-point (CSP) representation. We show that CSP allows us to represent complex surfaces of any topology (open
or closed) with high fidelity. It also allows for accurate and
* indicates two authors equally advised

efficient computation of local geometric properties. We further demonstrate that it leads to efficient implementation
of downstream algorithms like sphere-tracing for rendering the 3D surface as well as to create explicit mesh-based
representations. Extensive experimental evaluation on the
ShapeNet dataset validate the above contributions with results surpassing the state-of-the-art. Code and data are
available at https://sites.google.com/view/cspnet.

1. Introduction
High fidelity representation and rendering of potentially
open 3D surfaces with complex topology from raw sensor data (images, point clouds) finds application in vision,
graphics and animation industry [19]. Therefore, in recent
years deep learning based methods for 3D reconstruction of
objects have garnered significant interest [36, 32, 29].
Explicit 3D shape representations such as point clouds,
voxels, triangles or quad meshes pose challenges in reconstructing surfaces with arbitrary topology [31]. Moreover, the ability to capture details of such representations
are limited by predefined structure (like number of vertices for meshes) or memory and computational footprint

12653

