Who’s Waldo? Linking People Across Text and Images
Claire Yuqing Cui1∗ Apoorv Khandelwal1∗ Yoav Artzi1,2 Noah Snavely1,2 Hadar Averbuch-Elor1,2
1

Cornell University 2 Cornell Tech

{yc2296, ak2254, yoavartzi, snavely, hadarelor}@cornell.edu

Abstract
We present a task and benchmark dataset for personcentric visual grounding, the problem of linking between
people named in a caption and people pictured in an image. In contrast to prior work in visual grounding, which
is predominantly object-based, our new task masks out the
names of people in captions in order to encourage methods trained on such image–caption pairs to focus on contextual cues, such as the rich interactions between multiple people, rather than learning associations between
names and appearances. To facilitate this task, we introduce
a new dataset, Who’s Waldo, mined automatically from
image–caption data on Wikimedia Commons. We propose a
Transformer-based method that outperforms several strong
baselines on this task, and release our data to the research
community to spur work on contextual models that consider
both vision and language. Code and data are available at:
https://whoswaldo.github.io

1. Introduction
The correspondence between people observed in images
and their mentions in text is informed by more than simply their identities and our knowledge of their appearances.
Consider the image and caption in Figure 1. We often see
such image–caption pairs in newspapers and, as humans,
are skilled at recovering associations between the people
depicted in images and their references in captions, even if
we’re unfamiliar with the specific people mentioned. This
ability requires complex visual reasoning skills. For the example in Figure 1, we must understand an underlying activity (“passing”) and determine who is passing the ball, who
is being passed to, and which people in the image are not
mentioned at all.
In this paper, we present a person-centric vision-andlanguage grounding task and benchmark. The general problem of linking between textual descriptions and image regions is known as visual grounding, and is a fundamental
∗ Equal contribution

Figure 1. By studying this picture and caption, we can use contextual cues to link between the people referred to in the text and their
visual counterparts, even if we are unfamiliar with the specific individuals. This capability requires understanding of a broad set of
interactions (e.g. “passing”) and expected behaviors (e.g. players
pass to their teammates). We propose the task of person-centric visual grounding, where we abstract over identity names (e.g. masking out Sam Schulz and Curtly Hampton with [NAME] tokens) to
encourage algorithms to emulate such contextual reasoning.

capability in visual semantic tasks with applications including image captioning [66, 41, 3], visual question answering [19, 20, 26] and instruction following [4, 43, 7]. Our
task and data depart from most existing works along two
axes. First, our task abstracts over identity information, instead focusing specifically on the relations and properties
specified in images and text. Second, rather than using data
annotated by crowd workers, we leverage captions originating from real-life data sources.
While visual grounding has traditionally centered around
localizing objects based on referring expressions, we observe that inferring associations based on expressions in
person-centric samples—i.e. people’s names—could lead
to problematic biases (e.g. with regards to gender). Hence,
we formulate the task to use captions that mask out people’s names. This allows for an emphasized focus on the
context—both in image and text—where the person appears, requiring models to understand complex asymmetric
human interactions and expected behaviors. For instance, in
the example in Figure 1 we might expect a player to pass to
someone on their own team.

1374

