Semantic-embedded Unsupervised Spectral Reconstruction
from Single RGB Images in the Wild
Zhiyu Zhu1 , Hui Liu1 , Junhui Hou1 *, Huanqiang Zeng2 , Qingfu Zhang1
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Huaqiao University
zhiyuzhu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, hliu99-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk,
zeng0043@hqu.edu.cn, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk.

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of reconstructing
hyperspectral (HS) images from single RGB images captured by commercial cameras, without using paired HS and
RGB images during training. To tackle this challenge, we
propose a new lightweight and end-to-end learning-based
framework. Specifically, on the basis of the intrinsic imaging degradation model of RGB images from HS images, we
progressively spread the differences between input RGB images and re-projected RGB images from recovered HS images via effective unsupervised camera spectral response
function estimation. To enable the learning without paired
ground-truth HS images as supervision, we adopt the adversarial learning manner and boost it with a simple yet effective L1 gradient clipping scheme. Besides, we embed the semantic information of input RGB images to locally regularize the unsupervised learning, which is expected to promote
pixels with identical semantics to have consistent spectral
signatures. In addition to conducting quantitative experiments over two widely-used datasets for HS image reconstruction from synthetic RGB images, we also evaluate our
method by applying recovered HS images from real RGB
images to HS-based visual tracking. Extensive results show
that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
unsupervised methods and even exceeds the latest supervised method under some settings. The source code is public available at https://github.com/zbzhzhy/
Unsupervised-Spectral-Reconstruction.

1. Introduction
As hyperspectral (HS) images delineate more reliable
and accurate spectrum information of scenes than traditional RGB images, they facilitate many vision-based applications, such as visual tracking [44, 39], detection [26, 33],
* Corresponding author. This work was supported by the Hong Kong
Research Grants Council under grant CityU 11219019.

and segmentation [34, 6]. However, it is costly to acquire
HS images [50], which severely limits its wide deployment.
Without relying on expensive and specially designed
hardware, recovering HS images from single RGB images
via computational methods promises a convenient and lowcost manner, and recent deep neural network (DNN)-based
methods have demonstrated the impressive abilities in solving such a highly ill-posed recovery problem. However, the
majority of them have to be trained with paired RGB and
HS images [25, 49, 45]. Unfortunately, it is non-trivial to
collect a large number of such paired data via specially designed devices, e.g., well calibrated dual cameras. Although
one can inversely synthesize RGB images from available
HS images to form paired data for training, the huge gaps
between the synthetic and real images may degrade the performance of a model trained with synthetic data when applied to real data.
To tackle the above issues, as illustrated in Fig. 1,
we propose a lighweight, unsupervised, and end-to-end
learning-based framework, which is capable of recovering
HS images from single RGB images captured by commercial cameras without using paired RGB and HS images during training. Specifically, based on the low-dimensional
property of camera spectral response functions (SRFs), we
first propose a prior-driven method to estimate the underlying camera SRFs of input RGB images by extracting their
deep features. Then, we propose an imaging degradation
model-aware HS image generation approach, in which an
HS image is generated in a coarse-to-fine manner by progressively spreading the information of the difference between input RGB images and re-projected RGB images obtained by integrating recovered HS images via the estimated
camera SRFs. Such a generation manner well adapts to this
unsupervised scenario. To enable the meaningful learning
of our method under the lack of paired ground-truth HS images, we make types of efforts: (1) globally, we employ
the popular and powerful adversarial learning to enforce the
distribution of generated HS images to be close to that of
real HS images, Moreover, we propose L1 gradient clip-

2279

