Full-Body Motion from a Single Head-Mounted Device:
Generating SMPL Poses from Partial Observations
Andrea Dittadi,1, * Sebastian Dziadzio,2 Darren Cosker,3 Ben Lundell,2 Tom Cashman,2 Jamie Shotton2
1

Technical University of Denmark

Abstract
The increased availability and maturity of head-mounted
and wearable devices opens up opportunities for remote communication and collaboration. However, the signal streams
provided by these devices (e.g., head pose, hand pose, and
gaze direction) do not represent a whole person. One of the
main open problems is therefore how to leverage these signals to build faithful representations of the user. In this paper,
we propose a method based on variational autoencoders to
generate articulated poses of a human skeleton based on
noisy streams of head and hand pose. Our approach relies
on a model of pose likelihood that is novel and theoretically well-grounded. We demonstrate on publicly available
datasets that our method is effective even from very impoverished signals and investigate how pose prediction can be
made more accurate and realistic.

1. Introduction
Head-mounted and wearable devices are steadily increasing in availability and maturity. These technologies open
up opportunities to build tools for remote communication
and collaboration that are human-centred, and which allow
us to work in the way we naturally interact when we meet
in person [27, 50, 62]. Mixed reality devices, such as Microsoft HoloLens, allow 3D content to be displayed and
viewed in physical space with local or remote collaborators,
all sharing a single coordinate system and spatial context.
However, to communicate effectively with remote collaborators, there is a significant and largely unsolved challenge
to build faithful representations of the motion of a person
wearing such a headset from only head-worn sensors. There
is a high perceptual bar to meet if we are to trust such a
system to represent ourselves, as we are attuned to motion
that does not look human [44].
To sense the motion and actions of a user, devices such
as HoloLens provide a variety of signal streams derived
* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: adit@dtu.dk

2

Microsoft

3

University of Bath

using computer vision; these include the location and orientation of the head-mounted device (HMD) relative to a world
coordinate system, hand pose (location and orientation of
the user’s hands relative to the HMD) and even eye tracking signals [66]. These signal streams provide invaluable
information but they do not represent a whole person. Furthermore, while each individual stream has its own failure
rate due to detection or tracking errors, the combination of
all the streams has a much higher compound failure rate,
as a failure in any one subsystem can result in non-human
behaviour that breaks the trust and understanding required
for effective communication.
While the possibility of estimating the full body pose of a
person using egocentric views is an attractive prospect on future devices [64, 52], no currently available consumer device
has suitable embedded cameras. On a wearable device, each
additional camera is costly in terms of power and thermal
dissipation [35], and so it is advantageous for motion prediction systems to require as few cameras as possible. Even
if future devices provide egocentric body tracking cameras,
there will be an ongoing need to allow full-body representations for users of legacy or lower-power devices. Solutions
that predict body motion from external cameras mounted
on an interacting person are also promising [46], but are
limited to cases were there are multiple people interacting
and participants are always visible.
To address this challenge, we require a model of human
motion that is conditioned on limited low-level inputs and
provides plausible inferred body poses while staying responsive to the signal streams. In this paper, we address an important sub-problem: reconstructing the articulated pose of a human skeleton from noisy streams of head and hand pose. We
use the variational autoencoder (VAE) framework [30, 51],
which allows us to decompose the problem into a generative
model of human pose, with an inference model that maps
input signals into the learned latent embedding.
Our primary contribution is to show how to make this
framework effective even from very impoverished signals:
in our case the three orthogonal coordinate frames provided
by a head and hand tracker. Our secondary contribution is
to formulate a model of pose likelihood which is factorized

11687

