Multi-Task Self-Training for Learning General Representations
Golnaz Ghiasi∗, Barret Zoph∗, Ekin D. Cubuk∗, Quoc V. Le, Tsung-Yi Lin
Google Research, Brain Team
{golnazg,barretzoph,cubuk,qvl,tsungyi}@google.com

Abstract
Despite the fast progress in training specialized models for various tasks, learning a single general model that
works well for many tasks is still challenging for computer
vision. Here we introduce multi-task self-training (MuST),
which harnesses the knowledge in independent specialized
teacher models (e.g., ImageNet model on classification) to
train a single general student model. Our approach has
three steps. First, we train specialized teachers independently on labeled datasets. We then use the specialized
teachers to label an unlabeled dataset to create a multitask pseudo labeled dataset. Finally, the dataset, which
now contains pseudo labels from teacher models trained
on different datasets/tasks, is then used to train a student
model with multi-task learning. We evaluate the feature representations of the student model on 6 vision tasks including
image recognition (classification, detection, segmentation)
and 3D geometry estimation (depth and surface normal estimation). MuST is scalable with unlabeled or partially labeled datasets and outperforms both specialized supervised
models and self-supervised models when training on large
scale datasets. Lastly, we show MuST can improve upon
already strong checkpoints [23] trained with billions of examples. The results suggest self-training is a promising direction to aggregate labeled and unlabeled training data for
learning general feature representations.

1. Introduction
Visual representation learning is a core problem in computer vision. Supervised and self-supervised pre-training
have shown promising results in transferring the learned
feature representations to downstream tasks. Typically, a
model is pre-trained with a supervised [28, 10] or a selfsupervised objective [5, 16, 17]. Despite the wide adoption
of transfer learning from supervised training, the features
may not necessarily be useful for downstream tasks. For
example, He et al. found that ImageNet pre-training fails
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Specialized
Teacher 1
Specialized
Teacher 2

..
.

Pseudo
Labeling

Multi-Task
Dataset

Training

General
Student

Specialized
Teacher N

Figure 1. An overview of Multi-Task Self-Training (MuST).
Specialized Teacher represents a supervised model trained on a
single task and dataset (e.g., classification model trained on ImageNet). Specialized Teacher models are trained independently
on their own tasks and datasets. They then generate pseudo labels on a shared dataset. Finally, a single General Student model
is trained jointly using the pseudo (and supervised) labels on the
shared dataset.

to improve COCO instance segmentation [18]. In contrast,
Shao et al. showed features learned from Objects365 detection dataset improve COCO instance segmentation by a
large margin [46]. Pre-training with a specialized task that
aligns with the downstream target task still yields the best
performance in object detection [32, 46] and semantic segmentation [4].
Intuitively, it is possible to learn general features by
training a model to simultaneously do well on multiple
tasks. Recent work in NLP started to show promising results on learning a generalist model with multi-task learning [55, 9]. In computer vision, the biggest challenge of
training a multi-task model is in the data collection and
annotation. Despite datasets like COCO [34], collecting
a wide variety of annotations (e.g., instance segmentation,
person keypoints, image caption) for the same image dataset
is quite challenging. Due to the time consuming nature of
annotating images with labels, it is hard to scale such efforts
with the number of images and the number of tasks. The
lack of large scale multi-task datasets impedes the progress
in multi-task learning for computer vision.
In this work, we study using self-training to remedy the
issue. We propose to use pseudo labeling to enable large
scale multi-task feature learning for computer vision. Zoph

8856

