Do Different Deep Metric Learning Losses Lead to Similar Learned Features?
Konstantin Kobs

Michael Steininger Andrzej Dulny
University of Würzburg
Germany

Andreas Hotho

{kobs,steininger,dulny,hotho}@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de

Abstract

Properties:

car model


1. Introduction
In deep metric learning (DML), a neural network is
trained to map input images to 𝑚-dimensional embedding
vectors, that should be close to each other if the corresponding inputs share a given class. Thus, the network has
to learn to extract discriminating input features to embed
an image. Many loss functions have been introduced that
can be categorized into ranking based losses [12], classification based losses [47], and hybrid methods combining
both approaches [13]. Ranking based losses compare pairs,
triplets, or higher-order tuples of data points to calculate
a loss. Classification based methods usually learn one or

car color

...

Neural
Network



trained with



Contrastive Loss,
Triplet Loss, ...

1. car model


Analysis

Importance

Recent studies have shown that many deep metric learning loss functions perform very similarly under the same
experimental conditions. One potential reason for this unexpected result is that all losses let the network focus on
similar image regions or properties. In this paper, we investigate this by conducting a two-step analysis to extract
and compare the learned visual features of the same model
architecture trained with different loss functions: First, we
compare the learned features on the pixel level by correlating saliency maps of the same input images. Second,
we compare the clustering of embeddings for several image
properties, e.g. object color or illumination. To provide independent control over these properties, photo-realistic 3D
car renders similar to images in the Cars196 dataset are
generated. In our analysis, we compare 14 pretrained models from a recent study and find that, even though all models perform similarly, different loss functions can guide the
model to learn different features. We especially find differences between classification and ranking based losses. Our
analysis also shows that some seemingly irrelevant properties can have significant influence on the resulting embedding. We encourage researchers from the deep metric
learning community to use our methods to get insights into
the features learned by their proposed methods.

2. ...

3. car color

4. ...

Pixel Level

Property Level

Figure 1. Given the standard DML setting with a neural network
that maps input images to an embedding space (grey box), we propose two analysis methods. First, we identify pixels that are important for the network to create the embedding. We then compare them qualitatively and quantitatively between loss functions.
Second, we investigate the influence of image properties on the
clustering behavior in the embedding space and compare them between loss functions.

multiple class representations and train the network to map
inputs to the corresponding class embeddings.
In recent studies, different DML loss functions were
shown to lead to similar test performances if compared
fairly [23, 26]. Musgrave et al. [23] identify flaws in the
evaluation settings of many DML papers and conduct a fair
comparison between DML methods by testing several common loss functions with the same benchmark datasets, architecture, and test metrics. Their study finds very similar
performances for all of the tested losses. In general, research has shown that even with similar performance, neural networks might learn to focus on different [5] and some-

10644

