Pyramid Architecture Search for Real-Time Image Deblurring
Xiaobin Hu1,2,7 , Wenqi Ren2 ,* Kaicheng Yu3,6 , Kaihao Zhang4 , Xiaochun Cao2 , Wei Liu5 , Bjoern Menze 1,7
1
Informatics, TU München 2 SKLOIS, IIE, CAS 3 CVLab, EPFL 4 Australian National University
5
Tencent Data Platform 6 Abacus.AI 7 Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Zurich

Abstract
Multi-scale and multi-patch deep models have been
shown effective in removing blurs of dynamic scenes. However, these methods still suffer from one major obstacle:
manually designing a lightweight and high-efficiency network is challenging and time-consuming. To tackle this
obstacle, we propose a novel deblurring method, dubbed
PyNAS (pyramid neural architecture search network), towards automatically designing hyper-parameters including the scales, patches, and standard cell operators. The
proposed PyNAS adopts gradient-based search strategies
and innovatively searches the hierarchy patch and scale
scheme not limited to cell searching. Specifically, we introduce a hierarchical search strategy tailored to the multiscale and multi-patch deblurring task. The strategy follows
the principle that the first distinguishes between the toplevel (pyramid-scales and pyramid-patches) and bottomlevel variables (cell operators) and then searches multiscale variables using the top-to-bottom principle. During
the search stage, PyNAS employs an early stopping strategy to avoid the collapse and computational issues. Furthermore, we use a path-level binarization mechanism for
multi-scale cell searching to save the memory consumption.
Our primary contribution is a real-time deblurring algorithm (around 58 fps) for 720p images while achieves stateof-the-art deblurring performance on the GoPro and Video
Deblurring datasets.

1. Introduction
Blind motion deblurring is an ill-posed problem aiming to rehabilitate the sharp image from a degraded image
caused by depth variation, camera shakes, and object motions [21, 26, 35]. In the past decades, image deblurring has
attracted massive attention from the computer vision community, especially in applications of surveillance, remote
sensing, and cameras. Traditional deblurring approaches
remove the undesirable blur via the blur kernel estimation
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. PSNR vs. test runtime of state-of-the-art deep motion
deblurring methods and the proposed PyNAS on the GoPro dataset
[21]. The pink zone indicates that the inference time of a 720p
image is less than 33ms (i.e., 30fps). The architecture found by
our PyNAS achieves better performance and less inference time
(17 ms) than other handcrafted or NAS-based networks.

[7, 25], which approximates the hidden degradation knowledge. However, obtaining a satisfactory blur kernel ramains
as an open problem.
Deep learning-based models [31, 35, 8] have verified
the superiority in learning the regression between blurry inputs and the corresponding sharp images. Especially, the
‘coarse-to-fine’ scheme has been applied to deblurring scenarios via a multi-scale architecture to exploit the deblurring priors at different levels. However, there still exist
some challenges: i) expensive runtime caused by the large
number of training parameters due to large filter size; ii)
structure redundancy attributed to the ineffectual increasing depth for very low-resolution or small patch input in a
multi-scale model [21].
Recently, a growing interest is witnessed in developing
algorithms to automatically design deep learning architectures instead of the manual process. Architectures found
by the searching algorithms have achieved highly competitive performance especially on high-level tasks such as image classification [16], object detection [37, 6] and seman-

4298

