Omniscient Video Super-Resolution
Peng Yi1 , Zhongyuan Wang∗1 , Kui Jiang1 , Junjun Jiang2,3 , Tao Lu4 , Xin Tian5 , and Jiayi Ma5
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan
University 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology 3 Peng Cheng
Laboratory 4 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Wuhan Institute of Technology
5
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University
{yipeng, kuijiang, xin.tian}@whu.edu.cn, {wzy hope, junjun0595}@163.com,
{lutxyl, jyma2010}@gmail.com

Abstract
Most recent video super-resolution (SR) methods either
adopt an iterative manner to deal with low-resolution (LR)
frames from a temporally sliding window, or leverage the
previously estimated SR output to help reconstruct the current frame recurrently. A few studies try to combine these
two structures to form a hybrid framework but have failed to
give full play to it. In this paper, we propose an omniscient
framework to not only utilize the preceding SR output, but
also leverage the SR outputs from the present and future.
The omniscient framework is more generic because the iterative, recurrent and hybrid frameworks can be regarded
as its special cases. The proposed omniscient framework
enables a generator to behave better than its counterparts
under other frameworks. Abundant experiments on public
datasets show that our method is superior to the state-ofthe-art methods in objective metrics, subjective visual effects and complexity.

1. Introduction
Super-Resolution (SR) aims at reconstructing highresolution (HR) images from the corresponding lowresolution (LR) images. As the most basic problem in SR, single image super-resolution (SISR) has been relatively studied thoroughly, where under a unified framework,
the researchers only have to design different kinds of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [4, 14, 32, 31, 3] to
solve this issue. Based on SISR, video super-resolution
(VSR) has also been developed, albeit a lot of works
[1, 22, 19, 27, 29, 11, 10] have been proposed, there is not
a unified framework being dominant in VSR yet. Figure 1
∗ Corresponding author. Code: https://github.com/psychopa4/OVSR.

GOVSR (ours)
LOVSR (ours)

Iterative
Recurrent
& Hybrid

Figure 1: Performances on Vid4 [1] dataset and time costs.
The Red circle denotes iterative methods, and the blue circle indicates recurrent and hybrid methods. Please refer to
Table 4 and Table 6 for more details.

illustrates dozens of state-of-the-art (SOTA) VSR methods
in terms of performance and speed.
As SISR requires only one input image, most SISR
methods focus on exploring different generator networks to
extract features from this one image under a unified framework. Nevertheless, since VSR involves consecutive video
frames as input, different schemes for handling the temporal
information have emerged. We demonstrate different kinds
of frameworks for VSR in Figure 2.
As illustrated in Figure 2(a), most recent VSR methods
[1, 22, 25, 30, 12, 24, 29, 23, 11] apply an iterative manner
to deal with LR frames from a temporally sliding window,
where we only show the case of window size as 3. Given
a sequence of video frames, the iterative framework considers the whole VSR processing as multiple independent
sub-processes. Theoretically, these sub-processes are not
temporally correlated and can be handled simultaneously,
which means they enjoy the advantage of parallel comput-

4429

