Recursively Conditional Gaussian for Ordinal Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Xiaofeng Liu1†∗ , Site Li2† , Yubin Ge3 , Pengyi Ye1 , Jane You4 , Jun Lu5
1

Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
3
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.
4
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong.
5
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
2

†

Contribute Equally, ∗ Corresponding Author:

liuxiaofengcmu@gmail.com

Abstract
The unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been
widely adopted to alleviate the data scalability issue, while
the existing works usually focus on classifying independently
discrete labels. However, in many tasks (e.g., medical diagnosis), the labels are discrete and successively distributed.
The UDA for ordinal classification requires inducing nontrivial ordinal distribution prior to the latent space. Target for this, the partially ordered set (poset) is defined for
constraining the latent vector. Instead of the typically i.i.d.
Gaussian latent prior, in this work, a recursively conditional
Gaussian (RCG) set is adapted for ordered constraint modeling, which admits a tractable joint distribution prior. Furthermore, we are able to control the density of content vector
that violates the poset constraints by a simple “three-sigma
rule”. We explicitly disentangle the cross-domain images
into a shared ordinal prior induced ordinal content space
and two separate source/target ordinal-unrelated spaces,
and the self-training is worked on the shared space exclusively for ordinal-aware domain alignment. Extensive experiments on UDA medical diagnoses and facial age estimation
demonstrate its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Deep learning is typically data-starved and relies on the
i.i.d assumption of training and testing sets [5, 32]. However, the real-world deployment of target tasks is usually
significantly diverse, and massive labeling of the target domain data can be expensive or even prohibitive [29]. To
address this, the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is
developed, which proposes to learn from both labeled source
domain and unlabeled target domain [12, 40, 39].
The existing UDA works [37, 61, 33, 17, 40] usually fo-

Figure 1. (Left) Illustration of 4-class latent vectors (points) aligned
in a poset formation in R2 . For a vector ck , its adjoined horizontal
and vertical lines specify the feasible quadrant where its superiors
ck+i for i > 0 can be positioned. (Right) Conditional spacing
model p(c1 , c2 , c3 ) = p(c1 )p(c2 |c1 )p(c3 |c2 ) for 3-class. The
adopted Gaussian conditional densities (4–7) and the constraints
(8) enforces the sample from p(c1 , c2 , . . . , cK ) satisfy c1 ≤ c2 ≤
· · · ≤ cK with high probability [48, 10, 23].

cus on the classification or segmentation tasks without considering the inter-class correlations. However, tasks with discrete and successively labels are commonly seen in the real
world. For instance, the Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) has five
labels corresponding to different severity levels: 0→normal,
1→mild, 2→moderate, 3→severe, and 4→proliferative DR.
In ordinal setting, class y = 1 is closer to y = 2 than y = 4.
The misclassification of y = 1 to y = 2 or y = 4 may lead to
different severity of misdiagnosis. The ordinal labeling system is widely adopted in medical diagnose, face age groups,
and facial expression intensity, etc. Limited by the collecting
cost, the UDA has great potential in the medical area, while
the UDA for the ordinal label is under-presented.
A promising solution for UDA is to jointly learn the
disentanglement of class-related/unrelated factors and the
adaptation on the class-relevant latent space exclusively [60].
The well-performed model is expected to extract the class label informative and domain invariant features [61]. However,
1764

