Target Adaptive Context Aggregation for Video Scene Graph Generation
Yao Teng1
Limin Wang1 B
Zhifeng Li2
Gangshan Wu1
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
tengyao19980325@gmail.com, {lmwang, gswu}@nju.edu.cn, michaelzfli@tencent.com

Abstract
This paper deals with a challenging task of video scene
graph generation (VidSGG), which could serve as a structured video representation for high-level understanding
tasks. We present a new detect-to-track paradigm for this
task by decoupling the context modeling for relation prediction from the complicated low-level entity tracking. Specifically, we design an efficient method for frame-level VidSGG,
termed as Target Adaptive Context Aggregation Network
(TRACE), with a focus on capturing spatio-temporal context information for relation recognition. Our TRACE
framework streamlines the VidSGG pipeline with a modular design, and presents two unique blocks of Hierarchical
Relation Tree (HRTree) construction and Target-adaptive
Context Aggregation. More specific, our HRTree first provides an adpative structure for organizing possible relation
candidates efficiently, and guides context aggregation module to effectively capture spatio-temporal structure information. Then, we obtain a contextualized feature representation for each relation candidate and build a classification
head to recognize its relation category. Finally, we provide a simple temporal association strategy to track TRACE
detected results to yield the video-level VidSGG. We perform experiments on two VidSGG benchmarks: ImageNetVidVRD and Action Genome, and the results demonstrate
that our TRACE achieves the state-of-the-art performance.
The code and models are made available at https://
github.com/MCG-NJU/TRACE.

1. Introduction
Video understanding tasks, such as action recognition [29, 1, 38, 39], temporal action localization [47, 20,
31], spatio-temporal action detection [18, 5], have received
lots of research attention in the past few years. Most of these
methods simply provide a single label or spatio-temporal
extent of each action instance in a long video sequence.
B: Corresponding author.

person

ride

person
sit on
watch
horse

(a) Video-level video scene graph

sofa

TV

person
sit on
sofa

person
stand on
floor

(b) Frame-level video scene graph

Figure 1. (a) An example of video-level VidSGG. The subject/object nodes in this graph are entity trajectories and their relation is constant for this clip. (b) An example for frame-level
VidSGG. The frame-level VidSGG is determined by short-term
information for each frame and could vary along time.

However, an ideal video understanding system is expected
to not only recognize the action types, but also provide detailed and structured interpretation of the whole scene by
parsing an event into a sequence of interactions between
different visual entities. This structured video representation, known as video scene graph [27], can contribute to
more accurate action recognition [10] and allow for our
vision models to tackle high-level and complex inference
tasks, such as video caption [7, 36], video retrieval [4, 16],
and video question answering [33, 15]. Nevertheless, video
scene graph generation (VidSGG) [25, 34, 22, 30] has received much less research efforts in our community, when
compared with image scene graph generation [41, 43, 17].
As shown in Figure 1, the existing benchmark of
VidSGG can be roughly grouped into two types according
to the granularity of its graph representation: (1) video-level
scene graph generation, where each graph node represents
an object trajectory, and the edge captures the relation between visual entities, which is constant for one clip. (2)
frame-level scene graph generation, where the graph is defined at frame level and the relation could change over time
in this short clip. For video-level VidSGG, it requires to accurately trim long videos into short clips (e.g., 30 frames)
in advance, according to the precise temporal boundaries of
relations. This setting cannot be easily adapted to realistic
VidSGG in untrimmed videos, as trimming is difficult and
subjective due to temporal ambiguity. In contrast, framelevel VidSGG provides a more flexible mechanism for rela-

13688

