Dual-Camera Super-Resolution with Aligned Attention Modules
Tengfei Wang1∗ Jiaxin Xie1∗ Wenxiu Sun2 Qiong Yan2 Qifeng Chen1
1
HKUST 2 SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI

Abstract
We present a novel approach to reference-based superresolution (RefSR) with the focus on dual-camera superresolution (DCSR), which utilizes reference images for
high-quality and high-fidelity results. Our proposed method
generalizes the standard patch-based feature matching with
spatial alignment operations. We further explore the dualcamera super-resolution that is one promising application of RefSR, and build a dataset that consists of 146
image pairs from the main and telephoto cameras in a
smartphone. To bridge the domain gaps between realworld images and the training images, we propose a selfsupervised domain adaptation strategy for real-world images. Extensive experiments on our dataset and a public benchmark demonstrate clear improvement achieved by
our method over state of the art in both quantitative evaluation and visual comparisons. Our code and data are
available at https://tengfei-wang.github.io/
Dual-Camera-SR/index.html.

1. Introduction
Most smartphone manufacturers adopt an asymmetriccameras system consisting of multiple fixed-focal lenses
instead of a variable-focal one for optical zoom, due to
limited assembly space. As shown in Fig. 1, the most
common configuration has dual cameras with wide-angle
(main camera) and telephoto lenses that have different field
of views (FoV). The wide-angle and telephoto images often have spatial misalignment and color discrepancy due to
viewpoint differences and different image signal processing
(ISP) pipelines in the two lenses. As these two images capture the same scene with different focal lengths, can we use
the telephoto image as a reference to enhance the resolution
of the wide-angle image? To answer this question, we study
reference-based super-resolution (RefSR) with the focus on
dual-camera super-resolution (DCSR).
The key challenges of RefSR lie in (1) how to effectively establish correspondences between low-resolution in1 equal contribution

puts (LR) and reference images (Ref) (feature warping),
and (2) how to integrate the reference information to improve the output image quality (feature fusion). It has been
widely observed that similar semantic patches and texture
patterns tend to recur in the same or highly-correlated images with variable positions, orientations and sizes [23, 46].
To search and utilize these correlated patterns from reference images, previous learning-based approaches adopt
either patch-wise matching (patch-match [44, 43], patchbased attention [34, 35]) or pixel-wise alignment (opticalflow [45], offsets [28]), with different pros and cons. The
pixel-wise alignment is able to handle non-rigid transformation, but usually less stable and prone to generate distorted
structures due to the difficulty of reliable flow or offsets estimations [6], especially for largely misaligned reference images. Patch-wise matching can achieve compelling warping
performance since it evaluates similarity scores between LR
and Ref patches in an explicit fashion. However, the vanilla
patch-level matching lacks robustness to spatial misalignment, e.g. scaled or rotated patches. As shown in Fig. 1,
even though highly-similar patches are available in the reference image, previous approaches are insufficient to make
use of these cues, and tend to average the misaligned Ref
and LR patches to produce blurry images.
Another limitation of previous RefSR approaches is that
they are difficult to be directly applied to high-resolution
images captured by smartphones. The reference images in
RefSR datasets [43] are typically smaller than 512 × 512.
Most methods thus globally searches over the entire reference image for super-resolution cues. Nevertheless, the
memory consumption of a global searching strategy would
be intractable for the high-resolution cases (e.g. 4K). The
domain gaps between real-world images and training images can also degrade the zoom performance [13, 40, 5].
To tackle these issues, we propose a deep RefSR method
with the focus on dual-camera super-resolution. First, we
generalize the vanilla patch-based attention to an aligned
attention module, which searches for related patches based
on explicit matching, while implicitly learning inter-patch
transformations to alleviate spatial misalignment. Second,
to prevent the reference patches from idling and contributing less to the super-resolution results, we impose a fidelity

2001

