Divide and Conquer for Single-frame Temporal Action Localization
Chen Ju1 , Peisen Zhao1 , Siheng Chen1 , Ya Zhang1B , Yanfeng Wang1 , Qi Tian2
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Huawei Cloud & AI
{ju chen, pszhao, sihengc, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract

(B) The two-stage framework

(A) The one-stage framework

whole video

whole video

Single-frame temporal action localization (STAL) aims
to localize actions in untrimmed videos with only one timestamp annotation for each action instance. Existing methods adopt the one-stage framework but couple the counting
goal and the localization goal. This paper proposes a novel
two-stage framework for the STAL task with the spirit of divide and conquer. The instance counting stage leverages
the location supervision to determine the number of action instances and divide a whole video into multiple video
clips, so that each video clip contains only one complete action instance; and the location estimation stage leverages
the category supervision to localize the action instance in
each video clip. To efficiently represent the action instance
in each video clip, we introduce the proposal-based representation, and design a novel differentiable mask generator to enable the end-to-end training supervised by category labels. On THUMOS14, GTEA, and BEOID datasets,
our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods by 3.5%,
2.7%, 4.8% mAP on average. And extensive experiments
verify the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) plays an important
role in video understanding [35, 45, 38]. Its goal is to detect
and classify all action instances in untrimmed videos. Recently, the fully-supervised setting [4, 18, 16, 34, 6, 14, 49]
which requires frame-level supervision, has achieved impressive results; however, it is time-consuming and expensive to densely annotate each frame. On the other hand, the
video-level weakly-supervised setting [19, 27, 28, 33, 20,
31] only needs the action category label of the whole video
for localization. But lacking explicit location supervision
fundamentally limits its empirical performance. To bridge
the gap between fully-supervised and video-level weaklysupervised settings, a single-frame weakly-supervised TAL
(STAL) is recently introduced [21], where a single frame
(seedframe) is annotated for each action instance. STAL
provides limited, yet precise action location supervision,
and shows the potential to achieve great empirical perfor-

time

divide
frame-based
representation

…

…
time
counting
&
localization

video clips

conquer
length

length

center

center

action

background action

proposal-based
representation

results

results
ground truth

seedframe
detection

action

background action

ground truth

Figure 1. Comparison. (A): The one-stage framework couples the
counting goal and the localization goal via thresholding, causing
inferior localization results. (B): The two-stage framework detects
seedframes to divide a whole video into multiple video clips, each
of which contains only one complete action instance; then, it separately localizes the action instance in each video clip.

mance and maintain cheap annotation overhead at the same
time. This work explores this new STAL task.
The existing STAL method [21] considers a one-stage
framework, similar to video-level weakly-supervised methods [28, 11, 19]. Based on Multiple Instance Learning, this
framework directly estimates the action probability at each
individual frame; and then, by thresholding the action probability sequence, the framework simultaneously determines
the number of action instances (counting) and localizes each
action instance (localization); see Figure 1 (A). Since this
one-stage framework couples the counting goal and the localization goal via thresholding, adjusting such a threshold
empirically would highly affect both counting and localization performances, causing a serious coupling issue. Even
tuning a threshold to provide the perfect counting results,
this single and unified threshold might not be able to precisely localize all the action instances because each action
instance could have its local sensitivity.
To solve the coupling issue, this work introduces a strategy of divide and conquer to decouple the counting goal
and the localization goal. In other words, we aim to strategically divide the STAL task into multiple sub-tasks, each of
which only needs to localize one action instance in a video

13455

