Mutual Affine Network for Spatially Variant Kernel Estimation
in Blind Image Super-Resolution
Luc Van Gool1,2
Radu Timofte1
Jingyun Liang1
Guolei Sun1
Kai Zhang1, *
1
2
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
KU Leuven, Belgium
{jinliang, guosun, kai.zhang, vangool, timofter}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

https://github.com/JingyunLiang/MANet

Abstract
Existing blind image super-resolution (SR) methods
mostly assume blur kernels are spatially invariant across
the whole image. However, such an assumption is rarely
applicable for real images whose blur kernels are usually
spatially variant due to factors such as object motion and
out-of-focus. Hence, existing blind SR methods would inevitably give rise to poor performance in real applications.
To address this issue, this paper proposes a mutual affine
network (MANet) for spatially variant kernel estimation.
Specifically, MANet has two distinctive features. First, it
has a moderate receptive field so as to keep the locality of
degradation. Second, it involves a new mutual affine convolution (MAConv) layer that enhances feature expressiveness
without increasing receptive field, model size and computation burden. This is made possible through exploiting channel interdependence, which applies each channel split with
an affine transformation module whose input are the rest
channel splits. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real
images show that the proposed MANet not only performs
favorably for both spatially variant and invariant kernel estimation, but also leads to state-of-the-art blind SR performance when combined with non-blind SR methods.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR), with the aim of reconstructing the high-resolution (HR) image from a lowresolution (LR) image, is a classical vision problem. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [42, 40, 39,
7, 5, 21, 15, 44, 24, 23] have been widely used in SR. However, most of these SR methods assume the blur kernel is
ideal and fixed (usually a bicubic kernel), and thus deteriorate seriously if the real kernel deviates from the ideal
one [46, 3, 53, 14]. Therefore, dealing with unknown blur
kernels, i.e., blind SR, is becoming a hot topic.
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Kernel estimation results of the proposed MANet on
“img017” in Urban100 [19] for scale factor 4. The shown image
is the SR image, whose corresponding HR image was blurred by a
spatially invariant kernel as shown in the top right green rectangle.

While existing blind SR methods [14, 3, 54, 53, 32, 25]
have achieved remarkable performance, they assume blur
kernels are spatially invariant and only estimate a single kernel for the whole image, giving rise to two inherent problems. First, real-world blur kernels are typically spatially
variant. Due to different environmental factors like object
motion and depth difference, as well as non-ideal imaging
such as out-of-focus and camera shake [37, 2], blur kernels at different locations of the image tend to be different.
Second, estimating a single kernel for the whole image is
susceptible to the adverse effects of flat patches, even under the spatially invariant assumption. For a natural image,
some patches contain edges or corners that are discriminative for kernel estimation (e.g., the pillars in Fig. 1), while
some other patches are rather flat (e.g., the blue sky) and
are less discriminative since they correspond to various indistinguishable but correct blur kernels that all result in the
same LR patch. Therefore, estimating spatially variant kernels is more reasonable for blind SR.
The main challenge of spatially variant kernel estimation lies in the locality of degradation. A blur kernel only
has impacts on a local image patch of the same size, e.g.,
21 × 21, which becomes even smaller after downsampling
(e.g., about 5 × 5 when scale factor is 4). Furthermore, utilizing pixels outside of the impacted patch may be detrimen-

4096

