Training Multi-Object Detector by
Estimating Bounding Box Distribution for Input Image
Jaeyoung Yoo1
Hojun Lee1,∗
1
Seoul National University

Inseop Chung1,∗
Geonseok Seo2
Nojun Kwak1
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology

{yoojy31, hojun815, jis3613, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In multi-object detection using neural networks, the
fundamental problem is, “How should the network learn
a variable number of bounding boxes in different input
images?”. Previous methods train a multi-object detection network through a procedure that directly assigns the
ground truth bounding boxes to the specific locations of
the network’s output. However, this procedure makes the
training of a multi-object detection network too heuristic
and complicated. In this paper, we reformulate the multiobject detection task as a problem of density estimation of
bounding boxes. Instead of assigning each ground truth to
specific locations of network’s output, we train a network
by estimating the probability density of bounding boxes in
an input image using a mixture model. For this purpose,
we propose a novel network for object detection called
Mixture Density Object Detector (MDOD), and the corresponding objective function for the density-estimationbased training. We applied MDOD to MS COCO dataset.
Our proposed method not only deals with multi-object detection problems in a new approach, but also improves detection performances through MDOD. The code is available: https://github.com/yoojy31/MDOD.

1. Introduction
Multi-object detection is the task of finding multiple objects through bounding boxes with class information. Since
the breakthrough of the deep neural networks, multi-object
detection has been extensively developed in terms of computational efficiency and performance, and is now at a level
that can be used in real life and industry.
Unlike image classification and sementic segmentation
tasks, multi-object detection has a variable number of
∗ H. Lee and I. Chung equally contributed to this work.

This work was supported by NRF grant (2021R1A2C3006659) and IITP
grant (No. 2021-0-01343), both funded by Korean Government. The authors are also funded by Samsung Electronics.

gunsuk.seo@samsung.com

bounding boxes as targets. In this aspect, the fundamental problem in training a multi-object detection network
is, “How should the network learn a variable number of
bounding boxes in different input images?”
As an answer to this question, instead of directly modeling a variable number of bounding boxes, methods have
been developed to learn a variable number of bounding
boxes by discretizing the bounding box space and directly
assigning the ground truth to the network’s output. These
methods have become the mainstream of training multiobject detection networks.
Figure 1 shows the training procedure of these methods. First, the matching algorithm compares each ground
truth bounding box with each reference point such as an anchor box or a center, and determines whether they match or
not. Second, as a result of the matching algorithm, the network output corresponding to the reference point location
matched with the ground truth bounding box is extracted as
the assignment location. Third, targets (e.g. displacements,
classes) for each assigned location of output are generated.
Finally, the assigned location is trained by the generated target through the objective function. Here, the unassigned locations are considered background areas, and are not trained
by the coordinate of the ground truth bounding box.
However, in order to successfully train a multi-object detection network through this procedure, thoughtful consideration for each step is required. First, in both the localization and the classification, the steps to assign each ground
truth to the network’s output are needed to learn the coordinates of the ground truth bounding box. In these steps,
a matching algorithm and the reference points such as anchor boxes are important, since the ground truth are only
assigned to the locations determined by the matching result.
Second, in the classification, there exists a severe imbalance between foreground and background. By the matching result, assigned locations are trained as corresponding
ground truth classes regarded as foreground, but unassigned
locations are trained as the background class. Generally,
unassigned locations outnumber the assigned ones. This
foreground-background imbalance problem makes training

3437

