Joint Inductive and Transductive Learning for Video Object Segmentation
Yunyao Mao1
1

Ning Wang1

Wengang Zhou1,2, * Houqiang Li1,2, *

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{myy2016,wn6149}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Memory

Abstract
Semi-supervised video object segmentation is a task of
segmenting the target object in a video sequence given only
a mask annotation in the first frame. The limited information available makes it an extremely challenging task.
Most previous best-performing methods adopt matchingbased transductive reasoning or online inductive learning.
Nevertheless, they are either less discriminative for similar
instances or insufficient in the utilization of spatio-temporal
information. In this work, we propose to integrate transductive and inductive learning into a unified framework
to exploit the complementarity between them for accurate
and robust video object segmentation. The proposed approach consists of two functional branches. The transduction branch adopts a lightweight transformer architecture
to aggregate rich spatio-temporal cues while the induction
branch performs online inductive learning to obtain discriminative target information. To bridge these two diverse
branches, a two-head label encoder is introduced to learn
the suitable target prior for each of them. The generated
mask encodings are further forced to be disentangled to better retain their complementarity. Extensive experiments on
several prevalent benchmarks show that, without the need
of synthetic training data, the proposed approach sets a series of new state-of-the-art records. Code is available at
https://github.com/maoyunyao/JOINT.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised video object segmentation (VOS) aims
at segmenting the target object in a video sequence with the
supervision given in the first frame by a pixel-wise segmentation mask. It has received tremendous attention in recent
years for its wide applications. Since the target-specific information is only given in the first frame, and the target
may undergo fast-moving and dramatic deformation, how
to make full use of the limited information to perform accu* Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li

Transduction
Branch (TB)

…

Output Mask

Disentangle
learning

Search Image
Ground‐truth

IB

Induction
Branch (IB)

Decoder

TB

IB & TB

Figure 1. An overview of our approach. The transduction branch
(TB) aggregates rich spatio-temporal cues from sampled history
frames and propagates them to the current frame, and the induction branch (IB) performs online inductive learning to obtain discriminative target information.

rate segmentation is thus extremely challenging.
Top-performing methods can be roughly categorized as
transductive reasoning and online inductive learning. In
transductive formulation, direct reasoning from reference
frames (labeled samples) to the current frame (unlabeled
sample) is performed to facilitate segmentation. In recent
transductive solutions [19, 23, 28, 33, 37, 44, 45, 54], feature matching has become the mainstream choice, where
pixel-level affinity or distance maps between the current
frame and reference frames are obtained to deliver rich historical target information. This specific-to-specific reasoning favorably retains the temporal information with attractive time efficiency. Despite achieving the state-of-the-art
performance, it heavily relies on the offline learned feature
embeddings for accurate matching, thus suffers limited generalization and discrimination capabilities.
On the other hand, online inductive learning utilizes reference frames to train a target model (general rule), which is
then applied to subsequent frames to perform segmentation.
Recently, efficient online discriminative learning [4, 12] in
visual object tracking has been introduced to the VOS community for its well-acknowledged adaptivity and generaliz-

9670

