Complementary Patch for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Fei Zhang, Chaochen Gu∗, Chenyue Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

Yuchao Dai
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China

{ferenas, jacygu, lucklypeach}@sjtu.edu.cn

daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS)
based on image-level labels has been greatly advanced
by exploiting the outputs of Class Activation Map (CAM)
to generate the pseudo labels for semantic segmentation.
However, CAM merely discovers seeds from a small number of regions, which may be insufficient to serve as pseudo
masks for semantic segmentation. In this paper, we formulate the expansion of object regions in CAM as an increase
in information. From the perspective of information theory, we propose a novel Complementary Patch (CP) Representation and prove that the information of the sum of
the CAMs by a pair of input images with complementary
hidden (patched) parts, namely CP Pair, is greater than or
equal to the information of the baseline CAM. Therefore,
a CAM with more information related to object seeds can
be obtained by narrowing down the gap between the sum
of CAMs generated by the CP Pair and the original CAM.
We propose a CP Network (CPN) implemented by a triplet
network and three regularization functions. To further improve the quality of the CAMs, we propose a Pixel-Region
Correlation Module (PRCM) to augment the contextual information by using object-region relations between the feature maps and the CAMs. Experimental results on the PASCAL VOC 2012 datasets show that our proposed method
achieves a new state-of-the-art in WSSS, validating the effectiveness of our CP Representation and CPN.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the booming of deep learning methods, recent years have witnessed extraordinary progress in semantic
segmentation [28, 43, 7, 8]. However, the prerequisite of
a successful neural network for semantic segmentation is
pixel-level segmentation ground-truth, which requires massive investments in manual annotation. Numerous efforts
have been devoted to developing Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) to ease the pressure, which
∗ Corresponding author



)64

)66GOX

(GYKROTK)'3

=

≥

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed method. The original CAM
simply finds object seeds in most discriminative regions. To enlarge the seed areas, our Complementary Patch Network (CPN)
uses a pair of images with CP regions (CP Pair) to generate two
CAMs, the sum of which are supposed to incorporate more information of the foreground than the original CAM.

aims to train a semantic segmentation network by using
weaker supervision, such as image-level classification labels [22, 5, 2, 3], bounding boxes [21, 10], scribbles [27]
and points [4]. Image-level labels, as the most convenientlyacquired annotation format, have been extensively studied
in WSSS. In this work, we particularly focus on WSSS using image-level labels.
Most WSSS approaches generating initial seeds through
image-level labels heavily rely on an efficient method—
Class Activation Map (CAM) [45]. Nevertheless, this architecture appears to be barely sensitive to the most discriminative regions, resulting in many incomplete foreground areas.
To address the issue, a promising way is to erase or ignore
some high response regions to help CAM ’see’ more seeds
in an image [36, 24, 23, 9], i.e., region erasing or mining
methods. However, these methods are more or less losing
part of the regions of an image in each training epoch due to
the randomness of the hiding process. It seems to be effective to intentionally cover the high response areas identified
from the CAM in each training epoch, while such iterative
operation introduces much computational complexity, and
it is difficult to properly determine the number of iterations
for each image as well.
In this paper, we show that CAM could explore more
high response areas by taking full advantage of the information of an image, specifically including both uncov-

7242

