GraphFPN: Graph Feature Pyramid Network for Object Detection
Gangming Zhao †1,2,3 , Weifeng Ge ∗1,2 , and Yizhou Yu ∗3
1

Nebula AI Group, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Feature pyramids have been proven powerful in image
understanding tasks that require multi-scale features.
State-of-the-art methods for multi-scale feature learning
focus on performing feature interactions across space and
scales using neural networks with a ﬁxed topology. In this
paper, we propose graph feature pyramid networks that are
capable of adapting their topological structures to varying
intrinsic image structures, and supporting simultaneous
feature interactions across all scales. We ﬁrst deﬁne an
image speciﬁc superpixel hierarchy for each input image to
represent its intrinsic image structures. The graph feature
pyramid network inherits its structure from this superpixel
hierarchy. Contextual and hierarchical layers are designed
to achieve feature interactions within the same scale
and across different scales. To make these layers more
powerful, we introduce two types of local channel attention
for graph neural networks by generalizing global channel
attention for convolutional neural networks. The proposed
graph feature pyramid network can enhance the multiscale
features from a convolutional feature pyramid network.
We evaluate our graph feature pyramid network in the
object detection task by integrating it into the Faster R-CNN
algorithm. The modiﬁed algorithm outperforms not only previous state-of-the-art feature pyramid based methods
with a clear margin but also other popular detection methods on both MS-COCO 2017 validation and test datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks exploit local connectivity and weights sharing, and have led to a series of
† This work is done when Gangming Zhao is a visiting student at
Fudan University. *Corresponding authors: wfge@fudan.edu.cn and yizhouy@acm.org

breakthroughs in computer vision tasks, including image
recognition [23, 46, 12, 47], object detection [9, 41, 33, 39,
5, 30, 45], and semantic segmentation [32, 54, 28, 17, 52,
48]. Since objects in an image may have varying scales,
it is much desired to obtain multiscale feature maps that
have fused high-level and low-level features with sufﬁcient spatial resolution at every distinct scale. This motivated
feature pyramid networks (FPN [29]) and its improved versions, such as path aggregation network (PANet [32]) and
feature pyramid transformer (FPT [52]), and other mtehods [21, 18, 8, 50, 11].
Every image has multiscale intrinsic structures, including the grouping of pixels into object parts, the further
grouping of parts into objects as well as the spatial layout of
objects in the image space. Such multiscale intrinsic structures are different from image to image, and can provide
important clues for image understanding and object recognition. But FPN and its related methods always use a ﬁxed
multiscale network topology (i.e. 2D grids of neurons) independent of the intrinsic image structures. Such a ﬁxed
network topology may not be optimal for multiscale feature
learning. According to psychological evidence [13], human
parse visual scenes into part-whole hierarchies, and model part-whole relationships in different images dynamically.
Motivated by this, researchers have developed a series of
”capsule” models [43, 15, 22], that describe the occurrence
of a particular type in a particular region of an image. Hierarchical segmentation can recursively group superpixels
according to their locations and similarities to generate a
superpixel hierarchy [38, 34]. Such a part-whole hierarchy
can assist object detection and semantic segmentation by
bridging the semantic gap between pixels and objects [34] .
It is known that multiscale features in a feature pyramid
can be enhanced through cross-scale interactions [29, 32,
25, 52] in addition to interactions within the same scale.
Another limitation of existing methods related to feature
pyramid networks is that only features from adjacent scales
interact directly while features from non-adjacent scales in-

2763

