Exploring Cross-Image Pixel Contrast for Semantic Segmentation
Wenguan Wang1 *, Tianfei Zhou1∗ , Fisher Yu1 , Jifeng Dai2 , Ender Konukoglu1 , Luc Van Gool1
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 2 SenseTime Research

https://github.com/tfzhou/ContrastiveSeg

Abstract
Current semantic segmentation methods focus only on
mining “local” context, i.e., dependencies between pixels
within individual images, by context-aggregation modules
(e.g., dilated convolution, neural attention) or structureaware optimization criteria (e.g., IoU-like loss). However,
they ignore “global” context of the training data, i.e., rich
semantic relations between pixels across different images.
Inspired by recent advance in unsupervised contrastive representation learning, we propose a pixel-wise contrastive
algorithm for semantic segmentation in the fully supervised
setting. The core idea is to enforce pixel embeddings belonging to a same semantic class to be more similar than
embeddings from different classes. It raises a pixel-wise
metric learning paradigm for semantic segmentation, by
explicitly exploring the structures of labeled pixels, which
were rarely explored before. Our method can be effortlessly
incorporated into existing segmentation frameworks without extra overhead during testing. We experimentally show
that, with famous segmentation models (i.e., DeepLabV3,
HRNet, OCR) and backbones (i.e., ResNet, HRNet), our
method brings performance improvements across diverse
datasets (i.e., Cityscapes, PASCAL-Context, COCO-Stuff,
CamVid). We expect this work will encourage our community to rethink the current de facto training paradigm in semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims to infer semantic labels for all pixels in an image, is a fundamental problem
in computer vision. In the last decade, semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable progress, driven by the availability of large-scale datasets (e.g., Cityscapes [15]) and
rapid evolution of convolutional networks (e.g., VGG [63],
ResNet [32]) as well as segmentation models (e.g., fully
convolutional network (FCN) [51]). In particular, FCN [51]
is the cornerstone of modern deep learning techniques for
segmentation, due to its unique advantage in end-to-end
* The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

Figure 1: Main idea. Current segmentation models learn to map
pixels (b) to an embedding space (c), yet ignoring intrinsic structures of labeled data (i.e., inter-image relations among pixels from
a same class, noted with same color in(b)). Pixel-wise contrastive
learning is introduced to foster a new training paradigm (d), by explicitly addressing intra-class compactness and inter-class dispersion. Each pixel (embedding) i is pulled closer ( ) to pixels ( )
of the same class, but pushed far ( ) from pixels (
) from
other classes. Thus a better-structured embedding space (e) is derived, eventually boosting the performance of segmentation models.

pixel-wise representation learning. However, its spatial invariance nature hinders the ability of modeling useful context among pixels (within images). Thus a main stream of
subsequent effort delves into network designs for effective
context aggregation, e.g., dilated convolution[80, 8, 9], spatial pyramid pooling[84], multi-layer feature fusion[58, 47]
and neural attention [35, 24]. In addition, as the widely
adopted pixel-wise cross entropy loss fundamentally lacks
the spatial discrimination power, some alternative optimization criteria are proposed to explicitly address object structures during segmentation network training [40, 2, 86].
Basically, these segmentation models (excluding [37])
utilize deep architectures to project image pixels into a
highly non-linear embedding space (Fig. 1(c)). However,
they typically learn the embedding space that only makes
use of “local” context around pixel samples (i.e., pixel dependencies within individual images), but ignores “global”
context of the whole dataset (i.e., pixel semantic relations
across images). Hence, an essential issue has been long ignored in the field: what should a good segmentation embedding space look like? Ideally, it should not only 1) address
the categorization ability of individual pixel embeddings,
but also 2) be well structured to address intra-class compactness and inter-class dispersion. With regard to 2), pixels
17303

