ASCNet: Self-supervised Video Representation Learning
with Appearance-Speed Consistency
Wenhao Wu2∗
Weiwen Hu1
Xu Liu1
Deng Huang1,3 *
Dongliang He2 Zhihua Wu2 Xiangmiao Wu1 Mingkui Tan1,4† Errui Ding2
1
South China University of Technology 2 Baidu Inc. 3 Pazhou Laboratory
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
{sehuangdeng,sehuww,seqdmy}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {xmwu, mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn,
wuwenhao17@mails.ucas.edu.cn, {hedongliang01, wuzhihua02, dingerruis}@baidu.com

Abstract
We study self-supervised video representation learning,
which is a challenging task due to 1) lack of labels for explicit supervision; 2) unstructured and noisy visual information. Existing methods mainly use contrastive loss with
video clips as the instances and learn visual representation
by discriminating instances from each other, but they need
a careful treatment of negative pairs by either relying on
large batch sizes, memory banks, extra modalities or customized mining strategies, which inevitably includes noisy
data. In this paper, we observe that the consistency between
positive samples is the key to learn robust video representation. Specifically, we propose two tasks to learn appearance and speed consistency, respectively. The appearance
consistency task aims to maximize the similarity between
two clips of the same video with different playback speeds.
The speed consistency task aims to maximize the similarity
between two clips with the same playback speed but different appearance information. We show that optimizing
the two tasks jointly consistently improves the performance
on downstream tasks, e.g., action recognition and video retrieval. Remarkably, for action recognition on the UCF-101
dataset, we achieve 90.8% accuracy without using any extra modalities or negative pairs for unsupervised pretraining, which outperforms the ImageNet supervised pretrained
model. Codes and models will be available.

1. Introduction
By 2022, almost 79% of the world’s mobile data traffic
will be video. With the rise of cameras on smartphones,
* Co-first authorship. This work was done when Deng Huang was a
research intern at Baidu VIS.
† Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

1× speed

Retrieval

2× speed
pull

(c)

2× speed
pull

Figure 1: An illustration of appearance-speed consistency. Video clips (a) and (b) come from the same video,
and the appearance is consistent with different playback
speeds. On the other hand, by using the same frame interval, we can sample the clip (c) from different videos but
with the same playback speed as clip (b). We train the
model to map clips to appearance and speed embedding
space while maintaining the consistency. The appearancebased retrieval strategy reduces the conflict between these
two objectives.

recording videos has never been easier. Video analysis has
become one of the most active research topics [36, 35, 37].
However, the generation of high-quality video data requires
a massive human annotation effort (e.g., Kinetics-400 [20],
Youtube-8M [1]), which is expensive, time-consuming, and
hard to scale up. In contrast, millions of unlabeled videos
are freely available on the Internet, e.g., YouTube. Thus,
learning meaningful representations from unlabeled videos
is crucial for video analysis.
Self-supervised learning makes it possible to exploit a
variety of labels that come with the data for free. Instead of collecting manual labels, the proper learning ob-

8096

