Kernel Methods in Hyperbolic Spaces
Pengfei Fang1,3 , Mehrtash Harandi2,3 , Lars Petersson3
1
The Australian National University, 2 Monash University, 3 DATA61-CSIRO
Pengfei.Fang@anu.edu.au, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu, Lars.Petersson@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Embedding data in hyperbolic spaces has proven beneficial for many advanced machine learning applications
such as image classification and word embeddings. However, working in hyperbolic spaces is not without difficulties as a result of its curved geometry (e.g., computing the
Frechet mean of a set of points requires an iterative algorithm). Furthermore, in Euclidean spaces, one can resort to
kernel machines that not only enjoy rich theoretical properties but that can also lead to superior representational
power (e.g., infinite-width neural networks). In this paper,
we introduce positive definite kernel functions for hyperbolic spaces. This brings in two major advantages, 1. kernelization will pave the way to seamlessly benefit from kernel machines in conjunction with hyperbolic embeddings,
and 2. the rich structure of the Hilbert spaces associated
with kernel machines enables us to simplify various operations involving hyperbolic data. That said, identifying valid
kernel functions on curved spaces is not straightforward
and is indeed considered an open problem in the learning
community. Our work addresses this gap and develops several valid positive definite kernels in hyperbolic spaces, including the universal ones (e.g., RBF). We comprehensively
study the proposed kernels on a variety of challenging tasks
including few-shot learning, zero-shot learning, person reidentification and knowledge distillation, showing the superiority of the kernelization for hyperbolic representations.

1. Introduction
This paper proposes a family of positive definite (pd)
kernels to map the representations in hyperbolic spaces into
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHSs), which enables us to seamlessly benefit from kernel machines to analyze hyperbolic spaces.
In the machine learning community, the Euclidean space
has been the “workhorse” for feature embeddings. This is
mainly because the high-dimensional vector space is a natural generalization from the familiar three-dimensional space

we live in and performing basic operations for comparison
(e.g., calculating distances and similarities) is straightforward. However, embedding in Euclidean spaces can harm
and distort the encoding of structured data, thereby losing
the complex geometric information inherently present in the
data. For example, the Euclidean space fails to encode the
hierarchical information in graph-structured data [38].
Several recent studies in computer vision suggest that
embedding images and video using hyperbolic geometry
can be beneficial compared to the common practice of using Euclidean geometry. This includes tasks such as textual
entailment [18], image classification and retrieval [32], and
graph classification [38] to name a few.
The hyperbolic space is characterized by a constant negative sectional curvature (in contrast to the flat structure of
the Euclidean space), and does not satisfy Euclid’s parallel
postulate. One intriguing property of hyperbolic spaces is
their capacity of encoding hierarchical data, as the volume
of hyperbolic space expands exponentially [22], thereby
increasing their representation power. Although several
studies have successfully employed the hyperbolic geometry for inference [18, 32, 8], the difficulties of working
with such non-linear spaces still overwhelm their wider
use. For example, while averaging in Euclidean geometry
is straightforward, its counterpart in hyperbolic space is approximated by the Frechet mean. Computing the Frechet
mean requires an iterative algorithm and could easily become costly [31, 40]. This motivates us to develop kernels
to make it possible to seamlessly benefit and employ kernel
machines towards analyzing hyperbolic data.
To be able to make use of kernel machines, one needs to
have a pd kernel function at its disposal. Loosely speaking,
a kernel function is a measure of similarity. Many familiar kernels in the Euclidean space are defined as functions
of the Euclidean distance (which is indeed the geodesic
distance of the space). Take the RBF kernel k(x, y) =
exp(−ξd2 (x, y)) as an example. This might imply that
valid pd kernels in curved spaces, the hyperbolic space
being one, can be constructed once the geodesic distance
is known. Unfortunately, this is not the case as shown
in [30, 15] (c.f ., theorem 6.2 in [30]), because such curved

10665

