Universal and Flexible Optical Aberration Correction Using
Deep-Prior Based Deconvolution
Xiu Li1 *, Jinli Suo1 , Weihang Zhang1 , Xin Yuan2 , Qionghai Dai1
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Westlake University

High quality imaging usually requires bulky and expensive lenses to compensate geometric and chromatic aberrations. This poses high constraints on the optical hash or
low cost applications. Although one can utilize algorithmic
reconstruction to remove the artifacts of low-end lenses, the
degeneration from optical aberrations is spatially varying
and the computation has to trade off efficiency for performance. For example, we need to conduct patch-wise optimization or train a large set of local deep neural networks to
achieve high reconstruction performance across the whole
image. In this paper, we propose a PSF aware deep network, which takes the aberrant image and PSF map as
input and produces the latent high quality version via incorporating deep priors, thus leading to a universal and
flexible optical aberration correction method. Specifically,
we pre-train a base model from a set of diverse lenses and
then adapt it to a given lens by quickly refining the parameters, which largely alleviates the time and memory consumption of model learning. The approach is of high efficiency in both training and testing stages. Extensive results verify the promising applications of our proposed approach for compact low-end cameras. The code is available
at https://github.com/leehsiu/UABC

1. Introduction
Optical aberration is one of the most common degeneration in real lens-based imaging systems. Due to the deviation from ideal thin-lens model, the simple/single lens
elements suffer from chromatic, spherical aberration and
coma aberrations, and degenerate the imaging quality significantly. To cancel out these artifacts, modern camera
lenses are usually made of a complex combination of several (even dozens of) lens elements with carefully designed
parameters (aka. lens prescription). In a nutshell, existing techniques achieve high imaging quality via such com* lixiu15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

－

．． ． ． ． ． ． • ． ． ．
． ． ． ． ． ． ． ． ． ． ．
’ ’ ’
． ’ ’ ． ．
． ． ．
． ． ．
． ． ． ．
． ． ． ．
． ． ． ． ． ． ． ． ． •．
． ． ．
’
．

Abstract

’＝

’k

(b)

(a)

－

．，

噜

I

!

(c)

Figure 1: One example of computationally reconstructing
high quality image with a simple lens. (a) A camera with
a simple double glued lens (Thorlabs, AC254-075-A-ML).
(b) The calibrated PSF of the camera in (a). (c) The input
degenerated image (upper row) and our reconstruction result (bottom row).

plex design, at the expense of high cost, bulky weight and
inevitable lens flare. With the rapid development of large
pixel count digital sensors (e.g. 100 mega-pixel scale), effective compensation of lens aberration is highly desired.
To achieve light-weighted and low-cost high-quality
imaging, computational optical aberration correction has
been exploited during the past decades. Different from
advanced optical design, computational methods employ a
simple lens for imaging and remove the aberration afterwards with algorithms. Mathematically, the lens aberration can be formulated as convolution with spatially varying
kernels, and the compensation is conducted by deconvolution with the assistance of image priors. These computa-

2613

