Joint Audio-Visual Deepfake Detection
Yipin Zhou
Ser-Nam Lim
Facebook AI
{yipinzhou, sernamlim}@fb.com

Abstract
Deepfakes (”deep learning” + ”fake”) are videos synthetically generated with AI algorithms. While they could
be entertaining, they could also be misused for falsifying
speeches and spreading misinformation. The process to create deepfakes involves both visual and auditory manipulations. Exploration on detecting visual deepfakes has produced a number of detection methods as well as datasets,
while audio deepfakes (e.g. synthetic speech from text-tospeech or voice conversion systems) and the relationship
between the video and audio modalities have been relatively
neglected. In this work, we propose a novel visual / auditory deepfake joint detection task and show that exploiting
the intrinsic synchronization between the visual and auditory modalities could benefit deepfake detection. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed joint detection framework outperforms independently trained models, and at the
same time, yields superior generalization capability on unseen types of deepfakes.

1. Introduction
A convincing deepfake intentionally designed for delivering spurious information and fake news, e.g. a politician
giving a speech or making a statement1 , usually requires
meticulous manipulations of both the video and audio channels. In the given example, the video content has been modified with a technique known as lip sync [44, 43] while the
voice was from an impersonator. With recent advances in
text-to-speech (TTS) and voice conversion (VC) algorithms
[58, 41, 22, 37, 10], synthesizing human speech will become even easier, paving a future where audio will play an
equally important role as video in deepfake detection. Our
work in this paper addresses the interplay between these two
modalities, which can be critical towards detecting audiovisual deepfakes.
Recent work has mostly focus on identifying visual artifacts and ‘fingerprints’ from various generative frameworks
[39, 56, 61, 11] or detecting local texture inconsistency
1 youtu.be/30NvDC1zcL8

Moment
and

How

I am
(𝑎)

(𝑏)

used

Often

(𝑐)

Figure 1: Examples to show that modified video or audio
might violate the synchronization patterns. (a) The first row
of video frames are unmodified while the second row has
been faceswapped, and the words below are spoken by both
videos. (b) Same as (a) just the bottom row has been lipsynced instead. Large discrepancies exist between the lip
motions in the forged videos and the pronounced words. (c)
The top row are authentic video frames, uttering the word
“Moment”. The corresponding Mel-spectrograms are in the
second row, a TTS generated “Moment” Mel-spectrograms
are in the third row which sounded more like “wow-mount”.
The audiovisual pair comprising the first and third row
breaks the synchronization patterns maintained by the pair
of the first and second row, which is what we hope to capture in this work.

caused by face swapping [30, 31]. Another branch of work
utilizes biometric signals such as detecting specific facial
motion patterns inherent in particular individuals [5, 3], but
such ID-specific approach is limited by its ability to generalize to new identities. To achieve a more generalized
approach, we observe that when humans speak, there is a
strong correlation between the lip motions (viseme) and the
pronounced syllables (phoneme) [32]. The synchronization
breaks at some inconspicuous moments when any one of
the modalities is fake, so for instance, in Fig. 1, the lip motions did not fit well with the syllables due to the artifacts
introduced by face swapping or lip sync. Moreover, when
the phonemes are created from TTS systems, they are often
times not pronounced clearly to match mouth shapes, which
is a good signal for detecting audiovisual deepfakes.

14800

