Else-Net: Elastic Semantic Network for Continual Action Recognition from
Skeleton Data
Tianjiao Li 1

Qiuhong Ke 2
1

Hossein Rahmani 3

Rui En Ho 1

Henghui Ding 4

Jun Liu 1 *

2

Singapore University of Technology and Design
University of Melbourne
3
4
Lancaster University
Nanyang Technological University

{tianjiao li, ruien ho}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg
h.rahmani@lancaster.ac.uk, qiuhong.ke@unimelb.edu.au, ding0093@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Most of the state-of-the-art action recognition methods
focus on offline learning, where the samples of all types
of actions need to be provided at once. Here, we address
continual learning of action recognition, where various
types of new actions are continuously learned over time.
This task is quite challenging, owing to the catastrophic forgetting problem stemming from the discrepancies between
the previously learned actions and current new actions to
be learned. Therefore, we propose Else-Net, a novel Elastic
Semantic Network with multiple learning blocks to learn
diversified human actions over time. Specifically, our ElseNet is able to automatically search and update the most
relevant learning blocks w.r.t. the current new action, or
explore new blocks to store new knowledge, preserving
the unmatched ones to retain the knowledge of previously
learned actions and alleviates forgetting when learning new
actions. Moreover, even though different human actions
may vary to a large extent as a whole, their local body
parts can still share many homogeneous features. Inspired
by this, our proposed Else-Net mines the shared knowledge
of the decomposed human body parts from different actions,
which benefits continual learning of actions. Experiments
show that the proposed approach enables effective continual action recognition and achieves promising performance
on two large-scale action recognition datasets.

1. Introduction
Skeleton-based human action recognition has been attracting increasing attention in recent years because of its
research significance [5, 32, 29] and relevance to a wide
range of applications, e.g., human-robot interaction, selfdriving vehicles, and security surveillance [34, 6]. Most
of the existing works [7, 30, 38, 20, 13, 17, 26] mainly
* Corresponding Author.

focus on using offline learning strategies to train the action
recognition models, i.e., all training action sequences need
to be provided at once when training the fixed-structure
models. However, the recognition models operating in the
real world may be exposed to continuous streams of new information, i.e., new unseen actions may continuously come
in. For instance, in the real-world human-robot interaction
scenario, the robot operates under open-set and can always
encounter new human interactions. Given an unseen human
interaction, retraining the robot on all previously observed
interactions hinders the robot from conducting efficient
learning and providing a timely response. In this case, the
recognition models must learn from the non-stationary data
distributions. However, continual learning of human action
recognition under non-stationary conditions is challenging
due to the catastrophic forgetting problem [23], which
refers to the tendency that the recognition models forget the
previously learned knowledge upon learning new unseen
actions.
On the other hand, humans have an extraordinary capacity to learn continually from the external environment and
their historical experience over their lifespan without the
catastrophic forgetting problem, i.e., they excel at continually acquiring and accumulating new knowledge and skills.
This is because human brains can learn new knowledge by
searching and consolidating the most relevant memories in
multiple neocortex regions or establishing new memories
by activating new neocortex regions [9, 22]. In this way,
human brains can turn new knowledge into long-term memories to avoid forgetting. Moreover, when learning each
new knowledge, humans do not need to be retrained with
all the historical information to avoid the forgetting of the
old knowledge.
In this paper, we aim to investigate a brain-inspired
model that can approach human intelligence for continual
human action recognition, i.e., the model needs to effectively accumulate new knowledge from actions over time

13434

