HiNet: Deep Image Hiding by Invertible Network
Junpeng Jing1, * , Xin Deng1, ∗ , Mai Xu2, † , Jianyi Wang2 , Zhenyu Guan1, †
, School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
1

{junpengjing, cindydeng, MaiXu, guanzhenyu}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Image hiding aims to hide a secret image into a cover
image in an imperceptible way, and then recover the secret
image perfectly at the receiver end. Capacity, invisibility
and security are three primary challenges in image hiding
task. This paper proposes a novel invertible neural network
(INN) based framework, HiNet, to simultaneously overcome
the three challenges in image hiding. For large capacity, we
propose an inverse learning mechanism by simultaneously
learning the image concealing and revealing processes. Our
method is able to achieve the concealing of a full-size secret
image into a cover image with the same size. For high invisibility, instead of pixel domain hiding, we propose to hide
the secret information in wavelet domain. Furthermore, we
propose a new low-frequency wavelet loss to constrain that
secret information is hidden in high-frequency wavelet subbands, which signiﬁcantly improves the hiding security. Experimental results show that our HiNet signiﬁcantly outperforms other state-of-the-art image hiding methods, with more
than 10 dB PSNR improvement in secret image recovery on
ImageNet, COCO and DIV2K datasets. Codes are available
at https://github.com/TomTomTommi/HiNet.

1. Introduction
The task of image hiding is to conceal a secret image
into a cover image to generate a stego image, which only
allows the informed receivers to recover the secret image,
but invisible to other people. For security concern, the stego
image is usually required to be indistinguishable from the
cover image. Different from bit-level message hiding or
steganography [2, 20, 35, 36, 39–41], image hiding is more
challenging, which requires large capacity, high invisibility
and security. Image hiding has a wide range of applications,
of which secret communication and privacy protection are
the most signiﬁcant ones. Compared to the well-known im* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

xsecret Concealing xstego Revealing xrec
Network

Network

(a) Traditional methods

xsecret
xrec

Invertible Network

xstego

(b) Our method

Figure 1. The illustration of difference between our image hiding
method and the traditional methods [5, 23, 32].

age cryptography, image hiding has a remarkable security
advantage, i.e., the stego image with secret information inside is indistinguishable from the cover image, which makes
it more suitable for secret communication. In addition, unlike image cryptography, image hiding focuses more on the
capacity and invisibility of hidden information rather than
robustness.
Traditional steganographic approaches can only hide a
small amount of information [6,11,13,16,19,24], which cannot meet the requirement of large capacity in image hiding
task. Baluja [4] proposed the ﬁrst convolutional neural network (CNN) to solve image hiding problem. This work was
then extended in [5] by permuting the pixels of secret image
to enhance the hiding security. Weng et al. [32] further proposed a deep network for video steganography by temporal
residual modeling. However, all these methods adopt two
sub-networks for image hiding: a concealing network to hide
a secret image xsecret into a cover image to generate a stego
image xstego , and a revealing network to recover the secret
image xrec from xstego , as shown in Fig. 1 (a). The concealing and revealing networks have two sets of parameters,
which are linked through simple concatenation. This loose
connection may cause color distortion and texture-copying
artifacts. Besides, they barely consider the security issue,
making hidden secret information easy to be detected.
In this paper, we propose an invertible image hiding network, HiNet, in which the concealing and revealing pro-

4733

