Human Detection and Segmentation via Multi-view Consensus
Isinsu Katircioglu1 ∗

Helge Rhodin2
Jörg Spörri3
Mathieu Salzmann1,4
Pascal Fua1
1
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 UBC, Vancouver, Canada
3
Balgrist University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland 4 ClearSpace SA, Lausanne, Switzerland
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch, rhodin@cs.ubc.ca, joerg.spoerri@balgrist.ch

Koh et al. [22]

Yang et al. [53]

Katircioglu et al. [20]

Rhodin et al. [37] + [20]

Ours

Figure 1: Leveraging multi-view consistency at training time to segment the salient object from single images at inference
time and to outperform baselines exploiting temporal consistency [22], optical flow [53, 20] and novel view synthesis [37].

Abstract
Self-supervised detection and segmentation of foreground objects aims for accuracy without annotated training data. However, existing approaches predominantly rely
on restrictive assumptions on appearance and motion.
For scenes with dynamic activities and camera motion,
we propose a multi-camera framework in which geometric
constraints are embedded in the form of multi-view consistency during training via coarse 3D localization in a voxel
grid and fine-grained offset regression. In this manner, we
learn a joint distribution of proposals over multiple views.
At inference time, our method operates on single RGB images. We outperform state-of-the-art techniques both on images that visually depart from those of standard benchmarks
and on those of the classical Human3.6M dataset.

1. Introduction
Robust detection and segmentation of moving people
can now be achieved reliably in scenarios for which large
∗ Work supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation.

amounts of annotated data are available. However, for less
common activities, such as skiing, it remains challenging,
because the required training databases do not exist. Selfsupervised approaches [10, 22, 5, 6, 8, 9, 37, 53, 28, 3, 31]
promise to address this problem. However, most of them
depend on strong constraints, such as the target objects being seen against a static background, or rely on object localization and object-boundary detection networks pre-trained
with supervision, which limits their applicability.
In this paper, we propose to remove these limitations by
using a multi-camera setup for training purposes and explicitly encoding the 3D geometry of the scene. At inference
time, our trained network can then handle single images and
outperforms earlier techniques, as shown in Fig. 1. Our algorithm can be applied to any object as long as the two assumptions from [24] hold: foreground and background are
distinguishable by color or texture; every part of the background must be visible more often than not.
Using several cameras complicates data acquisition but
only in a limited way because both synchronization and calibration are well understood tasks for which off-the-shelf

2855

