ASMR: Learning Attribute-Based Person Search with
Adaptive Semantic Margin Regularizer
Boseung Jeong1*
Jicheol Park2*
Suha Kwak1,2
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH1 ,
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH2
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/ASMR/

Abstract
Attribute-based person search is the task of ﬁnding person images that are best matched with a set of text attributes
given as query. The main challenge of this task is the large
modality gap between attributes and images. To reduce the
gap, we present a new loss for learning cross-modal embeddings in the context of attribute-based person search. We regard a set of attributes as a category of people sharing the
same traits. In a joint embedding space of the two modalities, our loss pulls images close to their person categories
for modality alignment. More importantly, it pushes apart
a pair of person categories by a margin determined adaptively by their semantic distance, where the distance metric
is learned end-to-end so that the loss considers importance
of each attribute when relating person categories. Our loss
guided by the adaptive semantic margin leads to more discriminative and semantically well-arranged distributions of
person images. As a consequence, it enables a simple embedding model to achieve state-of-the-art records on public
benchmarks without bells and whistles.

1. Introduction
Person search is the task of ﬁnding people from a large
set of images given a query describing their appearances.
It plays critical roles in applications for public safety such
as searching for criminals in videos and tracking people
using multiple surveillance cameras with non-overlapping
ﬁelds of view. Person search has been formulated as a ﬁnegrained image retrieval problem focusing only on person
images, where a solution should discriminate subtle appearance variations of different people and at the same time generalize well to people unseen during training.
Most of existing person search techniques need an image that exempliﬁes target person as query [3, 4, 5, 17, 18,
20, 24, 27, 30, 33, 38, 48, 50, 52]. However, image query
is not always accessible in real world scenarios, e.g., where
* Equal contribution

eyewitness memory is the only evidence for ﬁnding criminals. A solution to this issue is to utilize a verbal description
as query for person search [22, 23], but it suffers from the
inherent ambiguity of natural language and requires complicated processes to understand the query.
To address the above issue, we study in this paper person search using text attributes as query. Speciﬁcally, a
query is given as a set of predeﬁned attributes indicating
traits of target person, e.g., gender, age, clothing, and accessory; we consider such a set as a person category, and
multiple people sharing the same traits belong to the same
person category. This approach is suitable for person search
in the wild since attributes are cheap to collect while being
less ambiguous and more tractable than natural language
descriptions. The use of attributes as query, however, introduces additional challenges due to the limited descriptive
capability of attributes, which leads to a large modality gap
between images and person categories.
Previous work on attribute-based person search attempts
to reduce the modality gap by aligning each person category and corresponding images in a joint embedding space
through modality-adversarial training [2, 51] or by enhancing the expressive power of embedding vectors of person
categories and images in a hierarchical manner [9]. Although these pioneer studies shed light on the important
yet less explored approach to person search, there is still
large room for further improvement. First, they are unstable
and computationally heavy in training due to their adversarial learning strategies [2, 51], or expensive in inference
due to the large dimensional embedding vectors demanding an extra network to be matched [9]. More importantly,
these methods treat person categories as independent class
labels of person images and ignore their relations, e.g., how
many attributes are different between them, although such
relations can provide a rich supervisory signal for learning
better representations of person categories and images.
We develop a new attribute-based person search method
that overcomes these limitations. Our method learns a joint
embedding space of the two different modalities through a
pair of simple encoder networks, one for images and the

12016

