Progressive Correspondence Pruning by Consensus Learning
Chen Zhao1†∗ Yixiao Ge3† Feng Zhu2

Rui Zhao24

Hongsheng Li3

Mathieu Salzmann1

1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
SenseTime Research 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

{chen.zhao, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch {zhufeng, zhaorui}@sensetime.com
{yxge@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

Correspondence pruning aims to correctly remove false
matches (outliers) from an initial set of putative correspondences. The pruning process is challenging since putative
matches are typically extremely unbalanced, largely dominated by outliers, and the random distribution of such outliers further complicates the learning process for learningbased methods. To address this issue, we propose to progressively prune the correspondences via a local-to-global
consensus learning procedure. We introduce a “pruning”
block that lets us identify reliable candidates among the initial matches according to consensus scores estimated using local-to-global dynamic graphs. We then achieve progressive pruning by stacking multiple pruning blocks sequentially. Our method outperforms state-of-the-arts on robust line fitting, camera pose estimation and retrieval-based
image localization benchmarks by significant margins and
shows promising generalization ability to different datasets
and detector/descriptor combinations.

1. Introduction
Accurate pixel-wise correspondences act as a premise
to tackle many important tasks in computer vision and
robotics, such as Structure from Motion (SfM) [39], Simultaneous Location and Mapping (SLAM) [30], image stitching [7], visual localization [31], and virtual reality [41]. Unfortunately, feature correspondences established by off-theshelf detector-descriptors [26, 30, 28, 11] tend to be sensitive to challenging cross-image variations, such as rotations, scale changes, viewpoint changes, and illumination
changes. Much recent research has therefore focused on
correspondence pruning [4, 27, 29], aiming to identify correct matches (inliers) while rejecting false ones (outliers).
∗ Work was done when the author was an intern at SenseTime Research
† Authors contributed equally

Consensus

Abstract
Local Graphs

Ini

ti a
lM

atc
he
s

Hard to identify inliers

Global Graph

Ca
nd
ida
tes

Inl

ier
s

Easy to identify inliers

Figure 1. Progressive correspondence pruning via local-toglobal consensus learning.
Given initial correspondences
(bottom-left image) with dominant outliers, correctly identifying
inliers remains challenging. Instead of classifying correspondences in a one-shot fashion, we propose to gradually prune the
correspondences to obtain a subset of reliable candidates based on
correspondence consensus scores estimated from local-to-global
graphs, encouraging accurate inlier identification.

In this context, deep learning has been utilized as a powerful solution [29, 48, 47, 40], typically casting correspondence pruning as a per-match classification task, and adopting Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) to classify putative
matches into inliers and outliers. However, the resulting
learning problem is significantly complicated by the fact
that the initial matches are general extremely unbalanced,
with around 90% of outliers [48](refer to the bottom-left image in Fig 1), which are randomly distributed in real-world
scenarios [48]. We therefore employ a toy line-fitting example shown in Fig. 2 to explain this issue, in which 100 inliers are identically sampled from the same line, while 900
outliers are randomly located. The standard PointCN [29]
baseline may fail to detect the same set of inliers depending
on the outliers included in the data, because, given a finite
training time, learning a distinctive feature embedding from

6464

