Understanding and Mitigating Annotation Bias
in Facial Expression Recognition
Yunliang Chen
Jungseock Joo
University of California, Los Angeles
chenyunliang@ucla.edu, jjoo@comm.ucla.edu

Abstract
The performance of a computer vision model depends
on the size and quality of its training data. Recent studies have unveiled previously-unknown composition biases
in common image datasets which then lead to skewed model
outputs, and have proposed methods to mitigate these biases. However, most existing works assume that humangenerated annotations can be considered gold-standard and
unbiased. In this paper, we reveal that this assumption can
be problematic, and that special care should be taken to prevent models from learning such annotation biases. We focus
on facial expression recognition and compare the label biases between lab-controlled and in-the-wild datasets. We
demonstrate that many expression datasets contain significant annotation biases between genders, especially when it
comes to the happy and angry expressions, and that traditional methods cannot fully mitigate such biases in trained
models. To remove expression annotation bias, we propose
an AU-Calibrated Facial Expression Recognition (AUCFER) framework that utilizes facial action units (AUs) and
incorporates the triplet loss into the objective function. Experimental results suggest that the proposed method is more
effective in removing expression annotation bias than existing techniques.

1. Introduction
Computer vision models rely heavily on large sets of
training images. Unfortunately, most datasets are “biased”
in one way or another [58]. Traditional (i.e., lab-controlled)
datasets are often too small and not diverse enough to train
a robust model. Recently, many large-scale image datasets
have been created through web-scraping and crowdsourced
annotations [16, 95]. While this practice helps researchers
collect millions of diverse “in-the-wild” images rapidly at
low cost, it also introduces an undesired problem of dataset
bias [79, 78, 64]. To mitigate the problem of biases effectively, we need to know (1) what causes biases (source), (2)

which specific problems, datasets, or models suffer from biases, and (3) which methods are effective in each situation.
Machine learning models, unless explicitly modified, have
been shown to be capable of learning bias from data [23]
and, consequently, to produce biased outcomes against certain groups of people, undermining fairness and social trust
of AI systems [83, 30, 94, 8, 9, 18, 26, 48].
We consider the scenario of supervised learning. Let
X = {Xi }N
i=1 denote the collection of input images, and
Y = {Yi }N
i=1 be the set of labels. A dataset is unbiased if
the joint distribution P (X, Y ) matches reality. In particular,
this requires the annotated labels, Y |X, to be unbiased.
For tabulated data, label bias is a classical focus in the
fairness literature, where machine learning models are applied to some historically discriminatory data whose labels
are unfair to certain racial or gender groups [65], such as
recidivism prediction [12], loan approval, and employment
decisions [89, 63]. For crowdsourced image annotations,
however, it is often assumed that the annotations are not systematically biased. Each annotator may have their personal
biases, and there may be labeling mistakes, but given the diversity and large size of the data, they are generally assumed
to be just another component of random noises [6, 96].
In reality, however, it is unlikely that people’s biases are
all idiosyncratic. In fact, annotators may possess systematic
cultural or societal biases, and if not specifically trained,
they may incorporate such biases into their annotations. As
a result, models trained on such data will become unfair. In
this paper, we investigate the presence of systematic annotation bias in large in-the-wild datasets. We focus on the
task of facial expression recognition. Fairness in expression
recognition has not received wide attention [87, 70], yet it
has a profound impact: more and more companies nowadays conduct video job interviews in which algorithms are
used to evaluate applicants’ facial expressions, voice, and
word selection to predict their skills, behaviors, and personality traits [90, 67, 28]; in addition, automated emotion
analysis is already ubiquitous and used in consumer analysis, content recommendation, clinical psychology, lie detection, pain assessment, and many other human computer

14980

