Collaborative Learning with Disentangled Features
for Zero-shot Domain Adaptation
Won Young Jhoo, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{jhoowy, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Abstract
Typical domain adaptation techniques aim to transfer the
knowledge learned from a label-rich source domain to a
label-scarce target domain in the same label space. However, it is often hard to get even the unlabeled target domain data of a task of interest. In such a case, we can
capture the domain shift between the source domain and
target domain from an unseen task and transfer it to the
task of interest, which is known as zero-shot domain adaptation (ZSDA). Most of existing state-of-the-art methods for
ZSDA attempted to generate target domain data. However,
training such generative models causes significant computational overhead and is hardly optimized. In this paper, we
propose a novel ZSDA method that learns a task-agnostic
domain shift by collaborative training of domain-invariant
semantic features and task-invariant domain features via
adversarial learning. Meanwhile, the spatial attention map
is learned from disentangled feature representations to selectively emphasize the domain-specific salient parts of the
domain-invariant features. Experimental results show that
our ZSDA method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
several benchmarks.

✎❛✏✑ ❢ ■♥✍✂✁✂✏✍ ✭✎ ■✒

■✁✁✂r✂✌❛♥✍ ✎❛✏✑ ✭■✁✎✒

❙ ✉✁❝✂ ❞ ♠❛✄♥
❚☎✆❣✝✞ ✟✠✡☎☛☞

✖ (✗)

✓✔s✕✕✔

Figure 1: An example of zero-shot-domain adaptation. In
this scenario, IrT is the digit image analysis and ToI is the
fashion image analysis. The source and target domains are
grayscale and color image domains, respectively. The objective of zero-shot domain adaptation is to train a model
for ToI in the target domain, which is unseen during training time, by learning a task-agnostic domain shift T (·).

1. Introduction
Recent deep learning methods achieved success in various computer vision tasks including image classification,
segmentation, and object detection. However, such deeplearned models often suffer from severe performance degradation when the training data and testing data are from different domains due to the domain shift [12]. For example, a
scene segmentation model trained on synthetic images performs worse when applied to real-world images, and vice
versa. To tackle this problem, domain adaptation techniques
that aim to transfer the knowledge learned from a label-rich
source domain to the desired target domain, also known as
* Corresponding author

”transfer learning”, are actively being studied.
Typical domain adaptation methods assume that the target domain data is available at the training phase. However,
in real-world applications, it is often not feasible to get the
unlabeled target domain data that shares an identical label
space with the source domain data of interest. Such a situation refers to a new transfer learning task, known as zeroshot domain adaptation (ZSDA) [25]. The objective of the
zero-shot domain adaptation task is to transfer the domain
shift to a task of interest (ToI) from an irrelevant task (IrT)
as shown in Fig 1. This domain adaptation technique suggests a novel approach for various data scarcity problems.
Suppose that we have a scene text dataset and a synthetic

8896

