OVANet: One-vs-All Network for Universal Domain Adaptation
Kuniaki Saito1 , Kate Saenko1,2
1
Boston University, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
[keisaito,saenko]@bu.edu

Abstract
Universal Domain Adaptation (UNDA) aims to handle
both domain-shift and category-shift between two datasets,
where the main challenge is to transfer knowledge while
rejecting “unknown” classes which are absent in the labeled source data but present in the unlabeled target data.
Existing methods manually set a threshold to reject ”unknown” samples based on validation or a pre-defined ratio
of “unknown” samples, but this strategy is not practical.
In this paper, we propose a method to learn the threshold using source samples and to adapt it to the target domain. Our idea is that a minimum inter-class distance in
the source domain should be a good threshold to decide between “known” or “unknown” in the target. To learn the
inter- and intra-class distance, we propose to train a onevs-all classifier for each class using labeled source data.
Then, we adapt the open-set classifier to the target domain
by minimizing class entropy. The resulting framework is the
simplest of all baselines of UNDA and is insensitive to the
value of a hyper-parameter, yet outperforms baselines with
a large margin. Implementation is available at https://
github.com/VisionLearningGroup/OVANet.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks can learn highly discriminative
representations for image recognition tasks [6, 30, 14, 26,
12] given a large amount of training data, but do not generalize well to novel domains. Collecting a large amount
of annotated data in novel domains incurs a high annotation cost. To tackle this issue, domain adaptation transfers knowledge from a label-rich training domain to a labelscarce novel domain [1]. Traditional unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) assumes that the source domain and the
target domain completely share the sets of categories, i.e.,
closed-set DA. But, this assumption does not often hold in
practice. There are several possible situations: the target
domain contains categories absent in the source (unknown
categories), i.e., open-set DA (ODA) [4, 29]; the source domain includes categories absent in the target (source pri-

Figure 1: Existing open-set or universal domain adaptation methods handle unknown samples by manually setting a threshold to reject them, either by validation or prior knowledge about the target
domain. If set incorrectly, it can mistakenly reject known classes
as shown here, e.g., car and truck. Instead, we propose to learn the
threshold by training one-vs-all classifiers for each class.

vate categories); i.e., partial DA (PDA) [5]; a mixture of
ODA and PDA, called open-partial DA (OPDA). Many approaches have been tailored for a specific setting, but a true
difficulty is that we cannot know the category shift in advance.
The task of universal domain adaptation (UNDA) was
proposed [37, 28] to account for the uncertainty about the
category-shift. The assumption is that the label distributions
of labeled and unlabeled data can be different, but we cannot know the difference in advance. Since estimating the
label distributions of unlabeled data is very hard in real applications, the setting is very practical. Although we focus
on a domain shift problem in this paper, the setting also applies to a semi-supervised learning problems [11].
In this task, our goal is to have a model that can categorize target samples into either one of the correct known
labels or the unknown label. The main technical difficulty
is that no supervision is available to distinguish unknown
samples from known ones; that is, we do not know how
many of them are unknown nor the properties of the unknown instances. Obtaining this prior knowledge without
manual labeling is hard in practice.
To allow a model to learn the concept of unknown,
existing UNDA and ODA methods employ various techniques: rejecting a certain ratio of target samples [3], validating a threshold to decide unknown by using labeled tar-

9000

