ReDAL: Region-based and Diversity-aware Active Learning for Point Cloud
Semantic Segmentation
Tsung-Han Wu1
Yueh-Cheng Liu1†
Yu-Kai Huang1†
1
1
Hsin-Ying Lee
Hung-Ting Su
Ping-Chia Huang1
Winston H. Hsu1,2
1

National Taiwan University

2

Mobile Drive Technology

Abstract
Despite the success of deep learning on supervised point
cloud semantic segmentation, obtaining large-scale pointby-point manual annotations is still a significant challenge. To reduce the huge annotation burden, we propose a Region-based and Diversity-aware Active Learning
(ReDAL), a general framework for many deep learning approaches, aiming to automatically select only informative
and diverse sub-scene regions for label acquisition. Observing that only a small portion of annotated regions are
sufficient for 3D scene understanding with deep learning,
we use softmax entropy, color discontinuity, and structural
complexity to measure the information of sub-scene regions.
A diversity-aware selection algorithm is also developed to
avoid redundant annotations resulting from selecting informative but similar regions in a querying batch. Extensive
experiments show that our method highly outperforms previous active learning strategies, and we achieve the performance of 90% fully supervised learning, while less than
15% and 5% annotations are required on S3DIS and SemanticKITTI datasets, respectively.

Figure 1. Human labeling efforts (colored areas) of different
learning strategies. (a) In supervised training or traditional deep
active learning, all points in a single point cloud are required to be
labeled, which is labor-intensive. (b) Since few regions contribute
to the model improvement, our region-based active learning strategy selects only a small portion of informative regions for label
acquisition. Compared with case (a), our approach greatly reduces
the cost of semantic labeling of walls and floors. (c) Moreover,
considering the redundant labeling where repeating visually similar regions in the same querying batch, we develop a diversityaware selection algorithm to further reduce redundant labeling
(e.g., ceiling colored in green in (b) and (c)) effort by penalizing
visually similar regions.

1. Introduction
Point cloud semantic segmentation is crucial for various emerging applications such as indoor robotics and autonomous driving. Many supervised approaches [19, 20, 30,
27, 6, 26] along with several large-scale datasets [1, 7, 10, 5]
are recently provided and have made huge progress.
Although recent deep learning methods have achieved
great success with the aid of massive datasets, obtaining
a large-scale point-by-point labeled dataset is still costly
and challenging. Specifically, the statistics show that there
would be more than 100,000 points in a room-sized point
cloud scene [1, 5]. Furthermore, the annotation process of
3D point-wise data is much more complicated than that of
† Co-second authors contribute equally.

2D data. Unlike simply selecting closed polygons to form
a semantic annotation in a 2D image [22], in 3D point-bypoint labeling, annotators are asked to perform multiple 2D
annotations from different viewpoints during the annotation
process [10] or to label on 3D space with brushes through
multiple zooming in and out and switching the brush size
[5]. Therefore, such numerous points and the complicated
annotation process significantly increase the time and cost
of manual point-by-point labeling.
To alleviate the huge burden of manual point-by-point
labeling in large-scale point cloud datasets, some previous
works have tried to reduce the total number of labeled point
cloud scans [14] or lower the annotation density within a

15510

