Adversarial Attack on Deep Cross-Modal Hamming Retrieval

1

Chao Li1, * Shangqian Gao2, * Cheng Deng1,† Wei Liu3
Heng Huang2,4
2
3
Xidian University
University of Pittsburgh
Tencent Data Platform 4 JD Explore Academy
{chaolee.xd, chdeng.xd, henghuanghh}@gmail.com, shg84@pitt.edu, wl2223@columbia.edu
Abstract

+DPPLQJ6SDFH
,PDJH7H[W

Recently, Cross-Modal Hamming space Retrieval
(CMHR) regains ever-increasing attention, mainly beneﬁting from the excellent representation capability of deep neural networks. On the other hand, the vulnerability of deep
networks exposes a deep cross-modal retrieval system to
various safety risks (e.g., adversarial attack). However, attacking deep cross-modal Hamming retrieval remains underexplored. In this paper, we propose an effective Adversarial Attack on Deep Cross-Modal Hamming Retrieval,
dubbed AACH, which fools a target deep CMHR model in
a black-box setting. Speciﬁcally, given a target model, we
ﬁrst construct its substitute model to exploit cross-modal
correlations within hamming space, with which we create
adversarial examples by limitedly querying from a target
model. Furthermore, to enhance the efﬁciency of adversarial attacks, we design a triplet construction module to
exploit cross-modal positive and negative instances. In this
way, perturbations can be learned to fool the target model
through pulling perturbed examples far away from the positive instances whereas pushing them close to the negative
ones. Extensive experiments on three widely used crossmodal (image and text) retrieval benchmarks demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed AACH. We ﬁnd that AACH
can successfully attack a given target deep CMHR model
with fewer interactions, and that its performance is on par
with previous state-of-the-art attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been widely
adopted to improve the retrieval performance in CMHR,
where the early network layers capture the implicit structure of cross-modal data, and binary codes are derived from
a deeper network layer. Generally, the DNN architecture
is trained to build the cross-modal correlations by detecting the semantic similarity or dissimilarity between different modalities. Inspired by such superior representation ca* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

‫ݖ‬





+DVK)XQFWLRQ


&URVV0RGDO'DWD3DLU

‫ݔ‬

\


(a) Cross-Modal Hamming Retrieval
1HJDWLYH

4XHU\

3HUWXUEDWLRQ

$QFKRU

$GYHUVDULDO
([DPSOH

1HJDWLYH
3XOO

3XVK

$WWDFN
3RVLWLYH

3RVLWLYH

(b) Attack on Cross-Modal Hamming Retrieval

Figure 1: Regular cross-modal Hamming retrieval and our
triplet-based cross-modal Hamming attack.
pability of DNN, many efforts have been focused on employing deep networks to enhance the correlations between
modalities through learning a common representation in
shared space. However, the robustness and stability of DNN
structures have been largely overlooked: even the most accurate deep learning models can be easily deceived by a
well-designed perturbation which is visually imperceptible
to the human eye. Therefore, the growing costs and risks of
the potential model failures have led to the study of adversarial attacks. In this paper we focus on a practical crossmodal Hamming adversarial attack that fulﬁlls two criteria:
1) the attack is designed for a black-box setting, where the
target cross-modal network is normally unavailable, and the
attacker can only interact with the target model by querying
it; 2) the query efﬁciency should be highly prioritized considering the practical case, that is, frequent and high volume
queries will be easily discovered by defenders.
Despite plenty of adversarial attacks proposed in the literature, the main attention only focuses on the problem of
adversarial examples learning for image-based classiﬁcation or retrieval within a single modality. Little effort has
been devoted to investigating how adversarial examples affect deep Hamming learning in cross-modal retrieval. There
exist great differences in learning adversaries between the

2218

