Rethinking preventing class-collapsing in metric learning
with margin-based losses
Elad Levi1 , Tete Xiao2 , Xiaolong Wang 3 , Trevor Darrell1,2
1
Nexar, 2 UC Berkeley, 3 UC San Diego

Abstract
Metric learning seeks perceptual embeddings where visually similar instances are close and dissimilar instances
are apart, but learned representations can be sub-optimal
when the distribution of intra-class samples is diverse and
distinct sub-clusters are present. Although theoretically
with optimal assumptions, margin-based losses such as the
triplet loss and margin loss have a diverse family of solutions. We theoretically prove and empirically show that
under reasonable noise assumptions, margin-based losses
tend to project all samples of a class with various modes
onto a single point in the embedding space, resulting in
class collapse that usually renders the space ill-sorted for
classification or retrieval. To address this problem, we propose a simple modification to the embedding losses such
that each sample selects its nearest same-class counterpart
in a batch as the positive element in the tuple. This allows
for the presence of multiple sub-clusters within each class.
The adaptation can be integrated into a wide range of metric learning losses. Our method demonstrates clear benefits on various fine-grained image retrieval datasets over a
variety of existing losses; qualitative retrieval results show
that samples with similar visual patterns are indeed closer
in the embedding space.

1. Introduction
Metric learning aims to learn an embedding function
to lower dimensional space, in which semantic similarity translates to neighborhood relations in the embedding
space [22]. Deep metric learning approaches achieve
promising results in a large variety of tasks such as face
identification [5, 44, 43], zero-shot learning [9], image retrieval [14, 10] and fine-grained recognition [47].
In this work we investigate the family of losses which
optimize for an embedding representation that enforces that
all modes of intra-class appearance variation project to a
single point in embedding space. Learning such an embedding is very challenging when classes have a diverse appearance. This happens especially in real-world scenarios
where the class consists of multiple modes with diverse vi-

sual appearance. Pushing all these modes to a single point
in the embedding space requires the network to memorize
the relations between the different class modes, which could
reduce the generalization capabilities of the network and result in sub-par performance.

Recently researchers observed that this phenomena,
where all modes of class appearance “collapse” to the
same center, occurs in case of the classification SoftMax
loss [30]. They proposed a multi-center approach, where
multiple centers for each class are used with the SoftMax
loss to capture the hidden distribution of the data to solve
this issue. In the metric learning field, a positive sampling
method has been proposed [53] with respect to the N-pair
loss [41] in order to relax the constraints on the intra-class
relations. For margin-based losses such as the triplet loss [3]
and margin loss [51], it was believed that they might offer
some relief from class collapsing [47, 51]. From a theoretic perspective, we prove that with optimal assumptions
on the hypothesis space and the training procedure, it is indeed true that the margin-based losses have a minimal solutions without class collapsing. However, we formulate a
noisy framework and prove that with modest noise assumptions on the labels, the margin-based losses yet suffer from
class collapse and the easy positive sampling method proposed in [53] allow more diverse solutions. Adding noise
to the labels allow modelling both the aleatoric and the approximation uncertainties of the neural network, therefore it
batters represent the training process on real-world datasets
with fixed restricted network architecture.

We complement our theoretical study with an extensive
empirical study, which demonstrates the class-collapsing
phenomena on real-world datasets, and show that the easy
positive sampling method is able to create a more diverse
embedding which results in better generalization performances. These findings suggest that the noisy environment
framework better fits the training dynamic of neural networks in real-world use cases.

10316

