Unified Graph Structured Models for Video Understanding
Anurag Arnab

Chen Sun Cordelia Schmid
Google Research

{aarnab, chensun, cordelias}@google.com

Abstract
Accurate video understanding involves reasoning about
the relationships between actors, objects and their environment, often over long temporal intervals. In this paper,
we propose a message passing graph neural network that
explicitly models these spatio-temporal relations and can
use explicit representations of objects, when supervision is
available, and implicit representations otherwise. Our formulation generalises previous structured models for video
understanding, and allows us to study how different design choices in graph structure and representation affect
the model’s performance. We demonstrate our method on
two different tasks requiring relational reasoning in videos
– spatio-temporal action detection on AVA and UCF10124, and video scene graph classification on the recent Action Genome dataset – and achieve state-of-the-art results
on all three datasets. Furthermore, we show quantitatively
and qualitatively how our method is able to more effectively
model relationships between relevant entities in the scene.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has enabled rapid advances in many image understanding tasks such as image classification [20],
object detection [45] and semantic segmentation [7]. However, progress on recent video understanding datasets such
as AVA [17] and Charades [48] has lagged behind in comparison. Further progress in the video understanding tasks
posed by these datasets would facilitate applications in autonomous vehicles, health monitoring and automated media
analysis and production among others.
A reason why video understanding is so challenging is
because, as shown in Fig. 1, it requires understanding the
interactions between actors, objects and other context in the
scene. Furthermore, these interactions are not always observable from a single frame, and thus require reasoning
over long temporal intervals. This is illustrated in Fig. 1,
where understanding the actions of the person in the centreframe is not possible from the target keyframe alone. In order to know that the woman is “listening”, we need to con-

sider the man who is speaking but no longer in the scene.
And to correctly infer that the woman is “driving” the car,
rather than “riding” like the man, we must take into account
that she is later holding the steering wheel.
Video is a significantly higher-dimensional signal than
single images, due to its additional temporal axis, and so we
believe learning these unlabelled interactions directly from
current datasets with large convolutional networks is not
feasible. In this paper, we propose a structured graph neural
network to explicitly model these spatio-temporal interactions. We model actors and objects (explicitly with bounding boxes when we have supervision, and implicitly otherwise) as nodes in our spatio-temporal graph and perform
message passing inference to directly model their relations.
Although a wide range of graph-structured models have
been proposed for action recognition, we note that there has
been no unifying formulation for these models. As such,
some works only model spatial relations between actors
and objects [14, 53], but not how these interactions evolve
over time. Other approaches model long-range temporal
interactions [60], but do not capture spatial relations and
are not trained end-to-end. And whilst some methods do
model spatio-temporal interactions of objects [3, 59], their
explicit representations of objects need additional supervision, and are not evaluated on spatio-temporal localisation
tasks which requires detailed understanding and is necessary for analysing untrimmed videos.
Our graph network formulation based on the messagepassing neural network [13] abstraction, allows us to explicitly model interactions between actors, objects and
the scene, and how these interactions evolve over time.
Our flexible model allows us to use explicit object representations from a pretrained Region Proposal Network
(RPN) [45], and/or implicitly from convolutional feature
maps without additional supervision. Moreover, our general
formulation allows us to interpret previous work [14, 53, 59,
60, 69] as special cases, and thus understand how different
design choices in object representation, graph connectivity
and message passing functions affect the model’s performance. We demonstrate our versatile model on two different tasks: spatio-temporal action detection on AVA [17]

8117

