Spatially Conditioned Graphs for Detecting Human–Object Interactions
Frederic Z. Zhang1,3 Dylan Campbell2,3 Stephen Gould1,3
1
The Australian National University 2 University of Oxford
3
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{firstname.lastname}@anu.edu.au

dylan@robots.ox.ac.uk

https://github.com/fredzzhang/spatially-conditioned-graphs
0
50

Abstract
We address the problem of detecting human–object interactions in images using graphical neural networks. Unlike
conventional methods, where nodes send scaled but otherwise identical messages to each of their neighbours, we
propose to condition messages between pairs of nodes on
their spatial relationships, resulting in different messages
going to neighbours of the same node. To this end, we explore various ways of applying spatial conditioning under a
multi-branch structure. Through extensive experimentation
we demonstrate the advantages of spatial conditioning for
the computation of the adjacency structure, messages and
the refined graph features. In particular, we empirically
show that as the quality of the bounding boxes increases,
their coarse appearance features contribute relatively less
to the disambiguation of interactions compared to the spatial information. Our method achieves an mAP of 31.33%
on HICO-DET and 54.2% on V-COCO, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art on fine-tuned detections.

1. Introduction
The task of detecting human–object interactions (HOIs)
requires localising and describing pairs of interacting humans and objects. In particular, an HOI is defined as a
(subject, predicate, object) triplet, following the definition
of visual relations from Lu et al. [23], where the subject and
object are typically represented as labelled bounding boxes.
For HOI triplets, the subject is always a human, so the interactions of interest simplify to pairs of predicates and objects, e.g., riding a horse or sitting on a bench.
Since the output representations are inherently similar,
HOI detection is most often approached as a downstream
task of object detection. Given a set of object detections
from an image, one may construct candidate human–object
pairs by exhaustively matching between the detected human
and object instances. Indeed, the vast majority of previous
works [3, 6, 10, 17, 25, 24, 28, 5, 11] use an off-the-shelf

100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

(a) An image with detected human and object instances

(b) Adjacency matrices computed with appearance features, normalised by
rows (left) and columns (right)

(c) Adjacency matrices computed with spatial conditioning, normalised by
rows (left) and columns (right)

Figure 1. Many images contain far more non-interactive human–
object pairs than interactive ones (a). Correct inference of the interaction type and the correspondences requires a combination of
appearance and spatial information. When using appearance features only, the adjacency matrix for a graphical neural network
tends to be dominated by a few salient objects (b). Since messages
from each node to its neighbours are identical apart from an adjacency scaling, this leads to the node features being dominated
by those of the most salient objects, confusing the classifier. With
spatial conditioning, the adjacency matrix is able to reflect the inherent interactive pairs without explicit supervision (c).

object detector [26] as a preprocessing stage. We take the
same approach, leveraging the success of modern object detectors. While this converts the HOI detection task into the

13319

