Unidentified Video Objects: A Benchmark for Dense, Open-World Segmentation
Weiyao Wang

Matt Feiszli
Heng Wang
Facebook AI Research

Du Tran

{weiyaowang,mdf,hengwang,trandu}@fb.com

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art object detection and segmentation methods work well under the closed-world assumption. This closed-world setting assumes that the list of
object categories is available during training and deployment. However, many real-world applications require detecting or segmenting novel objects, i.e., object categories
never seen during training. In this paper, we present, UVO
(Unidentified Video Objects), a new benchmark for openworld class-agnostic object segmentation in videos. Besides shifting the focus to the open-world setup, UVO is
significantly larger, providing approximately 6 times more
videos compared with DAVIS, and 7 times more mask (instance) annotations per video compared with YouTubeVO(I)S. UVO is also more challenging as it includes many
videos with crowded scenes and complex background motions. We also demonstrated that UVO can be used for
other applications, such as object tracking and super-voxel
segmentation. We believe that UVO is a versatile testbed
for researchers to develop novel approaches for open-world
class-agnostic object segmentation, and inspires new research directions towards a more comprehensive video understanding beyond classification and detection.

1. Introduction
During daily activities, humans routinely encounter
novel objects, e.g., unfamiliar birds or unknown flowers;
despite this unfamiliarity, people have no problem perceiving them as distinct object instances. Even cinematic examples like UFOs will be identified as independent things.
Many real-world applications such as object search [27, 30],
instance registration [50], human-object interaction modeling [14] and human activity understanding [6] require such
open-world prediction abilities, e.g., exhaustively detecting
or segmenting objects (both known and unknown), to accomplish their tasks. Open-world is also the natural setting for applications like embodied AI (e.g., robotics, autonomous driving) and augmented-reality assistants, which
will encounter novel situations regularly.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: State-of-the-art object detection/segmentation methods do
not work well in open-world settings. We evaluated (a) Mask R-CNN
trained on COCO and (b) Google AI cloud API on UVO videos and found
both methods fail to segment many objects that have not been seen in training. (c) Real-world applications require segmenting all objects that appear
in the videos, even unseen objects. Mask R-CNN works well only on predefined categories and fails to recognize objects (e.g., barbell) or confuses
non-object with objects in the taxonomy (refrigerator). Google cloud object detector offers stronger detection results but still misses all gym equipment in the background. (c) UVO is designed to detect/segment all objects
regardless of the categories and beyond.

In contrast, the current state-of-the-art methods are designed for closed-world detection and segmentation. Mask
R-CNN [17], when trained on COCO [24] with a closedworld taxonomy of 80 object categories, cannot segment
novel objects (see Figure 1a); the model can only be expected to segment the classes it is trained for. Similarly,
an industry publicly-available object detector (capable of
detecting 550+ objects) [1] still cannot detect many objects (see Figure 1b). From a methodology perspective,
open-world object segmentation is a challenging problem
due to its open-taxonomy nature. Though extensive research has been done to develop either supervised topdown approaches [17, 34, 33] or unsupervised bottom-up
approaches [39, 21, 15] for object detection/segmentation
in the closed-world setting, we find that simple modifications of existing approaches do not work well for the openworld segmentation problem. On one hand, adopting a topdown approach, e.g., Mask R-CNN, to class-agnostic object segmentation by replacing its multi-class loss with a

10776

