Personalized Trajectory Prediction via Distribution Discrimination
Guangyi Chen1,2,3 , Junlong Li1,2,3 , Nuoxing Zhou1,2,3 , Liangliang Ren1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
chen-gy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {ljlong.leo,nuoxingzhou}@gmail.com;
renliangliang@cvte.com; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Trajectory prediction is confronted with the dilemma to
capture the multi-modal nature of future dynamics with
both diversity and accuracy. In this paper, we present
a distribution discrimination (DisDis) method to predict
personalized motion patterns by distinguishing the potential distributions. Motivated by that the motion pattern
of each person is personalized due to his/her habit, our
DisDis learns the latent distribution to represent different
motion patterns and optimize it by the contrastive discrimination. This distribution discrimination encourages latent
distributions to be more discriminative. Our method can
be integrated with existing multi-modal stochastic predictive models as a plug-and-play module to learn the more
discriminative latent distribution. To evaluate the latent
distribution, we further propose a new metric, probability
cumulative minimum distance (PCMD) curve, which cumulatively calculates the minimum distance on the sorted
probabilities. Experimental results on the ETH and UCY
datasets show the effectiveness of our method. 1

1. Introduction
Human trajectory prediction aims at forecasting future
pedestrian trajectories in complex dynamic environments
with the observed history behaviors [1, 12, 18, 31]. It
plays a critical role in developing safe human-interactive
autonomous systems such as self-driving vehicles [28],
social robotics [4], and intelligent surveillance applications [5, 3, 6].
Forecasting the trajectories of humans faces the serious
challenges to model the indeterminacy of human behavior.
With the same environment and social interactions, the
∗ Corresponding author

1 Code and a video demo are available at https://github.com/
CHENGY12/DisDis

Figure 1. Illustration of the motivation with an example of a family
of three. The family members (father, mother, and child) with the
similar history trajectories might have different motion patterns
due to their habits. (Best viewed in color)

human might take different plausible actions. For example,
to avoid collisions with other pedestrians, one can choose
to stop for a moment or speed up. To generate plausible
multi-modal future states instead of a deterministic trajectory, many methods [12, 18, 32, 50] employ the Generative
Adversarial Networks [11] (GAN) to spread the distribution
of the prediction and cover the space of possible paths,
while some methods [19, 16, 34] apply the Conditional
Variational Auto-encoder (CVAE) [35] to explicitly encode
the multi-modal distribution with a latent variable.
With the increase of motion diversity and complexity,
stochastic prediction with the prior Gaussian distribution is
insufficient to cover the wide spectrum of future possibilities. As shown in Figure 1, considering a family of three
with different habits, the motion patterns are always different even given the similar trajectories. For example, the
child tends to go straight to school, while the father might
turn right for the bus. Although some methods[9, 16, 34]
attempt to use different latent distributions for different
persons, discriminative ability of these latent distributions
are limited. The model can’t always generate appropriate

15580

