Scaling up instance annotation via label propagation
Dim P. Papadopoulos∗
MIT CSAIL

Ethan Weber∗
MIT CSAIL

Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL

dimpapa@mit.edu

ejweber@mit.edu

torralba@mit.edu

Abstract
Manually annotating object segmentation masks is very
time-consuming. While interactive segmentation methods
offer a more efficient alternative, they become unaffordable at a large scale because the cost grows linearly with
the number of annotated masks. In this paper, we propose a highly efficient annotation scheme for building large
datasets with object segmentation masks. At a large scale,
images contain many object instances with similar appearance. We exploit these similarities by using hierarchical clustering on mask predictions made by a segmentation model. We propose a scheme that efficiently searches
through the hierarchy of clusters and selects which clusters
to annotate. Humans manually verify only a few masks per
cluster, and the labels are propagated to the whole cluster. Through a large-scale experiment to populate 1M unlabeled images with object segmentation masks for 80 object
classes, we show that (1) we obtain 1M object segmentation masks with an total annotation time of only 290 hours;
(2) we reduce annotation time by 76× compared to manual annotation; (3) the segmentation quality of our masks is
on par with those from manually annotated datasets. Code,
data, and models are available online1 .

1. Introduction
The incredible rise in computer vision over the past
decade has been propelled by the creation of datasets with
multi-million annotated images such as ImageNet [45],
Places [67] and Kinetics [21]. For deep learning models
to continue improving with higher capacity, there is a continual need for more training data. It has been shown that
the training data must grow exponentially to see linear improvements in the models [50, 52, 69].
Manual annotation for instance segmentation is expensive as it requires humans to draw a detailed outline around
every object in an image [8, 13, 33, 46, 68]. For example, annotating COCO [33] required 80 seconds per mask,
1 http://scaling-anno.csail.mit.edu
∗ Denotes equal contribution

Manual annotation: 1 car

Proposed method: 76 cars

Figure 1. Scaling up instance annotation. We obtain 76 segmentation masks for the cost of manually drawing one.

an image in Cityscapes [8] took 1.5 hours, and annotating
ADE20K [68] by a single annotator took several years. At
this pace, constructing a dataset with 10M masks would require more than 200k hours and cost over $2M [33].
An alternative is interactive segmentation [1, 4, 7, 30, 34,
39, 43], where the human interaction is much faster (e.g.,
boxes, scribbles, clicks). Given this interaction, these methods infer the final object mask. They offer substantial gains
in annotation time and can lead to larger datasets [4]. However, because annotators intervene on every object, the cost
grows linearly with the number of annotations and therefore, at a larger scale, they become unaffordable.
In this paper, we propose a method for crowd-sourcing
object segmentation masks that reduces the annotation time
by almost two orders of magnitude (Fig. 1). At large scale,
images contain many object instances with similar appearance. We exploit this by clustering mask predictions made
by an instance segmentation model. Human annotators verify a few masks per cluster and we propagate the verification labels to the whole cluster. Since annotators interact
with few masks per cluster, our cost scales with the number
of clusters rather than masks.
Given a small initial image set with manually segmented
objects and an annotation budget, our goal is to maximize
the number of high-quality obtained annotations in an unlabeled set. We first train an instance segmentation model
and obtain mask predictions on the unlabeled set and then
hierarchically cluster class-specific masks. Starting from
the root of the tree, we search for candidate clusters likely

15364

