Summarize and Search: Learning Consensus-aware Dynamic Convolution for
Co-Saliency Detection

1

Ni Zhang1
Junwei Han1
Northwestern Polytechnical University

2

Ling Shao2
Nian Liu2 *
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

{nnizhang.1995, junweihan2010, liunian228}@gmail.com, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Humans perform co-saliency detection by first summarizing the consensus knowledge in the whole group and then
searching corresponding objects in each image. Previous
methods usually lack robustness, scalability, or stability for
the first process and simply fuse consensus features with image features for the second process. In this paper, we propose a novel consensus-aware dynamic convolution model
to explicitly and effectively perform the “summarize and
search” process. To summarize consensus image features,
we first summarize robust features for every single image
using an effective pooling method and then aggregate crossimage consensus cues via the self-attention mechanism. By
doing this, our model meets the scalability and stability requirements. Next, we generate dynamic kernels from consensus features to encode the summarized consensus knowledge. Two kinds of kernels are generated in a supplementary way to summarize fine-grained image-specific consensus object cues and the coarse group-wise common knowledge, respectively. Then, we can effectively perform object
searching by employing dynamic convolution at multiple
scales. Besides, a novel and effective data synthesis method
is also proposed to train our network. Experimental results
on four benchmark datasets verify the effectiveness of our
proposed method. Our code and saliency maps are available at https://github.com/nnizhang/CADC.

1. Introduction
Co-salient object detection (Co-SOD) mimics the human
visual system to distinguish common and salient objects
when viewing a group of relevant images. Although various Co-SOD methods have been proposed, let us review
this problem from the humans perspective. Given a group
of images, humans can not segment the co-salient object
in each image directly. Instead, they need to first observe
all images and summarize the consensus knowledge about
* Corresponding author.

Summarize

Calculator

Kernel
Construction

Adaptive kernels
Common kernel

Search
Dynamic Convolution

Figure 1. Main idea of our proposed method.

what kind of objects this group is focusing on. Then, they
look back at each image and search the corresponding objects. We call this process “summarize and search”, which
is illustrated in Figure 1. A similar explanation can also be
found in [48]. Therefore, we can model Co-SOD in such an
intuitive way to summarize the consensus knowledge first
and then search consensus objects in each image.
Previous models can also be explained from such a point.
For consensus knowledge summarization, early traditional
methods employed graph models [18] or clustering methods [7, 39] to learn the common patterns. However, their
models lack end-to-end learning, thus limiting the model
performance. Some recent deep models [36, 35, 27] chose
to concatenate and convolve all image features for summarizing the consensus knowledge. However, convolution can
only aggregate the information at the same location among
different images, while co-salient objects often show variations in scales and locations in different images. Hence,
these models may easily fail in consensus summarization.
Using non-local dependencies [34] to summarize the consensus cues is another choice [8]. However, this method
lacks scalability since it is computationally prohibitive for
processing a large number of images. Some other work
[17] adopted recurrent networks to summarize the consensus cues step by step. However, recurrent models define an
input order for image sequences, thus lacking model stability since different input orders will lead to different results.
For consensus object searching, many works [36, 35,
17, 32, 40, 27, 47] directly fused the consensus feature

4167

