Pseudo-loss Confidence Metric for Semi-supervised Few-shot Learning
Kai Huang, Jie Geng,* Wen Jiang,* Xinyang Deng, Zhe Xu
Northwestern Polytechnical University
KaiHuangk@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, gengjie, jiangwen, xinyang.deng@nwpu.edu.cn
alan.xu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised few-shot learning is developed to train
a classifier that can adapt to new tasks with limited labeled data and a fixed quantity of unlabeled data. Most
semi-supervised few-shot learning methods select pseudolabeled data of unlabeled set by task-specific confidence
estimation. This work presents a task-unified confidence
estimation approach for semi-supervised few-shot learning, named pseudo-loss confidence metric (PLCM). It measures the data credibility by the loss distribution of pseudolabels, which is synthetical considered multi-tasks. Specifically, pseudo-labeled data of different tasks are mapped to
a unified metric space by mean of the pseudo-loss model,
making it possible to learn the prior pseudo-loss distribution. Then, confidence of pseudo-labeled data is estimated
according to the distribution component confidence of its
pseudo-loss. Thus highly reliable pseudo-labeled data are
selected to strengthen the classifier. Moreover, to overcome
the pseudo-loss distribution shift and improve the effectiveness of classifier, we advance the multi-step training strategy coordinated with the class balance measures of classapart selection and class weight. Experimental results on
four popular benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach can effectively select pseudo-labeled data
and achieve the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made great strides in many visual
recognition tasks, and its outstanding performances even
exceed human being in some scenarios [7]. However, it
always relies on numerous labeled data which may be a
heavy burden of data collection and maintenance in reality
[35]. How to get rid of the limitation of labeled samples and
learn a novel category only with one or few labeled samples
is the core of few-shot learning. Since few-shot learning
has great significance for its extensive applications on arti* Corresponding authors.

ficial intelligence, it aroused a growing academic interest in
recent years.
As a typical transfer learning method, fine-tuning [5]
is the preliminary exploration for transferring accumulated
experience to new tasks. However, it is hard to perform
the domain adaptation with only few training data, in which
limited samples cannot represent the distribution of its class
[26]. Episodes-based training strategy [6][39] clarifies the
few-shot learning problem and has been the foundation
of majority few-shot learning methods. Particularly, each
episode learns a specific classification task, in which only
a few samples per class are available for training. Performances are calculated on a series of episodes data for testing the ability of rapidly adapting to new tasks. Meta-based
learning methods [6] [31] adopt the meta-learner to improve
the capability of acclimatizing themselves to different tasks.
Metric learning methods [11][12] attempt to find more effective distance metrics from numerous episodic tasks. Utilizing the unified metrics formula, the class distribution is
more distinctive in metrics space.
More recently, there has been extensive research on
semi-supervised few-shot learning (SSFSL), aiming to improve the model by utilizing a certain amount of unlabeled
data. Predicting pseudo-labels of unlabeled samples and selecting high-confidence data for iterative training is a direct and valid way for SSFSL [20][40]. However, the taskspecific confidence inference of pseudo-label suffers from
lacking of adequate instances support in single task. To address this problem, we propose a task-free credibility estimation approach to select the credible pseudo-labeled data,
by means of building a unitive confidence metric space.
In this paper, we focus on constructing the reliability estimation of pseudo-labeled samples and proposing a
novel semi-supervised few-shot learning approach called
pseudo-loss confidence metric (PLCM). The full procedure
is showed in Algorithm 1 and illustrated in Figure 1. We
first map pseudo-labeled data to pseudo-loss space by utilizing the pseudo-loss model, which can reflect the acceptance of current classifier to the unlabeled data with its
pseudo-label. In general, classifier tends to give decep-

8671

