GAN Inversion for Out-of-Range Images with Geometric Transformations
Kyoungkook Kang
POSTECH CSE

Seongtae Kim
POSTECH GSAI

Sunghyun Cho
POSTECH CSE & GSAI

kkang831@postech.ac.kr

seongtae0205@postech.ac.kr

s.cho@postech.ac.kr

(a) Input

Age

Age

(b) PSP

(c) Ours

(d) Input

Gender

Gender

(e) PSP

(f) Ours

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison of reconstruction and semantic editing of different methods on in-the-wild images. (a) and (d) show input
images, (b) and (e) show the results of PSP [22], and (c) and (f) show our results.

Abstract
For successful semantic editing of real images, it is critical for a GAN inversion method to find an in-domain latent code that aligns with the domain of a pre-trained GAN
model. Unfortunately, such in-domain latent codes can be
found only for in-range images that align with the training
images of a GAN model. In this paper, we propose BDInvert,
a novel GAN inversion approach to semantic editing of outof-range images that are geometrically unaligned with the
training images of a GAN model. To find a latent code that
is semantically editable, BDInvert inverts an input out-ofrange image into an alternative latent space than the original latent space. We also propose a regularized inversion
method to find a solution that supports semantic editing in
the alternative space. Our experiments show that BDInvert
effectively supports semantic editing of out-of-range images
with geometric transformations.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are generative
models that can synthesize realistic-looking images [7].
Typically, GANs learn a mapping function from a random
noise vector sampled from a pre-defined distribution to a
realistic-looking image through the adversarial training of
a generator and a discriminator. For the past several years,
a significant progress has been made to improve the quality and diversity of synthesized images [21, 14, 15, 16, 5].
As a result, recent GAN models such as StyleGAN [15],
StyleGAN2 [16], and BigGAN [5] can produce extremely
high-quality images of high resolution.
Recently, it has been shown that rich semantic information is encoded in the intermediate features and the latent
space of GANs, and furthermore, that images can be effectively edited in a semantically meaningful way by modify-

ing features or latent code [21, 4, 26, 23, 10]. To enable
such semantic editing for real images, GAN inversion has
attracted much attention lately [3, 1, 31, 33]. GAN inversion maps a real image into the latent space of a pre-trained
GAN model. Once an inverted latent code is obtained, the
image can be semantically edited by modifying its latent
code or intermediate features generated from the code.
For successful semantic editing of real images, it is critical to find an in-domain latent code that aligns with the domain of a pre-trained GAN model [31]. As shown in [31],
there may exist more than one latent codes that can reconstruct a given input image, and some of them may be out of
the domain. The semantic knowledge encoded in the latent
space does not apply for such out-of-domain codes, thus semantic editing of such codes fails to produce proper results.
Unfortunately, such in-domain latent codes can be found
only for a small fraction of real images that align with the
training images of a pre-trained GAN model. For example,
most GAN models use geometrically aligned face images as
their training data for ease of training. As a result, images
with a small amount of translation or other geometric transformations are out of their ranges, and the previous GAN
inversion methods cannot find in-domain latent codes for
such out-of-range images. This severely limits the applicability of semantic editing of real images using GAN inversion. Fig. 1 shows real-world examples. The input images
in (a) and (d) are random images downloaded from internet.
As they are out-of-range with different rotation, scaling and
translation with respect to the training dataset (FFHQ [15]),
directly applying a previous GAN inversion method [22]
produces unacceptable results as shown in (b) and (e).
One solution would be to align a target image before
GAN inversion, but accurate alignment of an image to the
training data can be difficult or even impossible especially

13941

