Weakly-Supervised Action Segmentation and Alignment via
Transcript-Aware Union-of-Subspaces Learning
Zijia Lu
Northeastern Univeristy

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

lu.zij@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

Abstract

ticular, action transcripts, which refer to sequences of actions appearing in videos without specifying their beginning and ending times, are less costly to gather and can
also be obtained from video narrations or other meta data
[32, 1, 42]. This has motivated a variety of interesting approaches that learn to localize and classify actions using
transcripts [21, 2, 48, 49, 9, 73, 36, 4, 37].

We address the problem of learning to segment actions
from weakly-annotated videos, i.e., videos accompanied by
transcripts (ordered list of actions). We propose a framework in which we model actions with a union of lowdimensional subspaces, learn the subspaces using transcripts and refine video features that lend themselves to action subspaces. To do so, we design an architecture consisting of a Union-of-Subspaces Network, which is an ensemble
of autoencoders, each modeling a low-dimensional action
subspace and can capture variations of an action within
and across videos. For learning, at each iteration, we generate positive and negative soft alignment matrices using
the segmentations from the previous iteration, which we use
for discriminative training of our model. To regularize the
learning, we introduce a constraint loss that prevents imbalanced segmentations and enforces relatively similar duration of each action across videos. To have a real-time inference, we develop a hierarchical segmentation framework
that uses subset selection to find representative transcripts
and hierarchically align a test video with increasingly refined representative transcripts. Our experiments on three
datasets show that our method improves the state-of-the-art
action segmentation and alignment, while speeding up the
inference time by a factor of 4 to 13.1

1. Introduction
Localization and classification of human actions in long
uncurated videos has been a major challenge in video understanding [54, 10, 11, 27, 65, 69, 66, 59, 19]. While many
methods have studied the problem in a fully-supervised setting using dense supervision [50, 57, 29, 33, 55, 67], gathering framewise annotations is costly and cannot scale to
massive amounts of video data, which are available today.
As a result, there has been an increasing interest in methods that can learn from weakly-annotated videos. In par1 Code is available at https://github.com/ZijiaLewisLu/
ICCV21-TASL.

Challenges. Despite tremendous advances, existing works
on weakly-supervised action learning still face major challenges. In fact, a successful class of recent methods focuses on alternating between segmentation of the training
videos using transcripts and retraining models with the obtained segmentations [49, 36]. However, training a model
with the one estimated segmentation could ignore and discourage other likely segmentations and propagate the initial
segmentation errors.
Moreover, existing methods often ignore the underlying
low-dimensional structures of videos. In fact, it is well
known that high-dimensional visual data, e.g., rigid and
nonrigid motions or human actions, lie in low-dimensional
subspaces [63, 12, 41, 3, 40, 38, 6]. Yet, leveraging such
low-dimensional subspaces in the weakly-supervised setting has been mainly ignored, as the existing works work in
the fully-supervised or fully-unsupervised regimes and cannot take advantage of weak supervision, e.g., transcripts.
On the other hand, inference on test videos that do not
have transcripts is often extremely costly. This comes from
the fact that existing methods require aligning the test video
with every transcript in the training set to select the most
likely transcript and the associated segmentation. This prevents methods from being applicable in real-time.
Paper Contributions. In this paper, we address the
problem of weakly-supervised action segmentation by developing a Transcript-aware Action Subspace Learning
(TASL) framework that models actions with a union of lowdimensional subspaces, learns the subspaces using weak supervision (transcripts) and refines video features that lend
themselves to action subspaces. To do so, we design an architecture consisting of a feature learning module and a new

8085

