Feature Interactive Representation for Point Cloud Registration
Bingli Wu, Jie Ma *, Gaojie Chen, Pei An
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multi-spectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, P.R.China
{bingliwu, majie, chengaojie, anpei}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud registration is the process of using the common structures in two point clouds to splice them together.
To find out these common structures and make these structures match more accurately, interacting information of the
source and target point clouds is essential. However, limited attention has been paid to explicitly model such feature interaction. To this end, we propose a Feature Interactive Representation learning Network (FIRE-Net), which
can explore feature interaction among the source and target
point clouds from different levels. Specifically, we first introduce a Combined Feature Encoder (CFE) based on feature interaction intra point cloud. The CFE extracts interactive features intra each point cloud and combines them
to enhance the ability of the network to describe the local
geometric structure. Then, we propose a feature interaction
mechanism inter point clouds which includes a Local Interaction Unit (LIU) and a Global Interaction Unit (GIU).
The former is used to interact information between point
pairs across two point clouds, thus the point features in one
point cloud and its similar point features in another point
cloud can be aware of each other. The latter is applied to
change the per-point features depending on the global cross
information of two point clouds, thus one point cloud has
the global perception of another. Extensive experiments on
partially overlapping point cloud registration show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Geometric registration is a key task in 3D data analysis, which aligns one point cloud (source) to another (target) by estimating the transformation between them. It has
a variety of applications in many computational fields, including medical imaging, robotics, and autonomous driving. Iterative Closest Point (ICP) [3] is the most popular
and widely-used registration algorithm, however, it often
* Corresponding author: Jie Ma.

Figure 1: Comparison of prior work and the proposed FIRENet. (a) The pipeline without feature interaction [23], which use
a feature extractor to extract features for source and target point
clouds independently. (b) In our work, the multi-level feature interaction mechanism greatly improves the discriminative power of
features, which enables a more discriminative similarity matrix
and a more accurate registration result.

stalls in local minima and is only suitable for small transformations. Other methods [12, 30, 49, 55], which can register two point clouds with large rotation and translation, are
typically slower than the original ICP.
The past few years have seen a breakthrough in deep
learning, leading to remarkable advancements in most 3D
computer vision tasks, such as classification [28, 29, 40,
43, 47], segmentation [17, 44, 52, 53], and detection
[5, 18, 22, 35]. Recently, some learning-based methods
[19, 23, 41, 42, 50] for point cloud registration are proposed. They solve the registration problem in three steps:
(1) extract features for the source and target point clouds
using networks such as PointNet [28]; (2) design a module,
such as pointer network [41], to find the correspondence; (3)
apply a differentiable singular value decomposition (SVD)
layer to find the least-squares rigid transformation. These
methods show excellent performance with faster speed than
traditional algorithms and have the ability to handle large
rotations, but there are still problems. Many methods only
focus on the matching stage and neglect the important cor-

5530

