Refining activation downsampling with SoftPool
Alexandros Stergiou
Utrecht University

Ronald Poppe
Utrecht University

Grigorios Kalliatakis
University of Warwick

a.g.stergiou@uu.nl

r.w.poppe@uu.nl

grigorios.kalliatakis@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) use pooling to
decrease the size of activation maps. This process is crucial to increase the receptive fields and to reduce computational requirements of subsequent convolutions. An important feature of the pooling operation is the minimization of
information loss, with respect to the initial activation maps,
without a significant impact on the computation and memory overhead. To meet these requirements, we propose SoftPool: a fast and efficient method for exponentially weighted
activation downsampling. Through experiments across a
range of architectures and pooling methods, we demonstrate that SoftPool can retain more information in the reduced activation maps. This refined downsampling leads
to improvements in a CNN’s classification accuracy. Experiments with pooling layer substitutions on ImageNet1K
show an increase in accuracy over both original architectures and other pooling methods. We also test SoftPool on
video datasets for action recognition. Again, through the
direct replacement of pooling layers, we observe consistent
performance improvements while computational loads and
memory requirements remain limited1 .

Figure 1. SoftPool illustration. The original image is subsampled with a 2 × 2 (k = 2) kernel. The output is based on the
exponentially weighted sum of the original pixels within the kernel region. This can improve the representation of high-contrast
regions, present around object edges or specific feature activations.

activation features, while remaining computationally and
memory-efficient. Owing to better feature preservation,
models that include SoftPool consistently show improved
classification performance compared to their original implementations. We make the following contributions:

1. Introduction
Pooling layers are essential in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to decrease the size of activation maps. They
reduce the computational requirements of the network while
also achieving spatial invariance, and increase the receptive
field of subsequent convolutions [6, 27, 43].
A range of pooling methods has been proposed, each
with different properties (see Section 2). Most architectures
use maximum or average pooling, both of which are fast and
memory-efficient but leave room for improvement in terms
of retaining important information in the activation map.
We introduce SoftPool, a kernel-based pooling method
that uses the softmax weighted sum of activations. We
demonstrate that SoftPool largely preserves descriptive
1 Code is available at: http://www.tinyurl.com/softpool

• We introduce SoftPool: a novel pooling method based
on softmax normalization that can be used to downsample 2D (image) and 3D (video) activation maps.
• We demonstrate how SoftPool outperforms other pooling methods in preserving the original features, measured using image similarity.
• Experimental results on image and video classification
tasks show consistent improvement when replacing the
original pooling layers by SoftPool.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. We
first discuss related work on feature pooling. We then detail SoftPool (Section 3) and evaluate it in terms of feature
loss and image and video classification performance over
multiple pooling methods and architectures (Section 4).
10357

