Toward Realistic Single-View 3D Object Reconstruction
with Unsupervised Learning from Multiple Images
Training

Testing

Baseline

Long-Nhat Ho1 Anh Tuan Tran1,2 Quynh Phung1 Minh Hoai1,3
1
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam, 2 VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam,
3
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA
{v.nhathl,v.anhtt152,v.quynpt29,v.hoainm}@vinai.io

Training
Testing
Baseline
Figure 1: We propose a system to learn single-view 3D object reconstruction from multi-image datasets in an unsupervised manner. From
top to bottom: Multi-PIE [23], CASIA-WebFace [54], and Youtube Faces [50] datasets. From left to right: different training data structures,
our corresponding 3D reconstructions at test time, and the baseline [52] 3D results. For each 3D model, we provide two textureless views,
two textured views, and the canonical normal map.

Abstract
Recovering the 3D structure of an object from a single
image is a challenging task due to its ill-posed nature. One
approach is to utilize the plentiful photos of the same object
category to learn a strong 3D shape prior for the object.
This approach has successfully been demonstrated by a recent work of Wu et al. (2020), which obtained impressive
3D reconstruction networks with unsupervised learning.
However, their algorithm is only applicable to symmetric
objects. In this paper, we eliminate the symmetry requirement with a novel unsupervised algorithm that can learn
a 3D reconstruction network from a multi-image dataset.
Our algorithm is more general and covers the symmetryrequired scenario as a special case. Besides, we employ
a novel albedo loss that improves the reconstructed details
and realisticity. Our method surpasses the previous work
in both quality and robustness, as shown in experiments on
datasets of various structures, including single-view, multiview, image-collection, and video sets. Code is available at:
https://github.com/VinAIResearch/LeMul.

1. Introduction
Images are 2D projections of real-world 3D objects, and
recovering the 3D structure from a 2D image is an important computer vision task with many applications. Most
image-based 3D modeling methods rely on multi-view inputs [42, 43, 16, 17, 11, 57, 48, 21], requiring multiple
images of the target object captured from different views.
However, these methods are not applicable to the scenarios where only a single input image is available, which is
the focus of our work in this paper. This problem is called
single-view 3D reconstruction, and it is ill-posed since an
image can be a projection of infinitely many 3D shapes.
Interestingly, humans are very good at estimating the 3D
structure of any known class object from a single image;
we can even predict how it looks in unseen views. This is
perhaps because humans have strong prior knowledge about
the 3D shape and texture of the object class in consideration. Inspired by this observation, many category-specific
3D modeling methods have been proposed for specific object categories such as faces [3, 40, 59, 46, 39, 44, 47, 13],
hands [60, 30, 4, 18], and bodies [34, 24].

12600

