Morphable Detector for Object Detection on Demand
Xiangyun Zhao1 , Xu Zou2 , and Ying Wu1
1

2

Northwestern University
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Novel Category
Data

Seen Category
Data

Extra
Training

Zero-shot Detection







Few-shot Detection







Incremental
Few-shot Detection







Object Detection on
Demand







Abstract
Many emerging applications of intelligent robots need
to explore and understand new environments, where it is
desirable to detect objects of novel classes on the fly with
minimum online efforts. This is an object detection on demand (ODOD) task. It is challenging, because it is impossible to annotate a large number of data on the fly, and
the embedded systems are usually unable to perform backpropagation which is essential for training. Most existing few-shot detection methods are confronted here as they
need extra training. We propose a novel morphable detector
(MD), that simply “morphs” some of its changeable parameters online estimated from the few samples, so as to detect
novel classes without any extra training. The MD has two
sets of parameters, one for the feature embedding and the
other for class representation (called “prototypes”). Each
class is associated with a hidden prototype to be learned by
integrating the visual and semantic embeddings. The learning of the MD is based on the alternate learning of the feature embedding and the prototypes in an EM-like approach
which allows the recovery of an unknown prototype from
a few samples of a novel class. Once an MD is learned,
it is able to use a few samples of a novel class to directly
compute its prototype to fulfill the online morphing process.
We have shown the superiority of the MD in Pascal [12],
COCO [27] and FSOD [13] datasets.

1. Introduction
In applications, like robotics exploration and autonomous driving, the systems need to explore and understand new environments, where it is desirable to detect objects of novel classes on the fly with minimum online human supervision and interaction. This is an object detection
on demand (ODOD) task. ODOD is very challenging because it is impossible to collect a large amount of data on the
fly, and the computing resources are generally not powerful
enough for computationally intensive and time-consuming

Figure 1: Comparison with other detection tasks. Different
from other few-shot detection tasks, Object Detection on
Demand requires no extra training.
training on board, not to mention that many embedded systems are unable to perform back-propagation which is essential for training. In embedded systems, the detection task
is usually carried out on a computationally limited platform
where the neural networks are locked after the system is
built due to resource limits [19]. The prevailing few-shot
detection (FSD) [20, 49, 47, 46, 48] methods are confronted
here as they generally need to perform extra training for objects from novel classes.
To this end, we define Object Detection on Demand
(ODOD) specifically as detecting the novel classes without extra training while preserving the existing knowledge,
given (1) a detector offline trained using base class data,
(2) no access to base class data (3) a few samples for novel
classes. The ODOD can be regarded as a special few-shot
detection task and the differences of ODOD from other detection tasks are listed in Fig 1 .
The prevailing few-shot detectors (FSD) aim to train a
detector using base class data and further train it with a
few samples from novel classes. However, extra training
is unfeasible in the ODOD task. Furthermore, to keep the
performance for the base classes, these FSDs have to use

4771

