Causal Attention for Unbiased Visual Recognition
Tan Wang1 ,
1

Chang Zhou2 ,

Nanyang Technological University

2

Qianru Sun3 ,

Damo Academy, Alibaba Group

Hanwang Zhang1
3

Singapore Management University

TAN317@e.ntu.edu.sg, zhouchang.zc@alibaba-inc.com, qianrusun@smu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

ResNet + CBAM
ResNet
ResNet + CaaM (Ours)

Prediction: Bird

Abstract

70

Attention module does not always help deep models
learn causal features that are robust in any confounding
context, e.g., a foreground object feature is invariant to different backgrounds. This is because the confounders trick
the attention to capture spurious correlations that benefit
the prediction when the training and testing data are IID
(identical & independent distribution); while harm the prediction when the data are OOD (out-of-distribution). The
sole fundamental solution to learn causal attention is by
causal intervention, which requires additional annotations
of the confounders, e.g., a “dog” model is learned within
“grass+dog” and “road+dog” respectively, so the “grass”
and “road” contexts will no longer confound the “dog”
recognition. However, such annotation is not only prohibitively expensive, but also inherently problematic, as the
confounders are elusive in nature. In this paper, we propose
a causal attention module (CaaM) that self-annotates the
confounders in unsupervised fashion. In particular, multiple CaaMs can be stacked and integrated in conventional
attention CNN and self-attention Vision Transformer. In
OOD settings, deep models with CaaM outperform those
without it significantly; even in IID settings, the attention localization is also improved by CaaM, showing a
great potential in applications that require robust visual
saliency. Codes are available at https://github.com/
Wangt-CN/CaaM .

1. Introduction
Do you think attention [59, 53] would always capture
the salient regions in an image? No, as shown in Figure 1
(a, top), due to the lack of region-level labels, “learning to
attend” is a de facto weakly-supervised task. Or do you
think attention would always improve performance? Probably yes, after all, “Attention is All You Need” [14, 16, 44].
As shown in Figure 1 (a, top), even if the attended region is wrong, the model still makes correct predictions.
In conventional IID settings, where the training and testing data are identically and independently distributed, the

65
60
55

Prediction: Bird

Rare Context

50
45
40
35

IID Setting
(a)

OOD Setting
(b)

Figure 1. (a) The qualitative attention maps of two images in
NICO [21] using ResNet18 with CBAM [57]. (b) The accuracies
of three methods: ResNet18, ResNet18+CBAM [57] and + CaaM
(Ours) in both IID and OOD settings.

model equipped with attention is indeed better (red bar is
higher than black bar in Figure 1 (b)).
However, few people realize that attention may do evil
in OOD settings, where the testing data are out of the training distribution. For example, as shown in Figure 1 (a, top),
the attention considers the “ground” region as the visual cue
of the “bird” class, because most training “bird” images are
in “ground” context; but, when the test image is “bear in
ground” (bottom), the attention misleads the model to still
predict “bird”. Figure 1 (b) reports that the attention model
is even worse than the non-attention baseline in OOD setting (red bar is lower than black bar), where the gap is further amplified by the rare object and context combination in
training. Unfortunately, when we deploy such vision systems in critical domains such as car autopilot, it is often
the rare case that causes fatal accidents, e.g., recognizing a
“white” truck as “white” clouds1 .
Astute readers who are knowledgeable in causality [27,
42] may point out that the key reason for the bipolar role
of attention in IID and OOD is due to the confounding
effect [55, 66, 65, 60]. In visual recognition, the causal
pursuit between the input image X and the output label
Y is confounded by a common cause: the context S. To
see the effect, during data collection, X is usually found
1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X3hrKnv0dPQ

3091

