Video Self-Stitching Graph Network for Temporal Action Localization
Chen Zhao Ali Thabet Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{chen.zhao, ali.thabet, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Temporal action localization (TAL) in videos is a challenging task, especially due to the large variation in action temporal scales. Short actions usually occupy a major proportion in the datasets, but tend to have the lowest performance. In this paper, we confront the challenge
of short actions and propose a multi-level cross-scale solution dubbed as video self-stitching graph network (VSGN).
We have two key components in VSGN: video self-stitching
(VSS) and cross-scale graph pyramid network (xGPN). In
VSS, we focus on a short period of a video and magnify
it along the temporal dimension to obtain a larger scale.
We stitch the original clip and its magnified counterpart
in one input sequence to take advantage of the complementary properties of both scales. The xGPN component
further exploits the cross-scale correlations by a pyramid
of cross-scale graph networks, each containing a hybrid
module to aggregate features from across scales as well
as within the same scale. Our VSGN not only enhances
the feature representations, but also generates more positive anchors for short actions and more short training samples. Experiments demonstrate that VSGN obviously improves the localization performance of short actions as well
as achieving the state-of-the-art overall performance on
THUMOS-14 and ActivityNet-v1.3. VSGN code is available
at https://github.com/coolbay/VSGN .

1. Introduction
Nowadays has seen a growing interest in video understanding both from industry and academia, owing to the
rapidly produced video content on the Internet. Temporal
action localization (TAL) in untrimmed videos is one important task in this area, which aims to specify the start and
the end time of an action as well as to identify its category. TAL is not only the key technique of various application such as extracting highlights in sports, but also lays
the foundation for other higher-level tasks such as video
grounding [10, 13] and video captioning [17, 27].
Though many methods (e.g., [1, 2, 8, 19, 20, 23, 40,

Figure 1. Short actions are the majority in numbers, but have
the lowest performance. a) Distribution of action duration in
ActivityNet-v1.3 [6]. Actions are divided into five duration groups
(in seconds): XS (0, 30], S (30, 60], M (60, 120], L (120, 180],
and XL (180, inf). b) TAL Performance of different methods on
actions of different duration.

41, 42, 44]) in recent years have been continuously breaking the record of TAL performance, a major challenge hinders its substantial improvement – large variation in action duration. An action can last from a fraction of a second to minutes in the real-world scenario as well as in the
datasets [6, 14]. We plot the distribution of action duration
in the dataset ActivityNet-v1.3 [6] in Fig. 1 a). We notice
that actions shorter than 30 seconds dominate the distribution, but their performance is obviously inferior to longer
ones with all different TAL methods (Fig. 1 b)). Therefore,
the accuracy of short actions is a key factor to determine the
performance of a TAL method.
Why are short actions hard to localize? Short actions
have small temporal scales with fewer frames, and therefore, their information is prone to loss or distortion throughout a deep neural network. Most methods in the literature process videos regardless of action duration, which as
a consequence sacrifices the performance of short actions.
Recently, researchers attempt to incorporate feature pyramid networks (FPN) [21] from the object detection problem
to the TAL problem [23, 26], which generates different feature scales at different network levels, each level with different sizes for candidate actions. Though by this means short
actions may go through fewer pooling layers to avoid being excessively down-scaled, yet their original small scale

13658

