SketchLattice: Latticed Representation for Sketch Manipulation
Yonggang Qi1 * Guoyao Su1∗ Pinaki Nath Chowdhury2 Mingkang Li1 Yi-Zhe Song2
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, CN 2 SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK
{qiyg, sgybupt, lmk}@bupt.edu.cn

{p.chowdhury, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
The key challenge in designing a sketch representation lies with handling the abstract and iconic nature of
sketches. Existing work predominantly utilizes either, (i) a
pixelative format that treats sketches as natural images employing off-the-shelf CNN-based networks, or (ii) an elaborately designed vector format that leverages the structural
information of drawing orders using sequential RNN-based
methods. While the pixelative format lacks intuitive exploitation of structural cues, sketches in vector format are
absent in most cases limiting their practical usage. Hence,
in this paper, we propose a lattice structured sketch representation that not only removes the bottleneck of requiring
vector data but also preserves the structural cues that vector data provides. Essentially, sketch lattice is a set of points
sampled from the pixelative format of the sketch using a
lattice graph. We show that our lattice structure is particularly amenable to structural changes that largely benefits sketch abstraction modeling for generation tasks. Our
lattice representation could be effectively encoded using a
graph model, that uses significantly fewer model parameters (13.5 times lesser) than existing state-of-the-art. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of sketch lattice for sketch manipulation, including sketch healing and
image-to-sketch synthesis.

1. Introduction
Research on freehand human sketches has become increasingly popular in recent years. Due to its ubiquitous
ability in recording visual objects [6], sketches form a natural medium for human-computer interaction. Deriving a
tailor-made representation for sketches sits at the core of
sketch research, and has direct impact on a series of downstream applications such as sketch recognition [33, 27, 12],
sketch-based image retrieval [3, 32, 17, 16], sketch-3D
reconstruction [15, 9, 25, 19, 22], and sketch synthesis
[14, 23]. Albeit a pivotal component, designing an effective representation is challenging since sketches are typically abstract and iconic.
* Equal contribution

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Given lattice points sampled on input sketches (Left),
our proposed Lattice-GCN-LSTM network can recreate a corresponding vector sketch (Right). (b) Given a corrupted sketch, the
resulting lattice points are used to reconstruct a similar sketch accordingly. (c) The abstraction level of generated sketches is controllable by varying the density of latticed points. (d) Image-tosketch synthesis by dropping a few lattice points along the edge of
an object.

Prior works predominantly relied on encoding sketch in
a pixelative format (i.e., an image) [6, 33, 21]. Although
it provided the convenience of using off-the-shelf convolutional neural network effortlessly re-purposed for sketches,
pixelative format lacks the intuitive exploitation of structural information. The presence of structural information is
vital for sketch abstraction modeling [6, 20], which in turn
is essential for downstream tasks that dictate structural manipulation such as sketch generation [7, 4, 10] and sketch
synthesis [14, 23].
RNN-based approaches have consequently emerged as
means to fully explore the sequential nature of sketches [7].
The research convention is to use QuickDraw [8] vector format where each sketch is represented as a list of offsets in
x and y. Thanks to the stroke-level modeling, these approaches do offer a degree of flexibility in generation and
synthesis tasks, yet they do so by imposing a strong assumption – all sketches have sequential stroke data to them. This
assumption largely prohibits the application of RNN-based
methods to work with sketches such as those drawn on a
piece of paper. A natural question is therefore – is there a
way to remove the bottleneck on requiring vector data but

953

