DensePose 3D: Lifting Canonical Surface Maps of Articulated Objects to the
Third Dimension
Roman Shapovalov

David Novotny Benjamin Graham
Facebook AI Research

Patrick Labatut

Andrea Vedaldi

DP3D

DP3D

Training images with 2D DensePose annotations

Test-time monocular 3D mesh reconstruction

Figure 1: We propose DensePose 3D (DP3D), a method for monocular mesh recovery, which leverages a novel parametric
mesh articulation model. Crucially, the model is trained in a weakly supervised manner on a dataset of single views of
humans or animals in different poses and their DensePose labelling produced by an off-the-shelf pre-trained detector.

Abstract
We tackle the problem of monocular 3D reconstruction
of articulated objects like humans and animals. We contribute DensePose 3D, a method that can learn such reconstructions in a weakly supervised fashion from 2D image annotations only. This is in stark contrast with previous deformable reconstruction methods that use parametric models such as SMPL pre-trained on a large dataset
of 3D object scans. Because it does not require 3D scans,
DensePose 3D can be used for learning a wide range of articulated categories such as different animal species. The
method learns, in an end-to-end fashion, a soft partition of
a given category-specific 3D template mesh into rigid parts
together with a monocular reconstruction network that predicts the part motions such that they reproject correctly onto
2D DensePose-like surface annotations of the object. The
decomposition of the object into parts is regularized by expressing part assignments as a combination of the smooth
eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator. We show
significant improvements compared to state-of-the-art nonrigid structure-from-motion baselines on both synthetic and
real data on categories of humans and animals.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have produced impressive results in monocular 3D reconstruction of articulated
and deformable objects, at least for particular object categories such as humans. Unfortunately, while such techniques are general in principle, their success is rather difficult to replicate in other categories. Before learning to
reconstruct 3D objects from images, one must first learn a
model of the possible 3D shapes of the objects. For humans, examples of such models include SMPL [37] and
GHUM [62]. Constructing these requires a large dataset
of 3D scans of the objects deforming and articulating over
time, which have to be acquired with specialised devices
such as domes. Not only this hardware is uncommon, complex and expensive, but it is also difficult if not impossible to apply to many objects of interest, such as wild animals or even certain types of deformable inanimate objects.
Then, after building a suitable 3D shape model, one still
has to train a deep neural network regressor that can predict the shape parameters given a 2D image of the object
as input [29, 63, 26]. Supervising such a network requires
in turn a dataset of images paired with the corresponding
ground-truth 3D shape parameters. Images with paired reconstructions are also very difficult to obtain in practice.
111729

