Learning to Stylize Novel Views
Hsin-Ping Huang1 , Hung-Yu Tseng1 , Saurabh Saini2 , Maneesh Singh2 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1,3,4
1
UC Merced 2 Verisk Analytics 3 Google Research 4 Yonsei University
https://hhsinping.github.io/3d_scene_stylization

Input views

Style image

Stylized novel views

Figure 1. 3D scene stylization. Given a set of images of a 3D scene (left) as well as a reference image of the desired style (middle), our
method is able to modify the style of the 3D scene, and synthesize images of arbitrary novel views (right). The novel view synthesis results
1) contain the desired style and 2) are consistent across various novel views, e.g. the texture in the yellow boxes.

Abstract
We tackle a 3D scene stylization problem — generating
stylized images of a scene from arbitrary novel views given
a set of images of the same scene and a reference image
of the desired style as inputs. Direct solution of combining
novel view synthesis and stylization approaches lead to results that are blurry or not consistent across different views.
We propose a point cloud-based method for consistent 3D
scene stylization. First, we construct the point cloud by
back-projecting the image features to the 3D space. Second, we develop point cloud aggregation modules to gather
the style information of the 3D scene, and then modulate
the features in the point cloud with a linear transformation
matrix. Finally, we project the transformed features to 2D
space to obtain the novel views. Experimental results on
two diverse datasets of real-world scenes validate that our
method generates consistent stylized novel view synthesis
results against other alternative approaches.

1. Introduction
Visual content creation in 3D space has recently attracted
increasing attention. Driven by the success of 3D scene representation approaches [38, 46, 64], recent methods make

significant progress on various content creation tasks for 3D
scenes, such as semantic view synthesis [16, 19] and scene
extrapolation [34]. In this work, we focus on the 3D scene
stylization problem. As shown in Figure 1, given a set of
images of a target scene and a reference image of the desired style, our goal is to render stylized images of the scene
from arbitrary novel views. 3D scene stylization enables a
variety of interesting virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) applications, e.g. augment the street scene at user
locations to the Cafe Terrace at Night style by van Gogh.
Learning to modify the style of an existing 3D scene is
challenging for two reasons. First, the synthesized novel
views (i.e. 2D images) of the stylized 3D scene must contain the desired style provided by the reference image. Second, since our goal is to stylize the holistic 3D scene, the
generated novel views need to be consistent across different viewpoints for the same scene, such as the texture in the
yellow boxes shown in Figure 1.
To handle these challenges, one plausible solution is to
combine existing novel view synthesis [46, 64] and image
stylization approaches [30, 53]. However, such straightforward approaches lead to problematic results since image
stylization schemes are not designed to consider the consistency issue across different views for the same scene.

13869

