Reality Transform Adversarial Generators for Image Splicing Forgery Detection
and Localization
Xiuli Bi Zhipeng Zhang Bin Xiao∗
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Chongqing, China
bixl@cqupt.edu.cn S190201087@stu.cqupt.edu.cn xiaobin@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
When many forgery images become more and more realistic with help of image editing tools and convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), authenticators need to improve
their ability to verify these forgery images. The process
of generating and detecting forgery images is the same as
the principle of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs).
In this paper, since the retouching progress of forgery images requires to suppress the tampering artifacts and to
keep the structural information, we consider this retouching progress as an image style transform, and then propose
a fake-to-realistic transform generator GT . For detecting
the tampered regions, a localization generator GM is proposed too, which is based on a multi-decoder-single-task
strategy. By adversarial training two generators, the proposed α-learnable whitening and coloring transform (αlearnable WCT) block in GT automatically suppress the
tampering artifacts in the forgery images. Meanwhile, the
detection and localization abilities of GM will be improved
by learning the forgery images retouched by GT . The experiment results demonstrate that the proposed two generators in GAN can simulate confrontation between the faker
and the authenticator well; the localization generator GM
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in splicing forgery
detection and localization on four public datasets.

1. Introduction
Cyberspace has experienced explosive growth, and
countless images are uploaded to the Internet every day,
which includes a lot of forgery images. Since forgery images can be easily produced by user-friendly image editing
tools and used to create fake news and rumors, it is necessary to develop more effective methods for image forgery
detection and localization. For the image forgeries, copymove and removal forgery require a single source image,
∗ Corresponding Author

but splicing forgery copies and pastes regions from one
or more source images onto the target image. Fig. 1(a) demonstrates the two examples of splicing forgery images. In this paper, our work focuses on detecting the splicing forgery images and then locate the tampered regions of
these detected images.
The image splicing forgery detection methods can be
summarized into two main categories, methods based on
conventional features extraction[19, 6, 14, 21] and methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)[26,
28, 9, 1, 25, 24, 2, 13]. Most conventional methods focus
on a particular image fingerprint that is caused by imaging processing and post-processing. Because the particular image fingerprint is easy to be influenced by postprocessing, such as JPEG compression, down-sampling,
and mean filtering, many conventional methods are easy to
fail. Fig. 1-(c) shows the experiments results of a conventional method[19].
CNN-based methods can be further divided into patchbased nethods and end-to-end methods. For patch-based
methods, since the final detection result is derived from
the decisions of image patches, the detected results are
generally composed of square white blocks, or only the
patches on boundaries of the tampered regions are detected.
For end-to-end methods, if the tampering artifacts are suppressed and reduced by the faker, it is difficult for end-toend methods to detect tampered regions. Fig. 1-(d) shows
the experimental results of a CNN-based method[1].
To solve these problems, V. Kniaz et al.[13] introduced a
GAN-based method named Mixed Adversarial Generators
(MAG) for image splicing forgery detection and localization. However, MAG requires class segmentations to retouch splicing forgery images, which consumes a host of
computational resources. Furthermore, since the prediction
of both tampered region and class segmentation is generated
in a single decoder network, some untampered semantic regions, who are similar to the tampered regions in the ground
truth, will be easily detected as the tampered regions, as the
experiment results demonstrated in Fig. 1-(e)

14294

