DWKS : A Local Descriptor of Deformations
Between Meshes and Point Clouds
Robin Magnet
LIX, École Polytechnique

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique

rmagnet@lix.polytechnique.fr

maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
We propose a novel pointwise descriptor, called DWKS,
aimed at finding correspondences across two deformable
shape collections. Unlike the majority of existing descriptors, rather than capturing local geometry, DWKS captures the deformation around a point within a collection
in a multi-scale and informative manner. This, in turn,
allows to compute inter-collection correspondences without using landmarks. To this end, we build upon the successful spectral WKS descriptors, but rather than using
the Laplace-Beltrami operator, show that a similar construction can be performed on shape difference operators,
that capture differences or distortion within a collection.
By leveraging the collection information our descriptor facilitates difficult non-rigid shape matching tasks, even in
the presence of strong partiality and significant deformations. We demonstrate the utility of our approach across
a range of challenging matching problems on both meshes
and point clouds. The code for this paper can be found at
https://github.com/RobinMagnet/DWKS

1. Introduction
Shape matching is an ubiquitous problem in 3D computer vision, with various applications like texture and deformation transfer. Numerous methods have therefore been
developed during the last decade to compute correspondences between surfaces, relying on simple rigid deformations to more recent learning-based models [44, 36].
While these methods have shown impressive results on
several datasets, there remain some very challenging scenarios especially when dealing with symmetries and nonisometric shapes. The existence of intrinsic symmetries
in non-rigid shapes (e.g. left-right symmetry in a human
shape) can be handled in multiple ways, using an orientation preserving constraint on shape descriptors [31], exploring the space of maps [30], or adding priors through
learning-based methods [23, 34, 9]. These methods respec-

Figure 1. Our method uses two collections of noisy point-clouds
with roughly similar deformations (left) and outputs a point-wise
inter-collection map (right).

tively require the existence of precise shape descriptors, an
automatic selection of symmetric and non-symmetric map,
and large datasets for neural network training. The case of
non-isometric shapes is typically addressed either by requiring user-specified landmarks [1, 11, 38] or again, through
extensive neural network training [14], among many other
approaches. In the specific case of partial non-rigid shape
matching, several methods have been developed [33, 24],
relying on theoretical properties of the changes to the
Laplace-Beltrami operator under partiality.
Remarkably while 3D shapes often come in the context
of a collection, very few methods [39, 5] have tried to leverage the commonality of the deformations that exist within
the collections to facilitate matching across them, e.g. to
disambiguate such symmetries or address partiality. Notably while matching two human shapes in resting pose can
suffer from their intrinsic symmetry ambiguity, using information from the deformed version of these shapes with e.g.

3793

