Learning Efficient Photometric Feature Transform for Multi-view Stereo
Kaizhang Kang1 , Cihui Xie1 , Ruisheng Zhu1 , Xiaohe Ma1 , Ping Tan3 , Hongzhi Wu1 * and Kun Zhou1,2
1

Zhejiang University

2

ZJU-FaceUnity Joint Lab of Intelligent Graphics

Abstract
We present a novel framework to learn to convert the perpixel photometric information at each view into spatially
distinctive and view-invariant low-level features, which can
be plugged into existing multi-view stereo pipeline for enhanced 3D reconstruction. Both the illumination conditions during acquisition and the subsequent per-pixel feature transform can be jointly optimized in a differentiable
fashion. Our framework automatically adapts to and makes
efficient use of the geometric information available in different forms of input data. High-quality 3D reconstructions
of a variety of challenging objects are demonstrated on the
data captured with an illumination multiplexing device, as
well as a point light. Our results compare favorably with
state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
As one central problem in computer vision and graphics, shape reconstruction in the presence of complex appearance is challenging. At one hand, multi-view stereo methods [8] usually require a Lambertian-dominant reflectance
for computing reliable view-invariant features. The appearance variation with view or lighting is undesirable, as it
may change the native spatial features on the object, or
specularly reflect the projected pattern from active illumination [16, 23], leading to difficulties in correspondence computation for shape reconstruction.
On the other hand, single-view photometric stereo [34, 5]
exploits the lighting variations on each pixel and transforms the image measurements into a normal map. While
high-quality details can be recovered, it suffers from lowfrequency shape distortions [20]. Recently, multi-view photometric stereo [12, 32, 17] accurately integrates the photometric cues from different viewpoints, subject to the geometric constraints across multiple views.
However, photometric stereo techniques are not scalable
* : corresponding author (hwu@acm.org).

3

Simon Fraser University

to the amount of geometric information in the input data for
3D reconstruction, leading to suboptimal results. When additional physical cues such as rapid albedo variations are
present, they cannot be exploited to improve the reconstruction quality. On the other hand, when the measured
photometric information is insufficient to determine a normal field, the quality of results from existing approaches
will significantly degrade. Furthermore, related techniques
heavily exploit reflectance properties [17, 18], which hinders the extension to handle more general appearance such
as anisotropic materials.
To tackle the above challenges, we make the key observation that it is not necessary to use normal as the intermediate representation for 3D reconstruction from photometric
measurements. Instead, we propose a novel differentiable
framework, to efficiently transform the per-pixel photometric information measured at each view, into automatically
learned low-level features, in an end-to-end fashion. The
learned per-pixel features essentially exploit the available
geometric information in photometric measurements, and
can be plugged in existing multi-view stereo pipelines for
further processing tasks like spatial aggregation, resulting in
enhanced geometric reconstruction. Furthermore, our datadriven framework is highly flexible and can adapt to various factors, including the physical acquisition capabilities
/ characteristics of different setups, and different types of
appearance such as anisotropic reflectance, by feeding corresponding training data.
The effectiveness of our framework is demonstrated with
a high-performance illumination multiplexing device, on
geometric reconstruction results of a variety of 3D objects
using as few as 16 input photographs per view. Moreover,
the framework is generalized to handle the input data of
conventional photometric stereo with one point light on at
a time (DiLiGenT-MV[17]). Our results compare favorably
with state-of-the-art techniques. We make public the code
and data of this project 1 .
1 https://svbrdf.github.io/publications/ptmvs/
project.html

5956

