Adaptive confidence thresholding for monocular depth estimation
Hyesong Choi1∗ , Hunsang Lee2∗ , Sunkyung Kim1 , Sunok Kim3 ,
Seungryong Kim4 , Kwanghoon Sohn2 , Dongbo Min1†
1
Ewha W. University, 2 Yonsei University, 3 Korea Aerospace University, 4 Korea University

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation has become
an appealing solution to the lack of ground truth labels, but
its reconstruction loss often produces over-smoothed results
across object boundaries and is incapable of handling occlusion explicitly. In this paper, we propose a new approach
to leverage pseudo ground truth depth maps of stereo images generated from self-supervised stereo matching methods. The confidence map of the pseudo ground truth depth
map is estimated to mitigate performance degeneration by
inaccurate pseudo depth maps. To cope with the prediction error of the confidence map itself, we also leverage
the threshold network that learns the threshold dynamically conditioned on the pseudo depth maps. The pseudo
depth labels filtered out by the thresholded confidence map
are used to supervise the monocular depth network. Furthermore, we propose the probabilistic framework that refines the monocular depth map with the help of its uncertainty map through the pixel-adaptive convolution (PAC)
layer. Experimental results demonstrate superior performance to state-of-the-art monocular depth estimation methods. Lastly, we exhibit that the proposed threshold learning can also be used to improve the performance of existing
confidence estimation approaches.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation, which predicts a dense
depth map from a single image, plays an important role in
various fields such as scene understanding and autonomous
driving. Early works [8, 31, 4] are based on supervised
learning in which the performance depends on a huge
amount of training data with ground truth depth labels.
This work was supported by the Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the
Korean government (MSIT) (No. 2020-0-00056) and the Mid-Career Researcher Program through the NRF of Korea (NRF-2021R1A2C2011624).
S. Kim4 was supported in part by the MSIT under the ICT Creative Consilience Program (IITP-2021-2020-0-01819).
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Since establishing such a large-scale training data is very
costly and labour-intensive, recent approaches rely on the
self-supervised learning regime [11, 13, 32, 14, 36]. Instead
of using ground truth labels for training the network, they
attempt to leverage the self-supervision from a pair of stereo
images or monocular video sequences, under the assumption that the geometric structure of a scene can be encoded
with the reconstruction loss based on pixel-wise intensity
similarities [11]. This loss function seems to be an appealing alternative to the lack of large-scale ground truth labels,
but it often leads to blurry results around depth boundaries
and does not consider occluded pixels [13].
Instead of relying on the self-supervised reconstruction
loss across stereo images, Cho et al. [6] attempted to train
the monocular depth estimation network through pseudo
depth labels of the stereo images generated from pre-trained
stereo matching network [34]. To mitigate performance degeneration by inaccurate pseudo depth labels, they leverage
stereo confidence maps (∈ [0, 1]) indicating the reliability
of the pseudo depth labels. The confidence map is truncated with a threshold [6, 46] so that depth values with low
confidence are excluded. However, a fixed threshold for
all training dataset still has the risk of inaccurate pseudo
depth values being used in the network training [6]. The
method of [46] attempted to address this issue by learning
the threshold with an additional regularization term, but the
performance gain is rather limited due to its hard thresholding and the implicit constraint by the regularization term.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel architecture that adaptively learns the threshold dynamically
conditioned on the pseudo depth map. For a given inaccurate pseudo depth map, the stereo confidence map
and its associated threshold are inferred in an end-to-end
manner. The confidence map is then thresholded through
a differential soft-thresholding operator controlled by the
learned threshold. The proposed threshold learning is capable of dealing with the prediction errors of the confidence map more effectively. Note that we leverage the softthresholding operator to make the network differentiable.
The thresholded confidence map is then used together with

12808

