Enhancing Self-supervised Video Representation Learning via
Multi-level Feature Optimization
Rui Qian1 , Yuxi Li1,2 , Huabin Liu1 , John See3 , Shuangrui Ding1 , Xian Liu4 , Dian Li5 , Weiyao Lin1 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong Univeristy, 2 Tencent Youtu Lab, 3 Heriot-Watt University
4
Zhejiang University, 5 Tencent PCG
{qrui9911,huabinliu,dsr1212,wylin}@sjtu.edu.cn
{yukiyxli,goodli}@tencent.com,j.see@hw.ac.uk,alvinliu@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The crux of self-supervised video representation learning
is to build general features from unlabeled videos. However, most recent works have mainly focused on high-level
semantics and neglected lower-level representations and
their temporal relationship which are crucial for general
video understanding. To address these challenges, this paper proposes a multi-level feature optimization framework
to improve the generalization and temporal modeling ability of learned video representations. Concretely, high-level
features obtained from naive and prototypical contrastive
learning are utilized to build distribution graphs, guiding the process of low-level and mid-level feature learning. We also devise a simple temporal modeling module
from multi-level features to enhance motion pattern learning. Experiments demonstrate that multi-level feature optimization with the graph constraint and temporal modeling
can greatly improve the representation ability in video understanding. Code is available here.

1. Introduction
Video representation learning has been a fundamental
problem in computer vision to solve a series of video analysis tasks, e.g., action recognition and detection [11, 72, 7,
18, 39, 79], video retrieval [40, 45], video caption [60, 48],
and etc. To address this problem, some large-scale human annotated datasets, e.g., Kinetics [11], ActivityNet [7],
YouTube-8M [1], are developed to facilitate video understanding in specific downstream tasks. However, human labeling on videos is expensive, and fully-supervised methods
fail to leverage massive unlabeled video data. Therefore, it
is significant to develop unsupervised video representation
learning without resorting to manual labeling.
* Corresponding author. Email: wylin@sjtu.edu.cn

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Graph presentation of four conditions. The nodes denote different samples, the edges present sample-wise relationships, and different colors indicate different characteristics, e.g.,
appearance, motion and semantic. Fig. 1(a) one hot label in InfoNCE loss, we use self-loop to present only the instance with its
augmented view are regarded as positive. Fig. 1(b) instance-wise
similarity distribution, measured by cosine similarity in embedding space1 . We use arrows to show the samples with similarity
above threshold. Fig. 1(c) semantic-wise distribution, we connect
samples of the same category. Fig. 1(d) comprehensive distribution formulated by the intersection of the former two. Note that
we omit self-loops in the last three for concise presentation.

To achieve this goal, early works designed various pretext tasks to uncover effective supervision from video sequences [6, 46, 33, 31, 74, 63]. Recently, contrastive
learning has shown to be powerful in image representation
learning [28, 47, 55, 12, 26, 77]. It encourages augmentation invariant representations by leveraging instance discrimination to attract augmented samples of the same instance and repel those of different instances. Later, beyond
naive instance discrimination, inter-image relationships and
semantic structures are proved helpful for learning highquality representations [36, 67]. To expand this pipeline to
video domain, diverse spatiotemporal augmentation techniques are proposed to construct contrastive pairs and enhance motion modeling [17, 50, 64, 75, 14]. Some works
used contrastive learning to form temporal cycle or make future prediction to boost dense spatiotemporal feature mod1 The instance-wise similarity distribution is asymmetric due to the normalization, it is a directed graph.

7990

