Geometry-based Distance Decomposition for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Xuepeng Shi1 Qi Ye3 Xiaozhi Chen2 Chuangrong Chen2 Zhixiang Chen1 Tae-Kyun Kim1,4
1

Imperial College London 2 DJI 3 Zhejiang University
4
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

{x.shi19, zhixiang.chen, tk.kim}@imperial.ac.uk

𝑍

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection is of great significance
for autonomous driving but remains challenging. The core
challenge is to predict the distance of objects in the absence of explicit depth information. Unlike regressing the
distance as a single variable in most existing methods, we
propose a novel geometry-based distance decomposition to
recover the distance by its factors. The decomposition factors the distance of objects into the most representative and
stable variables, i.e. the physical height and the projected
visual height in the image plane. Moreover, the decomposition maintains the self-consistency between the two heights,
leading to robust distance prediction when both predicted
heights are inaccurate. The decomposition also enables us
to trace the causes of the distance uncertainty for different
scenarios. Such decomposition makes the distance prediction interpretable, accurate, and robust. Our method directly predicts 3D bounding boxes from RGB images with
a compact architecture, making the training and inference
simple and efficient. The experimental results show that
our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the
monocular 3D Object Detection and Bird’s Eye View tasks
of the KITTI dataset, and can generalize to images with different camera intrinsics 1 .

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental and challenging problem in computer vision. With the emergence of deep
learning [43, 16], 2D object detection has achieved great
progress in the past years [13, 12, 36, 29, 26, 25]. However,
it is yet insufficient for applications requiring 3D spatial information like autonomous driving. 3D object detection,
which detects objects as 3D bounding boxes, has drawn
much attention. Comparing with 3D object detection methods relying on expensive LiDAR sensors to provide depth
information [47, 38, 51, 22], monocular 3D object detec1 https://github.com/Rock-100/MonoDet

{qi.ye}@zju.edu.cn

𝑓
ℎ
ℎ

𝐻
Figure 1. Our distance decomposition is based on the imaging geometry [14] of a pinhole camera. The distance from the center
of an object to the camera, denoted as Z, can be calculated by
Z = fhH , where f denotes the focal length of the camera, H denotes the physical height of the object, and h denotes the length
of the projected central line (PCL). The PCL represents the projection of the vertical line at the center of the 3D bounding box.
This equation shows the distance of objects is determined by the
physical height and projected visual height in the image plane.

tion [5, 37] infers depth from monocular images with low
computation and energy cost. The core challenge of monocular 3D object detection is inferring the distance of objects
in the absence of explicit depth information. Given the visual appearance of an object, its spatial location can be inferred based on the imaging geometry [14] as an inverse
problem. Thus, the priors of object physical size, scene layout, and the imaging process of cameras are essential to exploit to recover the distance.
On one hand, such geometric priors have been exploited
to predict the pose or distance of objects by their factors. In
6D object pose estimation, PVNet [35] and SegDriven [17]
regress the 2D keypoints of objects. In category-level 6D
object pose and size estimation, NOCS [44] uses the normalized object coordinate space map. In stereo 3D object
detection, Stereo R-CNN [23] uses sparse 2D keypoints,
yaw angle, object physical size, and a region-based photometric alignment using the left and right RoIs. These
works [35, 17, 23, 44] recover the pose or distance by several factors, such as 2D keypoints, 2D bounding boxes, and
object physical size, which achieves interpretable and robust pose or distance estimation.
On the other hand, most monocular 3D object detection
methods deal with the challenging distance prediction by
regressing it as a single variable. The learning-based meth-

15172

