Equivariant Imaging: Learning Beyond the Range Space
Dongdong Chen
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh
y

A y

y

A y

Julián Tachella
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh

MC
EI
28.831839561462402 30.29245138168335

3.88

MC

EI

3.88

Mike E. Davies
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh
Supervised
x (GT)
35.646843910217285 36.92392826080322

24.13

Supervised

24.91

GT

Figure 1: Learning to image from only measurements. Training an imaging network through just measurement consistency (MC) does not significantly improve the reconstruction over the simple pseudo-inverse (A† y). However, by enforcing
invariance in the reconstructed image set, equivariant imaging (EI) performs almost as well as a fully supervised network.
Top: sparse view CT reconstruction, Bottom: pixel inpainting. PSNR is shown in top right corner of the images.

Abstract
In various imaging problems, we only have access to
compressed measurements of the underlying signals, hindering most learning-based strategies which usually require
pairs of signals and associated measurements for training. Learning only from compressed measurements is impossible in general, as the compressed observations do not
contain information outside the range of the forward sensing operator. We propose a new end-to-end self-supervised
framework that overcomes this limitation by exploiting the
equivariances present in natural signals. Our proposed
learning strategy performs as well as fully supervised methods. Experiments demonstrate the potential of this framework on inverse problems including sparse-view X-ray computed tomography on real clinical data and image inpainting on natural images. Code has been made available at:
https://github.com/edongdongchen/EI.

1. Introduction
Linear inverse problems are ubiquitous in computer vision and signal processing, appearing in multiple important

applications such as super-resolution, image inpainting and
computed tomography (CT). The goal in these problems
consists of recovering a signal x from measurements y, that
is inverting the forward process
y = Ax + ,

(1)

which is generally a challenging task due to the illconditioned operator A and noise . In order to obtain a
stable inversion, traditional approaches have used linear reconstruction, i.e. A† y, where the estimate is restricted to the
range space of A> , or model-based approaches that reduce
the set of plausible reconstructions x using prior information (e.g. sparsity). Leveraging the powerful representation
properties of deep neural networks, a different approach is
taken by recent end-to-end learning solutions which learn
the inverse mapping directly from samples (x, y). However,
all of these approaches require ground truth signals x for
learning the reconstruction function x = f (y), which hinders their applicability in many real-world scenarios where
ground truth signals are either impossible or expensive to
obtain. This limitation raises the natural question: can we
learn the reconstruction function without imposing strong
priors and without knowing the ground-truth signals?

4379

