Cluster-Promoting Quantization with Bit-Drop for Minimizing Network
Quantization Loss
Jung Hyun Lee1 *, Jihun Yun1 *, Sung Ju Hwang1,2 , Eunho Yang1,2
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 2 AITRICS
{onliwad101, arcprime, sjhwang, eunhoy}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Network quantization, which aims to reduce the bitlengths of the network weights and activations, has emerged
for their deployments to resource-limited devices. Although
recent studies have successfully discretized a full-precision
network, they still incur large quantization errors after training, thus giving rise to a significant performance gap between a full-precision network and its quantized counterpart. In this work, we propose a novel quantization method
for neural networks, Cluster-Promoting Quantization (CPQ)
that finds the optimal quantization grids while naturally encouraging the underlying full-precision weights to gather
around those quantization grids cohesively during training.
This property of CPQ is thanks to our two main ingredients that enable differentiable quantization: i) the use of the
categorical distribution designed by a specific probabilistic
parametrization in the forward pass and ii) our proposed
multi-class straight-through estimator (STE) in the backward
pass. Since our second component, multi-class STE, is intrinsically biased, we additionally propose a new bit-drop
technique, DropBits, that revises the standard dropout regularization to randomly drop bits instead of neurons. As a
natural extension of DropBits, we further introduce the way
of learning heterogeneous quantization levels to find proper
bit-length for each layer by imposing an additional regularization on DropBits. We experimentally validate our method
on various benchmark datasets and network architectures,
and also support a new hypothesis for quantization: learning heterogeneous quantization levels outperforms the case
using the same but fixed quantization levels from scratch.

* Equal contribution

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved great success in
various computer vision applications. However, the state-ofthe-art neural network architectures including ResNet [12]
generally require too much computation and memory to be
deployed to resource-limited devices. Therefore, researchers
have explored diverse approaches to compress them to reduce memory usage and computation cost.
Among them, network quantization aims to reduce the
bit-width of network parameters while maintaining competitive performance of a full-precision counterpart. One of the
simplest methods is to round a weight or an activation of
a network x to x
b = α⌊ αx + 12 ⌋ where α controls the grid
interval size. However, this naı̈ve approach incurs severe
performance degradation mainly due to the quantization loss.
Given that if the underlying full-precision weights x are clustered well around the optimal quantization grids, the performance difference between before and after the quantization
can be marginal so that the performance of full-precision network can be preserved even with the quantized parameters.
Hence, we focus on jointly finding the optimal quantization
grids and clustering the underlying full-precision weights x
around those quantization grids cohesively.
Some recent studies in fact have experimentally confirmed that their methods can partially give a clustering effect
in the quantization process. VNQ [2] clusters the underlying full-precision weights x around quantization grids using
multi-spike-and-slab prior, but it is restricted only to ternary
precision. RQ [19] experimentally shows some clustering
effects around several modes in low bit-width, but it does
not equip any algorithm that explicitly encourages clustering
around quantization grids. As a result, both methods incur
a considerable performance gap between a full-precision
network and its quantized counterpart.
In order to preserve the performance of a full-precision

5370

