Weakly Supervised Segmentation of Small Buildings with Point Labels
Jae-Hun Lee
ChanYoung Kim
Sanghoon Sull
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University
{jhlee|cykim}@mpeg.korea.ac.kr

sull@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Most supervised image segmentation methods require
delicate and time-consuming pixel-level labeling of building or objects, especially for small objects. In this paper,
we present a weakly supervised segmentation network for
aerial/satellite images, separately considering small and
large objects. First, we propose a simple point labeling
method for small objects, while large objects are fully labeled. Then, we present a segmentation network trained
with a small object mask to separate small and large objects
in the loss function. During training, we employ a memory
bank to cope with the limited number of point labels. Experiments results with three public datasets demonstrate the
feasibility of our approach.

Figure 1. Point labeling of a small object. (a) Input image. (b) Full
labels for both a small and a large object. (c) Point labels for the
small object and a full label for the large object. In the gray circle
which indicates unknown region, a small object point is shown in
white, and its corresponding background point is shown in black.

1. Introduction
Recently, a variety of image segmentation methods
based on deep learning have shown remarkable performance. However, most of them require vast amounts of
pixel-level labels, which are quite expensive [3, 6, 29]. Further, labeling of small objects requires more attention than
that of larger objects. As in MS COCO [17], some evaluation criteria of object segmentation consider the size of
objects(small/medium/large). In this paper, we focus on the
segmentation of objects or buildings, especially for small
objects given their weak labels that do not require precise
labeling.
One of the popular methods for labeling an object is
based on manual contour following, or drawing of a tight
polygon by placing multiple points around the object [12].
The pixels enclosed by the contour or polygon are labeled
as objects. This manual labeling seems doable for a large
object. But, for a small object, it results in larger portion
of mislabeled pixels than that of a large object. The precise
labeling of a small object requires time-consuming delicate
effort.
Detection result of small objects is not usually satisfactory compared with that of large ones, probably due to insufficient labels for small objects. However, detection of

small buildings could be useful to some specific tasks. For
example, considering a task of locating the position of an
input satellite/aerial image when its position information
is not available, the spatial relationship between detected
small and large buildings can give useful clues to its position. In this paper, we propose a new easier point labeling
scheme for small objects as well as a segmentation network
which can be trained by using the point labels for small objects and traditional contour labels for large objects.
Instead of trying to accurately label the contour of a
small object, we label it using two points inside and outside the small object, respectively, as shown in Figure 1.
Although the point label is less informative than the full label, the point labeling work requires less delicacy than the
full label, reducing the annotation time as mentioned in [2].
Instead of clicking precisely on the corner points of the object, you can roughly click on arbitrary points inside and
outside the object. In this paper, an object is called as small
object if its area is smaller than the small object threshold
Ts . Otherwise, it is treated as a large object. It is noted that
a regular contour-based labeling is used for large objects. It
is motivated by the map data in which a building is simply

7406

