ZFlow: Gated Appearance Flow-based Virtual Try-on with 3D Priors
Ayush Chopra* †2 , Rishabh Jain * ‡3 , Mayur Hemani1 , and Balaji Krishnamurthy1
1

2

Media and Data Science Research Lab, Adobe
Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
BITS Pilani

Abstract
Image-based virtual try-on involves synthesising perceptually convincing images of a model wearing a particular
garment and has garnered significant research interest due
to its immense practical applicability. Recent methods involve a two stage process: i) warping of the garment to
align with the model ii) texture fusion of the warped garment and target model to generate the try-on output. Issues arise due to the non-rigid nature of garments and the
lack of geometric information about the model or the garment. It often results in improper rendering of granular details. We propose ZFlow, an end-to-end framework, which
seeks to alleviate these concerns regarding geometric and
textural integrity (such as pose, depth-ordering, skin and
neckline reproduction) through a combination of gated aggregation of hierarchical flow estimates termed Gated Appearance Flow, and dense structural priors at various stage
of the network. ZFlow achieves state-of-the-art results as
observed qualitatively, and on quantitative benchmarks of
image quality (PSNR, SSIM, and FID). The paper presents
extensive comparisons with other existing solutions including a detailed user study and ablation studies to gauge the
effect of each of our contributions on multiple datasets.

1. Introduction
With recent socio-cultural events accelerating the shift
towards online commerce, there is an increasing interest in
providing smart and intuitive experiences [19, 27, 3, 1, 6,
22] that can compensate for the lack of in-store interaction.
Virtual try-on is concerned with the visualization of clothes
in a personalized setting and is of great importance to a
plethora of real world applications. While attractive even
* equal contribution
† work done while working at Adobe MDSR Lab
‡ work done as part of Adobe MDSR internship

Figure 1. Image-based virtual try-on involves synthesizing a tryon output where the target model is wearing the in-shop garment
while other characteristics of the model and garment are preserved.
The above output is generated by our proposed method ZFlow

before the renaissance of deep learning [37, 15, 8], recent
advances in generative networks have inspired researchers
to pursue image-based virtual try-on [41, 19, 40, 13, 43],
based solely on RGB images, by formulating the problem
as that of conditional image synthesis.
Given as input the images of an isolated in-shop garment and a target model, the objective of image-based virtual try-on is to synthesise a perceptually convincing new
image (referred to as the try-on output) where the target
model is wearing the in-shop garment (Figure 1). Recent
methods employ a two step process consisting of: a) warping of in-shop garment to align with pose and body shape
of the target model and, b) texture fusion of the warped garment and target model images to generate the try-on output.
A successful try-on experience depends upon synthesizing
a sharp, realistic image that preserves the textural and geometric integrity of both the garment and model. Issues arise
from improper warping or incorrect texture fusion due to the
non-rigid nature of garments and the lack of understanding
of the 3D geometry of the garment and the model. This results in unconvincing rendering of granular clothing details.
Alleviating these concerns is the focus of this work.
Recent research [14, 40, 19, 41] has been directed to-

5433

