Pseudo-mask Matters in Weakly-supervised Semantic Segmentation
Yi Li1

Zhanghui Kuang1
Liyang Liu2
Yimin Chen1
Wayne Zhang1,3,4
SenseTime1
Tsinghua University2
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University3
Shanghai AI Laboratory4
{liyi,kuangzhanghui,chenyimin,wayne.zhang}@sensetime.com, liu-ly14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Most weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS)
methods follow the pipeline that generates pseudo-masks
initially and trains the segmentation model with the pseudomasks in fully supervised manner after. However, we
find some matters related to the pseudo-masks, including
high quality pseudo-masks generation from class activation
maps (CAMs), and training with noisy pseudo-mask supervision. For these matters, we propose the following designs
to push the performance to new state-of-art: (i) Coefficient
of Variation Smoothing to smooth the CAMs adaptively;
(ii) Proportional Pseudo-mask Generation to project the expanded CAMs to pseudo-mask based on a new metric indicating the importance of each class on each location, instead of the scores trained from binary classifiers. (iii) Pretended Under-Fitting strategy to suppress the influence of
noise in pseudo-mask; (iv) Cyclic Pseudo-mask to boost the
pseudo-masks during training of fully supervised semantic
segmentation (FSSS). Experiments based on our methods
achieve new state-of-art results on two changeling weakly
supervised semantic segmentation datasets, pushing the
mIoU to 70.0% and 40.2% on PAS-CAL VOC 2012 and MS
COCO 2014 respectively. Codes including segmentation
framework are released at https://github.com/Eli-YiLi/PMM

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision problem and requires time-consuming pixel-level manual annotations. To reduce the annotation burden, weaklysupervised semantic segmentation approaches have been
proposed using scribble annotations [23, 32], bounding
boxes [36, 9, 16] , points [3] or image-level labels [17, 27,
28, 2, 33]. In this paper, we focus on weakly-supervised semantic segmentation with image-level labels due to its easily available annotations.
Almost all the latest WSSS algorithms require pseudomask derived from CAM to train the FSSS model. Instead

of the pseudo-mask, previous works mainly focus on the
generation of CAMs, or the post-process of them. We observe that there are some matters about pseudo-mask that
are not handled appropriately as follows: (i) argmax operation on the CAMs along the channel dimension projects
multi-label class activation maps (CAMs) to single-label
pseudo-masks, but the image-level classification for generating CAMs does not consider the conflicts of predictions
on target locations; (ii) CAMs generated by the classification model tend to focus on the most discriminative part and
result in partial activations; (iii) the noise in pseudo-masks
is inevitable and impedes the training of fully-supervised
semantic segmentation (FSSS). (iv) the predictions of FSSS
are usually more accurate than supervisory signals (pseudomasks).
In this paper, we propose a series of strategies to boost
the efficiency of pseudo-masks in aspects of both generation and utilization. Specifically, in the pseudo-mask generation step, we firstly compute the Coefficient of Variation (cv ) for each channel of CAMs, and then refine CAMs
via exponential functions with cv as the control coefficient.
This operation smooths the CAMs and could alleviate the
partial response problem introduced by the classification
pipeline. Instead of projecting the three-dimensional CAM
after dense-CRF [18] directly to two-dimensional pseudomask with the argmax operation on scores as in previous
studies, we equip each pixel a scalar which is computed as
the proportion between the pixel’s attention and the attention sum of the channels over the whole image. Intuitively
the scalar represents the importance of the corresponding
pixel based on which the final pseudo-masks are generated.
In the FSSS training step, we propose a Pretended Underfitting Strategy which suppresses the losses of the noise labels in the pseudo-masks. In addition, the model is evaluated on validation dataset and we update the masks cyclically in condition that prediction from model is better than
the pseudo-masks, rather than use the fixed pseudo-masks
generated in the first step.
Applying our methods to a baseline algorithm called
SEAM [33], we achieve new state-of-the-art results on

6964

