Testing using Privileged Information
by Adapting Features with Statistical Dependence
Kwang In Kim
UNIST

Abstract
Given an imperfect predictor, we exploit additional features at test time to improve the predictions made, without
retraining and without knowledge of the prediction function.
This scenario arises if training labels or data are proprietary,
restricted, or no longer available, or if training itself is prohibitively expensive. We assume that the additional features
are useful if they exhibit strong statistical dependence to the
underlying perfect predictor. Then, we empirically estimate
and strengthen the statistical dependence between the initial
noisy predictor and the additional features via manifold denoising. As an example, we show that this approach leads to
improvement in real-world visual attribute ranking.

1. Introduction
In supervised learning, sometimes we have additional
information at training time but not at testing time. One example is human action recognition, where training images
have additional skeletal features like bone lengths [17]. Another class of examples is tasks with crowdsourced labels,
which have derived confidence values from multiple noisy
human labelings [13]. In training, each input and output pair
(g, y) has additional ‘privileged’ features h to help learn
mapping function f . Vapnik and Vashist proposed to exploit
these data with learning using privileged information [21].
Their support vector machine (SVM) training algorithm was
later generalized to other learning algorithms.
We consider the complementary scenario where additional features h are only available at testing time. We call
this testing using privileged information (TUPI). This is different from retraining with new features: Given a pre-trained
f and test data g with test time features h, TUPI does not assume access to the original large set of labeled training data
{(gi , yi )}. TUPI is useful when the predictor is trained on a
single feature but multiple (perhaps heterogeneous) features
are available when the predictor is deployed.
For instance, when a predictor was trained on a single lens
camera but applied to multi-lens cameras (across smartphone
models or robot build variations), or when a predictor was

James Tompkin
Brown University

trained on RGB camera data yet run on RGB-D camera
data. TUPI is also useful when a predictor is proprietary or
built into a closed-source library and the training data are
inaccessible, e.g., Microsoft Kinect pose estimator, but new
features become available later on such as deep-learningbased features (we discuss more applications in Sec. 5).
Problem description. Suppose we have an estimation problem with an input feature space G and the corresponding
output space Y ⊂ R. Traditional algorithms aim to identify the underlying function f ∗ : G → Y based on the
input training features Gtr = {g1tr , . . . , gltr } ⊂ G and the
corresponding task-specific labels Y tr ⊂ Y. Once an estimate f I of f ∗ is constructed, we can apply it to unseen test
data points G = {g1 , . . . , gn } to construct the prediction
f I := f I |G = [f I (g1 ), . . . , f I (gn )]⊤ .
In the TUPI scenario, we assume that additional feature
sets {H i }m
i=1 are provided for the test set G such that each
test instance gk ∈ G is accompanied by m additional feai
tures {h1k , . . . , hm
k }. Our goal is to exploit {H } to improve
I
prediction f . However, each new feature set H i may or
may not be related to the underlying function f ∗ and so
may or may not be useful to improve f I . Further, we do not
assume explicit forms for the feature extractors g or hi (by
which G and H i are obtained), or for the learned function
f (e.g. f could be a deep neural network (DNN) regressor
or a rule-based classifier). Lastly, we do not assume access
to a large set of labeled data points (Gtr , Y tr ) at the testing
stage. Otherwise, the problem could be solved by adding
{H i }m
i=1 to the feature set and applying traditional supervised feature selection algorithms [18]. In general, exploiting
additional information during testing to improve a prediction
is an ill-posed problem, and existing algorithms are not able
to accomplish this without having access to the data or labels,
or are only applicable to very specific test time features.
Denoising statistical dependence. Our insight is that if the
test time feature sets are useful, then they will exhibit strong
statistical dependence with the underlying perfect predictor
f ∗ . For instance, in the extreme case of known perfect statistical dependence, knowing H i would immediately identify
f ∗ . Since we do not know in advance which feature sets (if

9405

