Learning with Noisy Labels via Sparse Regularization
Xiong Zhou1,2 Xianming Liu1,2 * Chenyang Wang1 Deming Zhai1 Junjun Jiang1,2 Xiangyang Ji3
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Tsinghua University
{cszx,csxm,cswcy,zhaideming,junjunjiang}@hit.edu.cn

xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning with noisy labels is an important and challenging task for training accurate deep neural networks. Some
commonly-used loss functions, such as Cross Entropy (CE),
suffer from severe overfitting to noisy labels. Robust loss
functions that satisfy the symmetric condition were tailored
to remedy this problem, which however encounter the underfitting effect. In this paper, we theoretically prove that
any loss can be made robust to noisy labels by restricting
the network output to the set of permutations over a fixed
vector. When the fixed vector is one-hot, we only need to
constrain the output to be one-hot, which however produces
zero gradients almost everywhere and thus makes gradientbased optimization difficult. In this work, we introduce the
sparse regularization strategy to approximate the one-hot
constraint, which is composed of network output sharpening operation that enforces the output distribution of a network to be sharp and the ℓp -norm (p ≤ 1) regularization
that promotes the network output to be sparse. This simple
approach guarantees the robustness of arbitrary loss functions while not hindering the fitting ability. Experimental
results demonstrate that our method can significantly improve the performance of commonly-used loss functions in
the presence of noisy labels and class imbalance, and outperform the state-of-the-art methods. The code is available
at https://github.com/hitcszx/lnl sr.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success on various computer vision tasks, such as image classification, segmentation, and object detection [7].
The most widely used paradigm for DNN training is the
end-to-end supervised manner, whose performance largely
relies on massive high-quality annotated data. However,
collecting large-scale datasets with fully precise annotations (or called clean labels) is usually expensive and timeconsuming, and sometimes even impossible. Noisy labels,
* Correspondence to: Xianming Liu (csxm@hit.edu.cn)

(a) FL

(b) FL+SR

(c) GCE

(d) GCE+SR

Figure 1. Visualization of learned representations on MNIST with
0.8 symmetric label noise. The representations learned by the
proposed sparse regularization (SR)-enhanced methods are significantly discriminative than that learned by original losses, which
are with more separated and clearly bound margin.

which are systematically corrupted from ground-truth labels, are ubiquitous in many real-world applications, such
as online queries [19], crowdsourcing [1], adversarial attacks [30], and medical images analysis [12]. On the other
hand, it is well-known that over-parameterized neural networks have enough capacity to memorize large-scale data
with even completely random labels, leading to poor performance in generalization [28, 1, 11]. Therefore, robust
learning with noisy labels has become an important and
challenging task in computer vision [25, 8, 12, 31].
To prevent over-fitting to mislabeled data, many strategies have been presented in the literature, among which
robust loss function design is one of the most popular approaches since it enjoys simplicity and universality. Ghosh
et al. [6] theoretically proved that a loss function would
be inherently tolerant to symmetric label noise as long as

72

