Viewpoint-Agnostic Change Captioning with Cycle Consistency
Hoeseong Kim1 Jongseok Kim1 Hyungseok Lee2 Hyunsung Park2 Gunhee Kim1,†
1
Seoul National University 2 AIRS Company, Hyundai Motor Group, Seoul, Korea
hsgkim@snu.ac.kr js.kim@vision.snu.ac.kr {hseokool,hyunsung}@hyundai.com gunhee@snu.ac.kr
https://github.com/hsgkim/clevr-dc

Abstract
Change captioning is the task of identifying the change
and describing it with a concise caption. Despite recent
advancements, filtering out insignificant changes still remains as a challenge. Namely, images from different camera perspectives can cause issues; a mere change in viewpoint should be disregarded while still capturing the actual
changes. In order to tackle this problem, we present a new
Viewpoint-Agnostic change captioning network with Cycle
Consistency (VACC) that requires only one image each for
the before and after scene, without depending on any other
information. We achieve this by devising a new difference
encoder module which can encode viewpoint information
and model the difference more effectively. In addition, we
propose a cycle consistency module that can potentially improve the performance of any change captioning networks
in general by matching the composite feature of the generated caption and before image with the after image feature. We evaluate the performance of our proposed model
across three datasets for change captioning, including a
novel dataset we introduce here that contains images with
changes under extreme viewpoint shifts. Through our experiments, we show the excellence of our method with respect to the CIDEr, BLEU-4, METEOR and SPICE scores.
Moreover, we demonstrate that attaching our proposed cycle consistency module yields a performance boost for existing change captioning networks, even with varying image
encoding mechanisms.

1. Introduction
With an endless stream of data in real world, it is pivotal to develop automated systems that assist human to
quickly grasp the essence of the data. Consider, for example, data streams from a myriad of surveillance cameras
scattered around highways. It is highly labor-intensive and
almost implausible to monitor them all without automation
† Corresponding author.

the brown box turned yellow

there is no change

Figure 1. An example of viewpoint-agnostic change captioning.
Compared to the top image, both images on the bottom are acquired from severely different viewpoints. Only the bottom left
image contains an actual change, where the color of the brown
box changes. Therefore, a meaningful caption should be generated only for this image (“the brown box turned yellow”), while
the caption for the bottom right should indicate there is no change.

due to the sheer amount of data and the flashing rate of
change. Change detection has received much attention as
one solution to this problem, along with other usages in
various fields such as medical imaging and satellite imaging [21, 36]. Recent advancements even allow generating
a short descriptive sentence that summarizes the detected
changes, often referred to as change captioning [10, 19, 28].
Despite such improvements in change detection and captioning, one of the most challenging aspects remains unsolved: identifying only the relevant semantic changes [26].
As shown in Figure 1, a picture of the same scene from another perspective is the epitome of an irrelevant change. Returning to the previous highway monitoring example, this
can be of grave importance when aggregating data acquired

2095

