Ensemble Attention Distillation for Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning
Xuan Gong1,2 , Abhishek Sharma2 , Srikrishna Karanam2 , Ziyan Wu2 ,
Terrence Chen2 , David Doermann1 , Arun Innanje2
1
University at Buffalo, Buffalo NY 2 United Imaging Intelligence, Cambridge MA
{xuangong, doermann}@buffalo.edu

{first.last}@uii-ai.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of Federated Learning (FL)
where numerous decentralized computational nodes collaborate with each other to train a centralized machine learning model without explicitly sharing their local data samples. Such decentralized training naturally leads to issues
of imbalanced or differing data distributions among the local models and challenges in fusing them into a central
model. Existing FL methods deal with these issues by either
sharing local parameters or fusing models via online distillation. However, such a design leads to multiple rounds
of inter-node communication resulting in substantial bandwidth consumption, while also increasing the risk of data
leakage and consequent privacy issues. To address these
problems, we propose a new distillation-based FL framework that can preserve privacy by design, while also consuming substantially less network communication resources
when compared to the current methods. Our framework
engages in inter-node communication using only publicly
available and approved datasets, thereby giving explicit privacy control to the user. To distill knowledge among the
various local models, our framework involves a novel ensemble distillation algorithm that uses both final prediction
as well as model attention. This algorithm explicitly considers the diversity among various local nodes while also seeking consensus among them. This results in a comprehensive
technique to distill knowledge from various decentralized
nodes. We demonstrate the various aspects and the associated benefits of our FL framework through extensive experiments that produce state-of-the-art results on both classification and segmentation tasks on natural and medical
images.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning algorithms rely on massive annotated datasets for many practical applications [63, 21, 18].
In most cases, however, this data is physically located
across multiple disparate locations and regulated by dif-

Figure 1. A schematic illustration of the proposed privacypreserving federated learning framework compared to traditional
update or parameter-sharing based federated learning frameworks.
Traditional FL frameworks transfer gradients or parameter updates
produced with private data from local nodes to a server, risking privacy leakage. Our framework only transfers products of unlabeled
public data.

ferent entities. This results in the challenges of centralizing the physically dispersed data, with the primary concerns being privacy and network bandwidth issues. Consequently, federated learning (FL) [46, 54, 17] has emerged
as an important topic where a single centralized model is
trained in a distributed, decentralized fashion using model
fusion/distillation techniques.
While some similarities exist, there are many more
unique challenges that make FL substantially different from
distributed learning. First, privacy is a critical consideration, and maintaining it is of utmost importance, particularly for applications such as healthcare [44, 3]. Second,
one needs to be able to train centralized models efficiently
and not get bogged down by network communication issues. Communication bandwidth may be quite pronounced
depending on the task (e.g. image and video applications)
and quantity of data (e.g., model parameters) being shared

15076

