LSD-StructureNet: Modeling Levels of Structural Detail in 3D Part Hierarchies
Dominic Roberts1 Ara Danielyan2 Hang Chu2 Mani Golparvar-Fard1 David Forsyth1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Autodesk AI Lab
{djrbrts2,mgolpar,daf}@illinois.edu

{ara.danielyan,hang.chu}@autodesk.com

Abstract
Generative models for 3D shapes represented by hierarchies of parts can generate realistic and diverse sets of outputs. However, existing models suffer from the key practical limitation of modelling shapes holistically and thus cannot perform conditional sampling, i.e. they are not able to
generate variants on individual parts of generated shapes
without modifying the rest of the shape. This is limiting for
applications such as 3D CAD design that involve adjusting created shapes at multiple levels of detail. To address
this, we introduce LSD-StructureNet, an augmentation to
the StructureNet architecture that enables re-generation of
parts situated at arbitrary positions in the hierarchies of its
outputs. We achieve this by learning individual, probabilistic conditional decoders for each hierarchy depth. We evaluate LSD-StructureNet on the PartNet dataset, the largest
dataset of 3D shapes represented by hierarchies of parts.
Our results show that contrarily to existing methods, LSDStructureNet can perform conditional sampling without impacting inference speed or the realism and diversity of its
outputs.

Figure 1. We augment existing methods for generative modelling
of 3D shapes structured according to hierarchies so each structural
level of detail is modelled with its own generative process. This
enables us to generate variants on any sub-tree of the output hierarchy by simply re-sampling and decoding from a sub-sequence of
the learnt latent spaces and conditionally on the root node of the
sub-tree (e.g. corresponding to the base, seat or back of the chair),
without modifying the remainder of the output hierarchy.

1. Introduction
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) involves creating the
structure and geometry of 3D objects organized according
to hierarchies of parts. This process can be emulated by
sampling from generative models trained on datasets of hierarchically structured objects. While existing models are
able to produce novel, diverse and realistic outputs, they
only model hierarchies holistically, via single latent spaces
that govern the geometry and/or structure of the entirety of
their outputs. This makes them ill-suited for use in CAD, as
creating objects involves making decisions at multiple levels of detail. For instance, designing a chair consists of both
high-level design choices such as deciding whether a chair
should have arm-rests or not and low-level design choices
such as deciding on the geometry and positioning of the
arm-rests.
In this paper, we address this issue by introducing LSD-

StructureNet, an augmented version of the StructureNet
[13] architecture that can efficiently re-generate arbitrary
sub-hierarchies of hierarchically structured 3D objects. Our
solution consists of learning one latent space for each depth
of an output hierarchy. We term the structure and geometry of elements at the same depth LSD (Level of Structural
Detail), and generate these elements by sampling from the
corresponding latent space and decoding the sample conditionally on the element’s parent. We can thus regenerate
multiple varying sub-hierarchies of an object without modifying the remainder of the hierarchy by simply re-sampling
from the latent spaces at and beyond the appropriate hierarchy depths. In contrast, re-generating a sub-hierarchy
with existing generative models cannot be achieved without
re-generating the entire hierarchy from scratch and without
any guarantee the remainder of the re-generated structure

5836

