IICNet: A Generic Framework for Reversible Image Conversion
Ka Leong Cheng*, Yueqi Xie*, Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{klchengad, yxieay}@connect.ust.hk, cqf@ust.hk

High-Res.
Input

(a) Spatial-Temporal Video Embedding

High-Res.
Restored

Low-Res.
Embedding

Embed

Restore
Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 3 (ref.)

(b) Mononizing Binocular Images

Frame 4

(c) Embedding Dual-View Images

Restore

Embedding

Frame 5

Restore

Left (ref.)

Right

Embedding

(d) Composition and Decomposition

Zoomed-in

Restore

Restore
Embedding
Embedding

Normal (ref.)

(e) Hiding Images in an Image

Composed (ref.)

Background

Foreground

Revealed 1
(ref.)
Revealed 2-5

Figure 1: (a) Our IICNet can embed a high-resolution sequency into one low-resolution embedding image, which can be
used to restore the original content when necessary. (b-e) Our IICNet is the first approach that can generalize among various
reversible image conversion (RIC) tasks. We show the whole process of IICNet in (a) but only the restoration process in (b-e).

Abstract

works (INNs) to better preserve the information during conversion. We use a relation module and a channel squeeze
layer to improve the INN nonlinearity to extract cross-image
relations and the network flexibility, respectively. Experimental results demonstrate that IICNet outperforms the
specifically-designed methods on existing RIC tasks and
can generalize well to various newly-explored tasks. With
our generic IICNet, we no longer need to hand-engineer
task-specific embedding networks for rapidly occurring visual content. Our source codes are available at: https:
//github.com/felixcheng97/IICNet.

Reversible image conversion (RIC) aims to build a reversible transformation between specific visual content (e.g.,
short videos) and an embedding image, where the original
content can be restored from the embedding when necessary.
This work develops Invertible Image Conversion Net (IICNet) as a generic solution to various RIC tasks due to its
strong capacity and task-independent design. Unlike previous encoder-decoder based methods, IICNet maintains a
highly invertible structure based on invertible neural net* Joint first authors

1991

