The Animation Transformer: Visual Correspondence via Segment Matching
Evan Casey1 Vı́ctor Pérez1 Zhuoru Li2
1
Cadmium 2 Project HAT

Figure 1: (right) Our model learns visual correspondence at the level of line-enclosed segments in the line images. (left)
Using the learned segment correspondences, our model performs colorization by propagating colors from a reference image
across a sequence of grayscale line images.

Abstract
Visual correspondence is a fundamental building block
on the way to building assistive tools for hand-drawn animation. However, while a large body of work has focused on
learning visual correspondences at the pixel-level, few approaches have emerged to learn correspondence at the level
of line enclosures (segments) that naturally occur in handdrawn animation. Exploiting this structure in animation has
numerous benefits: it avoids the memory complexity of pixel
attention over high resolution images and enables the use of
real-world animation datasets that contain correspondence
information at the level of per-segment colors. To that end,
we propose the Animation Transformer (AnT) which uses a
Transformer-based architecture to learn the spatial and visual relationships between segments across a sequence of
images. By leveraging a forward match loss and a cycle
consistency loss our approach attains excellent results compared to state-of-the-art pixel approaches on challenging
datasets from real animation productions that lack groundtruth correspondence labels.

1. Introduction
Hand-drawn animation has been around for over 100
years and is one of the most popular mediums of digital entertainment today. Though the advent of drawing
tablets and digital software have made the process of cre-

ating hand-drawn animation substantially easier, it is still
a highly manual process that involves drawing and editing
each individual frame. Many of these tasks lie in the grey
area between repetitively algorithmic processes and artistic
choices, opening the door for new assistive tools that augment artists’ workflows.
Existing commercial tools have applied heuristic algorithms in this domain with limited results, usually requiring artists to work in vector format or use complex character rigging that removes the hand-drawn feel of the final
product. Deep learning approaches, on the other hand, can
act directly on top of raw pixel input but cannot scale easily to HD resolutions and fail to properly exploit the structure of hand-drawn animation drawings – specifically, the
smaller line enclosures (segments) which can be extracted
by a flood-fill or morphological algorithm.
In this paper, we focus on the task of learning visual
correspondence across sequences of raster animation line
drawings. This is a fundamental building block for building assistive animation tools for tasks such as coloring, inbetweening, and texturing which make up a large portion
of the tedious, non-creative work in the animation pipeline.
With correspondence information an animator can color or
texture a few frames in a sequence and propagate the colors through the rest of the images, saving hours of manual
labor. New in-between frames can be generated by morph-

11323

