Retrieve in Style: Unsupervised Facial Feature Transfer and Retrieval
Min Jin Chong1

Wen-Sheng Chu2

Abhishek Kumar2

David Forsyth1

mchong6@illinois.edu

wschu@google.com

abhishk@google.com

daf@illinois.edu

1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Source

Reference

Reference

(a) Eyes/nose/mouth

Output

(b) Hair transfer

Google Research

Source

Source

Output

2

Reference

Output

(c) Pose transfer

Query

Retrieved images

(d) Facial feature retrieval

Figure 1: We propose an unsupervised method to transfer local facial appearance from real reference images to a real source
image, e.g., (a) eyes, nose, and mouth. Compared to the state-of-the-art [10], our method enables photo-realistic transfers for
(b) hair and (c) pose, and can be naturally extended for (d) semantic retrieval according to different facial features.

Abstract
We present Retrieve in Style (RIS), an unsupervised
framework for facial feature transfer and retrieval on real
images. Recent work shows capabilities of transferring local facial features by capitalizing on the disentanglement
property of the StyleGAN latent space. RIS improves existing art on the following: 1) Introducing more effective
feature disentanglement to allow for challenging transfers
(i.e., hair, pose) that were not shown possible in SoTA
methods. 2) Eliminating the need for per-image hyperparameter tuning, and for computing a catalog over a
large batch of images. 3) Enabling fine-grained face retrieval using disentangled facial features (e.g., eyes). To
our best knowledge, this is the first work to retrieve face
images at this fine level. 4) Demonstrating robust, natural editing on real images. Our qualitative and quantitative analyses show RIS achieves both high-fidelity feature transfers and accurate fine-grained retrievals on real
images. We also discuss the responsible applications of

RIS. Our code is available at https://github.com/
mchong6/RetrieveInStyle.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [6, 18, 19] have shown capabilities to generate realistic high resolution images, particularly for faces.
Under unconditional settings, it is often hard to interpret
or control the outputs of GANs. Conditional GANs are
more naturally amenable for semantic editing. However,
the degree of meaningful control over the output images is
largely dependent on how detailed the annotations are. This
presents a challenge for fine-grained face editing as it is often difficult or impossible to annotate datasets with the degree of detail needed for fine-grained editing.
Existing works on face editing typically leverage additional information to guide conditional generation, such
as manual labels [3, 8, 21, 42, 44, 45], segmentation
masks [12, 22], attribute classifiers [14], rendering models
13887

