Physics-based Human Motion Estimation and Synthesis from Videos
Kevin Xie1,2 , Tingwu Wang1,2 , Umar Iqbal2
Yunrong Guo2 , Sanja Fidler1,2 , Florian Shkurti1
1
University of Toronto and Vector Institute, 2 Nvidia
kevincxie@cs.toronto.edu

Figure 1: We propose a framework to estimate physically correct motions from noisy pose estimations from video. This
allows us to train a motion synthesis network directly on video data, removing the need for mocap data used in prior work.

Abstract
Human motion synthesis is an important problem with
applications in graphics, gaming and simulation environments for robotics. Existing methods require accurate motion capture data for training, which is costly to obtain.
Instead, we propose a framework for training generative
models of physically plausible human motion directly from
monocular RGB videos, which are much more widely available. At the core of our method is a novel optimization
formulation that corrects imperfect image-based pose estimations by enforcing physics constraints and reasons about
contacts in a differentiable way. This optimization yields
corrected 3D poses and motions, as well as their corresponding contact forces. Results show that our physicallycorrected motions significantly outperform prior work on
pose estimation. We can then use these to train a generative model to synthesize future motion. We demonstrate
both qualitatively and quantitatively significantly improved
motion estimation, synthesis quality and physical plausibility achieved by our method on the large scale Human3.6m
dataset [12] as compared to prior kinematic and physicsbased methods. By enabling learning of motion synthesis
from video, our method paves the way for large-scale, realistic and diverse motion synthesis.

1. Introduction
Given videos of human motion, how can we infer the 3D
trajectory of the body’s structure and use it to generate new,
plausible movements that obey physics constraints? Ad-

dressing the intricacies of this question opens up an array of
possibilities for high-fidelity character animation and motion synthesis, informed by real-world motion. This would
benefit games, pedestrian simulation [55] in testing environments for self-driving cars, realistic long-horizon predictions for model-based control and reinforcement learning,
as well as physics-based visual tracking.
The vast majority of existing approaches in learningbased human motion synthesis [1, 59, 26, 21, 5]
rely on large-scale motion capture observations, such
as AMASS [32], which are typically costly and timeconsuming to acquire, logistically challenging, and most
often limited to recordings in indoor environments. These
factors form a bottleneck that hinders the collection of highquality human motion data, particularly in settings where
there is interaction among multiple people or interaction
with a number of stationary and moving objects in the
scene. The recorded motions typically also lack realism
and diversity as they are acquired by acting out a set of
pre-defined motions. In addition to this issue, many timeseries models trained on motion capture data make predictions that are oblivious to the physics constraints of motion
and contact, often leading to inaccurate, jerky, and implausible motion.
In this paper we entirely forego reliance on motion capture and aim to train physically plausible human motion
synthesis directly from monocular RGB videos. We propose a framework that refines noisy image-based pose estimates by enforcing physics constraints through contact invariant optimization [37, 36], including computation of con11532

