Meta-Aggregator: Learning to Aggregate for 1-bit Graph Neural Networks
Yongcheng Jing1 , Yiding Yang2 , Xinchao Wang3 , Mingli Song4 , Dacheng Tao5,1
1
The University of Sydney, Australia, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology,
3
National University of Singapore, 4 Zhejiang University, 5 JD Explore Academy, China
yjin9495@sydney.edu.au, yyang99@stevens.edu,
xinchao@nus.edu.sg, brooksong@zju.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

32-bit Feature

Abstract
In this paper, we study a novel meta aggregation scheme
towards binarizing graph neural networks (GNNs). We begin by developing a vanilla 1-bit GNN framework that binarizes both the GNN parameters and the graph features.
Despite the lightweight architecture, we observed that this
vanilla framework suffered from insufficient discriminative
power in distinguishing graph topologies, leading to a dramatic drop in performance. This discovery motivates us to
devise meta aggregators to improve the expressive power of
vanilla binarized GNNs, of which the aggregation schemes
can be adaptively changed in a learnable manner based on
the binarized features. Towards this end, we propose two
dedicated forms of meta neighborhood aggregators, an exclusive meta aggregator termed as Greedy Gumbel Neighborhood Aggregator (GNA), and a diffused meta aggregator termed as Adaptable Hybrid Neighborhood Aggregator
(ANA). GNA learns to exclusively pick one single optimal
aggregator from a pool of candidates, while ANA learns
a hybrid aggregation behavior to simultaneously retain the
benefits of several individual aggregators. Furthermore, the
proposed meta aggregators may readily serve as a generic
plugin module into existing full-precision GNNs. Experiments across various domains demonstrate that the proposed method yields results superior to the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently emerged
as the dominant paradigm for learning and analyzing nonEuclidean data, which contain rich node content information as well as topological relational information [7, 12, 53].
As such, a massive number of GNN architectures have been
developed [21, 46, 55, 60, 63]. The success of GNNs
also triggers a great surge of interest in applying elaborated graph networks to various tasks across many domains,
such as object detection [11, 8], pose estimation [59], point
cloud processing [22, 51, 36], and visual SLAM [40]. These

(a) −3.13 0.24 5.11
0.09 −0.15 0.35
32-bit Weight
1-bit Feature
−
+
+
Graph

(b)

+
−
+
1-bit Weight

Floating-Point
Operations

Pre-defined
Aggregation

1-bit
Operations

Meta
Aggregation

⋯

⋯

Figure 1. Illustrations of the computational workflow in (a) conventional full-precision GNNs and (b) the proposed 1-bit GNNs.
In particular, we devise two meta aggregators for the proposed
model, termed as Greedy Gumbel Aggregator (GNA) and Adaptable Hybrid Aggregator (ANA), that learn to perform adaptive aggregation in a graph-aware and layer-aware manner.

GNN-based applications, in general, rely on cumbersome
graph architectures to deliver gratifying results. For example, SuperGlue, a GNN-based feature matching approach,
requires 12M network parameters to achieve the state-ofthe-art performance [40].
In practice, however, such applications typically require
a compact and lightweight architecture for real-time interaction, especially in resource-constrained environments. In
the case of autonomous driving [30], for example, it is
critical to maintain fast and timely responses for GNNbased SLAM algorithms to handle complex traffic conditions, thereby leading to the urgent need of compressing
cumbersome GNN models. The work of [58], as the first
attempt, leverages knowledge distillation to learn a compact student GNN with fewer parameters. In spite of the
improved efficiency, this approach still relies on the expensive floating-point operations, let alone a well-performed
teacher model pre-trained in the first place.
In this paper, we strive to make one step further towards
ultra lightweight GNNs. Our goal is to train a customized 1bit GNN, as shown in Fig. 1, that allows for favorable memory efficiency and meanwhile enjoys competitive performance. We start with developing a naı̈ve GNN binarization
framework, achieved through converting 32-bit features and
parameters into 1-bit ones, followed by leveraging straight-

5301

