PyMAF: 3D Human Pose and Shape Regression with Pyramidal Mesh
Alignment Feedback Loop
Hongwen Zhang§‡* , Yating Tian†* , Xinchi Zhou♮ , Wanli Ouyang♮ , Yebin Liu‡ , Limin Wang† B , Zhenan Sun§ B
§

CRIPAC, NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
♮
The University of Sydney, Australia ‡ Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
†

{hongwen.zhang@cripac,znsun@nlpr}.ia.ac.cn

{yatingtian@smail.,lmwang@}nju.edu.cn

{xinchi.zhou1,wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au

liuyebin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Regression-based methods have recently shown promising results in reconstructing human meshes from monocular
images. By directly mapping raw pixels to model parameters, these methods can produce parametric models in a
feed-forward manner via neural networks. However, minor deviation in parameters may lead to noticeable misalignment between the estimated meshes and image evidences. To address this issue, we propose a Pyramidal
Mesh Alignment Feedback (PyMAF) loop to leverage a feature pyramid and rectify the predicted parameters explicitly
based on the mesh-image alignment status in our deep regressor. In PyMAF, given the currently predicted parameters, mesh-aligned evidences will be extracted from finerresolution features accordingly and fed back for parameter
rectification. To reduce noise and enhance the reliability of
these evidences, an auxiliary pixel-wise supervision is imposed on the feature encoder, which provides mesh-image
correspondence guidance for our network to preserve the
most related information in spatial features. The efficacy
of our approach is validated on several benchmarks, including Human3.6M, 3DPW, LSP, and COCO, where experimental results show that our approach consistently improves the mesh-image alignment of the reconstruction. The
project page with code and video results can be found at
https://hongwenzhang.github.io/pymaf.

1. Introduction
Aiming at the same goal of producing natural and wellaligned results, two different paradigms for human mesh
recovery have been investigated in the research community. Optimization-based methods [5, 29, 63] explicitly fit
*: Equal contribution. B: Corresponding authors.

Prediction
Θt

Prediction
Θt
Sampling

Prediction
Θt+1

Prediction
Θt+1

Global
Features

Sampling

Iterative Error Feedback

Mesh Alignment Feedback

Pyramidal Meshaligned Evidences

(a)

(b)

(c)

Spatial Features

Before PyMAF

After PyMAF

(d)

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. (a) The commonlyused iterative error feedback. (b) Our mesh alignment feedback. (c) Mesh-aligned evidences extracted from a feature
pyramid. (d) Our approach PyMAF improves the meshimage alignment of the estimated mesh.
the models to 2D evidences, which can typically produce
results with accurate mesh-image alignments but tend to
be slow and sensitive to the initialization. Alternatively,
regression-based ones [22, 42, 27, 26] suggest to directly
predict model parameters from images, which have shown
very promising results, and yet still suffer from the coarse
alignment between predicted meshes and image evidences.
For parametric models like SMPL [34], the joint poses
are represented as the relative rotations with respect to their
parent joints, which means that minor rotation errors accumulated along the kinematic chain can result in notice-

11446

