Patch Craft: Video Denoising by Deep Modeling and Patch Matching
Gregory Vaksman
CS Department - The Technion
Technion City, Haifa, Israel

Michael Elad
Google Research
Mountain-View, California

Peyman Milanfar
Google Research
Mountain-View, California

grishav@campus.technion.ac.il

melad@google.com

milanfar@google.com

Abstract
The non-local self-similarity property of natural images
has been exploited extensively for solving various image
processing problems. When it comes to video sequences,
harnessing this force is even more beneficial due to the temporal redundancy. In the context of image and video denoising, many classically-oriented algorithms employ selfsimilarity, splitting the data into overlapping patches, gathering groups of similar ones and processing these together
somehow. With the emergence of convolutional neural networks (CNN), the patch-based framework has been abandoned. Most CNN denoisers operate on the whole image,
leveraging non-local relations only implicitly by using a
large receptive field. This work proposes a novel approach
for leveraging self-similarity in the context of video denoising, while still relying on a regular convolutional architecture. We introduce a concept of patch-craft frames –
artificial frames that are similar to the real ones, built by
tiling matched patches. Our algorithm augments video sequences with patch-craft frames and feeds them to a CNN.
We demonstrate the substantial boost in denoising performance obtained with the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
In this paper we put our emphasis on the denoising task,
removing white additive Gaussian noise of known variance
from visual content, focusing on video sequences. Image
and video denoising is a rich and heavily studied topic, with
numerous classically oriented methods and ideas that span
decades of extensive research activity. The recent emergence of deep learning has brought a further boost to this
field, with better performing solutions. Our goal in this paper to propose a novel video denoising strategy that builds
on a synergy between the classics and deep neural networks.
A key feature we build upon is the evident spatio-temporal
self-similarity existing in video sequences.
Natural images are known to have a spatial self-similarity
property – local image components tend to repeat them-

selves inside the same picture [33]. Imagine an image split
into overlapping patches of small size (e.g. 7 × 7). Many
of these are likely to have several similar twins in different locations in the same image. This property has been
exploited extensively by classically oriented algorithms for
solving various image processing problems – denoising and
many other tasks. These algorithms usually split the processed image into fully overlapping patches and arrange
them into some structure according to their similarity. For
example, the well-known Non-Local-Means algorithm [3]
filters each patch by averaging it with similar ones. The
methods reported in [5, 13] group the similar patches and
denoise them jointly. Alternatively, the authors of [16, 25]
chain all the patches into a shortest-path, using this as a
regularization for solving various inverse problems. Other
methods go even farther and construct more complicated
structures, such as binary trees [17] or graphs [27], and use
these structures for solving image reconstruction tasks.
In recent years convolutional neural networks (CNN) entered the image restoration field and took the lead, showing
impressive results (e.g., [30, 31, 14, 21, 11, 10, 32]). With
this trend in place, the patch-based framework has been
nearly abandoned, despite its success and popularity in classical algorithms. Most CNN based schemes work globally,
operating on the whole image rather than splitting it into
patches, leveraging self-similarity only implicitly by using
a large receptive field. This trend has two origins: First,
the reconstructed patches tend to be inconsistent on their
overlaps. This undesirable and challenging phenomenon
is referred to in the literature as the local-global gap, handled typically by plain averaging [18, 2, 20, 34]. The second reason for abandoning the patch-based framework is
the difficulty of combining it with CNNs. The convolutional architecture has been shown to be a very successful
choice, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) results in many
image restoration tasks (e.g., [30, 14, 21, 11, 32]). However, such an architecture implies working on the whole image uniformly, and thus combining it with a patch-based
framework is not straightforward.
Several recent denoisers have combined the patch-based
12157

