Support-Set Based Cross-Supervision for Video Grounding
Xinpeng Ding1,2 , Nannan Wang1∗ , Shiwei Zhang2 ,* De Cheng1 , Xiaomeng Li3 ,
Ziyuan Huang 4 , Mingqian Tang2 , Xinbo Gao5
1
2
Xidian University, Alibaba Group, 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
4
National University of Singapore, 5 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
xpding.xidian@gmail.com, {nnwang,dcheng}@xidian.edu.cn, eexmli@ust.hk
{zhangjin.zsw, mingqian.tmq}@alibaba-inc.com, ziyuan.huang@u.nus.edu, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Current approaches for video grounding propose kinds
of complex architectures to capture the video-text relations,
and have achieved impressive improvements. However, it
is hard to learn the complicated multi-modal relations by
only architecture designing in fact. In this paper, we introduce a novel Support-set Based Cross-Supervision (Sscs)
module which can improve existing methods during training phase without extra inference cost. The proposed Sscs
module contains two main components, i.e., discriminative
contrastive objective and generative caption objective. The
contrastive objective aims to learn effective representations
by contrastive learning, while the caption objective can
train a powerful video encoder supervised by texts. Due to
the co-existence of some visual entities in both ground-truth
and background intervals, i.e. mutual exclusion, naively
contrastive learning is unsuitable to video grounding. We
address the problem by boosting the cross-supervision with
the support-set concept, which collects visual information
from the whole video and eliminates the mutual exclusion
of entities. Combined with the original objectives, Sscs can
enhance the abilities of multi-modal relation modeling for
existing approaches. We extensively evaluate Sscs on three
challenging datasets, and show that our method can improve current state-of-the-art methods by large margins, especially 6.35% in terms of R1@0.5 on Charades-STA.

1. Introduction
Video grounding aims to localize the target time intervals in an untrimmed video by a text query. As illustrated in
Fig. 1 (a), given a sentence ‘The person pours some water
into the glass.’ and a paired video, the target is to localize
the best matching segment, i.e., from 7.3s to 17.3s. There
are various methods [51, 49, 12] have been proposed for
* Nannan Wang and Shiwei Zhang are the corresponding authors.

GT

Query with GT: The person pours some water into the glass

Query w/o GT: Person start holding the glass

GT clip based

Baseline

Person/glass

Support-Set based

（a）
𝑉𝑖 𝑉𝑗

Encoder
FFN

𝐗 𝑖 𝐗𝑗

𝑔

c

𝑔

Clips

Sscs
Module

𝑔
Encoder
FFN

G𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔
l𝑜𝑠𝑠

Shared space

Text

𝐿𝑖 𝐿𝑗

Interaction

𝑔

𝐘𝑖 𝐘𝑗

（b）

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of the attention map of the similarity between video clips and text queries. The darker the color, the higher
the similarity. ‘GT’ indicates the ground-truth. (b) The proposed
Support-Set based Cross-Supervision (Sscs) Module. Sscs makes
the embedding of semantic-related clip-text pairs (dark circles and
triangles) to be close in the shared feature space.

this task, and they have made significant progresses. These
methods can reach an agreement that video-text relation
modeling is one of the crucial roles. An effective relation
should be that semantically related videos and texts must
have high responses, and vice versa.
To achieve this goal, existing methods focus on carefully
designing complex video-text interaction modules. For example, Zeng et al. [49] propose a pyramid neural network
to consider multi-scale information. Local-global strategy [30] and self-modal graph attention [26] are applied as
the interaction operations to learning the multi-modal relations. After that, they use the interacted features to perform

11573

