F-Drop&Match: GANs with a Dead Zone in the High-Frequency Domain
Shin’ya Yamaguchi
NTT

Sekitoshi Kanai
NTT

shinya.yamaguchi.mw@hco.ntt.co.jp

sekitoshi.kanai.fu@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

StyleGAN2-ADA

Ours
1.0

Generative adversarial networks built from deep convolutional neural networks (GANs) lack the ability to exactly
replicate the high-frequency components of natural images.
To alleviate this issue, we introduce two novel training techniques called frequency dropping (F-Drop) and frequency
matching (F-Match). The key idea of F-Drop is to filter
out unnecessary high-frequency components from the input images of the discriminators. This simple modification
prevents the discriminators from being confused by perturbations of the high-frequency components. In addition, FDrop makes the GANs focus on fitting in the low-frequency
domain, in which there are the dominant components of
natural images. F-Match minimizes the difference between
real and fake images in the frequency domain for generating
more realistic images. F-Match is implemented as a regularization term in the objective functions of the generators;
it penalizes the batch mean error in the frequency domain.
F-Match helps the generators to fit in the high-frequency
domain filtered out by F-Drop to the real image. We experimentally demonstrate that the combination of F-Drop and
F-Match improves the generative performance of GANs in
both the frequency and spatial domain on multiple image
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks built from deep convolutional networks (GANs) [10, 11, 20, 22] have attracted
much attention in the computer vision community and
have been utilized in various applications because they can
synthesize diverse images with high-fidelity to the target
datasets. The training of GANs is formulated as a competitive game played by two neural networks called a generator
and a discriminator; the generator is optimized to produce
fake images that can fool the discriminator, and the discriminator is optimized to distinguish the real images from the
fake images through min-max optimization. In theory, the
model replicates training data as the optimal result. However, recent studies have revealed that GANs fail to replicate

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Figure 1. Sensitivities of discriminators in the frequency domain.
The sensitivity is measured by single Fourier attack (SFA) [26],
which perturbs each frequency component of an image. As the
sensitivity, we plot the average differences between outputs of normal and attacked discriminators over 128 images in the AFHQ-Cat
dataset (512 × 512) on each pixel. The differences in the lowfrequency domain are located near the center of each figure, and
the differences in the high-frequency domains are at the edges.
Our method outperforms the baseline (StyleGAN2-ADA) in terms
of the robustness against the SFA on the high-frequency components.

data in the frequency domain [7, 8]. Durall et al. [7] and
Frank et al. [8] have reported that the frequency characteristics of the generated images in the high-frequency domain
are different from those of real images (we refer to this difference as the frequency gap). They have also shown that
the generated images can be easily detected as fakes with almost 100% accuracy by assessing the frequency gap. While
the previous studies mainly focus on the aliasing caused
by upsampling in CNNs as the cause of the frequency gap,
modifying the upsampling is insufficient for correcting the
flaws in the frequency domain [8]. In this study, we explore another cause of the frequency gaps to reduce them.
Since spatial and frequency domains are dual, reducing the
frequency gaps can improve the generative performances of
GANs in the spatial domain.
We hypothesize that the frequency gap is caused by the
sensitivity of the discriminators to the perturbations in the
high-frequency domain. In GANs for image generation,
discriminators are usually implemented as CNN-based binary classifiers. As shown in [26, 30], CNN-based classi-

6743

