Sketch2Mesh: Reconstructing and Editing 3D Shapes from Sketches
Benoit Guillard,* Edoardo Remelli,* Pierre Yvernay, Pascal Fua
CVLab, EPFL
name.surname@epfl.ch

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D shape from 2D sketches has long
been an open problem because the sketches only provide
very sparse and ambiguous information. In this paper, we
use an encoder/decoder architecture for the sketch to mesh
translation. When integrated into a user interface that provides camera parameters for the sketches, this enables us to
leverage its latent parametrization to represent and refine a
3D mesh so that its projections match the external contours
outlined in the sketch. We will show that this approach is
easy to deploy, robust to style changes, and effective. Furthermore, it can be used for shape refinement given only
single pen strokes.
We compare our approach to state-of-the-art methods on
sketches—both hand-drawn and synthesized—and demonstrate that we outperform them.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D shapes from hand-drawn sketches has
the potential to revolutionize the way designers, industrial
engineers, and artists interact with Computer Aided Design
(CAD) systems. Not only would it address the industrial
need to digitize vast amounts of legacy models, an insurmountable task, but it would allow practitioners to interact
with shapes by drawing in 2D, which is natural to them,
instead of having to sculpt 3D shapes produced by cumbersome 3D scanners.
Current deep learning approaches [26, 6, 45, 46] that
regress 3D point clouds and volumetric grids from 2D
sketches have shown promise despite being trained on synthetic data, but yield coarse 3D surface representations that
are cumbersome to edit. Furthermore, they require multiview sketches for effective reconstruction [6] or are restricted to a fixed set of views [26].
Meanwhile Single View Reconstruction (SVR) approaches have progressed rapidly thanks to the introduc* Equal contribution

(a) Reconstructing

(b) Editing

Figure 1. Sketch2Mesh. We propose a pipeline for reconstructing and editing 3D shapes from line drawings. We train an encoder/decoder architecture to regress surface meshes from synthetic sketches. Our network learns a compact representation of
3D shapes that is suitable for downstream optimization: (a) When
presented with sketches drawn in a style different from that of the
training ones– for example a real drawing – aligning the projected
external contours to the input sketch bridges the domain gap. (b)
The same formulation can be used to enable unexperienced users
to edit reconstructed shapes via simple 2D pen strokes. Best seen
in Supplemental video.

tion of new shape representations [11, 33, 30, 36] along
with novel architectures [43, 10, 13, 44] that exploit imageplane feature pooling to align reconstructions to input images. Hence, it can seem like a natural idea to also use them
for reconstruction from sketches. Unfortunately, as we will
show, the sparse nature of sketch images makes it difficult
for state-of-the-art SVR networks relying on local feature
pooling from the image plane to perform well. This difficulty is compounded by the fact that different people sketch
differently, which introduces a great deal of variability in
the training process and makes generalization problematic.
Furthermore, these architectures do not learn a compact representation of 3D shapes, which makes the learned models

13023

