ALADIN: All Layer Adaptive Instance Normalization
for Fine-grained Style Similarity
Dan Ruta1

Saeid Motiian2

Andrew Gilbert1

Baldo Faieta2

John Collomosse1,2

1

Zhe Lin2

Hailin Jin2

CVSSP, University of Surrey

Alex Filipkowski2
2

Adobe Research

Figure 1. ALADIN enables style-based visual search, by learning a fine-grained embedding for artistic style similarity. Left:
Three queries (blue) and their results i.e. nearest neighbours in the ALADIN search embedding. Each result set exhibits
fine-grained style coherence; a consistent style of sketching. Right (red box): a search in a prior style search embedding [6]
returns results with only coarse-grained style coherence; all are different variants of watercolor style.

Abstract
We present ALADIN (All Layer AdaIN); a novel architecture for searching images based on the similarity of their
artistic style. Representation learning is critical to visual
search, where distance in the learned search embedding reflects image similarity. Learning an embedding that discriminates fine-grained variations in style is hard, due to
the difficulty of defining and labelling style. ALADIN takes
a weakly supervised approach to learning a representation
for fine-grained style similarity of digital artworks, leveraging BAM-FG, a novel large-scale dataset of user generated
content groupings gathered from the web. ALADIN sets a
new state of the art accuracy for style-based visual search
over both coarse labelled style data (BAM) and BAM-FG;
a new 2.62 million image dataset of 310,000 fine-grained
style groupings also contributed by this work.

1. Introduction
Digital artwork spans a broad range of content depicted
in diverse visual styles. Learning a representation suitable for searching artwork based on visual style is an open
challenge, particularly when discriminating between subtle,
fine-grained [39, 37, 25] variations in style. This is due to
the difficulties of both (i) defining a suitable fine-grained
ontology to label styles and (ii) the expert annotation task.
Research to date has therefore focused upon coarse-grain

discrimination of a limited number of styles [17, 6].
Artistic style is the distinctive appearance of an artwork;
i.e. how an artist has depicted their subject matter [8]. Style
may be characterized, non-exhaustively, by visual attributes
such as the texture, strokes, media, shading, or layout of an
artwork; the challenge of identifying a complete list of attributes is long-standing and unsolved [7]. Our core contribution is to learn fine-grained artistic style similarity (Fig.
1) and do so via a weakly supervised approach that does
not rely upon explicit labelling of style or style attributes in
images. Our technical contributions are three-fold:
1. ALADIN Fine-grained Style Embedding. We propose ALADIN; a novel architecture to learn a search embedding for image style. ALADIN is an encoder-decoder
(E-D) network, that pools Adaptive Instance Normalization
(AdaIN) statistics across its style encoder layers to learn a
discriminative search embedding capable of both discriminating subtle fine-grained of style (e.g. variations in sketching style) as well as coarse-grained styles (e.g. sketch, watercolor, etc.). Image stylization networks [14, 10, 15] have
previously used AdaIN for style transfer, but these perform
poorly for measuring similarlity (c.f. subsec 5.2). For
the first time, ALADIN explicitly disentangles content and
style within an E-D network to show how AdaIN may be
harnessed for fine-grained style search.
2. Behance Artistic Media Fine-Grained (BAM-FG)
dataset. We contribute a new 2.62 million image dataset
of artwork within 310K fine-grained style groupings, gath-

11926

