Multi-scale Matching Networks for Semantic Correspondence
Dongyang Zhao1,2 , Ziyang Song1 , Zhenghao Ji1 , Gangming Zhao3 , Weifeng Ge ∗1,2 , and Yizhou Yu3
1

Nebula AI Group, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong





  

 





 

 

Figure 1. Dense correspondence prediction produced by state-of-the-art algorithms, including ANC-Net [26], SCOT [30], DHPF [35] and
our multi-scale matching network. With the predicted key point pairs, images are warped with thin-plate splines algorithm [3].

Abstract
Deep features have been proven powerful in building accurate dense semantic correspondences in various previous works. However, the multi-scale and pyramidal hierarchy of convolutional neural networks has not been well
studied to learn discriminative pixel-level features for semantic correspondence. In this paper, we propose a multiscale matching network that is sensitive to tiny semantic differences between neighboring pixels. We follow the
coarse-to-ﬁne matching strategy and build a top-down feature and matching enhancement scheme that is coupled
with the multi-scale hierarchy of deep convolutional neural networks. During feature enhancement, intra-scale enhancement fuses same-resolution feature maps from multiple layers together via local self-attention and cross-scale
enhancement hallucinates higher-resolution feature maps
along the top-down pathway. Besides, we learn complementary matching details at different scales thus the overall matching score is reﬁned by features of different semantic levels gradually. Our multi-scale matching network can be trained end-to-end easily with few additional
*Corresponding author: wfge@fudan.edu.cn

learnable parameters. Experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance on three popular benchmarks with high computational efﬁciency. The code has been released at https:
//github.com/wintersun661/MMNet.

1. Introduction
Finding pixel-wise correspondences between a pair of
semantically similar images has been a longstanding fundamental problem in computer vision. They have been proven
useful for many tasks including optical ﬂow [16, 45, 46], geometric matching [39, 32, 50], disparity estimation [36, 60],
object recognition [9, 54, 58], semantic segmentation [17,
24] and etc. Due to large intra-class variations in color,
scale, orientation, illumination and non-rigid deformations,
the problem of semantic correspondence remains very challenging. With the breakthrough in representation learning,
semantic correspondence has achieved impressive improvements in various scenarios.
Despite that deep features have improved matching accuracy signiﬁcantly, the multi-scale and hierarchical structures of deep convolutional neural networks have not been
explored thoroughly for semantic correspondence. It is

3354

