Camera Distortion-aware 3D Human Pose Estimation in Video
with Optimization-based Meta-Learning
Hanbyel Cho

Yooshin Cho
Jaemyung Yu
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea

Junmo Kim

{tlrl4658, choys95, jaemyung, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing 3D human pose estimation algorithms trained
on distortion-free datasets suffer performance drop when
applied to new scenarios with a specific camera distortion.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective model for
3D human pose estimation in video that can quickly adapt
to any distortion environment by utilizing MAML, a representative optimization-based meta-learning algorithm. We
consider a sequence of 2D keypoints in a particular distortion as a single task of MAML. However, due to the absence of a large-scale dataset in a distorted environment,
we propose an efficient method to generate synthetic distorted data from undistorted 2D keypoints. For the evaluation, we assume two practical testing situations depending
on whether a motion capture sensor is available or not. In
particular, we propose Inference Stage Optimization using
bone-length symmetry and consistency. Extensive evaluation shows that our proposed method successfully adapts to
various degrees of distortion in the testing phase and outperforms the existing state-of-the-art approaches. The proposed method is useful in practice because it does not require camera calibration and additional computations in a
testing set-up. Code is available at https://github.
com/hanbyel0105/CamDistHumanPose3D.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation is a task that localizes 3D
human body joint from an RGB input. As a fundamental task in computer vision, it is applied to many downstream applications, e.g., action recognition [35, 15, 3], human body reconstruction [33, 9], and human-computer interaction [6]. Particularly, 3D pose estimation for monocular video, which predicts 3D joint in inputs from a singlecamera, has attracted a lot of academic interest recently [17,
36, 21, 2, 4, 16] because of the simplicity of the hardware
setting in use and its advantage of being able to leverage
temporal information to resolve inherent depth ambiguity.
Recently, many state-of-the-art studies adopted two-

(a) Undistorted

(b) Distortion 1

(c) Distortion 2

Figure 1: 3D reconstruction for videos with varying degrees
of distortion using a network trained with a distortion-free
dataset. Top: input video frames with 2D pose overlay.
Bottom: 3D reconstruction. 3D reconstruction of (a) is predicted from undistorted video, and (b) and (c) are predicted
from video with different degrees of distortion, respectively.
Condition

MPJPE(↓)

P-MPJPE(↓)

PCKh@0.5(↑)

Undistorted
Distortion 1
Distortion 2

48.5
94.4(+45.9)
133.8(+85.3)

37.1
65.6(+28.5)
79.2(+42.1)

87.1
57.7(-29.4)
38.2(-48.9)

Table 1: Performance drop in environments with distortion
of a network trained with a distortion-free dataset. Distortion
1 and Distortion 2 are the cases of barrel distortion and pincushion distortion, with tangential distortion, respectively.
stage architecture to achieve higher performance. In this architecture, 2D keypoints are first extracted from the off-theshelf 2D keypoint detector [5, 8, 20, 28], and 3D keypoints
are inferred using the predicted 2D keypoints sequence as
input. These approaches simplify the 3D pose estimation
problem to solve depth ambiguity from 2D joint sequences.
This allows the study [32, 4, 36] of algorithms explicitly using information such as skeleton kinematics and motion of
human, which showed plausible results.

11169

