Estimating and Exploiting the Aleatoric Uncertainty
in Surface Normal Estimation
Gwangbin Bae
Ignas Budvytis
Roberto Cipolla
University of Cambridge
{gb585,ib255,rc10001}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Surface normal estimation from a single image is an
important task in 3D scene understanding. In this paper,
we address two limitations shared by the existing methods: the inability to estimate the aleatoric uncertainty and
lack of detail in the prediction. The proposed network estimates the per-pixel surface normal probability distribution. We introduce a new parameterization for the distribution, such that its negative log-likelihood is the angular loss
with learned attenuation. The expected value of the angular error is then used as a measure of the aleatoric uncertainty. We also present a novel decoder framework where
pixel-wise multi-layer perceptrons are trained on a subset
of pixels sampled based on the estimated uncertainty. The
proposed uncertainty-guided sampling prevents the bias in
training towards large planar surfaces and improves the
quality of prediction, especially near object boundaries and
on small structures. Experimental results show that the
proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art in ScanNet [4] and NYUv2 [33], and that the estimated uncertainty correlates well with the prediction error. Code is
available at https://github.com/baegwangbin/
surface_normal_uncertainty.

1. Introduction
The ability to estimate surface normal from a single
RGB image plays a crucial role in understanding the 3D
scene geometry. The estimated normal can be used to build
augmented reality (AR) applications [18] or to control autonomous robots [41]. In this work, we address two limitations shared by the state-of-the-art methods.
(1) Inability to estimate the aleatoric uncertainty. Stateof-the-art learning-based approaches [39, 7, 1, 31, 14, 18,
42, 24, 32, 6, 38] train deep networks by minimizing some
distance metric (e.g., L2 ) between the predicted normal and
the ground truth. However, the ground truth normal, calculated from a measured depth map, can be sensitive to the

Image

TiltedSN
60°

0°

Ours – Surface Normal

Ours – Uncertainty

Figure 1. Comparison between our method and TiltedSN [6]. The
proposed network estimates the surface normal probability distribution, from which the expected angular error can be inferred. The
prediction made by our method shows clearer object boundaries
and preserves a higher level of detail. This is due to the proposed
uncertainty-guided sampling which prevents the bias in training
towards large planar surfaces.

depth noise and to the algorithm used to compute the normal (see Fig. 2 for examples of inaccurate ground truth).
The network should be able to capture such aleatoric uncertainty, in order to be deployed in real-world applications.
(2) Lack of detail in the prediction. An indoor scene
generally consists of large planar surfaces (e.g., walls and
floors) and small objects with complex geometry. Therefore, if the training loss is applied to all pixels, the learning becomes biased to large surfaces, resulting in an oversmoothed output. Such bias can be solved by applying the
loss on a carefully selected subset of pixels. For example,
in [40], pair-wise ranking loss was applied to the pixels near
instance boundaries to improve the quality of monocular
depth estimation. However, such effort has not been made
for surface normal estimation.

13137

