StereOBJ-1M: Large-scale Stereo Image Dataset for 6D Object Pose Estimation
Xingyu Liu
Shun Iwase
Kris M. Kitani
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We present a large-scale stereo RGB image object pose
estimation dataset named the StereOBJ-1M dataset. The
dataset is designed to address challenging cases such as object transparency, translucency, and specular reflection, in
addition to the common challenges of occlusion, symmetry,
and variations in illumination and environments. In order
to collect data of sufficient scale for modern deep learning
models, we propose a novel method for efficiently annotating pose data in a multi-view fashion that allows data capturing in complex and flexible environments. Fully annotated with 6D object poses, our dataset contains over 396K
frames and over 1.5M annotations of 18 objects recorded in
183 scenes constructed in 11 different environments. The 18
objects include 8 symmetric objects, 7 transparent objects,
and 8 reflective objects. We benchmark two state-of-the-art
pose estimation frameworks on StereOBJ-1M as baselines
for future work. We also propose a novel object-level pose
optimization method for computing 6D pose from keypoint
predictions in multiple images.

1. Introduction
Effectively leveraging 3D cues from visual data to infer
the pose of an object is crucial for applications such as augmented reality (AR) and robotic manipulation. Compared
to objects with opaque and Lambertian surfaces, estimating
the pose of transparent and reflective objects is especially
challenging. To leverage depth information from sensors,
previous approaches have explored deep models that take
RGB-D maps as input [34, 35, 8, 28, 32]. Unfortunately,
as the experiments in [17, 37, 29, 12] have shown, existing
commercial depth-sensing methods, such as time-of-flight
(ToF) or projected light sensors, failed to capture the depths
of transparent or reflective surfaces. As a result, monocular
RGB-D maps cannot serve as a reliable input for object pose
estimation models in these challenging scenarios. Based on
this observation, we focus on using stereo RGB images as
our input modality, allowing for object pose estimation on
a wider range of objects, including transparent or highly reflective objects.

Figure 1: StereOBJ-1M dataset. Upper: CAD models of
the objects in the dataset. Lower: four data stereo image
pair samples with bounding box annotations.
A major challenge in modern object pose estimation is
that of acquiring a large-scale training dataset. To increase
data size for training large-scale neural networks, previous works have explored leveraging synthetically rendered
[33, 27, 10] or augmented images [35] with 3D mesh models. However, photorealistic rendering is still challenging
with only basic graphics rendering tools and limited expertise. Synthetic image datasets that are currently available
typically introduce a very large domain gap. This is especially true for transparent and reflective objects where variations in illumination and background scenes are crucial but
difficult to model.
To address the challenge of costly pose data acquisition,
and to enable further training and evaluation of modern object pose estimation models, we introduce a novel method
for capturing and labeling a large-scale dataset with high
efficiency and quality. Our method is based on multi-view
geometry to accurately localize fiducial markers, cameras,
and object keypoints in the scene. We use a hand-held
stereo camera to record video data. With the help of two
other static cameras mounted to tripods, the positions of a

10870

