Self-Supervised Visual Representations Learning by Contrastive Mask
Prediction
Yucheng Zhao*†1
Guangting Wang*†1
Chong Luo2
University of Science and Technology of China1
{lnc, flylight}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Wenjun Zeng2
Zheng-Jun Zha‡1
Microsoft Research Asia2

{cluo, wezeng}@microsoft.com

zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Advanced self-supervised visual representation learning
methods rely on the instance discrimination (ID) pretext
task. We point out that the ID task has an implicit semantic
consistency (SC) assumption, which may not hold in unconstrained datasets. In this paper, we propose a novel contrastive mask prediction (CMP) task for visual representation learning and design a mask contrast (MaskCo) framework to implement the idea. MaskCo contrasts region-level
features instead of view-level features, which makes it possible to identify the positive sample without any assumptions.
To solve the domain gap between masked and unmasked
features, we design a dedicated mask prediction head in
MaskCo. This module is shown to be the key to the success
of the CMP. We evaluated MaskCo on training datasets beyond ImageNet and compare its performance with MoCo V2
[4]. Results show that MaskCo achieves comparable performance with MoCo V2 using ImageNet training dataset,
but demonstrates a stronger performance across a range of
downstream tasks when COCO or Conceptual Captions are
used for training. MaskCo provides a promising alternative
to the ID-based methods for self-supervised learning in the
wild.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) of visual representation
has been a great success in recent years [11, 3, 10, 2, 1],
facilitating a wide range of downstream tasks, including
both visual tasks [13, 22, 12, 15, 29], and cross-modality
tasks [34, 31]. Recently, several contrastive learning based
SSL methods have demonstrated strong results on downstream image classification task [10], closing the performance gap between them and supervised learning methods.
As SSL methods do not require human annotation of training datasets, people are optimistic about the day when they
surpass supervised feature learning methods when virtually
*

Equal contribution.

†

Interns at MSRA.

‡

Corresponding author.

(a) An example image that satis- (b) An example image that does
fies the SC assumption.
not satisfy the SC assumption.

Figure 1. Illustration of semantic consistency (SC) assumption by
visualizing two cropped views of an image. (a) An image from the
ImageNet dataset satisfies the SC assumption, as the two cropped
views sample different parts of the same fish. (b) An image from
the COCO dataset does not satisfy the SC assumption, as the two
cropped views contain different objects belonging to different semantic categories.

unlimited data are made use of.
The state-of-the-art (SOTA) SSL methods for visual feature learning are mostly based on a pretext task called instance discrimination (ID) [28]. The idea is illustrated in
Figure 2. The intuition behind is that we can learn a good
feature representation by merely asking the feature to be
discriminative of individual instances. To realize this idea,
SOTA SSL methods [11, 3] optimize a contrastive loss function which enforces the model to output sufficiently close
representations for different views of a single image. Since
semantic information is a principal component in visual
features, an implicit assumption here is that a training image should have consistent semantic meaning across views,
which we call semantic consistency (SC) assumption.
The SC assumption is almost always satisfied in the ImageNet dataset [5], which exhibits an object-centric bias [21].
An example image from the ImageNet dataset and its two
cropped views are shown in Figure 1(a). The two crops
sample different parts of the same fish, so it is quite reasonable to let them have similar feature representations. However, if the ID-based SSL methods are to be extended to
datasets beyond ImageNet, they will need to handle images

10160

