Extreme Structure from Motion for Indoor Panoramas without Visual Overlaps
Mohammad Amin Shabani
Simon Fraser University

Weilian Song
Simon Fraser University

Makoto Odamaki
Ricoh Company, Ltd.

mshabani@sfu.ca

weilians@sfu.ca

makoto.odamaki@jp.ricoh.com

Hirochika Fujiki
Ricoh Company, Ltd.

Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University

hirochika.fujiki@jp.ricoh.com

furukawa@sfu.ca

Figure 1. The paper introduces an extreme Structure from Motion problem for indoor panoramas that have little to no visual overlaps. Our
approach learns to evaluate the realism of room/door/window arrangements in the top-down semantic space and solve for the camera poses.

Abstract
This paper proposes an extreme Structure from Motion
(SfM) algorithm for residential indoor panoramas that have
little to no visual overlaps. Only a single panorama is
present in a room for many cases, making the task infeasible
for existing SfM algorithms. Our idea is to learn to evaluate
the realism of room/door/window arrangements in the topdown semantic space. After using heuristics to enumerate
possible arrangements based on door detections, we evaluate their realism scores, pick the most realistic arrangement, and return the corresponding camera poses. We evaluate the proposed approach on a dataset of 1029 panorama
images with 286 houses. Our qualitative and quantitative evaluations show that an existing SfM approach completely fails for most of the houses. The proposed approach
achieves the mean positional error of less than 1.0 meter
for 47% of the houses and even 78% when considering the
top five reconstructions. We will share the code and data in
https://github.com/aminshabani/extreme-indoor-sfm.

1. Introduction
The emergence of consumer-grade panorama cameras is
making a revolution in the real-estate industry. With only a

few hundred dollars per unit, increasingly more number of
real-estate agents and home owners utilize the cameras to
snap panoramas, enabling house renters or buyers to browse
through full-360 interior views with the flick of a finger. In
particular, the THETA series from RICOH is collecting 100
million panoramas for real-estate applications.
This incredible market growth comes from massconsumer crowd sourcing, whereas the operation must be
simple. Given lengthy instructions on how to 1) use a camera, 2) set up a mono/tri-pod, and 3) use a smartphone app
to verify shootings, create annotations, and moderate contents, users are simply asked to take a picture in the middle of each room. Therefore, panorama images have little
to no visual overlaps, making the pose estimation infeasible for existing techniques. A robust panorama alignment
algorithm will enable a plethora of applications such as automated floorplan generation, accurate price prediction, and
verification of building-codes.
This paper proposes an extreme Structure from Motion
(SfM) problem for indoor panoramas with little to no visual
overlaps and provides a novel compelling solution to the
problem. Our key idea is to learn the arrangement of rooms,
doors, and windows, and solve for camera parameters that
maximize the realism of their arrangement. For example, a
rest-room and a shower-room are often adjacent and nearby

5703

