GLoRIA: A Multimodal Global-Local Representation Learning Framework for
Label-efficient Medical Image Recognition
Shih-Cheng Huang*

Liyue Shen*

Matthew P. Lungren

Serena Yeung

Stanford University

Abstract
In recent years, the growing utilization of medical imaging is placing an increasing burden on radiologists. Deep
learning provides a promising solution for automatic medical image analysis and clinical decision support. However,
large-scale manually labeled datasets required for training
deep neural networks are difficult and expensive to obtain
for medical images. The purpose of this work is to develop
label-efficient multimodal medical imaging representations
by leveraging radiology reports. We propose an attentionbased framework for learning global and local representations by contrasting image sub-regions and words in the
paired report. In addition, we propose methods to leverage the learned representations for various downstream
medical image recognition tasks with limited labels. Our
results demonstrate high-performance and label-efficiency
for image-text retrieval, classification (finetuning and zerosshot settings), and segmentation on different datasets.

1. Introduction
Advancements in medical imaging technologies have
revolutionized healthcare practices and improved patient
outcome. However, the growing number of imaging studies
in recent years places an ever-increasing burden on radiologists, impacting the quality and speed of clinical decision
making. While deep learning and computer vision provide
a promising solution for automating medical image analysis, annotating medical imaging datasets requires domain
expertise and is cost-prohibitive at scale. Therefore, the task
of building effective medical imaging models is hindered by
the lack of large-scale manually labeled datasets.
To address this problem, a natural solution is to leverage the corresponding medical reports that contain detailed
*Equal Contribution
Correspondence: mschuang@stanford.edu
Emails: {mschuang,liyues,mlungren,syyeung}@stanford.edu
Code: https://github.com/marshuang80/gloria

Figure 1: Our multimodal global-local representation learning
framework (GLoRIA) extracts features through the image and text
encoders, and learns global and localized representations by contrasting attention-weighted image sub-regions and words in the reports. The learned global-local representations are utilized to obtain label-efficient models for various downstream tasks including
image-text retrieval, classification (fine-tuning and zero-shot settings) and segmentation.

descriptions of the medical conditions observed by radiologists. Several recent works utilize these medical reports to provide supervision signals and learn multimodal
representations by maximising mutual information between
the global representations of the paired image and report
[13, 3, 41, 40]. However, pathology usually occupies only
small proportions of the medical image, making it difficult to effectively represent these subtle yet crucial visual
cues using global representations alone. This motivates a
need for learning localized features to capture fine-grained
semantics in the image in addition to global representations. While the idea of learning local representations has
been explored in several other contexts for natural images
[7, 27, 25, 4], including image-text retrieval and text-toimage generation, these works typically require pre-trained
object detection models to extract localized image features,
which are not readily available for medical images.
In this work, we focus on jointly learning global and
local representations for medical images using the cor-

3942

