T-Net: Effective Permutation-Equivariant Network for Two-View
Correspondence Learning
Zhen Zhong1 , Guobao Xiao1,∗ , Linxin Zheng1 , Yan Lu1 and Jiayi Ma2
1

College of Computer and Control Engineering, Minjiang University, China
2

Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, China

“ ”Structure

We develop a conceptually simple, flexible, and effective framework (named T-Net) for two-view correspondence
learning. Given a set of putative correspondences, we reject
outliers and regress the relative pose encoded by the essential matrix, by an end-to-end framework, which is consisted of two novel structures: “ − ” structure and “|” structure. “ − ” structure adopts an iterative strategy to learn
correspondence features. “|” structure integrates all the
features of the iterations and outputs the correspondence
weight. In addition, we introduce Permutation-Equivariant
Context Squeeze-and-Excitation module, an adapted version of SE module, to process sparse correspondences in
a permutation-equivariant way and capture both global
and channel-wise contextual information. Extensive experiments on outdoor and indoor scenes show that the proposed T-Net achieves state-of-the-art performance. On outdoor scenes (YFCC100M dataset), T-Net achieves an mAP
of 52.28%, a 34.22% precision increase from the bestpublished result (38.95%). On indoor scenes (SUN3D
dataset), T-Net (19.71%) obtains a 21.82% precision increase from the best-published result (16.18%). Source
code: https://github.com/x-gb/T-Net.

1. Introduction
Two-view feature matching is the core of many fundamental computer vision problems [15, 12], including Structure from Motion (SfM) [32, 25], visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping [17, 3] and image retrieval [29, 18].
However, establishing reliable correspondences is not a trivial task, due to a large number of false correspondences
(i.e. outliers), caused by the large viewpoint and lighting
changes, occlusion, blur, and lack of texture.
Recently, learning-based outlier rejection algorithms [16, 22, 26, 36] obtain superior matching performance due
to the powerful ability in the feature extraction and nonlin*Corresponding author

|

Abstract
Weights,
Residuals

Input

Weights,
Residuals

C

C

Features
Features

C

C

Features

“|”Structure

Concatenation

Sub-network
PCSE Module

Output

Figure 1. The proposed T-Net architecture.

ear expression. The most popular networks often adopt an
iterative network [22, 36], where the latter iteration inherits
the weights and residuals of the previous iteration, since it
can extremely boost the performance for outlier rejection.
Nevertheless, we find that a large amount of information in
the previous iteration is not fully exploited, and only the last
iteration result could be used as the predicted weight, which
may lead to sub-optimal performance.
To further improve the performance, we develop a novel
network (named T-Net), which integrates the features of all
the iterations to comprehensively utilize all the information
of iterations. For convenience understanding, we regard all
iterations as a whole network and each iteration as the feature learning of the sub-network in that network. As shown
in Fig. 1, T-Net consists of two structures: “ − ” structure
and “|” structure. “ − ” structure iteratively learns correspondence features in each sub-network, and “|” structure
integrates all the features of sub-networks and learns the integrated features.
Moreover, previous works [16, 22, 36] often rely on a
PointNet-like architecture with Context Normalization to
learn the features. Although that module is an effective
module to process unordered and sparse data (e.g., sparse
correspondences), that module is not very robust to outliers [26]. To address this issue, we introduce a novel
Permutation-Equivariant Context Squeeze-and-Excitation

1950

