NASOA: Towards Faster Task-oriented Online Fine-tuning with a Zoo of Models
Hang Xu
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Ning Kang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Gengwei Zhang
Sun Yat-sen University

Chuanlong Xie
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Xiaodan Liang∗
Sun Yat-sen University

Zhenguo Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Fine-tuning from pre-trained ImageNet models has been
a simple, effective, and popular approach for various computer vision tasks. The common practice of fine-tuning is
to adopt a default hyperparameter setting with a fixed pretrained model, while both of them are not optimized for specific tasks and time constraints. Moreover, in cloud computing or GPU clusters where the tasks arrive sequentially in
a stream, faster online fine-tuning is a more desired and realistic strategy for saving money, energy consumption, and
CO2 emission. In this paper, we propose a joint Neural Architecture Search and Online Adaption framework named
NASOA towards a faster task-oriented fine-tuning upon the
request of users. Specifically, NASOA first adopts an offline NAS to identify a group of training-efficient networks to
form a pretrained model zoo. We propose a novel joint block
and macro level search space to enable a flexible and efficient search. Then, by estimating fine-tuning performance
via an adaptive model by accumulating experience from the
past tasks, an online schedule generator is proposed to pick
up the most suitable model and generate a personalized
training regime with respect to each desired task in a oneshot fashion. The resulting model zoo1 is more training efficient than SOTA models, e.g. 6x faster than RegNetY-16GF,
and 1.7x faster than EfficientNetB3. Experiments on multiple datasets also show that NASOA achieves much better
fine-tuning results, i.e. improving around 2.1% accuracy
than the best performance in RegNet series under various
constraints and tasks; 40x faster compared to the BOHB.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning using pre-trained models becomes the defacto standard in the field of computer vision because of
∗ Corresponding Author: Xiaodan Liang xdliang328@gmail.com
1 The efficient training model zoo (ET-NAS) has been released at:
https://github.com/NAS-OA/NASOA

its impressive results on various downstream tasks such as
fine-grained image classification [36, 50], object detection
[19, 23, 54] and segmentation [8, 30]. [25, 19] verified that
fine-tuning pre-trained networks outperform training from
scratch. It can further help to avoid over-fitting [10] as
well as reduce training time significantly [19]. Due to those
merits, many cloud computing and AutoML pipelines provide fine-tuning services for an online stream of upcoming
users with new data, different tasks and time limits. In order to save the user’s time, money, energy consumption,
or even CO2 emission, an efficient online automated finetuning framework is practically useful and in great demand.
Thus, we propose to explore faster online fine-tuning.
The conventional practice of fine-tuning is to adopt a
set of predefined hyperparameters for training a predefined
model [27]. It has three drawbacks in the current online setting: 1) The design of the backbone model is not optimized
for the upcoming fine-tuning task and the selection of the
backbone model is not data-specific. 2) A default setting
of hyperparameters may not be optimal across tasks and the
training settings may not meet the time constraints provided
by users. 3) With the incoming tasks, the regular diagram is
not suitable for this online setting since it cannot memorize
and accumulate experience from the past fine-tuning tasks.
Thus, we propose to decouple our faster fine-tuning problem into two parts: finding efficient fine-tuning networks
and generating optimal fine-tuning schedules pertinent to
specific time constraints in an online learning fashion.
Recently, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) algorithms
demonstrate promising results on discovering top-accuracy
architectures, which surpass the performance of handcrafted networks and saves human’s efforts [58, 31, 32, 38,
49, 40, 48, 56] as well as studying NAS across tasks and
datasets [9, 13]. However, those NAS works usually focus on inference time/FLOPS optimization and their search
space is not flexible enough which cannot guarantee the optimality for fast fine-tuning. In contrast, we resort to devel-

5097

