Learning Signed Distance Field for Multi-view Surface Reconstruction
Jingyang Zhang
Yao Yao
Long Quan
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{jzhangbs,yyaoag,quan}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Recent works on implicit neural representations have
shown promising results for multi-view surface reconstruction. However, most approaches are limited to relatively
simple geometries and usually require clean object masks
for reconstructing complex and concave objects. In this
work, we introduce a novel neural surface reconstruction
framework that leverages the knowledge of stereo matching and feature consistency to optimize the implicit surface
representation. More specifically, we apply a signed distance field (SDF) and a surface light field to represent the
scene geometry and appearance respectively. The SDF is
directly supervised by geometry from stereo matching, and
is refined by optimizing the multi-view feature consistency
and the fidelity of rendered images. Our method is able to
improve the robustness of geometry estimation and support
reconstruction of complex scene topologies. Extensive experiments have been conducted on DTU, EPFL and Tanks
and Temples datasets. Compared to previous state-of-theart methods, our method achieves better mesh reconstruction in wide open scenes without masks as input.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from calibrated multi-view images is one of the key problems in 3D computer vision.
Traditionally, surface reconstruction can be divided into two
substeps: 1) depth maps and point clouds are reconstructed
from images via multi-view stereo (MVS) algorithms [2,
8, 41, 37, 44]; 2) a surface, usually represented as a triangular mesh, is extracted from dense points by maximizing
the conformity to points [20, 17, 26]. Optionally, a surface refinement step can be applied to recover geometry details through multi-view photo-consistency [34, 42, 5, 4, 7].
While this pipeline has been proven to be effective and robust in various scenarios, the reconstructed geometry may
be suboptimal due to the accumulated loss in representation conversions from images to points, then to mesh. For
example, errors introduced in point cloud reconstruction
would pass to the surface reconstruction, causing wrong

Mesh

Rendered Image

Figure 1. Our reconstructions on Family and Horse of the Tanks
and Temples dataset. The proposed MVSDF is able to reconstruct
correct mesh topologies with fine details for highly texture-less
and reflective surfaces.

mesh topology and difficult to be recovered. Although recent learning-based MVS [15, 13, 45, 32, 46] and mesh extraction [31, 28, 39, 33] methods have been proposed to
boost the reconstruction quality of each substep independently, it is still desirable to reconstruct the optimal surface
from images in an end-to-end manner.
Alternatively, recent works on neural representations
show that mesh surface can be directly constructed from
images through implicit representations and differentiable
rendering [30, 24, 36, 25, 49, 39, 29]. Surface geometry and
color information of the scene are usually represented as implicit functions, which are directly modeled by multi-layer
perceptrons (MLPs) in the network and optimized through
differentiable rendering. The triangle mesh can be extracted
from the implicit field via the Marching Cube algorithm
[26, 28]. Compared with classical meshing pipelines, these
methods are able to reconstruct the scene geometry in an
end-to-end manner and generate synthesized images at the

6525

