The Right to Talk:
An Audio-Visual Transformer Approach
Thanh-Dat Truong1,∗ , Chi Nhan Duong2,∗ , The De Vu3 , Hoang Anh Pham3
Bhiksha Raj4 , Ngan Le1 , Khoa Luu1
1
CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas 2 Concordia University
3
VinAI Research 4 Carnegie Mellon University
{tt032, thile, khoaluu}@uark.edu, dcnhan@ieee.org, {v.devt, v.anhph18}@vinai.io, bhiksha@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Turn-taking has played an essential role in structuring
the regulation of a conversation. The task of identifying the
main speaker (who is properly taking his/her turn of speaking) and the interrupters (who are interrupting or reacting to the main speaker’s utterances) remains a challenging task. Although some prior methods have partially addressed this task, there still remain some limitations. Firstly,
a direct association of Audio and Visual features may limit
the correlations to be extracted due to different modalities.
Secondly, the relationship across temporal segments helping to maintain the consistency of localization, separation
and conversation contexts is not effectively exploited. Finally, the interactions between speakers that usually contain the tracking and anticipatory decisions about transition
to a new speaker is usually ignored. Therefore, this work introduces a new Audio-Visual Transformer approach to the
problem of localization and highlighting the main speaker
in both audio and visual channels of a multi-speaker conversation video in the wild. The proposed method exploits different types of correlations presented in both visual and audio signals. The temporal audio-visual relationships across spatial-temporal space are anticipated and
optimized via the self-attention mechanism in a Transformer
structure. Moreover, a newly collected dataset is introduced
for the main speaker detection. To the best of our knowledge, it is one of the first studies that is able to automatically localize and highlight the main speaker in both visual
and audio channels in multi-speaker conversation videos.

1. Introduction
Although human beings possess capabilities of localizing and separating sounds from noisy environments, we still
have trouble following a conversation with noises, background voices, or interruptions from other speakers. Either
∗ denotes equal contributions

Figure 1. Given a multi-speaker video, our Audio-Visual Transformer can localize and highlight the main speaker in both visual
and audio channels. (Best viewed in color)

with blind audio separation [42, 53, 62, 60, 70] or visualaid audio separation [4, 6, 13, 31, 33, 35, 39, 48, 43, 57, 61,
65, 66] approaches, this outlier separation task still remains
a challenge in the wide conditions beyond the lab settings.
The problem becomes especially harder when dealing with
unknown numbers of speakers in an audio. Nachmani et
al. [54] make a comparison between methods and show
how hard it is to separate voices when the number of sound
sources increases. Existing methods achieve high performance with inputs from multiple microphones. Some methods assume a clean set of single source audio examples are
available for supervision [2, 28, 71, 72]. In practice, rather
than solely trying to separate voices of all speakers in a conversation and determining “who-spoke-when”, we tend to
give more attentions to the main speaker, i.e. who is on
his/her turn of speaking and his/her talk is the main channel of communication, and ignore the voices of remaining
speakers, i.e. interrupters or listener, or background noises.

1105

