GarmentNets: Category-Level Pose Estimation for Garments via
Canonical Space Shape Completion
Cheng Chi
Shuran Song
Columbia University
https://garmentnets.cs.columbia.edu
How to represent and estimate the full configuration of
different garments under severe self-occlusion?

Abstract
This paper tackles the task of category-level pose estimation for garments. With a near infinite degree of freedom, a garment’s full configuration (i.e., poses) is often
described by the per-vertex 3D locations of its entire 3D
surface. However, garments are also commonly subject to
extreme cases of self-occlusion, especially when folded or
crumpled, making it challenging to perceive their full 3D
surface. To address these challenges, we propose GarmentNets, where the key idea is to formulate the deformable
ob04812_Tshirt_3599
ject pose estimation problem as a shape completion task in
the canonical space. This canonical space is defined across
garments instances within a category, therefore, specifies
the shared category-level pose. By mapping the observed
partial surface to the canonical space and completing it
in this space, the output representation describes the garment’s full configuration using a complete 3D mesh with
the per-vertex canonical coordinate label. To properly handle the thin 3D structure presented on garments, we proposed a novel 3D shape representation using the generalized winding number field. Experiments demonstrate that
GarmentNets is able to generalize to unseen garment instances and achieve significantly better performance compared to alternative approaches. Code and data can be
found in https://garmentnets.cs.columbia.edu.

1. Introduction
Garments are one of the most common objects in our
life, yet they pose a set of unique properties that make them
incredibly difficult for machines to perceive and interact:
• Infinite degree of freedom (DoF): in contrast to rigid
objects whose pose can be fully specified as a lowdimensional vector, a piece of garment has near infinite
DoF, i.e., to fully specify its configuration (i.e., pose), we
need to describe positions of all 3D points on the garment surface. This issue is compounded when we consider category-level generalization, where there are infinite poses can be considered as the “canonical” for different garments instances.
• Severe self-occlusion: garments are often subject to extreme cases of self-occlusion, especially when folded or

Our Approach: GarmentNets

1. Pickup
& Observe

2. Map to
Canonical Pose

3. Completion
with WNF

4. Pose in
Task Space

Figure 1. Category-level Pose Estimation for Garments. The
key idea of GarmentNets is to formulate the garment pose estimation problem as a shape completion task in the canonical space.
This canonical space is defined across garment instances within a
category, therefore, specifies the shared category-level pose. The
output describes the garment’s full configuration using a complete
3D mesh with per-vertex canonical coordinate label.

crumpled. This property makes it particular challenging
and sometimes ambiguous to perceive their full configuration from partial visual observation.
• Thin structure: garments often consist of thin 3D geometric structures that are not water-tight. This unique
geometric property makes them ill-suited for typical 3D
shape representations designed for solid rigid objects
(e.g., occupancy grid or signed distance functions).
Due to these challenges, prior works on garments or
cloth perception often build on simplifying assumptions
such as full visibility [19], known instance-level mesh
[16, 24, 5], known physics or full state information in the
initial observation [24], where the problem is reduced to an
instance-level tracking task. As a result, these algorithms
cannot generalize to new garment instances that are not observed during training.
To address these challenges, we propose GarmentNets,
an end-to-end neural network that estimates the full config-

3324

