Improving Robustness of Facial Landmark Detection by Defending against
Adversarial Attacks
Congcong Zhu, Xiaoqiang Li*, Jide Li, Songmin Dai
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
{ congcongzhu, xqli, iavtvai, laodar }@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
Many recent developments in facial landmark detection
have been driven by stacking model parameters or augmenting annotations. However, three subsequent challenges
remain, including 1) an increase in computational overhead, 2) the risk of overfitting caused by increasing model
parameters, and 3) the burden of labor-intensive annotation by humans. We argue that exploring the weaknesses of
the detector so as to remedy them is a promising method
of robust facial landmark detection. To achieve this, we
propose a sample-adaptive adversarial training (SAAT) approach to interactively optimize an attacker and a detector, which improves facial landmark detection as a defense
against sample-adaptive black-box attacks. By leveraging
adversarial attacks, the proposed SAAT exploits adversarial perturbations beyond the handcrafted transformations
to improve the detector. Specifically, an attacker generates adversarial perturbations to reflect the weakness of
the detector. Then, the detector must improve its robustness to adversarial perturbations to defend against adversarial attacks. Moreover, a sample-adaptive weight is designed to balance the risks and benefits of augmenting adversarial examples to train the detector. We also introduce a masked face alignment dataset, Masked-300W, to
evaluate our method. Experiments show that our SAAT
performed comparably to existing state-of-the-art methods.
The dataset and model are publicly available at https:
//github.com/zhuccly/SAAT.

1. Introduction
Recently, facial landmark detection has been significantly improved by many works [36, 41, 42, 46, 51]. To
achieve new breakthroughs, researchers proposed multistage stacked networks [3, 12, 25, 10, 24, 28, 40]. Methods
such as [12, 25] use the two-stage architecture to regress
the facial shape in a coarse-to-fine manner. In [35, 28],
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Insight of the proposed SAAT. The attacker generates
adversarial perturbations to fool the detector, and the detector then
learns to defend against attacks.

the multi-stage stacked hourglass networks (SHG) are employed to predict the landmark heatmaps. In [19, 24, 40],
the additional sub-networks are equipped into the multistage stacked hourglass networks to improve the fitting performance further. Although the increasing number of model
parameters leads to breakthroughs, the redundant parameters may raise the risk of these models overfitting on the
training dataset, especially in small datasets that their data
distributions are usually unbalanced [4, 31]. Even the data
distribution of existing large-scale datasets may be unbalanced. For example, 300VW dataset [33] contains 95, 192
training frames. However, these frames are only collected
from 50 videos containing 44 different persons under 34
scenes. Because this dataset is large but not diverse, multistage stacked models can thoroughly memorize the data distribution of this large-scale dataset, leading to overfitting.
Increasing numbers of model parameters may further exacerbate this problem. Therefore, the degradation of the
generalization performance of facial landmark detectors in
unconstrained environments may not be addressed by simply increasing human annotations and model parameters.
In recent years, researchers have proposed various data
augmentation methods [8, 10, 12, 30, 49] to achieve robust
facial landmark detection. Wingloss [12] balances the data
distribution with handcrafted transformations (flipping, rotation, scaling etc.). However, these rigid transformations
are not adequate for those detectors facing various attacks
from the real world ( illumination, make-ups, skin color,

11751

