Generalizing Gaze Estimation with Outlier-guided Collaborative Adaptation
Yunfei Liu1, †
Ruicong Liu 1, †
Haofei Wang2
Feng Lu1, 2, *
1
State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{lyunfei, liuruicong, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

wanghf@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Eye gaze is an important indicator of human attention. It has been exploited in various applications, such
as human-robot interaction [1, 28, 30], virtual/augmented
reality games [2, 20, 32], intelligent cockpit systems [12],
medical analysis [4], gaze/head redirection [40], etc. With
the development of deep learning techniques, appearancebased gaze estimation attracts much attention recently. To
improve gaze estimation accuracy, many large-scale gaze
estimation datasets have been proposed [10, 19, 35, 37].
Due to the differences of subjects, background environ* Corresponding Author. † denotes equal contribution. This work was
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
under Grant 61972012 and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under
Project 2020TQ0156.

Gaze direction label

…

Deep neural networks have significantly improved
appearance-based gaze estimation accuracy. However, it
still suffers from unsatisfactory performance when generalizing the trained model to new domains, e.g., unseen environments or persons. In this paper, we propose a plug-andplay gaze adaptation framework (PnP-GA), which is an ensemble of networks that learn collaboratively with the guidance of outliers. Since our proposed framework does not require ground-truth labels in the target domain, the existing
gaze estimation networks can be directly plugged into PnPGA and generalize the algorithms to new domains. We test
PnP-GA on four gaze domain adaptation tasks, ETH-toMPII, ETH-to-EyeDiap, Gaze360-to-MPII, and Gaze360to-EyeDiap. The experimental results demonstrate that the
PnP-GA framework achieves considerable performance
improvements of 36.9%, 31.6%, 19.4%, and 11.8% over
the baseline system. The proposed framework also outperforms the state-of-the-art domain adaptation approaches
on gaze domain adaptation tasks. Code has been released at https://github.com/DreamtaleCore/
PnP-GA.

Source domain model
PnP Gaze
Adapter

Estimation
error

Adapter
Before
After

Collaborative
learning
Training image

Source domain

Test image
Outlier-guidance

Target domain

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed Plug-and-Play (PnP) adaption
framework for generalizing gaze estimation to a new domain.

ments, and illuminations between these datasets, the performance of gaze estimation models that are trained on a
single dataset usually dramatically degrades when testing
on a new dataset.
To tackle such a gap in gaze estimation, several
works have been proposed by utilizing adversarial training
(ADV) [26, 31], few-shot learning (FSL) [25, 33], or embedding with prediction consistency [14]. However, these
works mainly focus on the inter-person gap (i.e., personal
calibration) from the same dataset, where the environmental conditions are often very similar. When generalizing the
gaze estimation models to new datasets, the differences between the image capture devices and the environments cannot be neglected, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Consequently, a
gaze estimation model trained in the source domain cannot
achieve satisfactory performance by directly applying to the
target domain. In this paper, we focus on domain adaptation
between different datasets, which is more common in practical applications.
Unlike most of the existing works in gaze domain adaptation following supervised learning paradigm, this work
aims to generalize the gaze estimation in an unsupervised
manner. This is because we usually do not have access to
the ground-truth labels in a new domain. The task can be
viewed as an unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problem. Table 1 shows the differences between the existing
gaze domain adaptation approaches and UDA. While the

3835

