In-Place Scene Labelling and Understanding with Implicit Scene Representation
Shuaifeng Zhi, Tristan Laidlow, Stefan Leutenegger, Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Laboratory at Imperial College
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
{s.zhi17, t.laidlow15, s.leutenegger, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Semantic labelling is highly correlated with geometry
and radiance reconstruction, as scene entities with similar
shape and appearance are more likely to come from similar
classes. Recent implicit neural reconstruction techniques
are appealing as they do not require prior training data,
but the same fully self-supervised approach is not possible
for semantics because labels are human-defined properties.
We extend neural radiance fields (NeRF) to jointly encode semantics with appearance and geometry, so that complete and accurate 2D semantic labels can be achieved using a small amount of in-place annotations specific to the
scene. The intrinsic multi-view consistency and smoothness
of NeRF benefit semantics by enabling sparse labels to efficiently propagate. We show the benefit of this approach
when labels are either sparse or very noisy in room-scale
scenes. We demonstrate its advantageous properties in various interesting applications such as an efficient scene labelling tool, novel semantic view synthesis, label denoising,
super-resolution, label interpolation and multi-view semantic label fusion in visual semantic mapping systems.

1. Introduction
Enabling intelligent agents, such as indoor mobile
robots, to plan context-sensitive actions in their environment requires both a geometric and semantic understanding
of the scene. Machine learning methods have proven to be
valuable in both geometric and semantic prediction tasks,
but the performance of these methods suffers when the distribution of the training data does not match the scenes observed at test-time. Though the issue can be mitigated by
gathering costly annotated data or semi-supervised learning, it is not always feasible in open-set scenarios with various known and unknown classes. For this reason, it is advantageous to have methods that can self-supervise. In particular, there has been recent success in using scene-specific
methods (e.g. NeRF [16]) that represent the shape and radiance of a single scene with a neural network trained from
scratch using only images and associated camera poses.
Semantic scene understanding means attaching class la-

Label Propagation Label Synthesis

Fusion via Learning

Label Denoising

Super-Resolution

Label Interpolation

Figure 1: Neural radiance fields (NeRF) jointly encoding
appearance and geometry contain strong priors for segmentation and clustering. We build upon this to create a scenespecific 3D semantic representation, Semantic-NeRF, and
show that it can be efficiently learned with in-place supervision to perform various potential applications.
bels to a geometric model. The tasks of estimating the
geometry of a scene and predicting its semantic labels are
strongly related, as parts of a scene that have similar shape
are more likely to belong to the same semantic category than
those which differ greatly. This has been shown in work on
multi-task learning [9, 33], where networks that simultaneously predict both shape and semantics perform better than
when the tasks are tackled separately.
Unlike scene geometry, however, semantic classes are a
human-defined concept and it is not possible to semantically label a novel scene in a purely self-supervised manner. The best that could be achieved would be to cluster
self-similar structures of a scene into categories; but some
labelling would always be needed to associate these clusters
with human-defined semantic classes.
In this paper, we show how to design a scene-specific
network for joint geometric and semantic prediction and
train it on images from a single scene with only weak semantic supervision (and no geometric supervision). Because our single network must generate both geometry and

15838

