Fooling LiDAR Perception via Adversarial Trajectory Perturbation
Yiming Li†,∗
†
New York University

Congcong Wen†,§,∗ Felix Juefei-Xu‡ Chen Feng†
§
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences ‡ Alibaba Group
yimingli@nyu.edu, cfeng@nyu.edu

Abstract
LiDAR point clouds collected from a moving vehicle
are functions of its trajectories, because the sensor motion
needs to be compensated to avoid distortions. When autonomous vehicles are sending LiDAR point clouds to deep
networks for perception and planning, could the motion
compensation consequently become a wide-open backdoor
in those networks, due to both the adversarial vulnerability
of deep learning and GPS-based vehicle trajectory estimation that is susceptible to wireless spooﬁng? We demonstrate such possibilities for the ﬁrst time: instead of directly
attacking point cloud coordinates which requires tampering
with the raw LiDAR readings, only adversarial spooﬁng of
a self-driving car’s trajectory with small perturbations is
enough to make safety-critical objects undetectable or detected with incorrect positions. Moreover, polynomial trajectory perturbation is developed to achieve a temporallysmooth and highly-imperceptible attack. Extensive experiments on 3D object detection have shown that such attacks
not only lower the performance of the state-of-the-art detectors effectively, but also transfer to other detectors, raising a red ﬂag for the community. The code is available on
https://ai4ce.github.io/FLAT/.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving systems are generally equipped
with all kinds of sensors to perceive the complex environment [7]. Among the sensors, LiDAR has played a crucial
role due to its plentiful geometric information sampled by
incessantly spinning a set of laser emitters and receivers.
However, LiDAR scans are easily distorted by vehicle’s motion, i.e., the points in a full sweep are sampled at different
timestamps when vehicle is at different locations and orientations, as shown in Fig. 1. Imagine that a self-driving
car is on a highway at a speed of 30m/s, its LiDAR with a
20Hz scanning frequency would move 1.5 meters during a
* indicates equal contribution. The work is done during Congcong’s
visit at NYU. Chen Feng is the corresponding author.

Spoofer

GNSS Signal
࢚=10ms

࢚=20ms

࢚=30ms

࢚=100ms

Perception

…

Spoofed Results
Motion
Correction

Real Trajectory

Original Results

Undetected

Spoofed Trajectory

Undetected

Figure 1: Illustration of our trajectory-based attack and the motion correction process. The top right and bottom right ﬁgures are respectively original and distorted LiDAR sweep as well as the detection results. Green/red
boxes denote the ground truth/prediction. In this example, our method
(named as FLAT) makes the detector miss eight out of eleven vehicles.

full sweep, severely distorting the captured point cloud.
Such distortions are typically compensated by querying
the vehicle/LiDAR’s pose at any time from a continuous
vehicle ego-motion tracking module that fuses pose estimation from Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS, e.g.,
GPS, GLONASS, and BeiDou), Inertial Navigation System (INS), and SLAM-based localization using LiDAR or
cameras. Well-known LiDAR datasets like KITTI [7] and
nuScenes [2] have already corrected such motion distortions prior to the dataset release. Researchers then made
impressive progresses by processing those distortion-free
point clouds using deep neural networks (DNNs) for many
tasks, e.g., 3D object detection, semantic/instance segmentation, motion prediction, multiple object tracking.
However, using DNNs on LiDAR point clouds creates a potentially dangerous and less cognizant vulnerability in self-driving systems. First, the above perception
tasks are functions of LiDAR point clouds implemented
via DNNs. Second, the motion compensation makes LiDAR point clouds a function of the vehicle trajectories.
This functional composition leads to a simple but surprising fact that those perception tasks are now also functions of the trajectories. Thus, such a connection exposes
the well-known adversarial robustness issue of DNNs to

7898

