FACIAL: Synthesizing Dynamic Talking Face with Implicit Attribute Learning
Chenxu Zhang1 , Yifan Zhao2 , Yifei Huang3 , Ming Zeng4 , Saifeng Ni5
Madhukar Budagavi5 , Xiaohu Guo1
1
2
3
The University of Texas at Dallas
Beihang University
East China Normal University
4
5
Xiamen University
Samsung Research America
{chenxu.zhang, xguo}@utdallas.edu, zhaoyf@buaa.edu.cn, yifeihuang17@gmail.com
zengming@xmu.edu.cn, {saifeng.ni, m.budagavi}@samsung.com

Figure 1. Illustration of three typical frameworks. a) Explicit attribute generation: only considering mouth movements of talking head. b)
Explicit generation with implicit morphing: only generating explicit mouth movements and taking the implicit attributes from reference
videos. c) Our implicit attribute learning framework: generating explicit and implicit attributes from input audio in one unified framework.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a talking face generation
method that takes an audio signal as input and a short target video clip as reference, and synthesizes a photo-realistic
video of the target face with natural lip motions, head poses,
and eye blinks that are in-sync with the input audio signal. We note that the synthetic face attributes include not
only explicit ones such as lip motions that have high correlations with speech, but also implicit ones such as head
poses and eye blinks that have only weak correlation with
the input audio. To model such complicated relationships
among different face attributes with input audio, we propose
a FACe Implicit Attribute Learning Generative Adversarial
Network (FACIAL-GAN), which integrates the phoneticsaware, context-aware, and identity-aware information to
synthesize the 3D face animation with realistic motions of
lips, head poses, and eye blinks. Then, our Rendering-toVideo network takes the rendered face images and the attention map of eye blinks as input to generate the photo-

realistic output video frames. Experimental results and user
studies show our method can generate realistic talking face
videos with not only synchronized lip motions, but also natural head movements and eye blinks, with better qualities
than the results of state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing dynamic talking faces driven by input audio has become an important technique in computer vision,
computer graphics, and virtual reality. There have been
steady research progresses [4, 9, 10, 16, 26, 27, 31, 32, 40],
however, it is still very challenging to generate photorealistic talking faces that are indistinguishable from real
captured videos, which not only contain synchronized lip
motions, but also have personalized and natural head movements and eye blinks, etc.
The information contained in dynamic talking faces can
be roughly categorized into two different levels: 1) the at-

3867

