Learning Fast Sample Re-weighting Without Reward Data
Zizhao Zhang Tomas Pfister
Google Cloud AI
Typical methods

Abstract
Training sample re-weighting is an effective approach
for tackling data biases such as imbalanced and corrupted
labels. Recent methods develop learning-based algorithms
to learn sample re-weighting strategies jointly with model
training based on the frameworks of reinforcement learning
and meta learning. However, depending on additional
unbiased reward data is limiting their general applicability.
Furthermore, existing learning-based sample re-weighting
methods require nested optimizations of models and weighting parameters, which requires expensive second-order
computation. This paper addresses these two problems and
presents a novel learning-based fast sample re-weighting
(FSR) method that does not require additional reward data.
The method is based on two key ideas: learning from history
to build proxy reward data and feature sharing to reduce
the optimization cost. Our experiments show the proposed
method achieves competitive results compared to state of
the arts on label noise robustness and long-tailed recognition, and does so while achieving significantly improved
training efficiency. The source code is publicly available
at
https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/ieg.

1. Introduction
The performance of DNNs is dependent on the scale of
training datasets and the quality of labels. Data biases are
inevitable in practice, and in particular, noisy labels [51, 61]
or imbalanced classes [9, 25] can negatively influence the
model performance.
Sample re-weighting is an effective strategy that has been
explored to address problems caused by data biases [5]. The
underline principle of sample re-weighting is as simple as
upgrading the weights of good samples and downgrading the
weights of bad samples. Finding effective weights that can
optimize the model training with stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) is a dynamic process. The optimal weight of a sample can change over model training phases. Over-weighting
simple samples at later phases while under-weighting hard
samples at early phases can cause negative effects to the

Proposed methods

FC

FC

FC

FC

Leaner

Meta
learner

Leaner

Meta
learner
(shared)

Train data

Reward
data

Train data

Proxy
reward data

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method compared with typical
method for meta re-weighting. Our method is fast and does not
need reward data.

overall DNN accuracy [16]. In light of the advances in meta
learning and reinforcement learning (RL), there is a growing
interest in learning-to-learn based algorithms to optimize
sample weights jointly with model training [44, 47, 20, 57].
This problem well resembles the design of MAML [13]: incorporating meta optimization inside the supervised training
for sample weight optimization. The meta-objective of reweighting is usually defined as finding the optimal weight
per sample such that the trained model has the best objective
on an additional reward (a.k.a. validation) dataset. Moreover,
such reward dataset is required to be unbiased and to have
reasonable size. For example, in label noise robust training
problems, this unbiased reward dataset is expected to have
clean and class-balanced labels. This extra requirement has
been noted to be problematic, but how to remove such a
requirement remains unanswered [6].
From an optimization and efficiency perspective, although
this problem can be directly formulated as an RL problem,
the training computation is very expensive [15, 57]. Therefore, most existing work follows the more efficient meta
learning framework, assuming that the weight optimization
with respect to reward signals is a fully differentiable problem. Even so, similarly to MAML, the overall computation
still requires a second-order unroll of DNN computation
graphs, which increases the memory requirement and training time complexity significantly [44]. Such a limitation
hinders the applicability of the method to large-scale DNNs,
and emphasizes the importance of the need for further improving efficiency.
In this paper, we present a new fast sample re-weighting
(FSR) method to overcome the two aforementioned problems

725

