Semantic Aware Data Augmentation for Cell Nuclei Microscopical Images with
Artificial Neural Networks
Alireza Naghizadeh
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ

Hongye Xu
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ

Mohab Mohamed
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ

ar.naghizadeh@rutgers.edu

hx123@njms.rutgers.edu

mm2233@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

Dimitris N. Metaxas
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ

Dongfang Liu
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ

dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

dongfang.liu@rutgers.edu

Abstract
There exists many powerful architectures for object detection and semantic segmentation of both biomedical and
natural images. However, a difficulty arises in the ability
to create training datasets that are large and well-varied.
The importance of this subject is nested in the amount of
training data that artificial neural networks need to accurately identify and segment objects in images and the infeasibility of acquiring a sufficient dataset within the biomedical field. This paper introduces a new data augmentation
method that generates artificial cell nuclei microscopical
images along with their correct semantic segmentation labels. Data augmentation provides a step toward accessing
higher generalization capabilities of artificial neural networks. An initial set of segmentation objects is used with
Greedy AutoAugment to find the strongest performing augmentation policies. The found policies and the initial set
of segmentation objects are then used in the creation of the
final artificial images. When comparing the state-of-theart data augmentation methods with the proposed method,
the proposed method is shown to consistently outperform
current solutions in the generation of nuclei microscopical
images.

1. Introduction
The ability to image, extract and study cells is essential to various research areas within the medical field. Advancements in high-resolution fluorescent microscopy have
allowed medical professionals access to a more detailed visualization of cells and their interactions [17]. A prime example is within immunotherapy, where there exists great

importance to assess the efficacy of different treatments
for fatal illnesses such as cancer, or more contemporarily,
HIV/AIDS. Automated analysis of cellular images enables
medical researchers to avoid time-consuming quantification, vastly improving the speed at which it takes to quantify
reproducible mass data. The development of strong artificial neural networks for semantic segmentation and object
detection should naturally accompany the automation process.
However, the large datasets required to train models of
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) [21] greatly slows down
researchers due to the naturally lengthy process of acquiring ground truth images. Creating training data from microscopical images requires expertise and precision to separate
nuclei cells. If there is a method to reliably automate the
ground truth generation of nuclei cells, it can prevent common human errors. The requirement for experts in the field
can be reduced hugely. It saves time, saves resources, and
most importantly by generating a huge number of training
data, can help the learning of ANNs for related biological
fields in a way that is not possible with current technologies.
The solution that we are looking for is to create a methodology that not only generates artificially augmented images
but is also semantically aware of the objects within the images.
Unfortunately, current methods in machine learning
which deal with artificially augmenting training data such
as different forms of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [9] do not deal with generating semantically aware
labels for the objects. They also have other problems that
make them unsuitable for generating training data in medical fields. To properly train GAN networks, we usually need
a large set of training data, which is not always available in

3952

