Image Harmonization with Transformer
Zonghui Guo1 Dongsheng Guo1 Haiyong Zheng1, * Zhaorui Gu1 Bing Zheng1,2 Junyu Dong3
1
Underwater Vision Lab (http://ouc.ai), Ocean University of China
2
Sanya Oceanographic Institution, Ocean University of China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China

Abstract
Image harmonization, aiming to make composite images
look more realistic, is an important and challenging task.
The composite, synthesized by combining foreground from
one image with background from another image, inevitably
suffers from the issue of inharmonious appearance caused
by distinct imaging conditions, i.e., lights. Current solutions mainly adopt an encoder-decoder architecture with
convolutional neural network (CNN) to capture the context
of composite images, trying to understand what it looks like
in the surrounding background near the foreground. In this
work, we seek to solve image harmonization with Transformer, by leveraging its powerful ability of modeling longrange context dependencies, for adjusting foreground light
to make it compatible with background light while keeping structure and semantics unchanged. We present the design of our harmonization Transformer frameworks without and with disentanglement, as well as comprehensive experiments and ablation study, demonstrating the power of
Transformer and investigating the Transformer for vision.
Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on both
image harmonization and image inpainting/enhancement,
indicating its superiority. Our code and models are available at https://github.com/zhenglab/HarmonyTransformer.

1. Introduction
Combining regions of different photographs into a realistic composite is a fundamental problem in many vision and
graphics applications, such as image compositing, mosaicing, editing, and scene completion [33]. However, the composite, synthesized by combining the foreground from one
image with the background from another image, inevitably
suffers from the issue of inharmonious appearance between
foreground and background caused by distinct imaging con* Corresponding author: Haiyong Zheng (zhenghaiyong@ouc.edu.cn).

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant Nos. 61771440 and 41776113.

Figure 1. We create two composite images about pig that flies (top)
and tiger at party (bottom), also show harmonization comparison
between state-of-the-art DoveNet [9] and our method.

ditions (e.g., day and night, sunny and cloudy, outdoors and
indoors). Therefore, making the composite look more realistic, namely image harmonization, is an important and
challenging task [33, 35, 10, 9].
Image harmonization aims to adjust the foreground to
make it compatible with the background on the appearance. Essentially, the appearance of a natural image depends on various factors in the scene, such as illumination,
material, and shape [41, 1]. For a composite image, the
foreground and the background are considered semantically
harmonious, although sometimes it might be impractical or
unreasonable (e.g., pig that flies and tiger at party in Figure 1). Thus, the inharmony of composite images is mainly
caused by the distinct lights in the different scenes between
foreground and background while imaging, for instance, a
tiger captured in the wild under natural light as foreground
and the party captured in a hall under artificial lighting as
background, yielding inharmonious color appearance because an object appears coloured due to the way it interacts
with light. Hence, adjusting the foreground color to make
it compatible with the background color, while keeping the
structure and semantics unchanged, are crucial and essential
for harmonizing composite images.
Traditional harmonization methods have focused on better matching techniques to ensure consistent appearance between foreground and background, by transferring handcrafted statistics such as color and texture [39, 33]. Recently, deep harmonization models and large-scale datasets
have been developed to address this challenging task [35,

14870

