Multi-View Radar Semantic Segmentation
Arthur Ouaknine1,2
1

Alasdair Newson1
Patrick Pérez2
Julien Rebut2

Florence Tupin1

LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
2
valeo.ai, Paris, France
arthur.ouaknine@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Understanding the scene around the ego-vehicle is key
to assisted and autonomous driving. Nowadays, this is
mostly conducted using cameras and laser scanners, despite their reduced performance in adverse weather conditions. Automotive radars are low-cost active sensors that
measure properties of surrounding objects, including their
relative speed, and have the key advantage of not being impacted by rain, snow or fog. However, they are seldom used
for scene understanding due to the size and complexity of
radar raw data and the lack of annotated datasets. Fortunately, recent open-sourced datasets have opened up research on classification, object detection and semantic segmentation with raw radar signals using end-to-end trainable models. In this work, we propose several novel architectures, and their associated losses, which analyse multiple “views” of the range-angle-Doppler radar tensor to
segment it semantically. Experiments conducted on the recent CARRADA dataset demonstrate that our best model
outperforms alternative models, derived either from the semantic segmentation of natural images or from radar scene
understanding, while requiring significantly fewer parameters. Both our code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/valeoai/MVRSS.

1. Introduction
Radar sensors have been used in the automotive industry
for the last two decades, e.g., for automatic cruise control
or blind spot detection. They have become the sensor of
choice for applications requiring time to collision as they
provide, besides localization, the relative velocity thanks to
the Doppler information. However, these radars have been
hindered previously by their poor angular resolution.
The shift from driving assistance to automated driving
drastically increased the necessary level of performance,

Figure 1. Overview of our multi-view approach to semantic
segmentation of radar signal. At a given instant, radar signals
take the form of a range-angle-Doppler (RAD) tensor. Sequences
of q + 1 2D views of this data cube are formed and mapped to
a common latent space by the proposed multi-view architectures.
Two heads with distinct decoders produce a semantic segmentation of the range-angle (RA) and range-Doppler (RD) views respectively (‘background’ in black, ‘pedestrian’ in red and ‘cyclist’
in green in this example).

robustness and safety. Safety requires redundancy mechanisms at all levels of the system: From the sensing parts to
the final decision modules. Redundancy at the sensor level
can be reached using three sensors of different nature such
as camera, lidar and radar.
While deep learning has brought about major progress in
the automotive use of cameras and lidars – for object detection and segmentation in particular – it is only recently that
it has also embraced radar signals. In fact, even though the
radar technology has greatly improved, the signal processing pipeline has remained the same for years. This sensor
is now a source of interest since public datasets have been
released [3, 6, 15, 29, 33, 34, 45].
Radar scene understanding is in its infancy, but it provides key information to compensate for weaknesses of the
other sensors. The radar data presented as a range-angleDoppler (RAD) tensor contains signatures of the objects
surrounding the car with enough details to distinguish them
in the representation. Unlike object detection using bound-

15671

