Real-time Vanishing Point Detector Integrating Under-parameterized RANSAC
and Hough Transform
Jianping Wu, Liang Zhang, Ye Liu, Ke Chen
Suzhou Vocational University
Suzhou, China 215104
{wujp, zhangl, liuye, cke}@jssvc.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel approach that integrates underparameterized RANSAC (UPRANSAC) with Hough Transform to detect vanishing points (VPs) from un-calibrated
monocular images. In our algorithm, the UPRANSAC
chooses one hypothetical inlier in a sample set to find a
portion of the VP’s degrees of freedom, which is followed
by a highly reliable brute-force voting scheme (1-D Hough
Transform) to find the VP’s remaining degrees of freedom
along the extension line of the hypothetical inlier. Our approach is able to sequentially find a series of VPs by repeatedly removing inliers of any detected VPs from minimal
sample sets until the stop criterion is reached. Compared
to traditional RANSAC that selects 2 edges as a hypothetical inlier pair to fit a model of VP hypothesis and requires
hitting a pair of inliners, the UPRANSAC has a higher likelihood to hit one inliner and is more reliable in VP detection. Meanwhile, the tremendously scaled-down voting
space with the requirement of only 1 parameter for processing significantly increased the performance efficiency
of Hough Transform in our scheme. Testing results with
well-known benchmark datasets show that the detection accuracies of our approach were higher or on par with the
SOTA while running in deeply real-time zone.

1. Introduction
A set of parallel lines in 3-D space converge in image
plane to a common point called vanishing point (VP) which
is equivalent to the infinity of the set of parallel lines in
the original world frame. VP contains important information for perspective projection transformation. The coordinates of a VP fully determine the direction in 3-D space of
the set of parallel lines that converge to the VP. Moreover,
VPs formed by multiple sets of co-plane parallel lines are
collinear. The line that passes these VPs is called a vanishing line, which solely determines the plane containing the

very sets of parallel lines. A triplet of mutually orthogonal
VPs can be used to derive the internal as well as external
parameters of the camera [6]. A special and also important
type of vanishing line is the horizon line, a virtual line passing a set of horizontal vanishing points. In man-made environment, a type of vanishing point called zenith (or nadir
when the position is below the image center) is formed by
lines perpendicular to horizontal plane in the real world .
VP detection is of relevance in camera calibration
( [6], [7], [18], and [1]), 3-D reconstruction ( [25], [37]),
virtual reality [30], robot navigation [15] and scene tracking
[8] and vehicle automatic driving [16]. Consequently, VP
detection is an important research topic in computer vision.
The location of a VP in the image plane is determined by
relative positions and directions of a set of parallel lines displayed in the camera frame. The process of detecting a VP
is essentially to search in the image plane for the common
intersection of a set of VP’s inlier edges (line segments)
that are projections of the set of parallel line segments in
the original 3-D space. Due to background noise and image distortion, inlier edges of a valid VP generally do not
exactly converge to a single point and instead they intersect
with each other in a bounded region, whose centroid is regarded as a VP nonetheless.

1.1. Related Works
Having long been considered an important research topic
in computer vision, VP detection remains a challenging issue that is still far from being perfectly resolved.
Robust in noise environment, Hough Transform (HT)
[12] was among the first to be used in VP detection. The obstacle of applying HT to VP detection is that HT only works
in a bounded parameter space whereas the image plane is
unbounded. To overcome this obstacle, [28] divided the image plane into 3 bounded subspaces in which the cascaded
2-D Hough Transform was then conducted. For calibrated
images with known focal length, Barnard [3] mapped the
image plane into the Gaussian sphere and conducted HT in
the latter space. Later, improvements on [3] were proposed

3732

