Super-Resolving Cross-Domain Face Miniatures by
Peeking at One-Shot Exemplar
Peike Li1,2 ,* Xin Yu1 , Yi Yang1
1
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney
2
Baidu Research

1. Introduction
Face Super-Resolution (FSR), also known as face hallucination, aims at reconstructing high-resolution (HR) face
images from input low-resolution (LR) ones. FSR provides critical information for the downstream computer vision and machine learning tasks, such as face detection [1],
recognition [31] and photo-editing [22, 62, 27]. Thanks to
the advance of generative adversarial networks [15], FSR
has achieved great success in recent years [51, 53, 52, 48,
* Part of this work is done as an intern at Baidu Research

FSR

Training
Testing

(iii) Iteratively model adaptation

Unaligned LR
images
latent prior

HR images

One-shot
Examplar

Test LR

downsample

OSDA-FSR

latent prior

Previous Methods

Conventional face super-resolution methods usually assume testing low-resolution (LR) images lie in the same domain as the training ones. Due to different lighting conditions and imaging hardware, domain gaps between training and testing images inevitably occur in many real-world
scenarios. Neglecting those domain gaps would lead to inferior face super-resolution (FSR) performance. However,
how to transfer a trained FSR model to a target domain efficiently and effectively has not been investigated. To tackle
this problem, we develop a Domain-Aware Pyramid-based
Face Super-Resolution network, named DAP-FSR network.
Our DAP-FSR makes the first attempt to super-resolve LR
faces from a target domain by exploiting only a pair of highresolution (HR) and LR exemplar in the target domain. To
be specific, our DAP-FSR firstly employs its encoder to extract the multi-scale latent representations of the input LR
face. Considering only one target domain example is available, we propose to augment the target domain data by mixing the latent representations of the target domain face and
source domain ones, and then feed the mixed representations to the decoder of our DAP-FSR. The decoder will generate new face images resembling the target domain image
style. The generated HR faces in turn are used to optimize
our decoder to reduce the domain gap. By iteratively updating the latent representations and our decoder, our DAPFSR will be adapted to the target domain, thus achieving
authentic and high-quality upsampled HR faces. Extensive
experiments on three benchmarks validate the effectiveness
and superior performance of our DAP-FSR compared to the
state-of-the-art methods.

Developed on target domain

Trained on source domain

DAP-FSR (Ours)

Abstract

(i) Random sampling
and style mixing

(ii)Augmented
target-style
images

Figure 1. Conventional FSR methods achieve good performance
on the source dataset, but are prone to fail on the target dataset due
to the domain gap. Our proposed method effectively adapts the
model by leveraging only one-shot example.

54, 49, 56, 5, 8, 61].
Previous FSR methods usually presume training and
testing LR faces are captured from the same domain. When
testing LR faces resemble the training ones, previous works
achieve authentic upsampled HR faces. However, in practice, the domain gap between testing images and training
ones is inevitable due to different imaging equipment, illumination conditions, etc. As shown in the upper right of
Figure 1, previous state-of-the-art FSR methods fail to upsample HR authentically due to the large domain gap between the target domain (testing) and source domain (training). Considering FSR models would be deployed in different scenarios, it is very inefficient to re-train every deployed FSR model by collecting large-scale data from the
corresponding target domain. Therefore, only using a few
samples, ideally one example, to efficiently update an FSR
model is highly desirable.
In this paper, we aim to super-resolve LR faces that
exhibit an obvious domain gap by only leveraging oneshot exemplar from the target domain. We name this task
as One-Shot Domain Adaption for Face Super-Resolution
(OSDA-FSR). Different from conventional FSR methods [51, 8, 37], two challenges are naturally raised: (i) how
to design a FSR network architecture that is intrinsically
suitable for efficient adaptation; and (ii) how to explore one

4469

