MOTSynth: How Can Synthetic Data Help Pedestrian Detection and Tracking?
Matteo Fabbri1,3 Guillem Brasó2 Gianluca Maugeri1 Orcun Cetintas2 Riccardo Gasparini1,3
Aljos̆a Os̆ep2 Simone Calderara1 Laura Leal-Taixé2 Rita Cucchiara1
1
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy 2 Technical University of Munich, Germany
1

2

{firstname.lastname}@unimore.it
3
3

{firstname.lastname}@tum.de

GoatAI S.r.l.

{firstname.lastname}@goatai.it

Figure 1: We propose MOTSynth, a large and diverse dataset for pedestrian detection, re-identification and multi-object
tracking. Due to high diversity, we are able to obtain state-of-the art performance by training models solely on synthetic data.

Abstract

1. Introduction

standing research history, with applications ranging from
autonomous driving to visual surveillance. Since the advent of deep learning, the community has been investigating
how to effectively leverage neural networks [41, 45, 54, 69,
13, 65, 42, 25, 75, 6, 10, 78, 80, 38] to advance the field.
However, all these approaches are data-hungry, and data
collection and labeling are notoriously difficult and expensive. Moreover, dataset collection in public environments1
raises privacy concerns. In fact, European Union already
passed privacy-protecting laws such as General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR [2]) to protect the privacy of its
citizens that prohibit the acquisition of personal visual data
without authorization; ethical issues regarding privacy are
also critical in the US, where datasets for training person reidentification modules such as DukeMTMC [62] were taken
offline due to privacy concerns [33].
A possible solution for the aforementioned issues is to
employ virtual worlds. The community has already recognized the potential of synthetic data, successfully used for
benchmarking [44] or to compensate for the lack of training
data [3, 9]. To the best of our knowledge, so far, synthetic
data could fully replace recorded data only for low-level
tasks such as optical flow estimation [21]. For higher-level
tasks, such as object detection, tracking and segmentation,

Object detection and tracking in crowded real-world scenarios are challenging and difficult problems with long-

1 Crowded public scenes are especially difficult to record during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Deep learning-based methods for video pedestrian detection and tracking require large volumes of training data
to achieve good performance. However, data acquisition in
crowded public environments raises data privacy concerns
– we are not allowed to simply record and store data without the explicit consent of all participants. Furthermore,
the annotation of such data for computer vision applications usually requires a substantial amount of manual effort, especially in the video domain. Labeling instances of
pedestrians in highly crowded scenarios can be challenging
even for human annotators and may introduce errors in the
training data. In this paper, we study how we can advance
different aspects of multi-person tracking using solely synthetic data. To this end, we generate MOTSynth, a large,
highly diverse synthetic dataset for object detection and
tracking using a rendering game engine. Our experiments
show that MOTSynth can be used as a replacement for real
data on tasks such as pedestrian detection, re-identification,
segmentation, and tracking.

10849

