Counterfactual Attention Learning for
Fine-Grained Visual Categorization and Re-identification
Yongming Rao*, Guangyi Chen*, Jiwen Lu† , Jie Zhou
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{raoyongming95,guangyichen1994}@gmail.com; {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Attention mechanism has demonstrated great potential
in fine-grained visual recognition tasks. In this paper, we
present a counterfactual attention learning method to learn
more effective attention based on causal inference. Unlike
most existing methods that learn visual attention based on
conventional likelihood, we propose to learn the attention
with counterfactual causality, which provides a tool to measure the attention quality and a powerful supervisory signal
to guide the learning process. Specifically, we analyze the
effect of the learned visual attention on network prediction
through counterfactual intervention and maximize the effect
to encourage the network to learn more useful attention for
fine-grained image recognition. Empirically, we evaluate
our method on a wide range of fine-grained recognition tasks
where attention plays a crucial role, including fine-grained
image categorization, person re-identification, and vehicle
re-identification. The consistent improvement on all benchmarks demonstrates the effectiveness of our method. 1

1. Introduction
Attention is one of the most fundamental mechanism of
human visual perception. When facing a complex scene,
humans are able to select regions of interest, and employ attention to narrow down the search and speed up recognition.
Many efforts [57, 65, 50, 18, 45, 14, 1, 6, 36] have been made
to model the mechanism of human attention in computer
vision systems, which aim to facilitate high-performance
recognition by discovering discriminative regions and mitigating the negative effects brought by diverse visual appearance, cluttered backgrounds, occlusions, pose variations, etc.
Since subtle differences are key to distinguish subordinate
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/raoyongming/

CAL

Input Image

Baseline Attention

Our Attention

Input Image

Baseline Attention

Our Attention

Baird Sparrow

Vesper Sparrow

Baird Sparrow

Laysan Albatross

Cactus Wren

Laysan Albatross

Frigatebird

Long tailed Jaeger

Frigatebird

Rhinoceros Auklet

Least Auklet

Rhinoceros Auklet

Figure 1: Attention visualization on CUB. We respectively show
the original images, baseline attention maps, and attention maps
with counterfactual learning. In the left part, we observe that our
attention maps can better focus on the object. While comparisons
in the right part show that our models prefer to look at the whole
object instead of some parts. Best in color.

visual categories, visual attention mechanism has proven
to be especially effective in fine-grained visual recognition
tasks and become a core component in many state-of-the-art
methods [47, 31, 7, 65, 50, 19, 28, 25, 62, 44].
Despite the widespread use, the problem of how to learn
effective attention is still barely studied. Most existing methods learn the visual attention in a weakly-supervised manner,
i.e., the attention modules are simply supervised by the final loss function, without a powerful supervisory signal to
guide the training process. This likelihood based approach
only explicitly supervises the final prediction (e.g., class
probabilities for classification task) but ignores the causality
between the prediction and attention. Previous methods also
did not teach the machine how to distinguish between the
main clues and biased clues. For example, if most training
samples of one specific class appear with sky as background,
then the attention model may be very likely to treat the sky
as a discriminative region. Although these biased clues may
also be beneficial to the classification on the current datasets,
the attention model should only focus on the discriminative
patterns, i.e. the main clues. Besides, directly learning from
data may encourage the model to only focus on some cer-

1025

