Warp Consistency for Unsupervised Learning of Dense Correspondences
Prune Truong
Martin Danelljan
Fisher Yu
Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{prune.truong, martin.danelljan, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
The key challenge in learning dense correspondences
lies in the lack of ground-truth matches for real image pairs.
While photometric consistency losses provide unsupervised
alternatives, they struggle with large appearance changes,
which are ubiquitous in geometric and semantic matching
tasks. Moreover, methods relying on synthetic training pairs
often suffer from poor generalisation to real data.
We propose Warp Consistency, an unsupervised learning objective for dense correspondence regression. Our
objective is effective even in settings with large appearance and view-point changes. Given a pair of real images, we first construct an image triplet by applying a randomly sampled warp to one of the original images. We
derive and analyze all flow-consistency constraints arising between the triplet. From our observations and empirical results, we design a general unsupervised objective employing two of the derived constraints. We validate our warp consistency loss by training three recent
dense correspondence networks for the geometric and semantic matching tasks. Our approach sets a new stateof-the-art on several challenging benchmarks, including
MegaDepth, RobotCar and TSS. Code and models are at
github.com/PruneTruong/DenseMatching.

1. Introduction
Finding dense correspondences between images continues to be a fundamental vision problem, with many applications in video analysis [44], image registration [48, 42], image manipulation [7, 25], and style transfer [19, 24]. While
supervised deep learning methods have achieved impressive results, they are limited by the availability of groundtruth annotations. In fact, collecting dense ground-truth correspondence data of real scenes is extremely challenging
and costly, if not impossible. Current approaches therefore resort to artificially rendered datasets [4, 14, 45, 13],
sparsely computed matches [5, 55], or sparse manual annotations [3, 34, 10]. These strategies lack realism, accuracy,
or scalability. In contrast, there is a virtually endless source

i@yf.io

I’

Estimated flow

Known warp

Figure 1. We introduce the warp consistency graph of the image
triplet (I, I ′ , J). The image I ′ is constructed by warping I according to a randomly sampled flow W (black arrow). The blue arrows
represent predicted flows. Our unsupervised loss is derived from
the two constraints represented by the solid arrows, which predict
W by the composition I ′ → J → I and directly by I ′ → I.

of unlabelled image and video data, which calls for the design of effective unsupervised learning approaches.
Photometric objectives, relying on the brightness constancy assumption, have prevailed in the context of unsupervised optical flow [35, 57, 31]. However, in the more
general case of geometric matching, the images often stem
from radically different views, captured at different occasions, and under different conditions. This leads to large
appearance transformations between the frames, which significantly undermine the brightness constancy assumption.
It is further invalidated in the semantic matching task [25],
where the images depict different instances of the same object class. As a prominent alternative to photometric objectives, warp-supervision [50, 49, 36, 32], also known as
self-supervised learning [37, 40, 34], trains the network on
synthetically warped versions of an image. While benefiting from direct supervision, the lack of real image pairs often leads to poor generalization to real data.
We introduce Warp Consistency, an unsupervised learning objective for dense correspondence regression. Our loss

10346

