Towards Rotation Invariance in Object Detection
Agastya Kalra1 , Guy Stoppi1 , Bradley Brown1 , Rishav Agarwal1 and Achuta Kadambi1,2
1
Akasha Imaging, Palo Alto CA
2
UCLA, Los Angeles CA
{agastya, guy.stoppi, bradley.brown, rishav}@akasha.im, {achuta}@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Rotation augmentations generally improve a model’s invariance/equivariance to rotation - except in object detection. In object detection the shape is not known, therefore
rotation creates a label ambiguity. We show that the defacto method for bounding box label rotation, the Largest
Box Method, creates very large labels, leading to poor performance and in many cases worse performance than using no rotation at all. We propose a new method of rotation augmentation that can be implemented in a few lines
of code. First, we create a differentiable approximation of
label accuracy and show that axis-aligning the bounding
box around an ellipse is optimal. We then introduce Rotation Uncertainty (RU) Loss, allowing the model to adapt
to the uncertainty of the labels. On five different datasets
(including COCO, PascalVOC, and Transparent Object Bin
Picking), this approach improves the rotational invariance
of both one-stage and two-stage architectures when measured with AP, AP50, and AP75.

1. Introduction
It is desirable for object detectors to work when scenes
are rotated. But there is a problem: methods like Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) may be scale and translation invariant but CNNs are not rotation invariant [15].
To overcome this problem, the training dataset can be expanded to include data at new rotation angles. This is known
as rotation augmentation. In object detection, rotation augmentation can be abstracted as follows: given an original
bounding box and any desired angle of rotation, how should
we determine the axis-aligned rotated bounding box label?
If the shape of the object is known, this is quite simple: we
rotate the object shape and re-compute the bounding box.
However in the case of object detection, the shape is unknown.
The prevailing folk wisdom in the community is to select a label large enough to completely overlap the rotated box [45]. In studying this problem, we find that

Figure 1: A method is proposed to properly rotate a
bounding box for rotation augmentation. The previous solution of largest box is an overestimate of the perfect bounding box for a rotated scene. See table for how
choice of rotation augmentation affects object detection performance.

this method may hurt performance, and on COCO [22],
we find that every other prior we tried is better. Yet
somehow this “Largest Box” method is very prevalent
both in academia and in large scale object detection codebases [43, 4, 45, 37, 28, 26, 5, 7, 1, 17, 6, 40]. Indeed,
recent analysis has found that largest box is only robust to
about < 3◦ [16] of rotation.
In this paper, we propose an advance on the largest box
solution that achieves significantly better performance on
five object detection datasets; while retaining the simplicity
of a few lines of code implementation.

1.1. Contributions
In a nutshell, our solution has two aspects. First, we derive an elliptical shape prior from first principles to determine the rotated box label. We compare it to many other

3530

