AINet: Association Implantation for Superpixel Segmentation
Yaxiong Wang1,2 Yunchao Wei3‡ Xueming Qian1‡ Li Zhu1† Yi Yang4
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Baidu Research
3
Beijing Jiaotong University 4 Zhejiang University

Abstract
Recently, some approaches are proposed to harness deep
convolutional networks to facilitate superpixel segmentation. The common practice is to first evenly divide the image
into a pre-defined number of grids and then learn to associate each pixel with its surrounding grids. However, simply applying a series of convolution operations with limited receptive fields can only implicitly perceive the relations between the pixel and its surrounding grids. Consequently, existing methods often fail to provide an effective context when inferring the association map. To remedy this issue, we propose a novel Association Implantation
(AI) module to enable the network to explicitly capture
the relations between the pixel and its surrounding grids.
The proposed AI module directly implants the grid features to the surrounding of its corresponding central pixel,
and conducts convolution on the padded window to adaptively transfer knowledge between them. With such an implantation operation, the network could explicitly harvest
the pixel-grid level context, which is more in line with the
target of superpixel segmentation comparing to the pixelwise relation. Furthermore, to pursue better boundary precision, we design a boundary-perceiving loss to help the
network discriminate the pixels around boundaries in hidden feature level, which could benefit the subsequent inferring modules to accurately identify more boundary pixels.
Extensive experiments on BSDS500 and NYUv2 datasets
show that our method could achieve state-of-the-art performance. Code and pre-trained model are available at
https://github.com/wangyxxjtu/AINet-ICCV2021.

1. Introduction
Superpixels are image regions formed by grouping image pixels similar in color and other low-level properties,
which could be viewed as an over-segmentation of image.
The process of extracting superpixels is known as superpixel segmentation. Comparing to pixels, superpixel pro† Corresponding author
‡ Co-corresponding author

...
...

Target: Predict the association
between the pixel
and its 9 neighbor superpixels

FCN

..

Pixel
Pixel
Embedding
Superpixel
Embedding

FCN with AI Module

The last feature
map before
final prediction layer

SCN [54]

AINet

Figure 1: Different from the SCN [54] that implicitly learns
the association using the cascaded convolutions, our AINet
proposes to implant the corresponding grid features to the
surrounding of the pixel to explicitly perceive the relation
between each pixel and its neighbor grids.
vides a more effective representation for image data. With
such a compact representation, the computational efficiency
of vision algorithms could be improved [22, 12, 46]. Consequently, superpixel could benefit many vision tasks like
semantic segmentation [13, 53, 60, 58, 59], object detection [10, 40], optical flow estimation [15, 32, 44, 52], and
even adversarial attack [8]. In light of the fundamental importance of superpixels in computer vision, superpixel segmentation attracts much attention since it is first introduced
by Ren and Malik [38] in 2003.
The common practice for superpixel segmentation is to
first split the image into grid cells and then estimate the
membership of each pixel to its adjacent grids, by which
the grouping could be performed. Meanwhile, the membership estimation plays the key role in superpixel segmentation. Traditional approaches usually utilize the handcraft features and estimate the relevance of pixel to its
neighbor grids based on clustering or graph-based methods [1, 31, 25, 28, 2], however, these methods all suffer
from the weakness of the hand-craft features and are difficult to integrate into other trainable deep frameworks. Inspired by the success of deep neural networks in many
computer version problems, researchers recently attempts

7078

