Unlimited Neighborhood Interaction for Heterogeneous Trajectory Prediction
Fang Zheng1 Le Wang2 * Sanping Zhou2 Wei Tang3 Zhenxing Niu4 Nanning Zheng2 Gang Hua5
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
University of Illinois at Chicago
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
5
Wormpex AI Research

Abstract
Understanding complex social interactions among agents
is a key challenge for trajectory prediction. Most existing
methods consider the interactions between pairwise traffic
agents or in a local area, while the nature of interactions
is unlimited, involving an uncertain number of agents and
non-local areas simultaneously. Besides, they treat heterogeneous traffic agents the same, namely those among agents of
different categories, while neglecting people’s diverse reaction patterns toward traffic agents in different categories. To
address these problems, we propose a simple yet effective Unlimited Neighborhood Interaction Network (UNIN), which
predicts trajectories of heterogeneous agents in multiple categories. Specifically, the proposed unlimited neighborhood
interaction module generates the fused-features of all agents
involved in an interaction simultaneously, which is adaptive to any number of agents and any range of interaction
area. Meanwhile, a hierarchical graph attention module
is proposed to obtain category-to-category interaction and
agent-to-agent interaction. Finally, parameters of a Gaussian Mixture Model are estimated for generating the future
trajectories. Extensive experimental results on benchmark
datasets demonstrate a significant performance improvement
of our method over the state-of-the-art methods.

(1) Category
Attention
A. Hierarchical
Attention
(2) Agent
Attention
Category Node

Category Interaction
Agent Node
Agent Interaction

B. Unlimited
Neighborhood

Figure 1. Hierarchical Graph Attention & Unlimited Neighborhood Interaction. Different marked shapes are used to distinguish
the agent and category. (A) Hierarchical Attention. The agents
marked by the same color belong to the same category. (1) Category Attention. Every category interacts with each other and itself.
Attention of one category to all categories (including the attention
to itself) is transferred to all agents of the category. (2) Agent Attention. We compute one’s attention to the rest of the agents in
the whole scenario, and the attention is directed. (B) Unlimited
Neighborhood. We consider the interaction as among a collective,
rather than between two agents or in a small area. The behavior
of any agent may influence a group of agents around the whole
scenario.

1. Introduction
The challenges hampering prediction accuracy largely
stem from the complex interactions among agents [1, 12, 57].
Recent advances in this regard [1, 3, 23, 26, 27] mainly fall
into two types: Graph-based methods [13, 32, 56] build a spatial graph at each time step and aggregate the features from
adjacent nodes; RNN-based methods [4, 7, 57] model each
agent’s trajectory with Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
and pool hidden states within a surrounding area.
∗ Corresponding author.

However, these methods suffer from limitations. Graphbased methods [32] only exploit pairwise relation between the nodes, while other nodes are mixed and relayed.
GCN with many layers suffers from over-smoothing problem [9, 19]. In contrast, the interaction in real-world traffic
is much more complex than previously assumed, such as
multilateral relations (relation among three or more agents).
Namely, these methods are limited by inflexible numbers of
interaction agents.

13168

