Real-time Instance Segmentation with Discriminative Orientation Maps
Wentao Du

Zhiyu Xiang* Shuya Chen

Chengyu Qiao

Yiman Chen

Tingming Bai

College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Although instance segmentation has made considerable
advancement over recent years, it’s still a challenge to design high accuracy algorithms with real-time performance.
In this paper, we propose a real-time instance segmentation framework termed OrienMask. Upon the one-stage
object detector YOLOv3, a mask head is added to predict
some discriminative orientation maps, which are explicitly
defined as spatial offset vectors for both foreground and
background pixels. Thanks to the discrimination ability
of orientation maps, masks can be recovered without the
need for extra foreground segmentation. All instances that
match with the same anchor size share a common orientation map. This special sharing strategy reduces the amortized memory utilization for mask predictions but without
loss of mask granularity. Given the surviving box predictions after NMS, instance masks can be concurrently constructed from the corresponding orientation maps with low
complexity. Owing to the concise design for mask representation and its effective integration with the anchorbased object detector, our method is qualified under realtime conditions while maintaining competitive accuracy.
Experiments on COCO benchmark show that OrienMask
achieves 34.8 mask AP at the speed of 42.7 fps evaluated with a single RTX 2080 Ti. The code is available at
https://github.com/duwt/OrienMask.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation aims at pixel-wise predictions for
every individual object. It integrates instance-level object
detection [28, 26, 19, 16] and pixel-level semantic segmentation [21, 6, 7], formulating a more fine-grained visual perception task. Currently there are two dominating types of
solutions, namely detection-based and segmentation-based
methods. The former extends an object detector with additional foreground dense predictions while the latter deploys
specific per-pixel attributes or embeddings to separate instances of the same category in a bottom-up way.
* Corresponding author. Email: xiangzy@zju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Orientation-based Mask Construction. Those arrowed
lines denote densely predicted orientation vectors. Each mask is
constructed by gathering all pixels pointing to the central region of
the instance in the matched orientation map (white or black).

Both paradigms have apparent drawbacks. Conventional
detection-based methods like Mask R-CNN [9] rely on the
features pooling operation to project all regions of interest
(RoIs) into a fixed size. Since the subsequent mask head
should be applied to abundant feature maps of every region
proposal, the speed is largely constrained especially when
objects densely appear. Moreover, the constant mask resolution brings in unnecessary computation for small objects
and loses valuable details for large targets. On the contrary,
segmentation-based methods [20, 15] retain the fine-grained
appearance and geometry in a pixel-to-pixel manner. They
can acquire satisfactory results at elementary scenarios but
often fall behind detection-based approaches in accuracy.
When the scale of objects varies and the number of categories increases, the generalization of pixel-level clustering
adopted in segmentation-based methods is still in doubt.
For the requirement of real-time inference, YOLACT [2]
is proposed along with a special mask construction scheme,
which linearly combines shared non-local prototypes with
instance-wise coefficients. It discards the RoI pooling operation that commonly adopted in earlier detection-based
methods and directly assemblies masks from fine-grained
feature maps. Following this paradigm, an improved approach named BlendMask [4] is put forward. It replaces
the 1D instance-specific coefficients with a set of attention
maps, which supply additional spatial-adaptive information

7314

