A Closer Look at Rotation-invariant Deep Point Cloud Analysis
Feiran Li1 * Kent Fujiwara2
1

Fumio Okura1
2

Osaka University

Abstract
We consider the deep point cloud analysis tasks where the
inputs of the networks are randomly rotated. Recent progress
in rotation-invariant point cloud analysis is mainly driven
by converting point clouds into their respective canonical
poses, and principal component analysis (PCA) is a practical tool to achieve this. Due to the imperfect alignment
of PCA, most of the current works are devoted to developing powerful network structures and features to overcome
this deficiency, without thoroughly analyzing the PCA-based
canonical poses themselves. In this work, we present a detailed study w.r.t. the PCA-based canonical poses of point
clouds. Our investigation reveals that the ambiguity problem
associated with the PCA-based canonical poses is handled
insufficiently in some recent works. To this end, we develop
a simple pose selector module for disambiguation, which
presents noticeable enhancement (i.e., 5.3% classification
accuracy) over state-of-the-art approaches on the challenging real-world dataset.1

1. Introduction
Deep learning is thriving in point cloud analysis owing
to its excellent performance in various tasks. As a primitive representation of 3D data that can be directly obtained
from sensors, point clouds are widely employed as the direct
inputs of modern neural networks [17, 30, 31].
However, there exists a fundamental problem when point
clouds are used in high-level applications, such as classification, retrieval, and segmentation. In such applications, we
expect the networks to present consistent inferences w.r.t.
varying affine transformations on the point clouds. While
the effects of scaling and translation can be eliminated effectively by normalization and centralization [17], achieving
rotational invariance remains an open problem.
Various methods have been proposed to tackle this issue. There are attempts to learn to align shapes in an op-

Yasuyuki Matsushita1

LINE Corporation

timal pose [7, 9], or robustify the networks via equivariant properties [6, 20, 21]. However, these methods are not
strictly rotation-invariant and require the rotational space
to be densely sampled for data augmentation. Some works
also attempt to handcraft rotation-invariant geometric features [4, 24, 36], although they inevitably suffer from information loss compared to directly using the Cartesian coordinates of the point clouds.
Some recent works propose to use intrinsically determined canonical poses to avoid information loss. As a practical tool, PCA enables us to intrinsically determine 3 orthogonal bases (i.e., the principal axes) of a given point cloud and
align them to the world Cartesian coordinate. Despite the
effectiveness of PCA-based canonical poses, we observe that
some recent works are devoted to developing more powerful
networks without clearly studying the canonical poses themselves [10, 34, 35, 37]. Consequently, these works have not
explicitly tackled the ambiguity problem of the PCA-based
canonical poses, which hinders their performance.
In this work, we analyze in detail the PCA-based canonical poses in point cloud analysis. We study the actual number
of ambiguities of the PCA-based canonical poses, explore
the effects of PCA in point cloud analysis, and propose a
pose selector module for disambiguation. Our investigation reveals that the accurate identification of ambiguities
can lead to noticeable performance boosts than the recently
developed networks and features. I.e., state-of-the-art approaches would be outperformed by a large margin on the
challenging real-world dataset if ambiguities are properly
identified. We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We study the actual number of ambiguities of the PCAbased canonical poses, showing that it has not been
fully addressed in recent works.
• We demonstrate the actual ability of PCA-based canonical poses by distinct experiments and detailed analysis,
hoping to prompt future works in the context of rotationinvariant point cloud analysis.

* Work partially done during an internship at LINE.
1 Source code can be found at https://github.com/SILI1994/

• We propose a pose selector that can effectively disambiguate the canonical poses and boost performance.

rotation-invariant-pointcloud-analysis.

16218

