Dynamic View Synthesis from Dynamic Monocular Video
Chen Gao
Virginia Tech

Ayush Saraf
Facebook

Johannes Kopf
Facebook

Jia-Bin Huang
Virginia Tech

chengao@vt.edu

ayush29feb@fb.com

jkopf@fb.com

jbhuang@vt.edu

https://free-view-video.github.io

...

t1

...

...

t0

...

time

...

...

tN

view
(b) Output: free-viewpoint rendering

(a) Input: monocular video

Figure 1. Dynamic view synthesis from dynamic monocular video. Our method takes a monocular video as input (a). Each frame in the
video is taken at a unique time step and from a different view (e.g., the yellow and blue frames). Our goal is to synthesize photorealistic
novel views of a dynamic scene at arbitrary camera viewpoints and time steps (red frames). Such a system enables free-viewpoint video,
providing immersive and almost life-like viewing experiences for users.

Abstract

We present an algorithm for generating novel views at
arbitrary viewpoints and any input time step given a monocular video of a dynamic scene. Our work builds upon recent advances in neural implicit representation and uses
continuous and differentiable functions for modeling the
time-varying structure and the appearance of the scene.
We jointly train a time-invariant static NeRF and a timevarying dynamic NeRF, and learn how to blend the results
in an unsupervised manner. However, learning this implicit
function from a single video is highly ill-posed (with infinitely many solutions that match the input video). To resolve the ambiguity, we introduce regularization losses to
encourage a more physically plausible solution. We show
extensive quantitative and qualitative results of dynamic
view synthesis from casually captured videos.

1. Introduction
Video provides a window into another part of the real
world. In traditional videos, however, the viewer observes
the action from a fixed viewpoint and cannot navigate the
scene. Dynamic view synthesis comes to the rescue. These
techniques aim at creating photorealistic novel views of a
dynamic scene at arbitrary camera viewpoints and time,
which enables free-viewpoint video and stereo rendering,
and provides an immersive and almost life-like viewing experience. It facilitates applications such as replaying professional sports events in 3D [7], creating cinematic effects like
freeze-frame bullet-time (from the movie “The Matrix”),
virtual reality [11, 5], and virtual 3D teleportation [37].
Systems for dynamic view synthesis need to overcome
challenging problems related to video capture, reconstruction, compression, and rendering. Most of the existing
methods rely on laborious and expensive setups such as custom fixed multi-camera video capture rigs [8, 61, 11, 37, 5].
While recent work relaxes some constraints and can handle unstructured video input (e.g., from hand-held cam-

5712

