Hierarchical Graph Attention Network for Few-shot Visual-Semantic Learning
Chengxiang Yin1 , Kun Wu1 , Zhengping Che2 , Bo Jiang2 , Zhiyuan Xu3 , Jian Tang3, *
1
Syracuse University, 2 Didi Chuxing, 3 Midea Group
Abstract
Deep learning has made tremendous success in computer vision, natural language processing and even visualsemantic learning, which requires a huge amount of labeled training data. Nevertheless, the goal of humanlevel intelligence is to enable a model to quickly obtain
an in-depth understanding given a small number of samples, especially with heterogeneity in the multi-modal scenarios such as visual question answering and image captioning. In this paper, we study the few-shot visual-semantic
learning and present the Hierarchical Graph ATtention network (HGAT). This two-stage network models the intra- and
inter-modal relationships with limited image-text samples.
The main contributions of HGAT can be summarized as
follows: 1) it sheds light on tackling few-shot multi-modal
learning problems, which focuses primarily, but not exclusively on visual and semantic modalities, through better
exploitation of the intra-relationship of each modality and
an attention-based co-learning framework between modalities using a hierarchical graph-based architecture; 2) it
achieves superior performance on both visual question answering and image captioning in the few-shot setting; 3)
it can be easily extended to the semi-supervised setting
where image-text samples are partially unlabeled. We show
via extensive experiments that HGAT delivers state-of-theart performance on three widely-used benchmarks of two
visual-semantic learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently, significant progress has been made to various
applications in single modality, such as object detection and
machine translation, thanks to the advancing deep learning
technologies [15] including convolutional [26] and recurrent [18] neural networks. However, in order for an artificial intelligence (AI) system to understand the real world
around us, it requires not only the ability to memorize the
rich information contained in a single modality, such as visual signals (i.e., images and videos) and natural language
* Corresponding author

(i.e., captions and questions), but also a joint comprehension in multiple modalities. This, in general, is called multimodal learning [5], and one typical example is the visualsemantic learning. For instance, a smart cooking robot in
the kitchen is expected to make delicious dishes through understanding the recipe instructions as well as detecting and
selecting the right ingredients on the table. The robot can
hardly perform this task without the ability of either reading
the texts or seeing the objects.
Lots of methods have attempted to address the multimodal learning problems through dealing with visualsemantic learning tasks, such as visual question answering [32, 56, 54] and image captioning [10, 49, 12]. While
these models are capable when massive human-annotated
data and extensive training time are available, a real AI system should be able to quickly deliver an in-depth understanding using a small number of learning samples. The
ability of solving visual-semantic tasks with limited samples, termed as few-shot visual-semantic learning, turns out
to be challenging and critical for human-level intelligence.
Currently, for general few-shot learning problems, metalearning [29, 36, 52] has become a standard methodology. Based on it, a few extensions have been recently
made for few-shot visual-semantic learning. Fast Parameter
Adaptation for Image-Text Modeling (FPAIT) [11] directly
applied Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) [13], a
well-known meta-learning algorithm, to the few-shot visual
question answering and image captioning. Analogously, another work [46] adopted a question answering model with
two meta-learning techniques, prototypical networks [42]
and meta networks [35]. Nonetheless, these attempts left
much to be desired in terms of their scope and performance.
Firstly and fundamentally, all these methods merely applied
existing meta-learning algorithms without explicitly considering the multi-modal nature, to which we paid careful attention in this work. For example, Teney et al. [46] obtained
their model input through a simple element-wise production between visual and semantic representations. Additionally, neither of them deal with the cases where labels
are partially unlabeled, which is categorized as the semisupervised learning setting. As labeling data can be expensive or even infeasible, semi-supervised learning is very

2177

