Generative Adversarial Registration for Improved Conditional Deformable
Templates
Neel Dey
New York University

Mengwei Ren
New York University

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT, MGH

Guido Gerig
New York University

neel.dey@nyu.edu

mengwei.ren@nyu.edu

adalca@mit.edu

gerig@nyu.edu

Abstract
Deformable templates are essential to large-scale medical image registration, segmentation, and population analysis. Current conventional and deep network-based methods for template construction use only regularized registration objectives and often yield templates with blurry
and/or anatomically implausible appearance, confounding
downstream biomedical interpretation. We reformulate deformable registration and conditional template estimation
as an adversarial game wherein we encourage realism in
the moved templates with a generative adversarial registration framework conditioned on flexible image covariates.
The resulting templates exhibit significant gain in specificity
to attributes such as age and disease, better fit underlying
group-wise spatiotemporal trends, and achieve improved
sharpness and centrality. These improvements enable more
accurate population modeling with diverse covariates for
standardized downstream analyses and easier anatomical
delineation for structures of interest.

1. Introduction
Deformable image registration enables the quantification
of geometric dissimilarity via the pairwise warping of a
source image to a target. In the context of population studies, pairwise registration of a subject onto a deformable template is a central step in standardized analyses, where an
ideal template is an unbiased barycentric representation of
the (sub-)population of interest [7, 10, 47]. Templates play
a key role in diverse large-scale biomedical imaging tasks
such as alignment to a common coordinate system [33, 86],
brain extraction [38, 43], segmentation [17, 43], and image
and shape regression models [31, 67], among others.
While templates can be obtained from a reference
database, they are preferably constructed for specific populations by optimizing for an image which minimizes the
average deformation to each individual subject. As the
template strongly affects subsequent morphometric analy-

sis [82, 89], template construction has received significant
attention. Further, as a single template cannot capture the
wide structural variability within a population (via age and
cohort, for example), we consider conditional template estimation with continuous and/or categorical attributes. Conditional templates constructed on image sets with diverse
covariates enable sub-population modeling accounting for
information learned from the overall population and obviate
the need for arbitrary thresholding of demographic information to perform independent analyses [20, 23, 98].
Implicit models for template estimation [2, 7, 10, 47, 58,
96] alternate between registration of each scan to the current template estimate and updating the template based on
averages of the warped subject scans. Due to the averaging of aligned image intensities, the resulting templates may
blur significantly in regions with high-frequency deformations even alongside shape corrections [10]. Recently, explicit template estimation via unsupervised deep networks
was proposed in [23] where each stochastic update of a registration network yields a (potentially conditional) template
without averaging aligned images and transformations.
However, both implicit and explicit models typically
only minimize an image dissimilarity term between the
moved template and fixed image (and/or vice-versa) subject to application-specific regularization ensuring a diffeomorphic (smooth, differentiable, and invertible) transformation. As inter-brain variability includes complex topological changes not captured by purely diffeomorphic models, estimated templates are often unrealistic and do not resemble the data that they represent. Sub-optimal appearance impacts downstream applications due to ambiguous
and/or implausible anatomical boundaries. For example,
in order to register one or more expert-annotated templates
to target images for atlas-based segmentation [43, 54, 59],
the template(s) must have clearly distinguishable anatomical boundaries to enable expert delineation. Unfortunately,
structural anatomical boundaries are often obfuscated by
current template estimation approaches.
We present a learning framework to estimate sharp (optionally conditional) templates with realistic anatomy via

3929

