DRINet: A Dual-Representation Iterative Learning Network
for Point Cloud Segmentation
Maosheng Ye1‡* Shuangjie Xu2*
Tongyi Cao2
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
myeag@connect.ust.hk

Qifeng Chen1
DEEPROUTE.AI

{shuangjiexu, tongyicao}@deeproute.ai

Abstract

70

We present a novel and flexible architecture for
point cloud segmentation with dual-representation iterative
learning. In point cloud processing, different representations have their own pros and cons. Thus, finding suitable
ways to represent point cloud data structure while keeping
its own internal physical property such as permutation and
scale-invariant is a fundamental problem. Therefore, we
propose our work, DRINet, which serves as the basic network structure for dual-representation learning with great
flexibility at feature transferring and less computation cost,
especially for large-scale point clouds. DRINet mainly consists of two modules called Sparse Point-Voxel Feature Extraction and Sparse Voxel-Point Feature Extraction. By utilizing these two modules iteratively, features can be propagated between two different representations. We further
propose a novel multi-scale pooling layer for pointwise locality learning to improve context information propagation.
Our network achieves state-of-the-art results for point cloud
classification and segmentation tasks on several datasets
while maintaining high runtime efficiency. For large-scale
outdoor scenarios, our method outperforms state-of-the-art
methods with a real-time inference time of 62ms per frame.

65

1. Introduction
Point cloud data plays a significant role in various realworld applications, from autonomous driving to augmented
reality (AR). One of the critical tasks in point cloud understanding is point cloud semantic segmentation, which
can facilitate self-driving cars or AR applications to interact with the physical world. For real-world applications, an
accurate and real-time point cloud segmentation method is
highly desirable. Therefore, in this work, we will study a
new framework for high-quality point cloud segmentation
in real-time.
‡ Part of the work was done during an internship at DEEPROUTE.AI.
∗ Equal contributions.

2

cqf@ust.hk

Performance (mIoU)

O
SPV

60
55

PO

SQ353

RA

DASS

RN
SQ321

50
D53
D21

45
PV

40
35

0

5

10

15

Runtime (Hz)
Figure 1. The mIoU performance vs. speed on the SemanticKITTI
test set. Projection methods are drawn as blue triangles and
other kinds of methods are drawn as red rectangles. Methods
close to the right top location mean that achieving better performance within less runtime cost. Drawn methods are RA:
RandLA [13], PV: PVCNN [23], SPV: Sparse PVCNN [31],
DASS [34] PO: PolarNet [45], D53: Darknet53 [2], D21: Darknet21 [2], RN: RangeNet++ [24], SQ321: SqueezeSegV3-21 [37],
SQ353: SqueezeSegV3-53 [37], O: our DRINet. Our DRINet outperforms all the existing methods while maintaining high runtime
efficiency at 15Hz.

Although we have witnessed great progress in vision
tasks on 2D images with convolutional neural networks
(CNN), point cloud processing with deep learning still faces
lots of challenges. Due to its sparsity and irregularity, it
is difficult to directly apply 2D CNNs or some other popular operations in image processing for point cloud data.
PointNet [26] is a pioneering work that directly operates
on raw point clouds. PointNet++ [27] extends the PointNet
by aggregating local features at different scales of neighborhoods to capture more context information and fine geometry structures. Further, VoxelNet [50] firstly combines
learning-based point cloud feature extraction with a stan-

7447

