Unpaired Learning for High Dynamic Range Image Tone Mapping
Yael Vinker

Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas

Raanan Fattal

{yael.vinker, inbar.huberman1, raanan.fattal}@mail.huji.ac.il

School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

Abstract
High dynamic range (HDR) photography is becoming
increasingly popular and available by DSLR and mobilephone cameras. While deep neural networks (DNN) have
greatly impacted other domains of image manipulation,
their use for HDR tone-mapping is limited due to the lack of
a definite notion of ground-truth solution, which is needed
for producing training data.
In this paper we describe a new tone-mapping approach
guided by the distinct goal of producing low dynamic range
(LDR) renditions that best reproduce the visual characteristics of native LDR images. This goal enables the use of
an unpaired adversarial training based on unrelated sets of
HDR and LDR images, both of which are widely available
and easy to acquire.
In order to achieve an effective training under this minimal requirements, we introduce the following new steps and
components: (i) a range-normalizing pre-process which estimates and applies a different level of curve-based compression, (ii) a loss that preserves the input content while
allowing the network to achieve its goal, and (iii) the use of
a more concise discriminator network, designed to promote
the reproduction of low-level attributes native LDR possess.
Evaluation of the resulting network demonstrates its
ability to produce photo-realistic artifact-free tone-mapped
images, and state-of-the-art performance on different image
fidelity indices and visual distances.

1. Introduction
High dynamic range (HDR) photography gained a considerable popularity in the last decades among both professional and non-professional photographers. HDR capabilities are available in many DSLR cameras as well as in mainstream mobile smartphones, capable of providing 10- and
12-bits of color depth. Printing or displaying these images
on conventional low dynamic range (LDR) devices require
a tone-mapping step for reducing their dynamic range. The
latter revealed itself as a non-trivial task and drew a consid-

Figure 1. Tone-mapped HDR images produced by our method.
The four exposures on the left of each image portray the very high
dynamic range in the original scenes.

erable research effort.
Unlike many image processing and restoration tasks,
there is no ground-truth “solution” for tone-mapping HDR
images, and the different methods developed over the years
aim for different goals. Early approaches use global tonereproduction curves (TRC) that make a better use of the output dynamic range than linear bracketing [5, 24, 47]. These
curves avoid over- and under-exposed pixels, but their contractive nature leads to a severe reduction in local contrasts.
Consequently, more modern approaches focus their goal
on preserving, or enhancing, the local contrasts using detail
separation and enhancement techniques [6, 8, 9, 33, 35, 39,
48]. These methods produce highly-detailed images, but
applying high levels of compression remains a challenge in
terms of avoiding edge-related artifacts or achieving balanced levels of contrast and an overall photo-realistic appearance.
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have greatly impacted
various image processing tasks, such as super resolution [20], and deblurring [43], by using large training
sets containing ground-truth examples. In the absence of
ground-truth data, the prevalent approach in HDR tonemapping is using existing tone-mapping operators (TMOs)
to produce a panel of image labels, and narrowing it down
using an image quality index to obtain the final training examples [34, 38].

14657

