End-to-end Piece-wise Unwarping of Document Images
Sagnik Das1,2

Kunwar Yashraj Singh1
Rahul Bhotika1
1

Amazon AI

Jon Wu1
Erhan Bas1
Dimitris Samaras2
2

Vijay Mahadevan1

Stony Brook University

{sinkunwa, jonwu, erhanbas, vmahad, bhotikar}@amazon.com, {sadas, samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract

(a)

Document unwarping attempts to undo physical deformations of the paper and recover a ’flatbed’ scanned
document-image for downstream tasks such as OCR. Current state-of-the-art relies on global unwarping of the document which is not robust to local deformation changes.
Moreover, a global unwarping often produces spurious
warping artifacts in less warped regions to compensate for
severe warps present in other parts of the document. In this
paper, we propose the first end-to-end trainable piece-wise
unwarping1 method that predicts local deformation fields
and stitches them together with global information to obtain an improved unwarping. The proposed piece-wise formulation results in 4% improvement in terms of multi-scale
structural similarity (MS-SSIM) and shows better performance in terms of OCR metrics, character error rate (CER)
and word error rate (WER) compared to the state-of-the-art.

(b)

(c)

1. Introduction
Document images captured using mobile devices often
contain artifacts due to the physical shape of the paper, camera pose or complex lighting conditions. Therefore, unlike
images captured with high fidelity using flatbed scanners,
mobile captured documents are ill-suited for digitization.
To improve the image quality for downstream tasks, such
as OCR, document unwarping is used to minimize the visible distortion between a captured document image and its
flatbed-scanned version. With multiple sources of distortion due to camera viewpoint, paper shape and illumination, the task of unwarping document images in-the-wild is
inherently challenging and a long-standing research problem in the domain of document analysis. Most solutions
to date, first estimate the deformed 3D shape, and then unwarp the image to make it planar. There is a large body of
work in 3D shape-based unwarping, some relying on spe-

Figure 1. Comparison to state of the art with the proposed
piece-wise approach: (a) Our method (left) show local improvements, text-lines are more aligned (highlighted with dashed greenline) and leads to better unwarping on the edges compared to [7] on
the right. (b) Original image (left), result of the proposed approach
(center) and that of global unwarping [7] (right) shows that global
unwarping introduces additional warping (highlighted in box). (c)
Artifacts due to the absence of stitching reconstruction loss in [14],
columns 1, & 3 show our results without such artifacts.

cific hardware such as stereo [33, 28] and structured light
[3, 23], or using 2D images to estimate 3D using shapefrom-shading [30, 35] or multi-view images [27, 34]. With
respect to image based document unwarping, traditional approaches detect the boundary of a document [4], or explicitly predict text-lines [26, 21]. Generally, these traditional
approaches are not very accurate, e.g. textline based methods work as expected only if there exist enough textlines in

1 Project page: https://sagniklp.github.io/PiecewiseUnwarp/

This project was initiated when Sagnik Das was an intern at AWS.

4268

