CODEs: Chamfer Out-of-Distribution Examples against Overconfidence Issue
Keke Tang* 1 , Dingruibo Miao∗1,2 , Weilong Peng†1 , Jianpeng Wu1 , Yawen Shi1 , Zhaoquan Gu†1 ,
Zhihong Tian1 , Wenping Wang3,4
1

Guangzhou University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Texas A&M University 4 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Overconfident predictions on out-of-distribution (OOD)
samples is a thorny issue for deep neural networks. The
key to resolve the OOD overconfidence issue inherently is
to build a subset of OOD samples and then suppress predictions on them. This paper proposes the Chamfer OOD
examples (CODEs), whose distribution is close to that of
in-distribution samples, and thus could be utilized to alleviate the OOD overconfidence issue effectively by suppressing
predictions on them. To obtain CODEs, we first generate
seed OOD examples via slicing&splicing operations on indistribution samples from different categories, and then feed
them to the Chamfer generative adversarial network for
distribution transformation, without accessing to any extra
data. Training with suppressing predictions on CODEs is
validated to alleviate the OOD overconfidence issue largely
without hurting classification accuracy, and outperform the
state-of-the-art methods. Besides, we demonstrate CODEs
are useful for improving OOD detection and classification.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have obtained stateof-the-art performance in the classification problem [16].
Since those classification systems are generally designed
for a static and closed world [3], DNN classifiers will attempt to make predictions even with the occurrence of new
concepts in real world. Unfortunately, those unexpected
predictions are likely to be overconfident. Indeed, a growing body of evidences show that DNN classifiers suffer from
the OOD overconfidence issue of being fooled easily to generate overconfident predictions on OOD samples [37, 13].
A widely adopted solution is to calibrate the outputs
between in- and out-of-distribution samples to make them
* Joint first authors.
† Corresponding authors: wlpeng@gzhu.edu.cn, zqgu@gzhu.edu.cn.

Figure 1. For a classification task, (a) OOD samples can be
infinitely outnumber ID samples; (b) intuitively, OOD samples,
whose distribution is closer to that of ID samples, are more likely
to be effective against the OOD overconfidence issue; (c) we aim
at generating CODEs, a kind of effective OOD examples.

easy to detect [18, 31]. By this way, overconfident predictions on OOD samples could be rejected as long as identified by OOD detectors. While those approaches are significant steps towards reliable classification, the OOD overconfidence issue of DNN classifiers remains unsolved. Besides,
as challenged by Lee et al. [27], the performance of OOD
detection highly depends on DNN classifiers and they fail
to work if the classifiers do not separate the predictive distribution well. This motivates us to resolve the OOD overconfidence issue inherently with enforcing DNN classifiers
to make low-confident predictions on OOD samples.
Since with infinite amount, the key to resolve the OOD
overconfidence issue is to build a subset of OOD samples
and then suppress predictions on them. Lee et al. [27] use
a generative adversarial network [12] to model the subset which, however, requires to be tuned on the testingdistribution. Without synthesizing data from a carefully de-

1153

