Interaction via Bi-directional Graph of Semantic Region Affinity for
Scene Parsing

1

Henghui Ding1,3 † Hui Zhang1 Jun Liu2 Jiaxin Li3 Zijian Feng3 Xudong Jiang1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design 3 ByteDance

Abstract
In this work, we devote to address the challenging
problem of scene parsing. It is well known that pixels in
an image are highly correlated with each other, especially
those from the same semantic region, while treating pixels
independently fails to take advantage of such correlations.
In this work, we treat each respective region in an image
as a whole, and capture the structure topology as well
as the affinity among different regions. To this end, we
first divide the entire feature maps to different regions
and extract respective global features from them. Next,
we construct a directed graph whose nodes are regional
features, and the bi-directional edges connecting every two
nodes are the affinities between the regional features they
represent. After that, we transfer the affinity-aware nodes
in the directed graph back to corresponding regions of the
image, which helps to model the region dependencies and
mitigate unrealistic results. In addition, to further boost
the correlation among pixels, we propose a region-level
loss that evaluates all pixels in a region as a whole and
motivates the network to learn the exclusive regional feature
per class. With the proposed approach, we achieves new
state-of-the-art segmentation results on PASCAL-Context,
ADE20K, and COCO-Stuff consistently.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing (or semantic segmentation), as one of
the most fundamental tasks in computer vision, targets at
segmenting an image to different regions and assigning each
region a specific class label. Parsing errors exist widely
in previous methods, due to the diverse appearances and
the complicated topology structures among objects. In
this paper, we propose an approach that constructs affinity
dependency among different semantic regions, helps to
reason global affinities among objects/stuff in the given
image and mitigates the deviated segmentation results.
The scene parsing can be regarded as a pixel-level
† Henghui Ding (ding0093@ntu.edu.sg) is the corresponding author.

Image

Prediction

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Common errors in scene parsing: “spot”, ambiguous, and unrealistic predictions.

classification task (i.e., recognition) as well as a region
cluster task (i.e., segmentation). Previous works pay more
attention to recognition than region cluster, resulting in
“spot” predictions, ambiguous results and unrealistic results, as shown in Figure 1. Previous attempts to these
issues mainly revolved around capturing large receptive
fields for each pixel, like the pyramid [8, 81] and the nonlocal [20] receptive fields. These context methods, though
build implicit connections among different pixels, aim at
aggregating context for each pixel and thereby do not take
advantage of the region-level correlations.
In this work, we focus more on region clustering and
attribute the errors in Figure 1 to the lack of regionlevel constrains for each pixel and insufficient regional
correlations. Concretely we boost scene parsing by applying region-level constraints and establishing connections
among regions. We split the feature maps to various regions
and regard pixels in each respective region as a whole
to explore the region-level correlations. This approach
helps cluster the features from the same region and thus
remove the “spot” pieces in prediction. To this end,
we first generate a coarse segmentation mask (e.g., the

15848

