Photon-Starved Scene Inference using Single Photon Cameras
Bhavya Goyal
Mohit Gupta
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{bhavya, mohitg}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Scene understanding under low-light conditions is a
challenging problem. This is due to the small number
of photons captured by the camera and the resulting low
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Single-photon cameras (SPCs)
are an emerging sensing modality that are capable of capturing images with high sensitivity. Despite having minimal read-noise, images captured by SPCs in photon-starved
conditions still suffer from strong shot noise, preventing reliable scene inference. We propose photon scale-space –
a collection of high-SNR images spanning a wide range
of photons-per-pixel (PPP) levels (but same scene content)
as guides to train inference model on low photon flux images. We develop training techniques that push images with
different illumination levels closer to each other in feature
representation space. The key idea is that having a spectrum of different brightness levels during training enables
effective guidance, and increases robustness to shot noise
even in extreme noise cases. Based on the proposed approach, we demonstrate, via simulations and real experiments with a SPAD camera, high-performance on various
inference tasks such as image classification and monocular
depth estimation under ultra low-light, down to < 1 PPP.
Project Page: https://wisionlab.cs.wisc.edu/
project/photon-net

1. Scene Inference in Low Light
Over the past decade, deep learning has achieved unmatched accuracy on several complex, real-world scene inference tasks. As these techniques have matured, a new
axis in the performance space is emerging, driven by applications (e.g., autonomous navigation), where reliable performance under non-ideal imaging conditions is as important as the overall accuracy. In such safety-critical applications, it is important to consider the worst case performance of the vision system to ensure robust all-weather operation. For example, for a vision system to be deployed on
an autonomous car, it must perform reliably across the entire range of imaging scenarios, including night-time and

poorly-lit scenes, and high-speed moving objects, all of
which result in photon-starved images. Even state-of-theart inference algorithms tend to fail for such images where
the sensor has simply not collected sufficient light.
The goal of this paper is to develop vision systems that
achieve high accuracy even in ultra low-light, when a camera pixel may receive even less than one photon per pixel. In
such extreme conditions, images captured by conventional
cameras get overwhelmed by noise, causing the signalto-noise ratio (SNR) to dip below the threshold required
for downstream inference algorithms to extract meaningful
scene information. We propose a two-pronged approach to
achieve these goals: (a) Leverage a class of highly sensitive single-photon detectors, and (b) Develop inference algorithms that are optimized for low-flux operation.
Single-Photon Sensors: Single-photon avalanche diodes
(SPADs) [31, 37] are an emerging image sensor technology that are capable of detecting individual incident photons with high timing precision. In the past, these sensors were limited to single pixel or low-resolution devices
(e.g., 32x32 pixels), and thus restricted to scientific applications [5, 33, 4]. But, recently, due to their compatibility with
CMOS fabrication processes, high resolution cameras (up
to 1 MPixel) have been developed based on SPADs [29], as
well as the jots [27] technology. These single photon cameras are capable of capturing sequences of binary frames
with minimal read noise [41], thus opening the possibility of
capturing high-quality images even in low-flux conditions.
High-level Inference on Low-Flux Images: So far, SPADs
have primarily been used for recovering image intensities [2, 21, 28] and low/mid-level scene information such
as 3D shape [32, 36, 9, 22, 39, 16, 15] and motion [17].
Can we go beyond low-level imaging and signal processing, and develop algorithms for direct, high-level inference
from SPAD cameras? Despite low read noise, the stochastic nature of photon arrival results in considerable shot noise
in single-photon binary frames captured by SPAD cameras.
Although there has been some recent work on joint denoising and classification [25, 26, 12], inference on ultra-lowlight images where each pixel receives less than a photon
on average still remains an intractable problem.

2512

