Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation by Contrasting Object Mask Proposals
Wouter Van Gansbeke1 * Simon Vandenhende1 * Stamatios Georgoulis2
1
KU Leuven/ESAT-PSI 2 ETH Zurich/CVL, TRACE

Luc Van Gool1,2

Abstract
I. Generate Object Mask Proposals

Being able to learn dense semantic representations of
images without supervision is an important problem in computer vision. However, despite its significance, this problem
remains rather unexplored, with a few exceptions that considered unsupervised semantic segmentation on small-scale
datasets with a narrow visual domain. In this paper, we
make a first attempt to tackle the problem on datasets that
have been traditionally utilized for the supervised case. To
achieve this, we introduce a two-step framework that adopts
a predetermined mid-level prior in a contrastive optimization objective to learn pixel embeddings. This marks a large
deviation from existing works that relied on proxy tasks or
end-to-end clustering. Additionally, we argue about the importance of having a prior that contains information about
objects, or their parts, and discuss several possibilities to
obtain such a prior in an unsupervised manner.
Experimental evaluation shows that our method comes
with key advantages over existing works. First, the learned
pixel embeddings can be directly clustered in semantic
groups using K-Means on PASCAL. Under the fully unsupervised setting, there is no precedent in solving the semantic segmentation task on such a challenging benchmark.
Second, our representations can improve over strong baselines when transferred to new datasets, e.g. COCO and
DAVIS. The code is available1 .

1. Introduction
The problem of assigning dense semantic labels to images, formally known as semantic segmentation, is of great
importance in computer vision as it finds many applications,
including autonomous driving, augmented reality, humancomputer interaction, etc. To achieve state-of-the-art performance in this task, fully convolutional networks [45]
are typically trained on datasets [15, 20, 44] that contain a
large number of fully-annotated images. However, obtaining accurate, pixel-wise semantic labels for every image in
a dataset is a labor-intensive process that costs significant
* Authors contributed equally
1 github.com/wvangansbeke/Unsupervised-Semantic-Segmentation.git

Clustering/
Finetuning

Unsupervised Saliency

II. Unsupervised Learning of Pixel Embeddings

Φθ

Φθ

Figure 1. We learn pixel embeddings for semantic segmentation
in an unsupervised way. First, we predict object mask proposals
using unsupervised saliency. Second, we use the obtained masks
as a prior in a self-supervised optimization objective. Finally, the
pixel embeddings can be clustered or fine-tuned to a semantic segmentation of the image.

amounts of time and money [4]. To remedy this situation,
weakly-supervised methods leveraged weaker forms of supervision, such as scribbles [43, 65, 66, 72, 80], bounding
boxes [16, 37, 56, 80], clicks [5], and image-level tags [56,
66, 80], while semi-supervised methods [16, 26, 28, 56, 57]
used only a fraction of the dataset as labeled examples, both
of which require substantially less human annotation effort.
Despite the continued progress, the vast majority of semantic segmentation works still rely on some form of annotations to train the neural network models.
In this paper, we look at the problem from a different
perspective, namely self-supervised representation learning. More concretely, we aim to learn pixel-level representations or embeddings for semantic segmentation without using ground-truth. If we obtain a good pixel embedding that is discriminative w.r.t. the semantic classes, we
can directly cluster the pixels into semantic groups using
K-Means. This tackles the semantic segmentation problem
under the fully unsupervised setup. Alternatively, if a limited number of annotated examples are available, the representations can be further fine-tuned under a semi-supervised
or transfer learning setup. In this paper, we primarily focus
on the fully unsupervised setup, but include additional fine-

10052

