Gated3D: Monocular 3D Object Detection
From Temporal Illumination Cues
Frank Julca-Aguilar1 * Jason Taylor1 * Mario Bijelic2,3 Fahim Mannan1 Ethan Tseng3 Felix Heide1,3
1

Algolux

2

Mercedes-Benz AG

Abstract
Today’s state-of-the-art methods for 3D object detection are based on lidar, stereo, or monocular cameras.
Lidar-based methods achieve the best accuracy, but have
a large footprint, high cost, and mechanically-limited angular sampling rates, resulting in low spatial resolution at
long ranges. Recent approaches using low-cost monocular or stereo cameras promise to overcome these limitations but struggle in low-light or low-contrast regions as
they rely on passive CMOS sensors. We propose a novel 3D
object detection modality that exploits temporal illumination cues from a low-cost monocular gated imager. We introduce a novel deep detection architecture, Gated3D, that
is tailored to temporal illumination cues in gated images.
This modality allows us to exploit mature 2D object feature
extractors that guide the 3D predictions through a frustum
segment estimation. We assess the proposed method experimentally on a 3D detection dataset that includes gated
images captured over 10,000 km of driving data. We validate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art monocular and stereo methods, opening up a new sensor modality as an avenue to replace lidar in autonomous driving.
https://light.princeton.edu/gated3d

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a fundamental vision task in
robotics and autonomous driving. Accurate 3D detections
are critical for safe trajectory planning, with applications
emerging across disciplines such as autonomous drones, assistive and health robotics, as well as warehouse and delivery robots. RGB-D cameras using correlation time-offlight [22, 29, 34], such as Microsoft’s Kinect One, enable
robust 3D detection indoors [55, 56] for small ranges. In the
past, autonomous driving, which requires long ranges and
high depth accuracy, has relied on scanning lidar for 3D detection [50, 60, 15, 64, 35, 11, 68, 30, 33]. However, while
lidar provides accurate depth, existing systems are fundamentally limited by point-by-point acquisition, resulting in
* indicates equal contribution.

3

Princeton University

spatial resolution that falls off quadratically with distance
and linearly with frame rate. In contrast to conventional
cameras, lidar systems are three orders of magnitude more
expensive, suffer from low resolution at long distances, and
fail in the presence of strong back-scatter, e.g. in snow or
fog [3].
Promising to overcome these challenges, a recent line
of work proposed pseudo-lidar sensing [61], which relies
on low-cost sensors, such as stereo [10, 7, 27] or monocular [9, 20, 14] to recover dense depth maps from conventional intensity imagers. Point-clouds are sampled from the
depth maps and ingested by 3D detection methods that operate on point-cloud representations [33, 68]. More recent
methods predict 3D boxes directly from the passive input
images [36, 4, 54]. Although all of these methods promise
low-cost 3D detection with the potential to replace lidar,
they rely on passive camera-only sensing. Passive stereo
approaches degrade at long ranges, where disparities are
small, and in low-light scenarios, e.g. at night, when stereo
or monocular depth cues are less visible.
In this work, we introduce the first 3D object detection
method using gated imaging and evaluate this as a lowcost detection method, outperforming recent monocular and
stereo detection methods. Similar to passive approaches,
we use CMOS sensors but add active temporal illumination. The proposed gated imager captures illumination distributed in three wide gates (> 30 m) for all sensor pixels.
Gated imaging [25, 5, 2, 63, 49, 1, 21] allows us to capture
several dense high-resolution images distributed continuously across the distances in their respective temporal bin.
Additionally, back-scatter can be removed by the distribution of early gates. Whereas scanning lidar trades off temporal resolution with spatial resolution and signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR), the sequential acquisition of gated cameras
trades off dense spatial resolution and SNR (i.e. wide gates)
with coarse temporal resolution. We demonstrate that the
temporal illumination variations in gated images are a depth
cue naturally suited for 3D object detection. Operating on
2D gated slices allows us to leverage existing 2D object detection architectures to guide the 3D object detection task
with a novel frustum segmentation. The proposed architecture further exploits gated images by disentangling the
12938

