BV-Person: A Large-scale Dataset for Bird-view Person Re-identification
Cheng Yan1 ,* Guansong Pang2∗ , Lei Wang4 , Jile Jiao3†, Xuetao Feng3 ,
Chunhua Shen5 , Jingjing Li6
1
Tianjin University 2 The University of Adelaide 3 Alibaba Group
4
University of Wollongong 5 Monash University 6 University of Alberta

Abstract
Person Re-IDentification (ReID) aims at re-identifying
persons from non-overlapping cameras. Existing person
ReID studies focus on horizontal-view ReID tasks, in which
the person images are captured by the cameras from a
(nearly) horizontal view. In this work we introduce a new
ReID task, bird-view person ReID, which aims at searching
for a person in a gallery of horizontal-view images with the
query images taken from a bird’s-eye view, i.e., an elevated
view of an object from above. The task is important because
there are a large number of video surveillance cameras capturing persons from such an elevated view at public places.
However, it is a challenging task in that the images from the
bird view (i) provide limited person appearance information
and (ii) have a large discrepancy compared to the persons
in the horizontal view. We aim to facilitate the development of person ReID from this line by introducing a largescale real-world dataset for this task. The proposed dataset,
named BV-Person, contains 114k images of 18k identities in
which nearly 20k images of 7.4k identities are taken from
the bird’s-eye view. We further introduce a novel model for
this new ReID task. Large-scale experiments are performed
to evaluate our model and 11 current state-of-the-art ReID
models on BV-Person to establish performance benchmarks
from multiple perspectives. The empirical results show that
our model consistently and substantially outperforms the
state-of-the-art models on all five datasets derived from
BV-Person. Our model also achieves state-of-the-art performance on two general ReID datasets. The BV-Person
dataset is available at: https://git.io/BVPerson

1. Introduction
Person Re-IDentification (ReID) aims at searching the
images of the same person across non-overlapping cameras.
The task has been widely studied, achieving great progress
* CY and GP equally contributed to this work.
† Corresponding author, e-mail: jile.jjl@alibaba-inc.com

Horizontal-view ReID

Less than 40o

Search

A
Bird-view ReID

Search

B

Larger than 80

o

Figure 1 – (A) Horizontal-view ReID vs. (B) Bird-view ReID.
In (A), the images from both of the query and gallery sets are
captured from a (nearly) horizontal view, in which the angle between the horizontal ground and the line from camera to person
is small (less than 40o ). By contrast, in (B), the query images
are captured from an elevated view, in which the corresponding angle is large (e.g., larger than 80o ). The large discrepancy
between these two views makes the bird-view ReID task particularly challenging.

in the last few years [3, 6, 9, 12, 16, 19, 20, 24, 26, 28, 31,
32, 37, 38, 40, 41, 43]. Existing person ReID studies focus
on horizontal-view based re-identification, in which all the
images are captured by the cameras that are in nearly the
same horizontal line with persons. That is, the camera and
the person are nearly at the same horizontal level, with a
small angle (less than 40o ) between the line from camera
to person and the ground (see Figure 1(A)). The horizontalview images often present the whole body of the person and
each part of the body is distributed evenly in the image.
In this work we introduce a new ReID task, bird-view
person ReID, which aims at searching for a person in a
gallery of horizontal-view images with the query images
taken from a bird’s-eye view, i.e., an elevated view of an
object from above (see Figure 1(B)). The task is important
because there are a large number of video surveillance cam-

10943

