Body-Face Joint Detection via Embedding and Head Hook
Junfeng Wan∗†

Jiangfan Deng∗
Xiaosong Qiu
Algorithm Research, Aibee Inc.

Feng Zhou

{jfwan, jfdeng, xsqiu, fzhou}@aibee.com

Abstract

  

    

Detecting pedestrians and their associated faces jointly
is a challenging task. On one hand, body or face could be
absent because of occlusion or non-frontal human pose. On
the other hand, the association becomes difficult or even
miss-leading in crowded scenes due to the lack of strong
correlational evidence. This paper proposes Body-Face
Joint (BFJ) detector, a novel framework for detecting bodies and their faces with accurate correspondance. We follow the classical multi-class detector design by detecting
body and face in parallel but with two key contributions.
First, we propose an Embedding Matching Loss (EML) to
learn an associative embedding for matching body and face
of the same person. Second, we introduce a novel concept, “head hook”, to bridge the gap of matching body and
faces spatially. With the new semantical and geometrical
sources of information, BFJ greatly reduces the difficulty of
detecting body and face in pairs. Since the problem is unexplored yet, we design a new metric named log-average
miss matching rate (mMR−2 ) to evaluate the association
performance and extend the CrowdHuman and CityPersons benchmarks by annotating each face box. Experiments show that our BFJ detector can maintain state-of-theart performance in pedestrian detection on both one-stage
and two-stage structures while greatly outperform various
body-face association strategies. Code will be available at:
https://github.com/AibeeDetect/BFJDet.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection has been a long-standing topic in
the field of computer vision. Accurate localization of individuals in the scene can effectively facilitate the downstream process such as recognition, re-identification and
tracking. By the development of deep learning, methods
based on convolutional neural networks [20] have dramatically improved the detecting performance on both general
objects like MS-COCO [23] and pedestrians like Crowd∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done during Junfeng’s internship at Aibee.

    

(a)

(c)
   

s

(b)

Figure 1. Challenges of detecting pedestrian with associated faces
in the wild. (a) Face of pedestrians in green box (side to the camera) and blue box (back to the camera) are invisible. (b) Bodies of
the three people are absent despite their faces are clearly visible.
(c) Miss-matching between bodies and faces in crowded scenes.

Human [30], leading to the ability of application-level use
such as video surveillance and identity authentication. For a
pedestrian, the face is the most semantically discriminative
part. So finding out body and face jointly becomes meaningful. However, for the joint detection, there exist three
main obstacles. First, all persons’ bodies and faces are not
perfectly visible and not always yielding one-to-one correspondance. As shown in Fig. 1a, the man in green box is
side to the camera while the man in blue box is back to
the camera, both of their faces can not be seen. This phenomenon makes the simple method of regressing body and
face boxes jointly from one proposal [4] impractical. In
Fig. 1b, the three people have visually clear faces while their
bodies are hardly observed due to the heavy occlusion. This
anisotropy limits another intuitive pipeline of first detecting
bodies and then finding face from them (we depict it as cas-

2959

