Exploring Long Tail Visual Relationship Recognition with Large Vocabulary
Sherif Abdelkarim1 *†‡, Aniket Agarwal1,2 *†, Panos Achlioptas3 , Jun Chen1
Jiaji Huang4 , Boyang Li5 , Kenneth Church4 , Mohamed Elhoseiny1‡
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), 2 IIT Roorkee, 3 Stanford University, 4 Baidu, 5 NTU Singapore
abdelkas@uci.edu, aagarwal@ma.iitr.ac.in, panos@cs.stanford.edu, jun.chen@kaust.edu.sa,
huangjiaji@baidu.com, lily.liboyang@ntu.edu.sg, kennethchurch@baidu.com, mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Subjects
(Dog)

Several approaches have been proposed in recent literature to alleviate the long-tail problem, mainly in object
classification tasks. In this paper, we make the first largescale study concerning the task of Long-Tail Visual Relationship Recognition (LTVRR). LTVRR aims at improving
the learning of structured visual relationships that come
from the long-tail (e.g., “rabbit grazing on grass”). In this
setup, the subject, relation, and object classes each follow a
long-tail distribution. To begin our study and make a future
benchmark for the community, we introduce two LTVRRrelated benchmarks, dubbed VG8K-LT and GQA-LT, built
upon the widely used Visual Genome and GQA datasets.
We use these benchmarks to study the performance of several state-of-the-art long-tail models on the LTVRR setup.
Lastly, we propose a visiolinguistic hubless (VilHub) loss
and a Mixup augmentation technique adapted to LTVRR
setup, dubbed as RelMix. Both VilHub and RelMix can be
easily integrated on top of existing models and despite being simple, our results show that they can remarkably improve the performance, especially on tail classes. Benchmarks, code, and models have been made available at:
https://github.com/Vision-CAIR/LTVRR.

1. Introduction
Most existing works in visual recognition assume that
training data are abundant, with typically a few hundred to
thousands of examples per class [3, 16, 33, 8, 9]. A more
realistic setup, however, is to assume that classes follow a
long-tail distribution, where most categories have only few
examples. What makes the long-tail distribution more natural is that it covers the spectrum of frequent classes, fewshot classes (classes rarely observed in the training set) and
* Equal contribution
† Work done while working at King Abdullah University of Science and

Technology (KAUST)
‡ Corresponding Authors

VRR Setup (R)

Relations
(Riding)

Head

Tail

Our LTVRR setup (S)

VRR Setup (R)

Head

Objects
(Horse)

Tail

Our LTVRR setup (R)
VRR Setup (R)

Head

Tail
Our LTVRR setup (S)

Figure 1: Long-Tail Visual Relationship Recognition
(LTVRR). In contrast to existing Visual Relationship Recognition (VRR) setups, where each of the subject (S), objects(O), and relationships (R) have abundant examples, In
LTVRR, we focus on such rare relational events where S,R,
and O also follow a long-tail distribution which we believe
is more realistic and challenging

even zero-shot classes (classes that do not appear in the
training set). Few-shot and zero-shot learning has been separately studied in [35, 30, 49] and [41, 41, 40], respectively.
LTVRR Several approaches have been developed to advance Long-Tail Object Recognition (LTOR) [20, 22, 39,
36]. However, most of the metrics and evaluation setups
in long-tail object recognition do not apply to the Visual
Relationship Recognition (VRR) literature, which is more
complex and structured. The goal of the VRR task is
to recognize the categories of two interacting objects and
their relation, e.g., recognizing triplets like <dog, riding,
horse> [23, 28, 47]. In contrast to most existing VRR
benchmarks, all object categories no matter their frequency
contribute equally to evaluation metrics in LTOR, where
the average per class accuracy is the common metric. Inspired by LTOR literature, we extend their long-tail setup to
study visual relationship recognition. In our setup, dubbed
Long-Tail Visual Relationship Recognition (LTVRR), subjects, objects, and relationships follow a long-tail distribu-

15921

