DnD: Dense Depth Estimation in Crowded Dynamic Indoor Scenes
*

*

Dongki Jung 1 Jaehoon Choi 1,2 Yonghan Lee1 Deokhwa Kim1 Changick Kim3
Dinesh Manocha2 Donghwan Lee1
1
NAVER LABS 2 University of Maryland 3 KAIST

Projected Depth & RGB Image

Input

3D Model

Output

Monocular Depth Estimation

Figure 1: With traditional 3D reconstruction methods [45, 46], we can obtain a 3D model on complex and crowded indoor
environments. Our novel approach, DnD, takes both an RGB image and a sparse depth map projected from this 3D model as
input. Our method predicts dense and absolute-scale depth maps of single view dynamic scenes.

Abstract
We present a novel approach for estimating depth from
a monocular camera as it moves through complex and
crowded indoor environments, e.g., a department store or a
metro station. Our approach predicts absolute scale depth
maps over the entire scene consisting of a static background
and multiple moving people, by training on dynamic scenes.
Since it is difficult to collect dense depth maps from crowded
indoor environments, we design our training framework
without requiring depths produced from depth sensing devices. Our network leverages RGB images and sparse depth
maps generated from traditional 3D reconstruction methods
to estimate dense depth maps. We use two constraints to
handle depth for non-rigidly moving people without tracking their motion explicitly. We demonstrate that our approach offers consistent improvements over recent depth
estimation methods on the NAVERLABS dataset, which includes complex and crowded scenes.

1. Introduction
There is considerable interest in using robotics and aug* These two authors contributed equally.
Correspondence to dongki.jung@naverlabs.com, kevchoi@umd.edu

mented reality technologies in crowded real-world spaces
corresponding to malls, airports, or public places. In order to perform safe navigation or combine real and virtual
worlds, robots [29, 28, 44] or mobile devices [50, 35] need
a 3D geometric representation of large-scale indoor environments. While there is considerable progress in terms of
capturing depth using LiDARs or stereo cameras, existing
devices still have their own limitations. For example, 3D
LiDARs [8] tend to produce sparse depth maps for distant
objects and may result in noisy point cloud maps due to the
high level of occlusions caused by multiple moving people.
Moreover, because of the high prices and large volumes of
the depth sensors, there is a critical need to consider the case
where only a single camera is available.
Given a large number of video frames, traditional 3D reconstruction methods such as structure-from-motion (SfM)
and multi-view stereo (MVS) [14, 49, 45, 46] can generate
a 3D model. Recently, visual localization techniques [38]
have been developed to allow mobile devices to obtain the
location and camera pose from which the image is taken.
Given the 3D model and visual position, however, mobile
devices moving through crowded indoor environments are
only able to capture sparse and highly noisy depth maps.
This is because traditional reconstruction methods are based
on both a static scene assumption (that static areas of the
12797

