Aha! Adaptive History-driven Attack for Decision-based Black-box Models
Jie Li1 , Rongrong Ji1,2,4 ,* Peixian Chen1,6 , Baochang Zhang3 , Xiaopeng Hong5 ,
Ruixin Zhang6 , Shaoxin Li6 , Jilin Li6 , Feiyue Huang6 , Yongjian Wu6
1
MAC Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 2 Peng Cheng Lab, 3 Beihang University,
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, 5 Xi’an Jiaotong University, 6 Youtu Lab, Tencent

Abstract
The decision-based black-box attack means to craft adversarial examples with only the top-1 label of the victim
model available. A common practice is to start from a large
perturbation and then iteratively reduce it with a deterministic direction and a random one while keeping it adversarial. The limited information obtained from each query and
inefficient direction sampling impede attack efficiency, making it hard to obtain a small enough perturbation within a
limited number of queries. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel attack method termed Adaptive History-driven
Attack (AHA) which gathers information from all historical queries as the prior for current sampling. Moreover, to
balance between the deterministic direction and the random
one, we dynamically adjust the coefficient according to the
ratio of the actual magnitude reduction to the expected one.
Such a strategy improves the success rate of queries during optimization, letting adversarial examples move swiftly
along the decision boundary. Our method can also integrate
with subspace optimization like dimension reduction to further improve efficiency. Extensive experiments on both ImageNet and CelebA datasets demonstrate that our method
achieves at least 24.3% lower magnitude of perturbation
on average with the same number of queries. Finally, we
prove the practical potential of our method by evaluating it
on popular defense methods and a real-world system provided by MEGVII Face++.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development and the dominant performance, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successfully deployed to improve productivity in many fields,
e.g., the voice assistant in smart speakers, image recognition APIs on the cloud, and automatic pilot in vehicles. Though many effort have been put into explaining the
DNNs [1, 18, 19, 43], DNNs are still far from full control* R. Ji (rrji@xmu.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

lable and have been proven to be vulnerable to carefully
crafted imperceptible perturbations, i.e., adversarial perturbations [41], which poses threats to the application of DNNs
in security scenarios.
Therefore, many methods have been proposed to evaluate the robustness of the DNNs under different settings [13,
4, 21]. Among all the settings, the black-box setting
is the most practical but challenging one since only the
corresponding outputs are available. Some attack methods [29, 38, 37] craft adversarial examples on white-box
models and transfer them to the victim model. These
transfer-based methods consume fewer resources but can
not guarantee a high attack success rate. Some adversaries
turn to query the model repeatedly. Depending on the form
of the outputs, query-based black-box attack methods can
be further divided into the score-based attack and decisionbased attack. Outputs of the former one are usually continuous and floating numbers (e.g., class probabilities) responding to the change of input rapidly, which is able to guide the
perturbation generation step by step. The decision-based
attack setting is more challenging where the adversary can
only fetch the result whether the input belongs to the same
class as the target sample or not. Such a setting usually is
correlated to a target attack whose goal is to craft an adversarial example classified as a target one.
The most classic decision-based attack, Boundary Attack [2], starts from an adversarial example and search
along two directions: the source direction towards the
source image directly for reducing perturbation and the
spherical direction randomly sampled from the normal distribution for exploring. However, this method mainly depends on random sampling without utilizing information
from prior queries efficiently, resulting in an enormous
number of queries. Many methods have been proposed to
improve it. Biased Boundary Attack [3] introduces three biases to improve the efficiency of direction sampling. Evolutionary Attack [10] reduces the solution space and models
the local geometry via successful queries with (1+1)-CMAES optimization. However, without taking full advantage
of all information from all queries, these methods still re-

16168

