STEM: An approach to Multi-source Domain Adaptation with Guarantees
Van-Anh Nguyen1 , Tuan Nguyen2 , Trung Le2 , Quan Hung Tran3 , Dinh Phung2,4
1
VNU - University of Science, Vietnam
2
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Australia
3
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA, USA
4
VinAI Research, Vietnam
vananhnt57@gmail.com, {tuan.ng, trunglm}@monash.edu,
qtran@adobe.com, dinh.phung@monash.edu

Abstract
Multi-source Domain Adaptation (MSDA) is more practical but challenging than the conventional unsupervised
domain adaptation due to the involvement of diverse multiple data sources. Two fundamental challenges of MSDA
are: (i) how to deal with the diversity in the multiple source
domains and (ii) how to cope with the data shift between
the target domain and the source domains. In this paper,
to address the first challenge, we propose a theoreticalguaranteed approach to combine domain experts locally
trained on its own source domain to achieve a combined
multi-source teacher that globally predicts well on the mixture of source domains. To address the second challenge,
we propose to bridge the gap between the target domain
and the mixture of source domains in the latent space via a
generator or feature extractor. Together with bridging the
gap in the latent space, we train a student to mimic the predictions of the teacher expert on both source and target examples. In addition, our approach is guaranteed with rigorous theory offered insightful justifications of how each component influences the transferring performance. Extensive
experiments conducted on three benchmark datasets show
that our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performances to the best of our knowledge.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have enjoyed great
success in performing visual learning tasks under the collection of massive annotated data [26, 64, 50, 54, 3]. However, directly transferring knowledge of a learned model,
which is trained on a source domain, to a novel target
domain can undesirably degrade its performance due to
the existence of domain and label shifts [49]. To address these issues, a diverse range of approaches in do-

main adaptation (DA) has been proposed from shallow domain adaptation [45, 16, 5, 6] to deep domain adaptation
[13, 32, 51, 12, 55, 9, 29, 41, 40]. While the conventional
DA aims to transfer knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain, in many real-world
contexts, labeled data are collected from multiple domains,
for example, images taken under different conditions (e.g.,
weather, poses, lighting conditions, distinct backgrounds,
and etc) [70]. This has arisen a very practical and useful setting for transfer learning named multi-source domain
adaptation (MSDA) in which we need to transfer knowledge
from multiple distinct source domains to a single unlabeled
target domain.
For multi-source domain adaptation, there exist two fundamental challenges: (i) how to deal with the diversity in
the labeled source domains and (ii) how to cope with the
domain shift between the target domain and the source domains. The first challenge makes it harder to train a single
model that is expected to work well on multiple source domains due to the requirement to resolve diverge data complexity imposed on model training. To overcome this challenge, inspired by [36, 23], we propose combining domain
experts into a multi-source teacher by mixing the domain
expert predictions using the coefficients learned by a domain discriminator. Our rigorous theory demonstrates that
the performance of this multi-source teacher expert predicting globally on the mixture source domains is at least better than that of the worst domain expert predicting locally
on its domain (see Theorem 1). Therefore, if we can train
qualified domain experts, their combination leads to another
qualified expert with significantly broader coverage.
To address the second challenge, as suggested by Theorem 3, we employ a joint feature extractor that maps the
target domain and the mixture of source domains into the
same latent space with the help of adversarial learning. Furthermore, together with closing the divergence of the target
domain and mixture of source domains on the latent space,

9352

