Self-Supervised Image Prior Learning with GMM from a Single Noisy Image

Average PSNR on BSD68 (dB)

Haosen Liu1,2 , Xuan Liu1 , Jiangbo Lu2 , Shan Tan1 *
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 SmartMore Corporation
{haosen.liu0803, jiangbo.lu}@gmail.com, {liuxuan99, shantan}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
The lack of clean images undermines the practicability
of supervised image prior learning methods, of which the
training schemes require a large number of clean images.
To free image prior learning from the image collection burden, a novel Self-Supervised learning method for Gaussian
Mixture Model (SS-GMM) is proposed in this paper. It can
simultaneously achieve the noise level estimation and the
image prior learning directly from only a single noisy image. This work is derived from our study on eigenvalues of
the GMM’s covariance matrix. Through statistical experiments and theoretical analysis, we conclude that (1) covariance eigenvalues for clean images hold the sparsity; and
that (2) those for noisy images contain sufficient information for noise estimation. The first conclusion inspires us to
impose a sparsity constraint on covariance eigenvalues during the learning process to suppress the influence of noise.
The second conclusion leads to a self-contained noise estimation module of high accuracy in our proposed method.
This module serves to estimate the noise level and automatically determine the specific level of the sparsity constraint. Our final derived method requires only minor modifications to the standard expectation-maximization algorithm. This makes it easy to implement. Very interestingly,
the GMM learned via our proposed self-supervised learning method can even achieve better image denoising performance than its supervised counterpart, i.e., the EPLL.
Also, it is on par with the state-of-the-art self-supervised
deep learning method, i.e., the Self2Self. Code is available
at https://github.com/HUST-Tan/SS-GMM.

1. Introduction
Image modeling and prior learning play key roles in the
design of an image denoising algorithm. Traditional image modeling methods are generally hand-designed. These
* Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NNSFC), under Grant Nos.
61672253 and 62071197. Part of this work was done when Haosen was
interning in SmartMore Co., Ltd.

28.6
SS-GMM
Self-Supervised Methods
Other Methods

28.4
28.2

EPLL
NL-Bayes

SS-GMM
PGPD
BM3D

S2S

28.0
27.8
27.6

DIP
N2V

27.4
28.4

28.6

28.8

29.0

29.2

29.4

29.6

Average PSNR on Set12 (dB)

Figure 1. Average PSNR of image denoising results for three noise
levels σ=15, 25, 50 on Set12 and BSD68. These results are calculated based on Table 1. Comparison methods include a) the nonlearning method: BM3D [8]; b) GMM-related methods: EPLL
[33], PGPD [30] and NL-Bayes [16]; c) Self-supervised deep
learning methods: N2V [15], DIP [28] and S2S [22]; d) Our proposed self-supervised GMM (SS-GMM).

methods can be classified into two main categories [13], i.e.,
the analysis-based methods and the synthesis-based ones.
The analysis-based methods directly model the image itself [26, 4, 5, 17, 18], while synthesis-based methods model
coefficients of an image in a transform-domain [10, 12,
23, 11]. The main drawback of traditional hand-designed
methods is that images in the real world are too complex
to be effectively modeled with simplified assumptions. To
tackle this problem, the data-driven learning method is utilized as an alternative. Some representatives in this branch
include [25, 33, 27, 7, 32]. These methods have indeed
achieved great success in image denoising tasks. However,
their state-of-the-art performances are based on acquiring a
large number of clean images, which are generally unavailable in practice. This undermines the practicability of these
methods.
To reduce or even eliminate the image collection burden, the self-supervised learning method, which only requires noisy images themselves during the training process,
has attracted more and more attention. One recent work in
this field is the deep image prior (DIP) [28]. It performs
the self-supervised learning for the generator network with
an early-stopping strategy. Since the early-stopping strategy acts as an implicit constraint on network parameters
[14], an idea coming to our mind is that imposing reason-

2845

