DECA: Deep viewpoint-Equivariant human pose estimation using Capsule
Autoencoders
Nicola Garau1 , Niccolò Bisagno1 , Piotr Bródka1 , and Nicola Conci1
{nicola.garau, niccolo.bisagno}@unitn.it, piotrbrodka95@gmail.com, nicola.conci@unitn.it
1
University of Trento, Via Sommarive, 9, 38123 Povo, Trento TN

Input

(a) 2D/3D HPE

(b) 3D HMR

(c) Ours

Figure 1: [Better seen in color]. Overview of the proposed solution. Two different views of the same subject are shown for
each image: (a) 2D/3D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) and (b) 3D Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) methods achieve good
accuracy on the front-view (second row). Changing the viewpoint turns into performance degradation (first row). Our method
(c) promotes viewpoint equivariance, showing good results in both the RGB and depth domains.

Abstract
Human Pose Estimation (HPE) aims at retrieving the
3D position of human joints from images or videos. We
show that current 3D HPE methods suffer a lack of viewpoint equivariance, namely they tend to fail or perform
poorly when dealing with viewpoints unseen at training
time. Deep learning methods often rely on either scaleinvariant, translation-invariant, or rotation-invariant operations, such as max-pooling. However, the adoption of such
procedures does not necessarily improve viewpoint generalization, rather leading to more data-dependent methods.
To tackle this issue, we propose a novel capsule autoencoder network with fast Variational Bayes capsule routing, named DECA. By modeling each joint as a capsule

entity, combined with the routing algorithm, our approach
can preserve the joints’ hierarchical and geometrical structure in the feature space, independently from the viewpoint.
By achieving viewpoint equivariance, we drastically reduce the network data dependency at training time, resulting in an improved ability to generalize for unseen viewpoints. In the experimental validation, we outperform other
methods on depth images from both seen and unseen viewpoints, both top-view, and front-view. In the RGB domain,
the same network gives state-of-the-art results on the challenging viewpoint transfer task, also establishing a new
framework for top-view HPE. The code can be found at
https://github.com/mmlab-cv/DECA.

11677

