Motion Guided Region Message Passing for Video Captioning
Shaoxiang Chen and Yu-Gang Jiang∗
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
{sxchen13, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Video captioning is an important vision task and has
been intensively studied in the computer vision community.
Existing methods that utilize the fine-grained spatial information have achieved significant improvements, however,
they either rely on costly external object detectors or do not
sufficiently model the spatial/temporal relations. In this paper, we aim at designing a spatial information extraction
and aggregation method for video captioning without the
need of external object detectors. For this purpose, we propose a Recurrent Region Attention module to better extract
diverse spatial features, and by employing Motion-Guided
Cross-frame Message Passing, our model is aware of the
temporal structure and able to establish high-order relations among the diverse regions across frames. They jointly
encourage information communication and produce compact and powerful video representations. Furthermore, an
Adjusted Temporal Graph Decoder is proposed to flexibly
update video features and model high-order temporal relations during decoding. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets: MSVD, MSR-VTT, and VATEX demonstrate
that our proposed method can outperform state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Automatically generating sentences to describe video
contents, i.e., video captioning, has been attracting research attention from both the computer vision and natural language processing communities. From the vision
perspective, extracting and fully utilizing the information
contained in the video is the key of improving video captioning. Recent advancements of video captioning methods [6, 16, 55, 26, 50, 57, 58] can also be mainly attributed
to the exploration of more fine-grained spatial information
within the video frames. An representative example, ORGTRL [57] (Fig. 1 (c)), detects spatial bounding boxes of the
important objects with an external object detector [32] and
∗ Corresponding author.

Types
Time
Consumption
Number
of Regions
Spatial
Relation
Modeling
Fine-grained
Spatial
Information
Extraction

(a) Grid-based

(b) Region-based

(c) Object-based

Lowest

low

high

𝑇𝑇

𝑇𝑇 × 𝑁𝑁

𝑇𝑇 × 𝑁𝑁

None

Spatial
Attention

Decoding

Object
Relation
Graph

Region
Message
Passing

Recurrent
Region
Attention

Object
Detection

…
Feature map

…

𝑇𝑇 Frames

Figure 1. Illustration of video captioning methods with different
types of fine-grained spatial information extraction strategies: (a)
Grid-based: e.g., MGSA [6], attends to one region per frame.
(b) Region-based: our proposed method, extracts multiple regions
and performs message passing to conduct relation modeling. (c)
Object-based: e.g., ORG-TRL [57], can extract multiple regions
on each frame and model their relations, but are computationally
less efficient due to the use of object detectors.

then builds an object relation graph to model the relations
among all the objects. Objects together with their relations
are undoubtedly crucial for video captioning, because the
object interactions can be explicitly captured and lead to a
better understanding of the video contents.
However, it is costly to extract localized object features
by object detection and pretrained object detectors can not
generalize well to animated or video game contents in some
datasets [46]. The recent research of Jiang et al. [17]
compares grid-based and object region-based features, and
shows that incorporating object detectors into image visual
question answering models can significantly slow down the
models by 4.6 to 23.8 times, while using such object features does not bring significant advantages (in terms of accuracy) over using plain CNN feature maps (or grid features). They also conclude that the semantic content that
features represent is more critical than the format of features. Besides, incorporating an object detector requires
densely annotated external data and also increases the fi-

1543

