Context Reasoning Attention Network for Image Super-Resolution
Yulun Zhang1 , Donglai Wei2 , Can Qin1 , Huan Wang1,∗ , Hanspeter Pﬁster3 , Yun Fu1
1
Northeastern University, 2 Boston College, 3 Harvard University
Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are achieving great successes for image super-resolution (SR), where
global context is crucial for accurate restoration. However,
the basic convolutional layer in CNNs is designed to extract
local patterns, lacking the ability to model global context.
With global context information, lots of efforts have been
devoted to augmenting SR networks, especially by global
feature interaction methods. These works incorporate the
global context into local feature representation. However,
recent advances in neuroscience show that it is necessary
for the neurons to dynamically modulate their functions according to context, which is neglected in most CNN based
SR methods. Motivated by those observations and analyses,
we propose context reasoning attention network (CRAN) to
modulate the convolution kernel according to the global
context adaptively. Speciﬁcally, we extract global context
descriptors, which are further enhanced with semantic reasoning. Channel and spatial interactions are then introduced to generate context reasoning attention mask, which
is applied to modify the convolution kernel adaptively. Such
a modulated convolution layer is utilized as basic component to build the blocks and networks. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets with multiple degradation
models show that CRAN obtains superior results and favorable trade-off between performance and model complexity.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct an accurate high-resolution (HR) image given its low-resolution
(LR) counterpart [14]. Image SR plays a fundamental role
in various computer vision applications, ranging from security and surveillance imaging [71], medical imaging [48], to
object recognition [45]. However, image SR is an ill-posed
problem, since there exists multiple solutions for any LR
input. To tackle such an inverse problem, lots of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been proposed to
learn mappings between LR and HR image pairs.
Deep CNNs have achieved remarkable successes for image SR [10, 12, 26, 36, 62, 18, 66, 1, 23, 31, 67]. In
∗ Corresponding author: Huan Wang (wang.huan@northeastern.edu)

Urban100: img 098

HR

Bicubic

SAN [9]

CSNLN [41]

RFANet [38]

CRAN (ours)

Figure 1. Visual examples for 4× SR with Bicubic (BI) degradation on Urban100 [22]. SAN, CSNLN, and RFANet recover
parts of local textures. Global context guided convolution enables
CRAN to recover more structural textures with proper directions.

CNNs, convolution extracts local patches by a sliding window, making it only capable of capturing local patterns.
However, recent advances in neuroscience reveal that neurons’ awareness of global context is essential for us to process complex perceptual tasks effectively [34, 15]. The sliding window mechanism in convolution limits its ability to
utilize global context, being crucial for accurate image SR.
To alleviate this limitation, many SR methods have been
recently proposed to introduce global context modeling
modules into SR networks [64, 9, 38, 65, 41]. Zhang et
al. proposed residual channel attention network [64], where
the global context was modelled with global average pooling and used to rescale each feature channel. Dai et al. proposed second-order channel attention by considering higher
order feature statistics in SAN [9]. Different from channel
attention, Liu et al. proposed an enhanced spatial attention
block in FRANet [38] to make the residual features be more
focused on critical spatial contents.
Zhang et al. further proposed residual non-local attention network [65] to rescale hierarchical features with mixed
channel and spatial attentions adaptively. Such a non-local
attention mechanism was further developed in cross-scale
non-local attention (CSNLN) [41]. Mei et al. proposed a
self-exemplar mining cell to exhaustively mine all the possible intrinsic priors by combining local and in-scale/crossscale non-local feature correlations in CSNLN [41]. As
shown in Figure 1, SAN, RFANet, and CSNLN could recover some kind of local textures. But, it seems that the
directions of those textures are not faithful to the ground
truth. This is mainly because these methods mainly incorporate the global context into the local features.
However, as investigated in neuroscience [15], the func-

4278

