AdaFit: Rethinking Learning-based Normal Estimation on Point Clouds
Runsong Zhu1 * Yuan Liu2∗
1

Wuhan University

Zhen Dong1† Yuan Wang1
Bisheng Yang1†
2

The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
This paper presents a neural network for robust normal estimation on point clouds, named AdaFit, that can
deal with point clouds with noise and density variations.
Existing works use a network to learn point-wise weights
for weighted least squares surface fitting to estimate the
normals, which has difficulty in finding accurate normals
in complex regions or containing noisy points. By analyzing the step of weighted least squares surface fitting,
we find that it is hard to determine the polynomial order
of the fitting surface and the fitting surface is sensitive to
outliers. To address these problems, we propose a simple
yet effective solution that adds an additional offset prediction to improve the quality of normal estimation. Furthermore, in order to take advantage of points from different
neighborhood sizes, a novel Cascaded Scale Aggregation
layer is proposed to help the network predict more accurate point-wise offsets and weights. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that AdaFit achieves state-of-the-art performance on both the synthetic PCPNet dataset and the realword SceneNN dataset. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Runsong123/AdaFit.

1. Introduction
In point cloud processing, a fundamental task is to robustly estimate surface normals from point clouds, which
plays a key role in many practical applications, such as surface reconstruction [1], registration [2], segmentation [3],
primitive fitting [4], reverse engineering [5] and grasping [6]. Due to the presence of noise, point density variations, and missing structures, robust and accurate surface
normal estimation on point clouds remains challenging.
The most direct way for normal estimation is to regress
the normal vector from the feature extracted on neighbor* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors: [dongzhenwhu,bshyang]@whu.edu.cn

Input

Tengping Jiang1
3

Wenping Wang2,3

Texas A&M University

Output

Underfitting

Weight

Weight+Offset

Overfitting

60
Outliers

(c)
Groundtruth
Fitted surface

(a)

(b)

0

Prediction
Query point

(d)

Surface

Figure 1. (a) Given the input point cloud (left), our target is to estimate a normal for every point (right). (b) Current weighted least
square surface fitting is severely affected by underfitting (top),
overfitting (middle) or outliers (bottom), which leads to inaccurate
normal estimation. (c) The error maps of two normal estimation
methods. The first model only uses the weighted least square surface fitting (left) while the second model adds additional offsets
to adjust the distribution of neighboring points, which produces a
more accurate normal estimation. (d) The reconstructed surfaces
using normals from the model with weights only (left) and the
model with weights and offsets (right).

ing points [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. However, such brute-force
regression only forces the network to memorize normal vectors, which leads to limited generalization ability. This
generalization problem becomes more severe on real-world
data due to the scarcity of training data.
Rather than direct regression, a more accurate approach
to estimate the normal for a specific point is to fit a geometric surface (plane or polynomial surface) on its neighboring
points and then compute the normal from the estimated surface. Since the estimated surface is usually sensitive to the
noise or outliers present in the neighborhood, most existing methods [13, 14, 15] use weighted surface fitting which
predicts point-wise weights to control the contribution of
every neighboring point to the final surface. The focus of
these works is to obtain more accurate point-wise weights
that can reduce the effects of noisy points and outliers as
possible. Though substantial improvements on normal estimation have been achieved by using a neural network to

6118

