ResRep: Lossless CNN Pruning via Decoupling Remembering and Forgetting
Xiaohan Ding 1,2 Tianxiang Hao 1,2 Jianchao Tan 3 Ji Liu 3
Jungong Han 4 Yuchen Guo 1 Guiguang Ding 1,2 ∗
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
AI platform department, Seattle AI lab, and FeDA lab, Kwai Inc.
4
Computer Science Department, Aberystwyth University, SY23 3FL, UK
dxh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

beyondhtx,tanjianchaoustc,ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

jungonghan77,yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose ResRep, a novel method for lossless channel
pruning (a.k.a. filter pruning), which slims down a CNN by
reducing the width (number of output channels) of convolutional layers. Inspired by the neurobiology research about
the independence of remembering and forgetting, we propose to re-parameterize a CNN into the remembering parts
and forgetting parts, where the former learn to maintain
the performance and the latter learn to prune. Via training with regular SGD on the former but a novel update rule
with penalty gradients on the latter, we realize structured
sparsity. Then we equivalently merge the remembering and
forgetting parts into the original architecture with narrower
layers. In this sense, ResRep can be viewed as a successful application of Structural Re-parameterization. Such
a methodology distinguishes ResRep from the traditional
learning-based pruning paradigm that applies a penalty on
parameters to produce sparsity, which may suppress the parameters essential for the remembering. ResRep slims down
a standard ResNet-50 with 76.15% accuracy on ImageNet
to a narrower one with only 45% FLOPs and no accuracy drop, which is the first to achieve lossless pruning with
such a high compression ratio. The code and models are at
https://github.com/DingXiaoH/ResRep.

1. Introduction
The mainstream techniques to compress and accelerate
convolutional neural network (CNN) include sparsification
∗ This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. 61925107, U1936202, 61971260), the National Key R&D
Program of China (No. 2020AAA0105500). Xiaohan Ding is funded by
the Baidu Scholarship Program 2019. Correspondence to: Yuchen Guo,
Guiguang Ding.

dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

[10, 18, 20], channel pruning [26, 27, 35], quantization
[4, 5, 45, 68], knowledge distillation [28, 32, 41, 61], etc.
Channel pruning [27] (a.k.a. filter pruning [34] or network
slimming [42]) reduces the width (i.e., number of output
channels) of convolutional layers to effectively reduce the
number of floating-point operations (FLOPs) and memory
footprint, which is complementary to the other model compression methods as it produces a thinner model of the original architecture with no custom structures or operations.
However, as CNN’s representational capacity depends
on the width of conv layers, it is difficult to reduce the
width without performance drops. On practical CNN architectures like ResNet-50 [22] and large-scale datasets like
ImageNet [6], lossless pruning with high compression ratio has long been considered challenging. For reasonable
trade-off between compression ratio and performance, a
typical paradigm (Fig. 1.A) [2, 3, 9, 36, 39, 62, 63] trains
the model with magnitude-related penalty loss (e.g., group
Lasso [57, 60]) on the conv kernels to produce structured
sparsity, which means all the parameters of some channels
become small in magnitude. Ideally, if the parameters of
pruned channels are small enough, the pruned model may
deliver the same performance as before (i.e., after training
but before pruning), which we refer to as perfect pruning.
Since both the training and pruning may degrade the
performance, we evaluate a training-based pruning method
from two aspects. 1) Resistance. The training phase tends
to decrease the accuracy (referred to as training-caused
damage) as it introduces some desired properties such as
structured sparsity into the model, which may be harmful
because the objective of optimization is changed and the
parameters are deviated from the optima. We say a model
has high resistance if the performance maintains high during training. 2) Prunability. When we prune the model into
a smaller one after training, the properties obtained (e.g.,

4510

