CPF: Learning a Contact Potential Field to Model the Hand-Object Interaction
Lixin Yang1,2 Xinyu Zhan1 Kailin Li1 Wenqiang Xu1,2 Jiefeng Li1 Cewu Lu1,2,†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
{siriusyang, kelvin34501, kailinli, vinjohn, ljf likit, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Modeling the hand-object (HO) interaction not only requires estimation of the HO pose, but also pays attention to
the contact due to their interaction. Significant progress has
been made in estimating hand and object separately with
deep learning methods, simultaneous HO pose estimation
and contact modeling has not yet been fully explored. In this
paper, we present an explicit contact representation namely
Contact Potential Field (CPF), and a learning-fitting hybrid framework namely MIHO to Modeling the Interaction
of Hand and Object. In CPF, we treat each contacting HO
vertex pair as a spring-mass system. Hence the whole system forms a potential field with minimal elastic energy at
the grasp position. Extensive experiments on the two commonly used benchmarks have demonstrated that our method
can achieve state-of-the-art in several reconstruction metrics, and allow us to produce more physically plausible
HO pose even when the ground-truth exhibits severe interpenetration or disjointedness. Our code is available at
https://github.com/lixiny/CPF.

1. Introduction
It is essential to model hand-object interaction from a
single image for understanding the human activities, in
which simulating a physically plausible grasp is also crucial for VR/AR, teleoperation, and grasping applications.
Given an image as input, the problem aims to not only estimate proper hand-object pose but also to recover a natural grasp configuration. While estimating hand [36, 31, 58,
4, 19, 56] or object [20, 23, 14, 54, 55] alone has made a
considerable success over the past decades, simultaneously
estimating hand-object pose [24, 51, 23, 28, 12] with interaction has only emerged in the past few years.
Previous works on joint hand-object estimation usually
treat the contact as a result of the correct pose estimation
[23, 29, 44]. Apparently, if the hand and object can be
perfectly recovered, the contact between them will also be
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed Contact Potential Field.
The contacts between hand and object vertices are modeled as the
attractive (right) and repulsive (left) springs that connect paired
vertex on them.

satisfied. Yet, such perfection cannot be achieved in practice. Since contact can provide rich cues to guide accurate
pose and natural grasp, more attention has been recently
drawn to the contact modeling [5, 7] and contact representation [26, 6]. And several contact datasets [5, 7, 50]
have been released to the community. However, a solution of properly integrating contact modeling into the current hand-object pose estimation pipeline has remained an
open research question. The existing methods either exploit
distance-based attraction and repulsion [24, 26] to mitigate
disjointedness and interpenetration, or refine the predicted
pose in virtue of physics simulators [28, 29, 17]. While the
both solutions are considered to be irrelevant to contact semantics, which we will explain later, the latter solutions also
lack flexibility on hand pose and shape.
To model the contact, we propose an explicit representation named Contact Potential Field (CPF, §4). It is built
upon the idea that the contact between a hand and an object mesh under grasp configuration is multi-point contact,
which involves multiple hand-object vertex pair affinities.
These affinities are regarded as the contact semantics, which
depict the pairing of the hand-object vertices that come into
contact with each other during the interaction. When noisy
predicted hand and object are disjointed from each other,
we shall apply an attraction to pull these vertex pairs close;
While the hand and object are intersected, we shall have a

11097

