Learning to Generate Scene Graph from Natural Language Supervision
Yiwu Zhong1 , Jing Shi2 , Jianwei Yang3 , Chenliang Xu2 , Yin Li1
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 University of Rochester 3 Microsoft Research

Abstract

boat

“A man wearing a blue shirt is
driving a boat on the river.”

Image-Text Pair
Image + Object Detector

Learning from image-text data has demonstrated recent
success for many recognition tasks, yet is currently limited
to visual features or individual visual concepts such as objects. In this paper, we propose one of the first methods
that learn from image-sentence pairs to extract a graphical representation of localized objects and their relationships within an image, known as scene graph. To bridge
the gap between images and texts, we leverage an offthe-shelf object detector to identify and localize object instances, match labels of detected regions to concepts parsed
from captions, and thus create “pseudo” labels for learning scene graph. Further, we design a Transformer-based
model to predict these “pseudo” labels via a masked token
prediction task. Learning from only image-sentence pairs,
our model achieves 30% relative gain over a latest method
trained with human-annotated unlocalized scene graphs.
Our model also shows strong results for weakly and fully
supervised scene graph generation. In addition, we explore
an open-vocabulary setting for detecting scene graphs, and
present the first result for open-set scene graph generation.

1. Introduction
An image might have millions of pixels, yet its visual
content can be often summarized using dozens of words.
Images and their text descriptions (i.e. captions) are available in great abundance from the Internet [40], and offer a
unique opportunity of image understanding aided by natural language. Learning visual knowledge from image-text
pairs has been a long-standing problem [50, 8, 14, 7, 22,
54, 58, 16, 61, 37, 11, 35], with recent success on learning
deep models for visual representation [7, 22, 37, 11, 35],
and for recognizing and detecting individual visual concepts
(e.g. objects) [54, 58, 61, 35, 16]. In this paper, we ask the
question: can we learn to detect visual relationships beyond
individual concepts from image-text pairs? Fig. 1 (a) illustrates an example of such relationships (“man drive boat”).
As a first step, we focus on learning scene graph generation (SGG) from image-sentence pairs. A scene graph
is a symbolic and graphical representation of an image,

Supervision from
Natural Language
Detected Objects:
person, shirt, bench, ship

Our Model

man

drive
wear

Inference

shirt

--------------------Recall@100

Scene Graph (SG) Detection Performance

-----------------------------------------

15.3

11.5

7.0

-----------------------

SOTA
Ours
Fully-supervised
(Upper Bound)

5.4

Supervision Level
Image Caption

Unlocalized SG

Localized SG

Figure 1. Top (our setting): Our goal is learning to generate localized scene graphs from image-text pairs. Once trained, our model
takes an image and its detected objects as inputs and outputs the
image scene graph. Bottom (our results): A comparison of results from our method and [60] with varying levels of supervision.

with each graph node as a localized object and each edge
as a relationship (e.g. a predicate) between a pair of objects. Scene graph has emerged as a structured representation for many vision tasks, including action recognition [19], 3D scene understanding [1, 49], image generation and editing [21, 13], and vision-language tasks (e.g.
image captioning [55, 56, 66] and visual question answering [41, 47, 17, 17]). Most previous scene graph methods [52, 28, 62, 27, 53, 4, 46, 45, 65] follow a fully supervised approach, relying on human annotations of object
bounding boxes, object categories and their relationships.
These annotations are very costly and difficult to scale. Recently, Zareian et al. [60] considered weakly supervised
learning of scene graphs from image-level labels of unlocalized scene graphs. Nonetheless, learning scene graphs from
images and their text descriptions remains unexplored.
A major challenge of learning scene graphs from imagesentence pairs is the missing link between many candidate
image regions and a few concepts (e.g. nouns and predicates) parsed from an image caption. To this end, we propose to leverage off-the-shelf object detectors, capable of
identifying and localizing object instances from hundreds
of common categories. Our key idea is that object labels

1823

