Towards Robustness of Deep Neural Networks via Regularization
Yao Li1 Martin Renqiang Min2 Thomas Lee3
Wenchao Yu2 Erik Kruus2 Wei Wang4 Cho-Jui Hsieh4
1
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 2 NEC Labs America, Princeton
3
University of California, Davis 4 University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated the vulnerability of
deep neural networks against adversarial examples. Inspired by the observation that adversarial examples often
lie outside the natural image data manifold and the intrinsic dimension of image data is much smaller than its pixel
space dimension, we propose to embed high-dimensional
input images into a low-dimensional space and apply regularization on the embedding space to push the adversarial
examples back to the manifold. The proposed framework
is called Embedding Regularized Classiﬁer (ER-Classiﬁer),
which improves the adversarial robustness of the classiﬁer through embedding regularization. Besides improving
classiﬁcation accuracy against adversarial examples, the
framework can be combined with detection methods to detect adversarial examples. Experimental results on several
benchmark datasets show that, our proposed framework
achieves good performance against strong adversarial attack methods.

1. Introduction
It has been shown that Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
are vulnerable to adversarial examples that are generated
by adding carefully crafted perturbations to original images [44, 27]. This phenomenon brings out security concerns for practical applications of deep learning. Despite
many adversarial training methods have been proposed for
defending against adversarial examples [35, 50, 38, 39], we
propose a novel defense and detection method from a different point of view.
Recent work showed that adversarial examples often lie
outside the natural image data manifolds [24, 45]. Since
the model was trained using data in the manifold, the model
naturally mis-classiﬁes on examples outside the manifold.
Therefore, applying regularization to push the adversarial examples back to the natural image data manifold may
help improve the robustness of neural networks (see Figure 1). Furthermore, a consensus in the high-dimensional
data analysis community is that, a method working well on

   


  


  

Figure 1. Natural and adversarial images are from different distributions

the high-dimensional data is because the data is not really
of high-dimension [30]. Inspired by the observation that the
intrinsic dimension of image data is actually much smaller
than its pixel space dimension [30] and adversarial examples lie outside the natural image data manifold [24, 45],
we propose a defense framework called Embedding Regularized Classiﬁer (ER-Classiﬁer) shown in Figure 2.
The difference between ER-Classiﬁer and general deep
classiﬁer is that the extracted feature is regularized by a
discriminator part in ER-Classiﬁer. To be more speciﬁc,
we introduce a discriminator in the latent space which tries
to separate the generated code vectors (output of the encoder network) from the ideal code vectors (sampled from
a prior distribution, i.e., a standard Gaussian distribution).
Employing a similar powerful competitive mechanism as
demonstrated by Generative Adversarial Networks [17], the
discriminator enforces the embedding space of the model
to follow the prior distribution. This regularization process
can help remove the effect of adversarial distortion and push
the adversarial example back to the natural data manifold.
Another difference is that the embedding space dimension
of ER-classiﬁer is much smaller, which makes it easier for
ER-Classiﬁer to apply regularization.
We compare ER-Classiﬁer with other state-of-the-art defense methods on MNIST, CIFAR10, STL10 and Tiny Imagenet. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed
ER-Classiﬁer outperforms other methods by a large margin.
To sum up, this paper makes the following four main contributions:
• A novel uniﬁed end-to-end robust deep neural net-

7496

