Cross-Camera Convolutional Color Constancy
Mahmoud Afifi1,2 *

Jonathan T. Barron1
1

Chloe LeGendre1
2

Google Research

Yun-Ta Tsai1

Francois Bleibel1

York University

Abstract
We present “Cross-Camera Convolutional Color Constancy” (C5), a learning-based method, trained on images
from multiple cameras, that accurately estimates a scene’s
illuminant color from raw images captured by a new camera
previously unseen during training. C5 is a hypernetworklike extension of the convolutional color constancy (CCC)
approach: C5 learns to generate the weights of a CCC
model that is then evaluated on the input image, with the
CCC weights dynamically adapted to different input content. Unlike prior cross-camera color constancy models,
which are usually designed to be agnostic to the spectral
properties of test-set images from unobserved cameras, C5
approaches this problem through the lens of transductive inference: additional unlabeled images are provided as input
to the model at test time, which allows the model to calibrate itself to the spectral properties of the test-set camera
during inference. C5 achieves state-of-the-art accuracy for
cross-camera color constancy on several datasets, is fast to
evaluate (∼7 and ∼90 ms per image on a GPU or CPU,
respectively), and requires little memory (∼2 MB), and thus
is a practical solution to the problem of calibration-free automatic white balance for mobile photography.

1. Introduction
The goal of computational color constancy is to emulate the human visual system’s ability to constantly perceive
object colors even when they are observed under different illumination conditions. In many contexts, this problem
is equivalent to the practical problem of automatic white
balance—removing an undesirable global color cast caused
by the illumination in the scene, thereby, making it appear to
have been imaged under a white light (see Figure 1). White
balance does not only affect the quality of photographs but
also has an impact on the accuracy of different computer vision tasks [3]. On modern digital cameras, automatic white
balance is performed for all captured images as an essential
* This work was done while Mahmoud was an intern at Google.

Canon EOS 5DSR

Nikon D810

Mobile Sony IMX135

Input query image & additional images

Result of C5

Figure 1: Our C5 model exploits the colors of unlabeled additional images captured by the new camera model to generate a specific color constancy model for the input image. These additional
images can be randomly loaded from the photographer’s “camera roll”, or they could be a fixed set taken once by the camera
manufacturer. The shown images were captured by unseen DSLR
and smartphone camera models [38] that were not included in the
training stage.

part of the camera’s imaging pipeline.
Color constancy is a challenging problem, because it
is fundamentally under-constrained: an infinite family of
white-balanced images and global color casts can explain
the same observed image. Color constancy is, therefore, often framed in terms of inferring the most likely illuminant
color given some observed image and some prior knowledge of the spectral properties of the camera’s sensor.
One simple heuristic applied to the color constancy problem is the “gray-world” assumption: that colors in the world
tend to be neutral gray and that the color of the illuminant
can, therefore, be estimated as the average color of the input
image [14]. This gray-world method and its related tech-

1981

