3DVG-Transformer: Relation Modeling for Visual Grounding on Point Clouds
Lichen Zhao∗1 , Daigang Cai∗1 , Lu Sheng†1 , Dong Xu2
1
College of Software, Beihang University, China, 2 The University of Sydney, Australia
{zlc1114, caidaigang, lsheng}@buaa.edu.cn, dong.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

relations in complex 3D scenes and distinguish the proposals of the target object from other similar proposals.

Visual grounding on 3D point clouds is an emerging vision and language task that benefits various applications
in understanding the 3D visual world. By formulating
this task as a grounding-by-detection problem, lots of recent works focus on how to exploit more powerful detectors and comprehensive language features, but (1) how to
model complex relations for generating context-aware object proposals and (2) how to leverage proposal relations
to distinguish the true target object from similar proposals
are not fully studied yet. Inspired by the well-known transformer architecture, we propose a relation-aware visual
grounding method on 3D point clouds, named as 3DVGTransformer, to fully utilize the contextual clues for relationenhanced proposal generation and cross-modal proposal
disambiguation, which are enabled by a newly designed
coordinate-guided contextual aggregation (CCA) module
in the object proposal generation stage, and a multiplex
attention (MA) module in the cross-modal feature fusion
stage. We validate that our 3DVG-Transformer outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin, on
two point cloud-based visual grounding datasets, ScanRefer and Nr3D/Sr3D from ReferIt3D, especially for complex
scenarios containing multiple objects of the same category.

Recently, Chen et al. [6] and Achlioptas et al. [7] proposed to tackle visual grounding on 3D point clouds by formulating it as a grounding-by-detection problem, together
with two newly developed datasets (i.e., ScanRefer [6] and
ReferIt3D [7]). To be specific, they first use the state-of-theart (SOTA) 3D object detector [8] or the ground-truth (GT)
bounding boxes to generate object proposals, whose features are then fused with the language features from the linguistic query to predict the most confident proposals. Since
then, several variants, such as TGNN [9] and InstanceRefer [10], were proposed to leverage instance segmentation [11] and specially designed linguistic features for better localization and fine-grained matching between the two
modalities. However, these methods still suffer from some
critical issues: (1) how to model complex relations (e.g. relative spatial locations) within each point cloud, (2) how to
exploit various relations among proposals to distinguish the
true target object from similar proposals with the aid of textual descriptions. Thus the recent methods [6, 7, 9, 10] usually fail to localize the target object when the input scenes
contain multiple objects from the same category. Moreover,
due to the relatively small scales of recent visual grounding datasets, the existing methods also suffer from the overfitting problem, which also prevents these methods from
learning a generalizable visual grounding model.

1. Introduction

To this end, we propose a relation-aware visual grounding method on 3D point clouds, named as 3DVGTransformer. While our method follows the ground-bydetection strategy from ScanRefer [6], we additionally exploit various relations among proposals at both the object
proposal generation stage and the cross-modal fusion stage,
based on the powerful relation modeling capability by the
well-known transformer architecture [12]. To be specific,
in the object proposal generation stage, after producing the
cluster centers and features as the initial object proposals,
we propose a coordinate-guided contextual aggregation
(CCA) module, which stacks a set of coordinate-guided
transformer layers to extract multi-level context-aware representations from both neighboring proposals and the back-

As one emerging 3D visual understanding task, visual
grounding on point clouds, also called as referring 3D object localization, aims to locate the desired objects or regions in input point cloud from the given textual descriptions. The visual grounding technologies would significantly benefit various real-life applications such as autonomous robots, AR/VR, etc. Even though much progress
has been made in visual grounding on 2D images [1, 2, 3,
4, 5], it is still a challenging task to design a reliable pointbased visual grounding scheme that can well understand the
* First two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: Lu Sheng.

2928

