Context-aware Scene Graph Generation with Seq2Seq Transformers
Yichao Lu1 * Himanshu Rai1∗ Jason Chang1∗ Boris Knyazev2,3
Guangwei Yu1 Shashank Shekhar2,3 Graham W. Taylor2,3 Maksims Volkovs1
1

Layer 6 AI

2

School of Engineering, University of Guelph

3

Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Scene graph generation is an important task in computer vision aimed at improving the semantic understanding of the visual world. In this task, the model needs to detect objects and predict visual relationships between them.
Most of the existing models predict relationships in parallel assuming their independence. While there are different ways to capture these dependencies, we explore a conditional approach motivated by the sequence-to-sequence
(Seq2Seq) formalism. Different from the previous research,
our proposed model predicts visual relationships one at
a time in an autoregressive manner by explicitly conditioning on the already predicted relationships. Drawing
from translation models in NLP, we propose an encoderdecoder model built using Transformers where the encoder captures global context and long range interactions.
The decoder then makes sequential predictions by conditioning on the scene graph constructed so far. In addition, we introduce a novel reinforcement learning-based
training strategy tailored to Seq2Seq scene graph generation. By using a self-critical policy gradient training approach with Monte Carlo search we directly optimize for
the (mean) recall metrics and bridge the gap between training and evaluation. Experimental results on two public
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our Seq2Seq learning approach achieves strong empirical performance, outperforming previous state-of-the-art, while remaining efficient in terms of training and inference time. Full code
for this work is available here: https://github.com/
layer6ai-labs/SGG-Seq2Seq.

1. Introduction
Analyzing natural images containing multiple objects
and complex interactions between them is a challenging
task. We consider a common formulation of this task, scene
graph generation (SGG) [51], in which given an image, we
* Authors contributed equally and order is determined randomly

Figure 1: The top row shows predictions when the model is not
conditioned on any hsubject, predicate, objecti triplets, and the
model incorrectly predicts hman, on, surfboardi. In the bottom
row, as neighboring relevant triplets are revealed to the model
(non-shaded regions), the predictions shift to the correct predicate
hman, holding, surfboardi.

need to detect and predict objects and relationships between
them in the form of a scene graph [18]. SGG is important
for many applications at the intersection of computer vision
and language, such as VQA [61, 16, 39, 15, 10, 26], image
captioning [56, 14], retrieval [18, 2, 43] and others [1, 53].
Humans successfully understand images by alternating
between two primary steps: sequentially attending to different regions of the image and applying high-level reasoning about these regions [47]. The two steps are recurrent
until the image is understood, so the overall process is inherently both sequential and conditional. The benefit of
sequential conditioning also translates to machine learning
models for the SGG task as demonstrated by the example
in Figure 1. Given an image of a beach scene, we aim to
predict the correct relationship (predicate) between “man”
and “surfboard”. At the start, when the model is not shown
any other relationships (grayed out portion in the top image) and hence there is no conditioning, the model predicts
“on” with high likelihood, as this is one of the most common predicates occurring with “man” and “surfboard” in

15931

