Inferring high-resolution traffic accident risk maps based on satellite imagery
and GPS trajectories
Songtao He
MIT CSAIL

Mohammad Amin Sadeghi
HBKU QCRI

Sanjay Chawla
HBKU QCRI

songtao@mit.edu

MSadeghi@hbku.edu.qa

schawla@hbku.edu.qa

Mohammad Alizadeh
MIT CSAIL

Hari Balakrishnan
MIT CSAIL

Samuel Madden
MIT CSAIL

alizadeh@csail.mit.edu

hari@csail.mit.edu

madden@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Traffic accidents cost about 3% of the world’s GDP and
are the leading cause of death in children and young adults.
Accident risk maps are useful tools to monitor and mitigate
accident risk. We present a technique to generate highresolution (5 meters) accident risk maps. At this high resolution, accidents are sparse and risk estimation is limited
by bias-variance trade-off. Prior accident risk maps either
estimate low-resolution maps that are of low utility (high
bias), or they use frequency-based estimation techniques
that inaccurately predict where accidents actually happen
(high variance). To improve this trade-off, we use an endto-end deep architecture that can input satellite imagery,
GPS trajectories, road maps and the history of accidents.
Our evaluation on four metropolitan areas in the US with
a total area of 7,488 km2 shows that our technique outperform prior work in terms of resolution and accuracy.

1. Introduction
According to WHO, each year 1.35 million people die
and 20 to 50 million people sustain non-fatal injuries from
traffic accidents [20]. In the US alone, traffic accidents cost
$871 billion annually [6]. In most countries traffic accidents
cost about 3% of the GDP [20]. By identifying high-risk
locations on the map, many groups, including drivers, police departments, transportation departments and insurance
companies can take actions to reduce this risk.
Accident risk maps assign an expected rate of accident
over a given time period to each location on the map. Prior
works predict accident maps with resolutions of a few hundred meters (Table 1). In this work we predict maps with
5m×5m resolution because there are important details that
are not captured in lower resolutions. At this resolution,
sparsity causes a bias-variance trade-off in the estimation of
the underlying risk. We explain this challenge in Section 2.

Figure 1. Our model inputs road maps, satellite imagery, GPS trajectories, and historical traffic accidents. It outputs accident probability distribution. Note that our model has identified a few locations as high-risk (highlighted with circles) even though they have
no historical accidents. Locations that our model has identified as
high-risk experienced accidents during the follow-up years.

We improve this trade-off by incorporating context information from satellite imagery, GPS trajectories, and road
maps. We use an end-to-end deep neural network to combine different data modalities. We discuss the details of our
model in Section 3. Figure 1 shows our four input modalities, our prediction, and the accidents in the follow-up years.
At 5m×5m resolution, evaluation is also challenging because the ground-truth is noisy (It is sampled from a hidden
risk distribution.) In Section 4 we present a process to estimate the prediction error with respect to the true underlying
risk distribution. Our maps outperform prior work in terms
of resolution and prediction error.
11977

