Extending Neural P-frame Codecs for B-frame Coding
Reza Pourreza and Taco Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research*
{pourreza,tacos}@qti.qualcomm.com

1. Introduction
There are two types of frames in the video coding domain, Intra-frames and Inter-frames. Intra-frames
(I-frames) are encoded/decoded independently of other
frames. I-frame coding is equivalent of image compression. Inter-frames are encoded using motion compensation
followed by residuals i.e. a prediction of an input frame is
initially devised by moving pixels or blocks of one or multiple reference frames and then the prediction is corrected
using residuals. Prediction is an essential task in intercoding, for it is the primary way in which temporal redundancy is exploited. In the traditional paradigm of video coding [34, 41], motion vectors are used to model the motion
of blocks of pixels between a reference and an input image [34]. In the neural video coding domain, dense optical
flow is usually used to model individual pixels movements.
In both cases, a warping is performed on references using
motion vectors or optical flow to generate the prediction.
* Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

Inc.

38.5

37.5

PSNR (dB)

‫ܠ‬ො ୰ୣ୤భ

‫ܠ‬ො ୰ୣ୤

P-Frame Codec

While most neural video codecs address P-frame coding
(predicting each frame from past ones), in this paper we
address B-frame compression (predicting frames using both
past and future reference frames). Our B-frame solution is
based on the existing P-frame methods. As a result, B-frame
coding capability can easily be added to an existing neural
codec. The basic idea of our B-frame coding method is to
interpolate the two reference frames to generate a single
reference frame and then use it together with an existing Pframe codec to encode the input B-frame. Our studies show
that the interpolated frame is a much better reference for
the P-frame codec compared to using the previous frame as
is usually done. Our results show that using the proposed
method with an existing P-frame codec can lead to 28.5%
saving in bit-rate on the UVG dataset compared to the Pframe codec while generating the same video quality.

‫ܠ‬ො ௧
‫ܠ‬ො ୰ୣ୤బ

Frame Interpolation

Abstract

36.5

35.5

P-frame codec
B-frame codec

B-Frame Codec
‫ܠ‬௧

34.5
0.025

0.075

0.125

0.175

0.225

Rate (bits per pixel)

Figure 1. (a) the general idea of this work i.e. extending an existing P-frame codec to a B-frame codec by adding an interpolation block, (b) the rate-distortion improvements on the UVG
dataset [38] where the P-frame [2] and the B-frame codecs are
trained on the Vimeo-90k dataset [46] for the same number of iterations. The improvement is equivalent of 28.5% saving in bit-rate
measured by BD-rate gain [6].

Inter-frames are further divided into Predicted (P) frames
and Bi-directional predicted (B) frames. P-frame coding,
which is suitable for low-latency applications such as video
conferencing, uses only past decoded frames as references
to generate a prediction. Most of the available literature on
neural inter coding falls under this category and the methods often use a single past decoded frame as reference [23]
(see Fig. 2.b). On the other hand, B-frame coding, which is
suitable for applications such as on-demand video streaming, uses both past and future decoded frames as references.
Future references provide rich motion information that facilitate frame prediction and eventually lead to better coding efficiency. The number of neural video codecs that address B-frame coding is limited [11, 13, 16, 43]. They use
two references and generate a prediction either by bidirectional optical flow estimation and warping or by performing
frame interpolation. The reported results show that these
approaches, despite relative success in video coding, do not
fully exploit the motion information provided by two references as the results are not competitive with state-of-the-art
P-frame codecs [2].
For a given input frame, when references from both past
and future are available, under a linear motion assumption, one can come up with a rough prediction of the input frame by linearly interpolating the two references. This

6680

