Simpler is Better: Few-shot Semantic Segmentation with Classiﬁer Weight
Transformer
Zhihe Lu1,2 Sen He1,2 Xiatian Zhu1 Li Zhang3 Yi-Zhe Song1,2 Tao Xiang1,2
1
CVSSP, University of Surrey
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
3
School of Data Science, Fudan University
{zhihe.lu, sen.he, xiantian.zhu, y.song, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk, lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable
progress in the past ﬁve years thanks to the availability
of large-scale labeled datasets and advancements in deep
learning algorithms [5, 7, 21]. Nonetheless, relying on
many training images with exhaustive pixel-level annotation for every single class, existing methods have poor
scalability to new classes. Indeed, the high annotation
cost has hindered the general applicability of semantic
segmentation models. For instance, creating the COCO

Support

Decoder

A

(a) Existing methods

Adaptive module
Train a linear classifier

Support Mask

Masked average pooling

Support
Query

Encoder

Decoder

Training

Pre-trained

A

Adapted
Classifier

A

Training

Classifier

Query

Prediction

Encoder

Classifier

A few-shot semantic segmentation model is typically
composed of a CNN encoder, a CNN decoder and a simple
classiﬁer (separating foreground and background pixels).
Most existing methods meta-learn all three model components for fast adaptation to a new class. However, given
that as few as a single support set image is available, effective model adaption of all three components to the new
class is extremely challenging. In this work we propose to
simplify the meta-learning task by focusing solely on the
simplest component – the classiﬁer, whilst leaving the encoder and decoder to pre-training. We hypothesize that if
we pre-train an off-the-shelf segmentation model over a set
of diverse training classes with sufﬁcient annotations, the
encoder and decoder can capture rich discriminative features applicable for any unseen classes, rendering the subsequent meta-learning stage unnecessary. For the classiﬁer meta-learning, we introduce a Classiﬁer Weight Transformer (CWT) designed to dynamically adapt the supportset trained classiﬁer’s weights to each query image in an inductive way. Extensive experiments on two standard benchmarks show that despite its simplicity, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art alternatives, often by a large margin. Code is available on https://github.com/zhiheLu/CWTfor-FSS.

Meta-learned

Support Mask

Prediction

Meta-learned

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Illustrating the model training difference for 1-shot scenario between (a) existing few-shot segmentation methods and (b)
ours. A few-shot segmentation model is typically composed of
a deep CNN encoder, a deep CNN decoder and a much simpler
classiﬁer. (a) Previous training methods usually meta-learn all the
three parts (i.e., the whole model), so that all three can adapt to
a new class represented by an annotated support set image to perform segmentation on a query image. This adaptation is intrinsically difﬁcult and sub-optimal due to complex model design and
rather limited supervision available for the adaptation. Instead,
(b) we propose to meta-learn the simple classiﬁer part only whilst
pre-training and then freezing the encoder and decoder, making
few-shot adaptation to new classes much more tractable.

dataset [17] took over 70,000 worker hours even for only
80 common object categories. Inspired by the signiﬁcant
efforts in few-shot image classiﬁcation [27, 11, 29, 37],
few-shot learning has been introduced into semantic segmentation recently [25, 22, 3, 34, 36, 40, 41]. A few-shot
segmentation method eliminates the need of labeling a
large set of training images. This is typically achieved by
meta learning which enables the model to adapt to a new
class represented by a support set consisting of as few as a
single image.
A fundamental challenge faced by any few-shot segmen-

8741

