Move2Hear: Active Audio-Visual Source Separation
Sagnik Majumder1
Ziad Al-Halah1
Kristen Grauman1,2
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Facebook AI Research
{sagnik, ziad, grauman}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We introduce the active audio-visual source separation
problem, where an agent must move intelligently in order
to better isolate the sounds coming from an object of interest in its environment. The agent hears multiple audio
sources simultaneously (e.g., a person speaking down the
hall in a noisy household) and it must use its eyes and ears
to automatically separate out the sounds originating from
a target object within a limited time budget. Towards this
goal, we introduce a reinforcement learning approach that
trains movement policies controlling the agent’s camera and
microphone placement over time, guided by the improvement
in predicted audio separation quality. We demonstrate our
approach in scenarios motivated by both augmented reality (system is already co-located with the target object) and
mobile robotics (agent begins arbitrarily far from the target
object). Using state-of-the-art realistic audio-visual simulations in 3D environments, we demonstrate our model’s ability
to find minimal movement sequences with maximal payoff
for audio source separation. Project: http://vision.
cs.utexas.edu/projects/move2hear.

1. Introduction
Audio-visual events play an important role in our daily
lives. However, in real-world scenarios, physical factors can
either restrict or facilitate our ability to perceive them. For
example, a father working upstairs might move to the top of
the staircase to better hear what his child is calling out to him
from below; a traveler in a busy airport may shift closer to
the gate agent to catch the flight delay announcements amidst
the din, without moving too far in order to keep her suitcase
in sight; a friend across the table in a noisy restaurant may
tilt her head to hear the dinner conversation more clearly, or
scooch her chair to better catch music from the band onstage.
Such examples show how controlled sensor movements
can be critical for audio-visual understanding. In terms of
audio sensing, a person’s nearness and orientation relative
to a sound source affects the clarity with which it is heard,
especially when there are other competing sounds in the

RGB

𝑆2
𝑆1
Mixed Binaural

𝑆3
𝑆𝑖 Sound Source
𝑆𝑖 Target Audio

𝐿
𝑅
Target Monaural

Agent’s Start Location
Navigation Point

Figure 1: Active audio-visual source separation. Given multiple
mixed audio sources Si in a 3D environment, the agent is tasked to
separate a target source (shown in green) by intelligently moving
around using cues from its egocentric audio-visual input to improve
the quality of the predicted target audio signal. See text.

environment. In terms of visual sensing, one must see obstacles to circumvent them, spot desired and distracting sound
sources, use visual context to hypothesize an out-of-view
sound source’s location, and actively look for “sweet spots"
in the visible 3D scene that may permit better listening.
In this work, we explore how autonomous multi-modal
systems might learn to exhibit such intelligent behaviors.
In particular, we introduce the task of active audio-visual
source separation: given a stream of egocentric audio-visual
observations, an agent must decide how to move in order to
recover the sounds being emitted by some target object, and
it must do so within bounded time. See Figure 1. Unlike
traditional audio-visual source separation, where the goal
is to isolate sounds in passive, pre-recorded video [23, 27,
1, 20, 43, 28, 17, 29], the proposed task calls for actively
controlling the camera and microphones’ positions over time.
Unlike recent embodied AI work on audio-visual navigation,
where the goal is to travel to the location of a sounding
object [15, 25, 14, 16], the proposed task calls for returning
a separated soundtrack for an object of interest in limited
time, without necessarily traveling all the way to it.
We consider two variants of the new task. In the first, the
system begins exactly at the location of the desired sounding
object and must fine-tune its positioning to hear better; this
variant is motivated by augmented reality (AR) applications
where the object of interest is known and visible (e.g., the
person seated across from someone wearing an assistive

275

