Sketch Your Own GAN
Sheng-Yu Wang1
David Bau2
1
Carnegie Mellon University

z

Jun-Yan Zhu1
2
MIT CSAIL

···

G
samples from the original model

z

···

G!
samples from the new model

z

···

G
samples from the original model

z

···

G!
samples from the new model

(a) User sketches

(b) Customizing a GAN using human sketches

Figure 1. Customizing a GAN with one or more human sketches. Our method takes in one or a few hand-drawn sketches (a) and modifies
an off-the-shelf GAN to match the input sketch (b). The same noise z is used for both the original model G and modified model G0 . While
our new model changes an object’s shape and pose, other visual cues, such as color, texture, and background, are faithfully preserved after
the modification.

Abstract
Can a user create a deep generative model by sketching a single example? Traditionally, creating a GAN model
has required the collection of a large-scale dataset of exemplars and specialized knowledge in deep learning. In
contrast, sketching is possibly the most universally accessible way to convey a visual concept. In this work, we present
a method, GAN Sketching, for rewriting GANs with one or
more sketches, to make GANs training easier for novice
users. In particular, we change the weights of an original
GAN model according to user sketches. We encourage the
model’s output to match the user sketches through a crossdomain adversarial loss. Furthermore, we explore different
regularization methods to preserve the original model’s diversity and image quality. Experiments have shown that our

method can mold GANs to match shapes and poses specified
by sketches while maintaining realism and diversity. Finally,
we demonstrate a few applications of the resulting GAN,
including latent space interpolation and image editing.

1. Introduction
The power and promise of deep generative models such as
GANs [19] lie in their ability to synthesize endless realistic,
diverse, and novel content with minimal user effort. The
potential utility of these models continues to grow thanks to
the increased quality and resolution of large-scale generative
models [30, 6, 49, 47] in recent years.
Nonetheless, the training of high-quality generative models demands high-performance computing platforms, putting
the process out of reach for most users. Furthermore, training
14050

