The Many Faces of Robustness: A Critical Analysis of
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Norman Mu1 *
Dan Hendrycks1
Steven Basart2 *
3
1
Evan Dorundo
Rahul Desai
Tyler Zhu1
Dawn Song1
Jacob Steinhardt1

Abstract
We introduce four new real-world distribution shift
datasets consisting of changes in image style, image blurriness, geographic location, camera operation, and more.
With our new datasets, we take stock of previously proposed
methods for improving out-of-distribution robustness and
put them to the test. We find that using larger models and
artificial data augmentations can improve robustness on realworld distribution shifts, contrary to claims in prior work.
We find improvements in artificial robustness benchmarks
can transfer to real-world distribution shifts, contrary to
claims in prior work. Motivated by our observation that data
augmentations can help with real-world distribution shifts,
we also introduce a new data augmentation method which
advances the state-of-the-art and outperforms models pretrained with 1000× more labeled data. Overall we find that
some methods consistently help with distribution shifts in texture and local image statistics, but these methods do not help
with some other distribution shifts like geographic changes.
Our results show that future research must study multiple
distribution shifts simultaneously, as we demonstrate that
no evaluated method consistently improves robustness.

1. Introduction
While the research community must create robust models
that generalize to new scenarios, the robustness literature
[6, 9] lacks consensus on evaluation benchmarks and contains many dissonant hypotheses. Hendrycks et al., 2020 [14]
find that many recent language models are already robust to
many forms of distribution shift, while others [37, 10] find
that vision models are largely fragile and argue that data augmentation offers one solution. In contrast, other researchers
[30] provide results suggesting that using pretraining and
improving in-distribution test set accuracy improves natural
robustness, whereas other methods do not.
* Equal contribution. 1 UC Berkeley, 2 UChicago, 3 Google. Code is
available at https://github.com/hendrycks/imagenet-r.

Saurav Kadavath1
Samyak Parajuli1
Justin Gilmer3

Frank Wang3
Mike Guo1

Prior works have also offered various interpretations of
empirical results, such as the Texture Bias hypothesis that
convolutional networks are biased towards texture, harming
robustness [10]. Additionally, some authors posit a fundamental distinction between robustness on synthetic benchmarks vs. real-world distribution shifts, casting doubt on the
generality of conclusions drawn from experiments conducted
on synthetic benchmarks [30].
It has been difficult to arbitrate these hypotheses because
existing robustness datasets vary multiple factors (e.g., time,
camera, location, etc.) simultaneously in unspecified ways
[26, 16]. Existing datasets also lack diversity such that it is
hard to extrapolate which methods will improve robustness
more broadly. To address these issues and test the methods
outlined above, we introduce four new robustness datasets
and a new data augmentation method.
First we introduce ImageNet-Renditions (ImageNet-R),
a 30,000 image test set containing various renditions (e.g.,
paintings, embroidery, etc.) of ImageNet object classes.
These renditions are naturally occurring, with textures and
local image statistics unlike those of ImageNet images, allowing us to compare against gains on synthetic robustness
benchmarks.
Next, we investigate the effect of changes in the image
capture process with StreetView StoreFronts (SVSF) and
DeepFashion Remixed (DFR). SVSF contains business storefront images collected from Google StreetView, along with
metadata allowing us to vary location, year, and even the
camera type. DFR leverages the metadata from DeepFashion2 [8] to systematically shift object occlusion, orientation, zoom, and scale at test time. Both SVSF and DFR
provide distribution shift controls and do not alter texture,
which remove possible confounding variables affecting prior
benchmarks.
Additionally, we collect Real Blurry Images, which consists of 1,000 blurry natural images from a 100-class subset of the ImageNet classes. This benchmark serves as a
real-world analog for the synthetic blur corruptions of the
ImageNet-C benchmark [12]. With it we find that synthetic
corruptions correlate with corruptions that appear in the wild,
18340

