Diverse Image Style Transfer via Invertible Cross-Space Mapping
Haibo Chen, Lei Zhao∗ , Huiming Zhang, Zhizhong Wang
Zhiwen Zuo, Ailin Li, Wei Xing∗ , Dongming Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{cshbchen, cszhl, qinglanwuji, endywon, zzwcs, liailin, wxing, ldm}@zju.edu.cn

Content

Stylization results

Figure 1: Stylization examples generated by our proposed DIST. The first column shows the content images. The other four
columns show the diverse stylization results based on Paul Cezanne’s style.

Abstract
Image style transfer aims to transfer the styles of artworks onto arbitrary photographs to create novel artistic
images. Although style transfer is inherently an underdetermined problem, existing approaches usually assume a
deterministic solution, thus failing to capture the full distribution of possible outputs. To address this limitation, we
propose a Diverse Image Style Transfer (DIST) framework
which achieves significant diversity by enforcing an invertible cross-space mapping. Specifically, the framework consists of three branches: disentanglement branch, inverse
branch, and stylization branch. Among them, the disentanglement branch factorizes artworks into content space
and style space; the inverse branch encourages the invertible mapping between the latent space of input noise vectors and the style space of generated artistic images; the
* Corresponding author

stylization branch renders the input content image with the
style of an artist. Armed with these three branches, our approach is able to synthesize significantly diverse stylized images without loss of quality. We conduct extensive experiments and comparisons to evaluate our approach qualitatively and quantitatively. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
An exquisite artwork can take a diligent artist days or
even months to create, which is labor-intensive and timeconsuming. Motivated by this, a series of recent approaches
studied the problem of repainting an existing photograph
with the style of an artist using either a single artwork or
a collection of artworks. These approaches are known as
style transfer. Armed with style transfer techniques, anyone
could create artistic images.

14880

