Large-scale Robust Deep AUC Maximization: A New Surrogate Loss and
Empirical Studies on Medical Image Classification
Zhuoning Yuan1 , Yan Yan2 , Milan Sonka1 , Tianbao Yang1
University of Iowa1 , Washington State University2
{zhuoning-yuan, milan-sonka, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, yan.yan1@wsu.edu

Abstract
Deep AUC Maximization (DAM) is a new paradigm for
learning a deep neural network by maximizing the AUC
score of the model on a dataset. Most previous works of
AUC maximization focus on the perspective of optimization by designing efficient stochastic algorithms, and studies on generalization performance of large-scale DAM on
difficult tasks are missing. In this work, we aim to make
DAM more practical for interesting real-world applications
(e.g., medical image classification). First, we propose a
new margin-based min-max surrogate loss function for
the AUC score (named as the AUC min-max-margin loss
or simply AUC margin loss for short). It is more robust
than the commonly used AUC square loss, while enjoying the same advantage in terms of large-scale stochastic optimization. Second, we conduct extensive empirical
studies of our DAM method on four difficult medical image classification tasks, namely (i) classification of chest
x-ray images for identifying many threatening diseases,
(ii) classification of images of skin lesions for identifying
melanoma, (iii) classification of mammogram for breast
cancer screening, and (iv) classification of microscopic images for identifying tumor tissue. Our studies demonstrate
that the proposed DAM method improves the performance
of optimizing cross-entropy loss by a large margin, and
also achieves better performance than optimizing the existing AUC square loss on these medical image classification tasks. Specifically, our DAM method has achieved the
1st place on Stanford CheXpert competition on Aug. 31,
2020. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
makes DAM succeed on large-scale medical image datasets.
We also conduct extensive ablation studies to demonstrate
the advantages of the new AUC margin loss over the
AUC square loss on benchmark datasets. The proposed
method is implemented in our open-sourced library LibAUC
(www.libauc.org) whose github address is https:
//github.com/Optimization-AI/LibAUC.

Figure 1. An illustrative example for optimizing different AUC
losses on a toy data for learning a two-layer neural network with
ELU activation. The top row is optimizing the AUC square loss
and the bottom row is optimizing the new AUC margin loss. The
first column depicts the initial decision boundary (dashed line) pretrained on a set of examples. In the middle column, we add some
easy examples to the training set and retrain the model by optimizing the AUC loss. In the last column, we add some noisily labeled
data (blue circled data) to the training set and retrain the model by
optimizing the AUC loss. The results demonstrate the new AUC
margin loss is more robust than the AUC square loss.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, we have seen great progress in
deep learning (DL) techniques for medical image classification driven by large-scale medical datasets. For example, Stanford machine learning group led by Andrew
Ng has collected and released a high-quality large-scale
Chest X-Ray dataset for detecting chest and lung diseases,
which contains 224,316 high-quality X-rays images from
65,240 patients [22]. Various deep learning methods have
been designed and evaluated on this dataset by participating the CheXpert competition organized by Stanford ML
group [22], and many of them have achieved radiologistlevel performance on detecting certain related diseases. Esteva et al. [10] have trained a CNN using a dataset of
129,450 clinical images consisting of 2,032 different diseases, and achieved dermatologist-level performance for

3040

