Learning Unsupervised Metaformer for Anomaly Detection
Jhih-Ciang Wu1,2 , Ding-Jie Chen1 , Chiou-Shann Fuh2 , and Tyng-Luh Liu1
1
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
2
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan

Abstract
Anomaly detection (AD) aims to address the task of classification or localization of image anomalies. This paper
addresses two pivotal issues of reconstruction-based approaches to AD in images, namely, model adaptation and
reconstruction gap. The former generalizes an AD model to
tackling a broad range of object categories, while the latter
provides useful clues for localizing abnormal regions. At
the core of our method is an unsupervised universal model,
termed as Metaformer, which leverages both meta-learned
model parameters to achieve high model adaptation capability and instance-aware attention to emphasize the focal
regions for localizing abnormal regions, i.e., to explore the
reconstruction gap at those regions of interest. We justify the effectiveness of our method with SOTA results on
the MVTec AD dataset of industrial images and highlight
the adaptation flexibility of the universal Metaformer with
multi-class and few-shot scenarios.

1. Introduction
The principal goal of image Anomaly Detection (AD)
is to classify whether an image depicts an abnormal version of the target object and if exist, localize those regions
of anomaly. The technique to detect the various anomalies of interest is crucial for industrial inspection to ensure
that the resulting products meet the required standards [15].
However, since the anomalies (or the defects) can deviate
from the normal ones in numerous ways, it is hard to exhaustively pre-define an anomaly prior and collect enough
anomaly data for training an anomaly detection model. Instead, most of the previous methods use anomaly-free data
to construct its representative distribution for indirectly discriminating the deviated data as anomalies. Hence, the AD
task is also known as out-of-distribution detection.
Driven by the attempt to model the one-class distribution of the anomaly-free data, the embedding-based [5, 28]
and the reconstruction-based methods [24, 35, 39] comprise
the two main trends for tackling the AD problem. The
former seeks to learn an embedding function for making

Metaformer

meta-testing

meta-training

Figure 1. Model adaptation and reconstruction gap are two pivotal issues of reconstruction-based anomaly detection. Top: most
AD techniques train a specific model for each category. Such an
approach would become demanding as the number of categories
increases. Bottom: we instead propose to train a universal model,
Metaformer with instance-aware ability to simultaneously address
the two key issues. Note that I − Iˆ and I − I˜ respectively denote
the reconstruction errors with or without instance-aware attention.

the anomaly-free data close to each other in the embedding
space, and the latter aims to leverage a neural network for
reconstructing each sample of the normal class. To determine the anomalies, the embedding-based methods draw
on the resulting learned metrics, while the reconstructionbased ones employ reconstruction errors by contrast.
We resolve the AD problem from the reconstructionbased point of view. Our formulation particularly pays attention to explore two key factors, reconstruction gap and
model adaptation, in designing an effective AD framework.
(See Figure 1.) Most of the reconstruction-based AD techniques include an autoencoder component. As the training
data are typically sufficient and all from the “normal” class,
a well-trained autoencoder is expected to satisfactorily re-

4369

