Harnessing the Conditioning Sensorium for Improved Image Translation
Cooper Nederhood1,3 , Nicholas Kolkin2 , Deqing Fu1,3 , and Jason Salavon1,3
1

The University of Chicago 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 3 Jason Salavon Studio
{cnederhood, deqing, jsalavon}@uchicago.edu, {nick.kolkin}@ttic.edu

Figure 1: Image translation results of our framework across a variety of domains and conditioning modalities

Abstract
Multi-modal domain translation typically refers to synthesizing a novel image that inherits certain localized attributes from a ‘content’ image (e.g. layout, semantics, or
geometry), and inherits everything else (e.g. texture, lighting, sometimes even semantics) from a ‘style’ image. The
dominant approach to this task is attempting to learn disentangled ‘content’ and ‘style’ representations from scratch.
However, this is not only challenging, but ill-posed, as what
users wish to preserve during translation varies depending
on their goals. Motivated by this inherent ambiguity, we define ‘content’ based on conditioning information extracted
by off-the-shelf pre-trained models. We then train our style
extractor and image decoder with an easy to optimize set of
reconstruction objectives. The wide variety of high-quality
pre-trained models available and simple training procedure
makes our approach straightforward to apply across numerous domains and definitions of ‘content’. Additionally
it offers intuitive control over which aspects of ’content’
are preserved across domains. We evaluate our method on
traditional, well-aligned, datasets such as CelebA-HQ, and
propose two novel datasets for evaluation on more complex
scenes: ClassicTV and FFHQ-Wild. Our approach, Sensorium, enables higher quality domain translation for more
complex scenes.

1. Introduction
Our focus in this work is multi-modal, reference-guided,
image-to-image domain translation. One well-known variant of this task is seasonal change, for example translating a
photograph taken in the summer to a “winter” style, adding
snow to the ground and removing leaves from trees. However, it’s not always clear which features should be invariant
across domains. For example, when translating from photographic portraits to paintings a user might wish to either
keep their pose or to alter it to match the canon of Renaissance painting. An additional ambiguity arises from the
lack of a bijection between most domains. Even within
a domain there is typically heterogeneity for a given definition of content. These challenges motivate the development of flexible domain translation models which offer control over what should be preserved as “content” and which
mode of the target domain should be used as “style”.
Existing domain translation frameworks produce high
quality results on relatively simple meta-domains like human faces, but performance deteriorates both when the
complexity of a single domain increases, and when the
semantic and morphological gap between translation domains grows. Rather than pose domain translation as learning from scratch to disentangle and recombine content and
style, we instead pose it as reconstruction from conditioning information, aided by a tightly bottle-necked ‘style’
representation. Empirically this leads to style represen-

6752

