From Culture to Clothing:
Discovering the World Events Behind A Century of Fashion Images
Wei-Lin Hsiao
UT-Austin

Kristen Grauman
UT-Austin

kimhsiao@cs.utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Figure 1: Fashion history timeline created by our model. We automatically discover iconic styles in each era, and detect the world events
or cultural factors that gave rise to their popularity. For example, during the 1910s, World War I (i.e. war-related activities in England and
Germany) influenced utility clothing. On the other hand, postwar in the 1920s, people’s increasing engagement in music and entertainment
gave birth to the flapper style. Words listed in call-out boxes are the top words in the textual cultural topic (topic discovery described in
Sec. 3.4). Images and the words below are the iconic styles and detected clothing attributes/categories at that time (details in Sec. 3.3).

Abstract

tion about how people’s clothing is affected by happenings
in the world, whether economic, political, or social.

Fashion is intertwined with external cultural factors, but
identifying these links remains a manual process limited to
only the most salient phenomena. We propose a data-driven
approach to identify specific cultural factors affecting the
clothes people wear. Using large-scale datasets of news articles and vintage photos spanning a century, we present a
multi-modal statistical model to detect influence relationships between happenings in the world and people’s choice
of clothing. Furthermore, on two image datasets we apply our model to improve the concrete vision tasks of visual
style forecasting and photo timestamping. Our work is a
first step towards a computational, scalable, and easily refreshable approach to link culture to clothing.

The effects are felt from both localized and broad
sources. On the one hand, one-off momentous occasions
or iconic individuals can cause ripples of fashion changes,
such as the publicity surrounding Titanic’s voyage that attracted American designers to European fashions in the
1910s [13], or the oversized sunglasses donned by Jackie
Kennedy that continue to inspire women decades later [3].
On the other hand, longer periods of a collective experience can also shape trends, such as U.S. women of the
1950s forgoing boxier wartime styles for softer lines and
full skirts [7], or some African-Americans embracing ethnic
Afro hairstyles following the civil rights movement [1], or
today’s shift towards comfortable casual wear in the midst
of the COVID pandemic and work-from-home conditions.

1. Introduction
Fashion is much more than Paris runways and Instagram
darlings. Fashion is what all people wear—how they express their identity, taste, interests, and even mood. At the
same time, fashion is a reflection of our society and its cultural influences. Studying clothing trends over long periods
of time offers anthropologists a treasure trove of informa-

While such links are intriguing, today they require people cognizant of both clothing and cultural trends to manually tease them out. This process requires expert knowledge
and expensive labor, making it difficult to scale. As a result, such analysis is not updated frequently, and it focuses
mostly on a few major salient styles (like those referenced
above), ignoring many more subtle or localized ones.
We propose to automatically discover which events and

1066

