Semi-Supervised Active Learning with Temporal Output Discrepancy
Siyu Huang1
Tianyang Wang2
Haoyi Xiong1
Jun Huan3
Dejing Dou1
1
2
3
Baidu Research
Austin Peay State University
Styling AI
{huangsiyu,xionghaoyi,doudejing}@baidu.com

Abstract
While deep learning succeeds in a wide range of tasks, it
highly depends on the massive collection of annotated data
which is expensive and time-consuming. To lower the cost
of data annotation, active learning has been proposed to interactively query an oracle to annotate a small proportion
of informative samples in an unlabeled dataset. Inspired
by the fact that the samples with higher loss are usually
more informative to the model than the samples with lower
loss, in this paper we present a novel deep active learning approach that queries the oracle for data annotation
when the unlabeled sample is believed to incorporate high
loss. The core of our approach is a measurement Temporal
Output Discrepancy (TOD) that estimates the sample loss
by evaluating the discrepancy of outputs given by models
at different optimization steps. Our theoretical investigation shows that TOD lower-bounds the accumulated sample
loss thus it can be used to select informative unlabeled samples. On basis of TOD, we further develop an effective unlabeled data sampling strategy as well as an unsupervised
learning criterion that enhances model performance by incorporating the unlabeled data. Due to the simplicity of
TOD, our active learning approach is efficient, flexible, and
task-agnostic. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
that our approach achieves superior performances than the
state-of-the-art active learning methods on image classification and semantic segmentation tasks.

1. Introduction
Large-scale annotated datasets are indispensable and
critical to the success of modern deep learning models.
Since the annotated data is often highly expensive to obtain, learning techniques including unsupervised learning
[6], semi-supervised learning [59], and weakly supervised
learning [44] have been widely explored to alleviate the
dilemma. In this paper1 we focus on active learning [4]
which aims to selectively annotate unlabeled data with lim1 Code is available at https://github.com/siyuhuang/TOD

wangt@apsu.edu

lukehuan@shenshangtech.com

ited budgets while resulting in high performance models.
In existing literature of active learning, two mainstream approaches have been studied, namely the diversityaware approach and the uncertainty-aware approach. The
diversity-aware approach [15] aims to pick out diverse samples to represent the distribution of a dataset. It works well
on low-dimensional data and classifier with a small number of classes [40]. The uncertainty-aware approach [52]
aims to pick out the most uncertain samples based on the
current model. However, the uncertainty heuristics, such
as distance to decision boundary [2] and entropy of posterior probabilities [41], are often task-specific and need to
be specifically designed for individual tasks such as image
classification [19], object detection [50], and semantic segmentation [8].
In this paper, we consider that the samples with higher
loss would be more informative than the ones with lower
loss. Specifically in supervised learning settings, when
samples are correctly labeled, the averaged loss function
over all samples should be gradually minimized during the
learning procedure. Moreover, in every iteration the training model would backward propagated error according to
the loss of every sample [28], while the sample with high
loss usually brings informative updates to the parameters of
the training model [16]. In this work, we generalize these
evidences to active learning problems and propose a simple yet effective loss estimator Temporal Output Discrepancy (TOD), which could measure the potential loss of a
sample only relied on the training model, when the groundtruth label of the sample is not available. Specifically, TOD
computes the discrepancy of outputs given by models at different optimization steps, and a higher discrepancy corresponds to a higher sample loss. Our theoretical investigation shows that TOD well measures the sample loss.
On basis of TOD, we propose a deep active learning
framework that leverages a novel unlabeled data sampling
strategy for data annotation in conjunction with a semisupervised training scheme to boost the task model performance with unlabeled data. Specifically, the active learning
procedure can be split into a sequence of training cycles
starting with a small number of labeled samples. By the

3447

