Inverting a Rolling Shutter Camera: Bring Rolling Shutter Images to High
Framerate Global Shutter Video
Bin Fan
Yuchao Dai*
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
binfan@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn
Rolling shutter imaging mechanism

(v,Z)

89OSGMK

time

time

time
row

row

RSSR

row

time
row

row

time

-9\OJKU

Figure 1: The RS image is generated by continuously synthesizing the GS image row by row, while our rolling shutter
temporal super-resolution (RSSR) pipeline reverses this process, i.e., extracting the latent GS image sequence from two
consecutive RS images. Please see the arXiv version to be able to view the GS video image (bottom right) as a video.

Abstract
Rolling shutter (RS) images can be viewed as the result
of the row-wise combination of global shutter (GS) images
captured by a virtual moving GS camera over the period
of camera readout time. The RS effect brings tremendous
difﬁculties for the downstream applications. In this paper, we propose to invert the above RS imaging mechanism,
i.e., recovering a high framerate GS video from consecutive
RS images to achieve RS temporal super-resolution (RSSR).
This extremely challenging problem, e.g., recovering 1440
GS images from two 720-height RS images, is far from being solved end-to-end. To address this challenge, we exploit the geometric constraint in the RS camera model, thus
achieving geometry-aware inversion. Speciﬁcally, we make
three contributions in resolving the above difﬁculties: (i)
formulating the bidirectional RS undistortion ﬂows under
the constant velocity motion model, (ii) building the connection between the RS undistortion ﬂow and optical ﬂow via a
scaling operation, and (iii) developing a mutual conversion
scheme between varying RS undistortion ﬂows that correspond to different scanlines. Building upon these formulations, we propose the ﬁrst RS temporal super-resolution
network in a cascaded structure to extract high framerate
global shutter video. Our method explores the underly* Corresponding author

ing spatio-temporal geometric relationships within a deep
learning framework, where no extra supervision besides the
middle-scanline ground truth GS image is needed. Essentially, our method can be very efﬁcient for explicit propagation to generate GS images under any scanline. Experimental results on both synthetic and real data show that our
method can produce high-quality GS image sequences with
rich details, outperforming state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Many consumer cameras such as webcams or mobile
phones are generally built upon CMOS sensors due to their
low cost and simplicity in manufacturing, which commonly
adopt the rolling shutter (RS) mechanism. Unlike its global
shutter (GS) counterpart, an RS camera generates an image
row-by-row sequentially, which gives rise to the so-called
RS effect (e.g., stretch, wobble) in images and videos captured by a moving RS camera. The RS effect is increasingly
becoming a nuisance in photography. Simply ignoring the
RS effect in computer vision applications leads to performance degradation or even failure [2, 6, 19]. However, the
RS image combines information about both the scene geometry and the concealed motion [43], according to which
the RS effect can be removed by single frame [18,28,29,43]
or multiple frames [20, 30, 36, 41, 42]. As single-view RS

4228

