Graph-Based 3D Multi-Person Pose Estimation Using Multi-View Images
Size Wu1,3 Sheng Jin2,3 Wentao Liu3 * Lei Bai4 Chen Qian3 Dong Liu1 Wanli Ouyang4
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI 4 The University of Sydney
wsz327471010@mail.ustc.edu.cn
baisanshi@gmail.com

{jinsheng, liuwentao, qianchen}@sensetime.com

dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn

wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
This paper studies the task of estimating the 3D human
poses of multiple persons from multiple calibrated camera
views. Following the top-down paradigm, we decompose
the task into two stages, i.e. person localization and pose estimation. Both stages are processed in coarse-to-fine manners. And we propose three task-specific graph neural networks for effective message passing. For 3D person localization, we first use Multi-view Matching Graph Module (MMG) to learn the cross-view association and recover
coarse human proposals. The Center Refinement Graph
Module (CRG) further refines the results via flexible pointbased prediction. For 3D pose estimation, the Pose Regression Graph Module (PRG) learns both the multi-view geometry and structural relations between human joints. Our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on CMU
Panoptic and Shelf datasets with significantly lower computation complexity.

1. Introduction
The task of estimating 3D human poses of multiple persons from multiple views is a long-standing problem. It has
attracted increasing attention for its wide range of applications, e.g. sports broadcasting [6] and retail analysis [35].
Recent research on 3D multi-person pose estimation using multi-view images generally follows two streams: 2Dto-3D lifting-based approaches and direct 3D estimation approaches. As shown in Figrue 1(a), 2D-to-3D lifting approaches [3, 4] first estimate 2D joints in each view through
monocular pose estimator, then associate 2D poses across
views, and finally lift the matched 2D single-view poses
to 3D via triangulation [2] or Pictorial Structure Models
(PSM) [11]. Such approaches are generally efficient and
are the de-facto standard when seeking real-time performance [31]. However, the 3D reconstruction accuracy is
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Overview of mainstream multi-view 3D pose estimation
frameworks. (a) 2D-to-3D lifting-based approaches (b) Direct 3D
pose estimation approaches. (c) Our approach applies graph-based
matching algorithm to detect human centers, and applies a graphbased pose refinement model to effectively utilize both geometric
cues and human structural prior to achieve better performance.

limited by the 2D pose estimation, which is not robust
to occlusion. As shown in Figure 1(b), direct 3D approaches [35] construct the discretized 3D volumetric representations [28, 29] by gathering multi-view features and
directly operate in the 3D space. Such approaches avoid
making incorrect decisions in 2D camera views. However,
their computation cost increases cubically with the size of
the space. They also suffer the quantization errors caused
by space discretization [35].
As shown in Figure 1(c), we combine the virtues of both
approaches by adopting 2D-to-3D lifting for efficient 3D
human center detection in the first stage, and direct 3D estimation approach for accurate single-person 3D pose estimation in the second stage. To strike a balance between
accuracy and efficiency, both stages are processed in coarseto-fine manners with task-specific graph neural networks.
For coarse-level 3D human center detection in the first
stage, we generate coarse human center predictions via
multi-view matching. Previous methods perform associa-

11148

