Variable-Rate Deep Image Compression through
Spatially-Adaptive Feature Transform
Myungseo Song
Jinyoung Choi
Bohyung Han
ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
{micmic123, jin0.choi, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Source Image

Abstract
We propose a versatile deep image compression network
based on Spatial Feature Transform (SFT) [45], which takes
a source image and a corresponding quality map as inputs
and produce a compressed image with variable rates. Our
model covers a wide range of compression rates using a
single model, which is controlled by arbitrary pixel-wise
quality maps. In addition, the proposed framework allows
us to perform task-aware image compressions for various
tasks, e.g., classification, by efficiently estimating optimized
quality maps specific to target tasks for our encoding network. This is even possible with a pretrained network without learning separate models for individual tasks. Our algorithm achieves outstanding rate-distortion trade-off compared to the approaches based on multiple models that are
optimized separately for several different target rates. At
the same level of compression, the proposed approach successfully improves performance on image classification and
text region quality preservation via task-aware quality map
estimation without additional model training. The code is
available at the project website1 .

1. Introduction
Image compression has been studied actively for decades
and has recently become more critical with exploding use
of mobile devices for capturing and sharing images. Lossy
image compression is a particularly useful technique in this
trend since it reduces required space and transmission cost
significantly at the expense of quality of reconstructed images. The techniques based on deep learning [5, 6, 11, 18,
23–25, 28–31, 43, 46, 47] have started to outperform traditional codecs including JPEG [36], JPEG2000 [42] and
BPG [8]. Many learning-based approaches adopt autoencoder networks for coding nonlinear transformation and optimizing rate-distortion trade-off [13]. They have arisen
as new candidates for next generation image compression
1 https://github.com/micmic123/QmapCompression

Quality Map Guided
Compression Model

Quality Map

(a)

Compression Model
Task
Model

(b)

(c)
Figure 1. The proposed framework. (a) Our compression model
takes a quality map as an input along with an image. The compression for the image is conditioned on the quality map, which
indicates pixel-wise importance. (b) Task-aware compression at
test time via non-uniform quality map. One can create a quality
map manually or use an output of a pretrained task model (e.g.,
object detection results). (c) A task-aware quality map from pretrained models can be estimated at encoding phase by minimizing
rate-task loss for the quality map without fine-tuning the models.

standards due to their high performance and applicability
compared to the traditional hand-engineered codecs.
The rate-distortion optimization in learned lossy image
compression methods is realized by minimizing a combined
loss function based on compression ratio and distortion between an original and a corresponding output image. For
the objective function, most of existing algorithms rely on a
uniform compression ratio over image space. However, all
pixels in an image are not equally important and a spatially-

2380

