SnowﬂakeNet: Point Cloud Completion by Snowﬂake Point Deconvolution with
Skip-Transformer
Peng Xiang1 ,* Xin Wen1,4 ,* Yu-Shen Liu1 , Yan-Pei Cao2 , Pengfei Wan2 , Wen Zheng2 , Zhizhong Han3
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Y-tech, Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China 3 Wayne State University 4 JD.com, Beijing, China
xp20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn wenxin16@jd.com liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
caoyanpei@gmail.com {wanpengfei,zhengwen}@kuaishou.com h312h@wayne.edu

(a) Input

(b) TopNet

(c) CDN

(d) NSFA

(e) SnowflakeNet

(f) GT

Figure 1. Visual comparison of point cloud completion results. The input and ground truth have 2048 and 16384 points, respectively.
Compared with current completion methods like TopNet [43], CDN [46] and NSFA [59], our SnowﬂakeNet can generate the complete
shape (16384 points) with ﬁne-grained geometric details, such as smooth regions (blue boxes), sharp edges and corners (green boxes).

Abstract
Point cloud completion aims to predict a complete shape
in high accuracy from its partial observation. However,
previous methods usually suffered from discrete nature of
point cloud and unstructured prediction of points in local regions, which makes it hard to reveal ﬁne local geometric details on the complete shape. To resolve this issue, we propose SnowﬂakeNet with Snowﬂake Point Deconvolution (SPD) to generate the complete point clouds.
The SnowﬂakeNet models the generation of complete point
clouds as the snowﬂake-like growth of points in 3D space,
where the child points are progressively generated by splitting their parent points after each SPD. Our insight of revealing detailed geometry is to introduce skip-transformer
in SPD to learn point splitting patterns which can ﬁt local regions the best. Skip-transformer leverages attention
mechanism to summarize the splitting patterns used in the
previous SPD layer to produce the splitting in the current
SPD layer. The locally compact and structured point cloud
generated by SPD is able to precisely capture the structure
characteristic of 3D shape in local patches, which enables
the network to predict highly detailed geometries, such as
* Equal contribution. This work was supported by National Key R&D
Program of China (2020YFF0304100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62072268), and in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of
Future Media Data. The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.

smooth regions, sharp edges and corners. Our experimental
results outperform the state-of-the-art point cloud completion methods under widely used benchmarks. Code will be
available at https://github.com/AllenXiangX/
SnowflakeNet.

1. Introduction
In 3D computer vision [11, 18, 20, 14, 13] applications,
raw point clouds captured by 3D scanners and depth cameras are usually sparse and incomplete [53, 54, 48] due to
occlusion and limited sensor resolution. Therefore, point
cloud completion [53, 43], which aims to predict a complete shape from its partial observation, is vital for various
downstream tasks. Beneﬁting from large-scaled point cloud
datasets, deep learning based point cloud completion methods have been attracting more research interests. Current
methods either constrain the generation of point clouds by
following a hierarchical rooted tree structure [46, 55, 43]
or assume a speciﬁc topology [56, 53] for the target shape.
However, most of these methods suffered from discrete nature of point cloud and unstructured prediction of points in
local regions, which makes it hard to preserve a well arranged structure for points in local patches. It is still challenging to capture the local geometric details and structure
characteristic on the complete shape, such as smooth regions, sharp edges and corners, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In order to address this problem, we propose a novel net-

5499

