Video Matting via Consistency-Regularized Graph Neural Networks
Tiantian Wang1 , Sifei Liu2 , Yapeng Tian3 , Kai Li4 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1,5,6
1

UC Merced, 2 NVIDIA, 3 University of Rochester, 4 Northeastern University, 5 Google Research, 6 Yonsei University

Abstract
Learning temporally consistent foreground opacity
from videos, i.e., video matting, has drawn great attention
due to the blossoming of video conferencing. Previous
approaches are built on top of image matting models, which
fail in maintaining the temporal coherence when being
adapted to videos. They either utilize the optical flow to
smooth frame-wise prediction, where the performance is
dependent on the selected optical flow model; or naively
combine feature maps from multiple frames, which does
not model well the correspondence of pixels in adjacent
frames. In this paper, we propose to enhance the temporal
coherence by Consistency-Regularized Graph Neural
Networks (CRGNN) with the aid of a synthesized video
matting dataset. CRGNN utilizes Graph Neural Networks
(GNN) to relate adjacent frames such that pixels or
regions that are incorrectly predicted in one frame can be
corrected by leveraging information from its neighboring
frames. To generalize our model from synthesized videos to
real-world videos, we propose a consistency regularization
technique to enforce the consistency on the alpha and
foreground when blending them with different backgrounds.
To evaluate the efficacy of CRGNN, we further collect a
real-world dataset with annotated alpha mattes. Compared
with state-of-the-art methods that require hand-crafted
trimaps or backgrounds for modeling training, CRGNN
generates favorably results with the help of unlabeled real
training dataset. The source code and datasets are available at https://github.com/TiantianWang/VideoMattingCRGNN.git.

1. Introduction
Video matting aims to estimate the foreground opacity
(alpha matte) of each video frame. It has drawn much attention recently due to the blossoming of video conferencing. Typically, the predicted alpha matte can be utilized to
create new composites for video editing. Unlike the binary
segmentation task, matting produces soft masks that better
represent object boundaries or transparent material. Simply
segmenting the foreground regions does not synthesize re-

Figure 1: Matting results of different models. The first
row shows the image and ground truth. The second row
represents the predictions of a video matting method [34]
(Left) and our method (Right). The third row shows the
blended image generated by the foreground and predicted
alpha. Clearly, our method can predict more subtle details
on the hairs.
alistic image or video composition results due to the neglect
of the transition zone. To obtain accurate video matting, we
need to guarantee that: (i) alpha mattes extracted on individual frames should accurately represent the object to be
extracted, i.e., the spatial accuracy, and (ii) extracted mattes
should not result in noticeable temporal jitter, i.e., the temporal coherence. Compared to spatial accuracy, temporal
coherence is often more important in video matting as the
human visualization system is more sensitive to temporal
inconsistency when watching a video [42].
However, due to the lack of a large-scale video matting
dataset, previous methods usually build video matting systems on top of image matting models. For instance, one
naive way is to directly apply an image matting approach
frame by frame. However, this will cause inconsistent alpha
prediction across frames. To improve the temporal coherence of alpha mattes, the previous methods usually utilize

4902

