LayoutTransformer: Layout Generation and Completion with Self-attention
Kamal Gupta1⋆ , Justin Lazarow2 ,
Larry Davis1,3 , Vijay Mahadevan3⋆ ,
1

University of Maryland, College Park

2

Alessandro Achille3 ,
Abhinav Shrivastava1

University of California, San Diego

3

Amazon AWS

Abstract
We address the problem of scene layout generation for
diverse domains such as images, mobile applications, documents, and 3D objects. Most complex scenes, natural
or human-designed, can be expressed as a meaningful arrangement of simpler compositional graphical primitives.
Generating a new layout or extending an existing layout requires understanding the relationships between these primitives. To do this, we propose LayoutTransformer, a novel
framework that leverages self-attention to learn contextual
relationships between layout elements and generate novel
layouts in a given domain. Our framework allows us to
generate a new layout either from an empty set or from
an initial seed set of primitives, and can easily scale to
support an arbitrary of primitives per layout. Furthermore, our analyses show that the model is able to automatically capture the semantic properties of the primitives. We propose simple improvements in both representation of layout primitives, as well as training methods to
demonstrate competitive performance in very diverse data
domains such as object bounding boxes in natural images
(COCO bounding box), documents (PubLayNet), mobile
applications (RICO dataset) as well as 3D shapes (PartNet). Code and other materials will be made available at
https://kampta.github.io/layout.

1. Introduction
In the real world, there exists a strong relationship between different objects that are found in the same environment [43, 47]. For example, a dining table usually has
chairs around it, a surfboard is found near the sea, horses
do not ride cars etc. [3] provided strong evidence in cognitive neuroscience that perceiving and understanding a scene
involves two related processes: perception and comprehension. Perception deals with processing the visual signal
⋆ Corresponding authors.

Work started during an internship at Amazon.

sky-other

sky-other

sky-other

sea

sea
surfboard

(a) Autoregressive 2D layout generation and downstream Layout-to-Image application

(b) Generating 3D objects autoregressively

Figure 1: Our framework can synthesize layouts in diverse natural
as well as human designed data domains such as documents, mobile app wireframes, natural scenes or 3D objects in a sequential
manner.

or the appearance of a scene. Comprehension deals with
understanding the schema of a scene, where this schema
(or layout) can be characterized by contextual relationships
(e.g., support, occlusion, and relative likelihood, position,
and size) between objects. For generative models that synthesize scenes, this evidence underpins the importance of
two factors that contribute to the realism or plausibility of
a generated scene: layout, i.e., arrangement of different objects, and their appearance (in terms of pixels). Generating
a realistic scene necessitates both the factors to be plausible.
The advancements in the generative models for image
synthesis have primarily targeted plausibility of the appearance signal by generating incredibly realistic images often
with a single entity such as faces [23, 24], or animals [4, 61].
In the case of large and complex scenes, with strong non-

1004

