Elaborative Rehearsal for Zero-shot Action Recognition
Shizhe Chen*
Inria, France

Dong Huang
Carnegie Mellon University, USA

shizhe.chen@inria.fr

donghuang@cmu.edu

Abstract
The growing number of action classes has posed a new
challenge for video understanding, making Zero-Shot Action Recognition (ZSAR) a thriving direction. The ZSAR
task aims to recognize target (unseen) actions without training examples by leveraging semantic representations to
bridge seen and unseen actions. However, due to the complexity and diversity of actions, it remains challenging to
semantically represent action classes and transfer knowledge from seen data. In this work, we propose an ERenhanced ZSAR model inspired by an effective human memory technique Elaborative Rehearsal (ER), which involves
elaborating a new concept and relating it to known concepts. Specifically, we expand each action class as an Elaborative Description (ED) sentence, which is more discriminative than a class name and less costly than manualdefined attributes. Besides directly aligning class semantics with videos, we incorporate objects from the video as
Elaborative Concepts (EC) to improve video semantics and
generalization from seen actions to unseen actions. Our
ER-enhanced ZSAR model achieves state-of-the-art results
on three existing benchmarks. Moreover, we propose a
new ZSAR evaluation protocol on the Kinetics dataset to
overcome limitations of current benchmarks and first compare with few-shot learning baselines on this more realistic setting. Our codes and collected EDs are released at
https://github.com/DeLightCMU/ElaborativeRehearsal.

1. Introduction
Supervised video action recognition (AR) has made
great progress in recent years, benefited from new models such as 3D convolutional neural networks [10, 11, 42]
and large-scale video datasets [6, 16]. These supervised
models require abundant training data for each action class.
However, desired action classes are continuously increasing
with the explosive growth of video applications on smart
phones, surveillance cameras and drones. It is prohibitively
* This work was performed when Shizhe Chen was at Carnegie Mellon
University.

Figure 1: Attributes and word embeddings are insufficient to semantically represent action classes. Our Elaborative Rehearsal approach defines actions by Elaborative Descriptions (EDs) and associates videos with Elaborative Concepts (ECs, known concepts
detected from the video), which improve video semantics and generalization video-action association for ZSAR. (✩for videos, △
for seen actions, ◦ for unseen actions, and □ for ECs)

expensive to collect annotated videos for each action class
to fuel the training needs of existing supervised models. In
order to alleviate such burden, Zero-Short Action Recognition (ZSAR) [50] has become a thriving research direction,
which aims at generalizing AR models to unseen actions
without using any labeled training data of unseen classes.
A common approach for ZSAR is to embed videos and
action classes into a joint semantic space [12, 49], so that the
associations between video and seen actions can be transferred to unseen actions. However, how to semantically represent action classes for above associations is a challenging
problem due to the complexity and diversity of actions. As
shown in Figure 1(a), early works employ manual-defined
attributes [29] to represent actions. Despite being a natural
methodology, it is hard and expensive to define a complete
set of atom attributes that generalizes to arbitrary actions.
To overcome difficulties in attribute definition, recent works
adopt word embeddings of action names [50, 4] as class semantic representations. Though simple and effective, word
embeddings can be ambiguous. Words have different meanings in different context and some actions might not even

13638

