Towards Flexible Blind JPEG Artifacts Removal
Jiaxi Jiang
Kai Zhang *
Radu Timofte
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
jiaxijiang@student.ethz.ch

{kai.zhang, timofter}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

https://github.com/jiaxi-jiang/FBCNN

Abstract
Training a single deep blind model to handle different quality factors for JPEG image artifacts removal has
been attracting considerable attention due to its convenience for practical usage. However, existing deep blind
methods usually directly reconstruct the image without predicting the quality factor, thus lacking the flexibility to control the output as the non-blind methods. To remedy this
problem, in this paper, we propose a flexible blind convolutional neural network, namely FBCNN, that can predict
the adjustable quality factor to control the trade-off between artifacts removal and details preservation. Specifically, FBCNN decouples the quality factor from the JPEG
image via a decoupler module and then embeds the predicted quality factor into the subsequent reconstructor module through a quality factor attention block for flexible control. Besides, We find existing methods are prone to fail
on non-aligned double JPEG images even with only one
pixel shift, and we thus propose a double JPEG degradation model to augment the training data. Extensive experiments on single JPEG images, more general double JPEG
images and real-world JPEG images demonstrate that our
proposed FBCNN achieves favorable performance against
state-of-the-art methods in terms of both quantitative metrics and visual quality.

1. Introduction
JPEG [39] is one of the most widely-used image compression algorithms and formats due to its simplicity and
fast encoding/decoding speeds. JPEG compression splits an
image into 8 × 8 blocks and applies discrete cosine transform (DCT) to each block. The DCT coefficients are then
divided by a quantization table and rounded to the nearest
integer. The elements in the quantization table control the
compression ratio and the rounding operation is the only
lossy operation in the whole process. The quantization ta* Corresponding author.

ble is usually represented by an integer called quality factor
(QF) ranging from 0 to 100, where a lower quality factor
means less storage size but more lost information. Inspired
by the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) for image
classification [25, 37], researchers began to resort to DNNs
for JPEG artifacts removal and have achieved notable academic success.
However, existing methods for JPEG artifacts removal
generally have four limitations in real applications: (1)
Most existing DNNs based methods [6, 7, 11, 28, 54]
trained a specific model for each quality factor, lacking the
flexibility to learn a single model for different JPEG quality
factors. (2) DCT based methods [13, 17, 53] need to obtain
the DCT coefficients or quantization table as input, which
is only stored in JPEG format. Besides, when images are
compressed multiple times, only the most recent compression information is stored. (3) To solve the first problem,
some recent work [13, 15, 50] resort to training a single
model for a large range of quality factors. However, these
blind methods can only provide a deterministic reconstruction result for each input, ignoring the need for user preferences. (4) Existing methods are all trained with synthetic
images which assumes that the low-quality images are compressed only once. However, most images from the Internet
are compressed multiple times. Despite some progresses for
real recompressed images, e.g., from Twitter [11, 15], a detailed and complete study on double JPEG artifacts removal
is still missing.
To tackle the above problems, we design a flexible blind
convolutional neural network, namely FBCNN, for real
JPEG image restoration. Our FBCNN is a single model that
can deal with JPEG images with different quality factors. In
addition, FBCNN can work independent of the image formats, as it directly processes images in pixel-domain, without the need to access the metadata of images. By further
decoupling the latent quality factor from the input JPEG
image, we can use this important parameter to guide the
artifacts removal process. As a controllable variable with
clear physical meaning, the predicted quality factor can also
be adjusted via interactive selection to achieve a balance

4997

