Face Image Retrieval with Attribute Manipulation
Alireza Zaeemzadeh*
University of Central Florida

Shabnam Ghadar
Adobe Inc.

Baldo Faieta
Adobe Inc.

Zhe Lin
Adobe Inc.

zaeemzadeh@eecs.ucf.edu

ghadar@adobe.com

bfaieta@adobe.com

zlin@adobe.com

Nazanin Rahnavard
University of Central Florida

Mubarak Shah
University of Central Florida

Ratheesh Kalarot
Adobe Inc.

nazanin@eecs.ucf.edu

shah@crcv.ucf.edu

kalarot@adobe.com

Default result (no attribute manipulation):

Abstract
Current face image retrieval solutions are limited, since
they treat different facial attributes the same and cannot incorporate user’s preference for a subset of attributes in their
search criteria. This paper introduces a new face image retrieval framework, where the input face query is augmented
by both an adjustment vector that specifies the desired modifications to the facial attributes, and a preference vector
that assigns different levels of importance to different attributes. For example, a user can ask for retrieving images
similar to a query image, but with a different hair color, and
no preference for absence/presence of eyeglasses in the results. To achieve this, we propose to disentangle the semantics, corresponding to various attributes, by learning a set
of sparse and orthogonal basis vectors in the latent space
of StyleGAN. Such basis vectors are then employed to decompose the dissimilarity between face images in terms of
dissimilarity between their attributes, assign preference to
the attributes, and adjust the attributes in the query. Enforcing sparsity on the basis vectors helps us to disentangle the
latent space and adjust each attribute independently from
other attributes, while enforcing orthogonality facilitates
preference assignment and the dissimilarity decomposition.
The effectiveness of our approach is illustrated by achieving
state-of-the-art results for the face image retrieval task.

1. Introduction
The problem of image retrieval has been studied in many
different applications, such as product search [31, 32] and
face recognition [23]. The standard problem formulation
for image to image retrieval task is, given a query image,
find the most similar images to the query image among all
the images in the gallery. However, in many scenarios, it is
necessary to improve and/or adjust the retrieval results by
incorporating either the user’s feedback or by augmenting
* Work done as part of an internship at Adobe Inc.

Query

Emphasizing Eyeglasses (increased preference):

Emphasizing Eyeglasses (increased preference)
and adjusting Beard (no beard):

Figure 1. Example of face image retrieval by considering both the
attribute adjustment and attribute preference specified by the user.

the query. This is due to the fact, in many cases, a perfect
query image may not be readily available. Thus, it is desirable to give the user more control over the results. For example, in the context of fashion products, authors in [32, 13]
exploit the user’s feedback to refine the search results iteratively. For instance, the method in [32] asks the user a series
of visual multiple-choice questions to refine the search results and to eliminate the semantic gap between the user
and the retrieval system. Another parallel approach is to
augment the query with additional information, e.g., adjustment text, to modify the search results [29]. This is most
often done by mapping the multi-modal query onto a joint
embedding space [8, 33, 29]. These approaches treat different semantics the same and cannot prioritize a subset of
attributes. Thus, the user is not able to define a customized
distance metric and to assign importance to the attributes.
In this work, we introduce a new formulation for the image search task in the context of face image retrieval; and
augment the query with both an adjustment vector and a
preference vector. The adjustment vector is used to change
the presence of certain attributes in the retrieved images,
and the preference vector is used to assign the importance
of the attribute in the results. To the best of our knowledge,

12116

