Online Pseudo Label Generation by Hierarchical Cluster Dynamics
for Adaptive Person Re-identification
Yi Zheng∗1

Shixiang Tang∗3
Guolong Teng1
Yixiao Ge4
Kaijian Liu1
5
1
†2
Jing Qin
Donglian Qi
Dapeng Chen
1
2
3
Zhejiang University
AARC, Huawei
The University of Sydney
4
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

{21910099,qidl}@zju.edu.cn

stan3906@uni.sydney.edu.au

chendapeng8@huawei.com

Abstract
Adaptive person re-identification (adaptive ReID) targets at transferring learned knowledge from the labeled
source domain to the unlabeled target domain. Pseudolabel-based methods that alternatively generate pseudo labels and optimize the training model have demonstrated
great effectiveness in this field. However, the generated
pseudo labels are inaccurate and cannot reflect the true semantic meaning of the unlabeled samples. We consider such
inaccuracy stems from both the lagged update of the pseudo
labels as well as the simple criterion of the employed clustering method. To tackle the problem, we propose an online
pseudo label generation by hierarchical cluster dynamics
for adaptive ReID. In particular, hierarchical label banks
are constructed for all the samples in the dataset, and we
update the pseudo labels of the sample in each coming
mini-batch, performing the model optimization and the label generation simultaneously. A new hierarchical cluster dynamics is built for the label update, where cluster
merge and cluster split are driven by a possibility computed by the label propagation. Our method can achieve
better pseudo labels and higher reid accuracy. Extensive
experiments on Market-to-Duke, Duke-to-Market, MSMTto-Market, MSMT-to-Duke, Market-to-MSMT, and Duketo-MSMT verify the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at retrieving the
same person’s images across different cameras [45, 13,
46, 22, 15, 17]. Despite the great advances of ReID
with deep learning models [23, 34, 37, 44, 3], ReID still
remains a challenge due to the various distributions of
∗ These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

(𝒉 + 𝟏)𝒕𝒉

𝒉𝒕𝒉

(𝒉 − 𝟏)𝒕𝒉

Cluster split

Cluster merge

Merge border

Split unit

Figure 1. Schematic representation of online pseudo label refinement by hierarchical cluster dynamics. Different colors represent
different clusters. Hierarchical labels are refined from low level
to high level. In each level, clusters undergo the split and merge
process in sequence (from left to right). For cluster split in h-th
level, the clusters in (h − 1)-th level serve as the indivisible split
units. For cluster merge in h-th level, the cluster in (h+1)-th level
provides a merge border which restricts the cluster candidates that
can be merged. Label propagation is then leveraged to split and
merge clusters in a unified framework.

images captured by different camera systems, which is
known as domain shift. Unsupervised Adaptive Person
Re-identification (Adaptive ReID) is therefore proposed to
transfer the learned knowledge from the labeled source domain (dataset) to correctly measure the inter-instance affinities in the unlabeled target domain (dataset).
Clustering-based methods [30, 54, 55, 14, 58] dominated
the state-of-the-art performances for both adaptive and unsupervised ReID tasks. They adopted an iterative twostage training scheme, where the pseudo labels are generated offline by clustering the extracted features before each
training epoch. Although the clustered pseudo labels can

8371

