Motion-Focused Contrastive Learning of Video Representations*
Rui Li † , Yiheng Zhang ‡ , Zhaofan Qiu ‡ , Ting Yao ‡ , Dong Liu † , and Tao Mei ‡
†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China ‡ JD AI Research, Beijing, China
liruid@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {yihengzhang.chn, zhaofanqiu, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com
dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn, tmei@live.com

Abstract
Motion, as the most distinct phenomenon in a video to
involve the changes over time, has been unique and critical to the development of video representation learning.
In this paper, we ask the question: how important is the
motion particularly for self-supervised video representation
learning. To this end, we compose a duet of exploiting the
motion for data augmentation and feature learning in the
regime of contrastive learning. Specifically, we present a
Motion-focused Contrastive Learning (MCL) method that
regards such duet as the foundation. On one hand, MCL
capitalizes on optical flow of each frame in a video to temporally and spatially sample the tubelets (i.e., sequences of
associated frame patches across time) as data augmentations. On the other hand, MCL further aligns gradient maps
of the convolutional layers to optical flow maps from spatial, temporal and spatio-temporal perspectives, in order
to ground motion information in feature learning. Extensive experiments conducted on R(2+1)D backbone demonstrate the effectiveness of our MCL. On UCF101, the linear classifier trained on the representations learnt by MCL
achieves 81.91% top-1 accuracy, outperforming ImageNet
supervised pre-training by 6.78%. On Kinetics-400, MCL
achieves 66.62% top-1 accuracy under the linear protocol.

1. Introduction
The key difference between video and image is the dimension of time, which derives a particular form of motion information in a video. The state-of-the-art works often delve into motion in different ways, e.g., long/short
term dependencies [29, 43, 21], temporal structure/orders
[19, 20, 47], and temporal pooling [42, 49], to enhance
video understanding. The underlying foundation behind
these advances generally originates from the improvement
of representation learning via the exploration of motion information. Most recently, self-supervised representation
learning is gaining significant momentum [2, 4, 14], and
* This work was performed at JD AI Research.

the number of self-supervised learning papers practically
exploded. In particular, contrastive learning, as a memorybased self-supervised learning approach, is extended to
video domain [13, 50] and further closes the gap between
self-supervised and supervised video representation learning. A valid question then emerges as how important is the
motion for self-supervised video representation learning?
In an effort to answer the question, we look into the
problem, in the context of contrastive learning, from two
different perspectives: 1) leveraging motion information in
achieving data augmentations, and 2) taking motion into account in the optimization of feature learning. In a video, the
motion of different regions is inherently various and the velocity of motion measures the rate of change in position of
the region with respect to a frame of reference. In general,
the regions with larger velocities have much richer information and are potentially more advantageous for contrastive
learning. As a result, we capitalize on motion information
from both spatial and temporal dimensions to carefully sample the sequences of patches across frames, i.e., tubelets,
as augmentations, and examine how the first issue affects
self-supervised video representation learning. To study the
second one, we encourage the grounding of motion information explicitly in feature learning by aligning gradient
maps of the convolutional layers to motion (optical flow)
maps. As such, feature learning executes the optimization
with respect to motion information.
To consolidate the idea of exploring the motion information in video sequence for self-supervised video representation learning, we present a novel Motion-focused Contrastive Learning (MCL) method. Specifically, we leverage
unsupervised TV-L1 algorithm [53] to extract the dense optical flow of each frame in a video and compute the motion boundaries as in [6] to obtain the motion map. A
video is divided into a set of fixed-length video clips and
the spatio-temporal motion map (ST-motion) of each video
clip consists of the sequential motion maps of all the frames
in the clip. MCL then performs a motion-focused spatiotemporal sampling to select tubelets as data augmentations.
Technically, MCL applies a 3D average pooling on the

2105

