Just a Few Points are All You Need for Multi-view Stereo:
A Novel Semi-supervised Learning Method for Multi-view Stereo
Taekyung Kim1 , Jaehoon Choi2 , Seokeon Choi1 , Dongki Jung3 , Changick Kim1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2
University of Maryland
3
NAVER LABS
{tkkim93, seokeon, changick}@kaist.ac.kr, kevchoi@umd.edu, dongki.jung@naverlabs.com

Abstract
While learning-based multi-view stereo (MVS) methods
have recently shown successful performances in quality and
efficiency, limited MVS data hampers generalization to unseen environments. A simple solution is to generate various large-scale MVS datasets, but generating dense ground
truth for 3D structure requires a huge amount of time and
resources. On the other hand, if the reliance on dense
ground truth is relaxed, MVS systems will generalize more
smoothly to new environments. To this end, we first introduce a novel semi-supervised multi-view stereo framework
called a Sparse Ground truth-based MVS Network (SGTMVSNet) that can reliably reconstruct the 3D structures
even with a few ground truth 3D points. Our strategy is
to divide the accurate and erroneous regions and individually conquer them based on our observation that a probability map can separate these regions. We propose a selfsupervision loss called the 3D Point Consistency Loss to
enhance the 3D reconstruction performance, which forces
the 3D points back-projected from the corresponding pixels
by the predicted depth values to meet at the same 3D coordinates. Finally, we propagate these improved depth predictions toward edges and occlusions by the Coarse-to-fine
Reliable Depth Propagation module. We generate the spare
ground truth of the DTU dataset for evaluation and extensive experiments verify that our SGT-MVSNet outperforms
the state-of-the-art MVS methods on the sparse ground truth
setting. Moreover, our method shows comparable reconstruction results to the supervised MVS methods though we
only used tens and hundreds of ground truth 3D points.

1. Introduction
Multi-view Stereo (MVS) has been an important problem in computer vision, which reconstructs dense 3D geometry from multi-view images. The industrial applicability of

(a) Dense ground truth

(b) Sparse ground truth (1 × 10−5 )

(c) Point-MVSNet (Dense GT)

(d) Ours (Sparse GT)

Figure 1: Visualization of a dense ground truth and our
sparse ground truth of scan14, and multi-view reconstruction results of scan13 of the DTU dataset [7] by PointMVSNet [1] trained with dense ground truths and our SGTMVSNet trained with sparse ground truths. This sparse
ground truth generated by random sampling with 1 × 10−5
ratio contain around 30 to 40 3D points. Note that original
dense ground truth 3D structures consist of approximately
3 × 106 points.

3D reconstruction such as autonomous driving and robotics
has attracted extensive research for decades. Recent MVS
studies [15, 16, 1, 17, 11] successfully incorporate traditional approaches to the learning-based methods and improve 3D reconstruction quality under the blessing of the
MVS datasets [7, 10]. However, contrary to such increasing dependence on datasets, there have been fundamental
difficulties in collecting dense ground truth 3D structures,
which eventually hamper the generalization to unseen do-

6178

