Improving robustness against common corruptions with frequency biased models
Tonmoy Saikia
University of Freiburg

Cordelia Schmid
Inria

Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg

saikiat@cs.uni-freiburg.de

cordelia.schmid@inria.fr

brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract

StyleTransfer
25

Clean error

CNNs perform remarkably well when the training and
test distributions are i.i.d, but unseen image corruptions
can cause a surprisingly large drop in performance. In
various real scenarios, unexpected distortions, such as random noise, compression artefacts or weather distortions are
common phenomena. Improving performance on corrupted
images must not result in degraded i.i.d performance – a
challenge faced by many state-of-the-art robust approaches.
Image corruption types have different characteristics in the
frequency spectrum and would benefit from a targeted type
of data augmentation, which, however, is often unknown
during training. In this paper, we introduce a mixture of
two expert models specializing in high and low-frequency
robustness, respectively. Moreover, we propose a new regularization scheme that minimizes the total variation (TV)
of convolution feature-maps to increase high-frequency robustness. The approach improves on corrupted images
without degrading in-distribution performance. We demonstrate this on ImageNet-C and also for real-world corruptions on an automotive dataset, both for object classification and object detection.

RoHL: combining HF and LF experts

26

AugMix+DeepAugment(AMDA)
Ensemble (AMDA, AMDA)

24

SpeckleNoise
Standard-R50

DeepAugment(DA)
23

22
45

RoHL(HF, LF)

50

AugMix(AM)
IN-21K-Pretrained
SE(Self-Attention)

55

60

65

Corruption error (mCE)

70

75

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Improving clean and corruption errors. Each item
shows the error of a model on ImageNet (y-axis) and on
ImageNet-C (x-axis). All models use a ResNet50 backbone. Orange: The proposed RoHL approach – Robust
mixture of a HF (high-frequency) and a LF (low-frequency)
expert model. Blue: An ensemble trained with the state-ofthe-art approach AugMix + DeepAugment. Gray: Other
approaches.

Robustness to distribution shift is possibly the core challenge in deep learning. CNNs show strong performance
when training and test set samples are independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d). This led to strong claims of
obtaining superhuman performance on the challenging ImageNet dataset. However, such claims have somewhat diminished as the community, driven by practical applications,
started testing on out-of-distribution (OOD) test sets. Unlike human vision, CNNs are affected even by small perturbations in the input. Simply adding random noise to the
ImageNet test set is sufficient to almost triple the classification error [15].
Why does performance drop so severely under distribution shift? One explanation is that models rely on spurious,
unstable correlations present in the i.i.d training and test

dataset to obtain low training and test errors. When, due
to distribution shift, these unstable correlations are missing, performance drops severely. Although there has been
substantial prior work [12, 15, 24, 29, 35] investigating this
problem, it is far from being fully understood, let alone
solved. The most successful remedies to-date are wellchosen data augmentation schemes [7, 14, 17, 26, 11] and
adversarial training [10, 26, 32]. Geirhos et al. [12] proposed the texture hypothesis, where they show that classification models learn feature representations biased towards
textures. Many of these texture features are unstable and
get destroyed, for example, due to weather effects or digital
corruptions.

10211

