Membership Inference Attacks are Easier on Difficult Problems
Avital Shafran
Shmuel Peleg
Yedid Hoshen
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

Abstract
Membership inference attacks (MIA) try to detect if data
samples were used to train a neural network model, e.g. to
detect copyright abuses. We show that models with higher
dimensional input and output are more vulnerable to MIA,
and address in more detail models for image translation
and semantic segmentation, including medical image segmentation. We show that reconstruction-errors can lead to
very effective MIA attacks as they are indicative of memorization. Unfortunately, reconstruction error alone is less
effective at discriminating between non-predictable images
used in training and easy to predict images that were never
seen before. To overcome this, we propose using a novel
predictability error that can be computed for each sample,
and its computation does not require a training set. Our
membership error, obtained by subtracting the predictability
error from the reconstruction error, is shown to achieve high
MIA accuracy on an extensive number of benchmarks. 1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been widely adopted in various computer vision tasks, e.g. image classification, semantic
segmentation, image translation and generation, etc. Due
to the high sample-complexity of such models, they require
large amounts of training data. However, collection and annotation of many training samples is an expensive and labor
intensive process. In many domains, such as medical imaging, publicly available training data are particularly scarce
due to privacy concerns. In such settings, a common solution
is training the model privately and then providing black-box
access to the trained model. However, even black-box access
may leak sensitive information about the training data.
Membership inference attacks (MIA) are one way to detect
such leakage. Given access to a data sample, an attacker
attempts to find whether or not the sample was used in the
training process.
Due to memorization in deep neural networks, prediction
confidence tends to be higher for images used in training.
This difference in prediction confidence helps MIA methods
1 Our source code is available at GitHub: https://bit.ly/3k0UE6P

to successfully determine which images were used for training. Therefore, in addition to detecting information leakage,
MIA also provide insights on the degree of memorization in
the victim model.
MIA has previously been applied to a variety of neural network tasks including: classification, generative adversarial
models, and segmentation. The accuracy achieved by MIA
can vary greatly as a function of different properties of the attempted tasks. Our empirical results highlight two properties
that make tasks more vulnerable to MIA attacks: i) Uncertainty: tasks where there is more uncertainty in the prediction
of the output given an input are more susceptible to MIA. ii)
Output dimensionality: tasks with higher-dimensional outputs are more vulnerable to MIA. These apparently simple
properties can explain non-intuitive observations, for example, that reconstruction-based MIA on CycleGAN leads to
very low accuracy. As the training images should be reconstructed back after being translated to the other domain and
back, there is no uncertainty of the output given the input.
As the desired output is fully specified by the input (i.e. they
are identical), the reconstruction task is easy leading to low
MIA accuracy.
Motivated by the above findings, we focus our attention
on two tasks that exhibit these properties: supervised image
translation and semantic segmentation, including medical
image segmentation. We begin by evaluating a simple-toimplement but effective MIA that uses pixel-wise reconstruction error between the model output and ground truth. This
approach exploits memorization of the training data in the
victim model, resulting in lower reconstruction error on images used for training. However, we observe that for some
sample images the ground truth result can be easily predicted,
and for others it is harder to predict. Reconstruction error
alone is therefore less accurate at discriminating between
hard to predict samples used in training and easy samples
not seen before. To overcome this limitation, we propose a
novel predictability error which is computed for each query
input image and its ground truth output.
Our predictability error uses the accuracy of a linear predictor computed over the given query image, predicting pixel
values from deep features of the input image. The linear predictor serves as a simple approximation of the task attempted

14820

