Video Autoencoder: self-supervised disentanglement
of static 3D structure and motion
Zihang Lai
Carnegie Mellon University

Sifei Liu
NVIDIA

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

…

…
3D structure
(Deep voxels)

DECODER

ENCODER

…

Xiaolong Wang
UC San Diego

3D
Transform

Video

structure + motion

Reconstruction

R, t

3D Trajectory
Figure 1: Video Autoencoder: raw input video is automatically disentangled into 3D scene structure and camera trajectory. To reconstruct
the original video, the camera transformation is applied to the 3D structure feature and then decoded back to pixels. Without any fine-tuning,
the model generalizes to unseen videos and enables tasks such as novel view synthesis, pose estimation, and “video following”.

Abstract
A video autoencoder is proposed for learning disentangled representations of 3D structure and camera pose from
videos in a self-supervised manner. Relying on temporal
continuity in videos, our work assumes that the 3D scene
structure in nearby video frames remains static. Given a
sequence of video frames as input, the video autoencoder
extracts a disentangled representation of the scene including: (i) a temporally-consistent deep voxel feature to represent the 3D structure and (ii) a 3D trajectory of camera
pose for each frame. These two representations will then
be re-entangled for rendering the input video frames. This
video autoencoder can be trained directly using a pixel reconstruction loss, without any ground truth 3D or camera
pose annotations. The disentangled representation can be
applied to a range of tasks, including novel view synthesis, camera pose estimation, and video generation by motion following. We evaluate our method on several largescale natural video datasets, and show generalization results on out-of-domain images. Project page with code:
https://zlai0.github.io/VideoAutoencoder.

1. Introduction
The visual world arrives at a human eye as a streaming,
entangled mess of colors and patterns. The art of seeing, to

a large extent, is in our ability to disentangle this mess into
physically and geometrically coherent factors: persistent
solid structures, illumination, texture, movement, change of
viewpoint, etc. From its very beginnings, computer vision
has been concerned with acquiring this impressive human
ability, including such classics as Barrow and Tenebaum’s
Intrinsic Image decomposition [5] in the 1970s, or TomasiKanade factorization [63] in the 1990s. In the modern deep
era, learning a disentangled visual representation has been a
hot topic of research, often taking the form of an autoencoder
[39, 23, 36, 19, 41, 48, 22, 3, 50]. However, almost all prior
work has focused on disentanglement within the 2D image
plane using datasets of still images.
In this work, we propose a method that learns a disentangled 3D scene representation, separating the static 3D scene
structure from the camera motion. Importantly, we employ
videos as training data (as opposed to dataset of stills), using
the temporal continuity within a video as a source of training
signal for self-supervised disentanglement. We make the
assumption that a local snippet of video is capturing a static
scene, so the changes in appearance must be due to camera
motion. This leads to our Video Autoencoder formulation,
shown on Figure 1: an input video is encoded into two codes,
one for 3D scene structure (which is forced to remain fixed
cross frames) and the other for the camera trajectory (updated for every frame). The 3D structure is represented by

9730

