Continual Learning on Noisy Data Streams via Self-Purified Replay
Chris Dongjoo Kim∗ Jinseo Jeong∗ Sangwoo Moon Gunhee Kim
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{cdjkim, jinseo, sangwoo.moon}@vl.snu.ac.kr gunhee@snu.ac.kr
http://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/SPR

Abstract
Continually learning in the real world must overcome
many challenges, among which noisy labels are a common
and inevitable issue. In this work, we present a replaybased continual learning framework that simultaneously
addresses both catastrophic forgetting and noisy labels for
the first time. Our solution is based on two observations; (i)
forgetting can be mitigated even with noisy labels via selfsupervised learning, and (ii) the purity of the replay buffer is
crucial. Building on this regard, we propose two key components of our method: (i) a self-supervised replay technique
named Self-Replay which can circumvent erroneous training signals arising from noisy labeled data, and (ii) the SelfCentered filter that maintains a purified replay buffer via
centrality-based stochastic graph ensembles. The empirical
results on MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and WebVision
with real-world noise demonstrate that our framework can
maintain a highly pure replay buffer amidst noisy streamed
data while greatly outperforming the combinations of the
state-of-the-art continual learning and noisy label learning
methods.

1. Introduction
The most natural form of input for an intelligent agent
occurs sequentially. Hence, the ability to continually learn
from sequential data has gained much attention in recent
machine learning research. This problem is often coined
as continual learning, for which three representative approaches have been proposed [57, 67, 20] including replay [52, 29, 66, 73, 70, 44], regularization [38, 91, 3], and
expansion techniques [71, 89].
At the same time, learning from data riddled with noisy
labels is an inevitable scenario that an intelligent agent must
overcome. There have been multiple lines of work to learn
amidst noisy labels such as loss regularization [84, 96, 31],
data re-weighting [68, 72], label cleaning [64, 42, 61], and
∗ Equal Contribution

training procedures [85, 36].
In this work, we aim to jointly tackle the problems of
continual learning and noisy label classification, which to
the best of our knowledge have not been studied in prior
work. Noisy labels and continual learning are inevitable
for real-world machine learning, as data comes in a stream
possibly polluted with label inconsistency. Hence, the two
are bound to intersect; we believe exploring this intersection
may glean evidence for promising research directions and
hopefully shed light on the development of sustainable realworld machine learning algorithms.
We take on the replay-based approach to tackle continual
learning since it has often shown superior results in terms
of performance and memory efficiency even with simplicity. Yet, we discover that replaying a noisy buffer intensifies the forgetting process due to the fallacious mapping
of previously attained knowledge. Moreover, existing noisy
label learning approaches show great limitations when coping within the online task-free setting [2, 65, 43, 37]. In
their original forms, they assume that the whole dataset is
given to purify the noise and thus are hampered by a small
amount of data stored only in the replay buffer to either regularize, re-weight, or decide on its validity.
We begin by backtracking the root of the problem; if we
naively store a sampled set of the noisy input stream into
the replay buffer, it becomes riddled with noise, worsening the amount of forgetting. Thus, we discover the key to
success is maintaining a pure replay buffer, which is the major motive of our novel framework named Self-Purified Replay (SPR). At the heart of our framework is self-supervised
learning [16, 12, 30, 24], which allows to circumvent the erroneous training signals arising from the incorrect pairs of
data and labels. Within the framework, we present our novel
Self-Replay and Self-Centered filter that collectively cleanse
noisy labeled data and continually learn from them. The
Self-Replay mitigates the noise intensified catastrophic forgetting, and the Self-Centered filter achieves a highly clean
replay buffer even when restricted to a small portion of data
at a time.
We outline the contributions of this work as follows.

537

