Multi-Anchor Active Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation
Munan Ning,* Donghuan Lu,* Dong Wei†, Cheng Bian, Chenglang Yuan,
Shuang Yu, Kai Ma, Yefeng Zheng
Tencent Jarvis Lab, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaption has proven to be an effective approach for alleviating the intensive workload of
manual annotation by aligning the synthetic source-domain
data and the real-world target-domain samples. Unfortunately, mapping the target-domain distribution to the
source-domain unconditionally may distort the essential
structural information of the target-domain data. To this
end, we firstly propose to introduce a novel multi-anchor
based active learning strategy to assist domain adaptation
regarding the semantic segmentation task. By innovatively
adopting multiple anchors instead of a single centroid, the
source domain can be better characterized as a multimodal
distribution, thus more representative and complimentary
samples are selected from the target domain. With little
workload to manually annotate these active samples, the
distortion of the target-domain distribution can be effectively alleviated, resulting in a large performance gain. The
multi-anchor strategy is additionally employed to model the
target-distribution. By regularizing the latent representation of the target samples compact around multiple anchors
through a novel soft alignment loss, more precise segmentation can be achieved. Extensive experiments are conducted
on public datasets to demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods significantly,
along with thorough ablation study to verify the effectiveness of each component. The code will be released soon at
https://github.com/munanning/MADA.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has always been a fundamental
task in computer vision. Benefiting from the rapid development of deep learning, many advanced segmentation methods have been proposed and achieved great breakthroughs
with high accuracies for various tasks, such as autonomous
driving [16], scene parsing [8, 44], object detection [26, 61]
and human-computer interaction [43]. However, the re* Contributed equally.
† Correspondence: donwei@tencent.com

quirement of large amount of data with accurate pixel-wise
annotation limits their usage in many practical applications,
e.g., medical image segmentation [28, 40, 42, 41, 36] and
auto-driving tasks [6].
To avoid the intensive workload of manual annotation,
a lot of efforts have been made on unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) [5, 20, 21, 55], which aims at aligning
the target-domain distribution towards the source-domain
distribution, so that networks trained with the supervision
of only the synthetic source data can be applied to the realworld target data. However, forcing the target-domain features to fit the source-domain distribution may destroy the
latent structural pattern of the target domain, resulting in
inferior performance. As illustrated by the t-SNE [19] visualization in Fig. 1, the distributions of the source and
target domains present both overlap (region ①) and obvious discrepancies (regions ② and ③). When the adapted
target-domain features (red dots) obtained with a typical
UDA method based on adversarial training [55]—despite
generally aligned with the source domain distributions (blue
squares)—show a clear distortion of the target-domain distribution in region ②, the adapted network presents unsatisfactory performance. Worse segmentation can be observed
in region ③ when some specific targets are aligned neither
with the source domain nor the target domain. A promising
strategy to efficiently prevent such distortion of the targetdomain distribution with minimal annotation workload is
active learning (AL) [49]. By introducing little extra manual annotation for a few selected samples from the target domain, the performance can be significantly boosted regarding the classification and the detection tasks [51]. However,
the sample selection methods in all previous active learning studies [51] assumed a unimodal source-domain distribution and neglected the potential multimodal distribution,
resulting in sub-optimal active samples and inferior performance, as demonstrated in Table 4.
To address the above issues, we firstly propose to adopt
the active learning strategy to assist domain adaptation (DA)
regarding the semantic segmentation task, so that the essential structural pattern of the target domain can be maintained with minimal manual annotation workload. In ad-

9112

