LocTex: Learning Data-Efficient Visual Representations
from Localized Textual Supervision
Zhijian Liu
MIT

Simon Stent, Jie Li, John Gideon
Toyota Research Institute
https://loctex.mit.edu/
Image

Abstract
Computer vision tasks such as object detection and semantic/instance segmentation rely on the painstaking annotation of large training datasets. In this paper, we propose LocTex that takes advantage of the low-cost localized
textual annotations (i.e., captions and synchronized mouseover gestures) to reduce the annotation effort. We introduce
a contrastive pre-training framework between images and
captions, and propose to supervise the cross-modal attention
map with rendered mouse traces to provide coarse localization signals. Our learned visual features capture rich
semantics (from free-form captions) and accurate localization (from mouse traces), which are very effective when
transferred to various downstream vision tasks. Compared
with ImageNet supervised pre-training, LocTex can reduce
the size of the pre-training dataset by 10× or the target
dataset by 2× while achieving comparable or even improved
performance on COCO instance segmentation. When provided with the same amount of annotations, LocTex achieves
around 4% higher accuracy than the previous state-of-theart “vision+language” pre-training approach on the task of
PASCAL VOC image classification.

1. Introduction
The tremendous success of deep learning in computer
vision can be credited in part to the existence of large annotated datasets, such as ImageNet [7, 47]. However, acquiring
high-quality annotations is usually very expensive and timeconsuming, especially for dense, pixel-wise labeling tasks.
For instance, segmenting instances in a single image from the
COCO dataset takes more than 10 minutes on average [29]* .
Pre-training plus fine-tuning is a widely-adopted solution
to reduce the need for costly annotations. In the computer
vision community, a convolutional neural network (CNN)
backbone is first pre-trained to perform image classification on ImageNet. Then, the learned features can be trans* 70k hours / 320k images = 0.22 hours/image = 13 minutes/image

Song Han
MIT

Caption

Mouse Trace

There is a yellow
cat lying on the
blanket. There’re
books behind it.
(a) Localized Textual Annotation (Localized Narratives)
Cat

Book

Book
Fine-tune

(b) Image-Caption Attention Map
(from Pre-Trained Visual Backbone)

Cat
(c) Downstream
Transfer

Figure 1: LocTex pre-trains the visual CNN backbone with
(a) localized textual annotations, which consists of free-form
captions associated with synchronized mouse traces. With
our contrastive and localization loss, the model learns (b)
rich semantics and accurate localization. This is very useful
when transferred to (c) downstream tasks that are sensitive to
localization (e.g., object detection, instance segmentation).
ferred to other downstream tasks by fine-tuning on the target
dataset. Over the past few years, this paradigm has enabled
state-of-the-art performance on many computer vision tasks,
including object detection [46], semantic segmentation [31]
and instance segmentation [20].
Though effective, ImageNet pre-training has its caveats.
(i) Its annotations (i.e., 1000-class labels) are very expensive
to acquire. Annotating ImageNet is not as easy as it seems
because differentiating among a fine-grained class taxonomy
requires expert knowledge, which makes it hard to scale up or
repeat. (ii) It is not as effective for those tasks that are more
sensitive to localization than classification. As ImageNet pretraining only takes the object existence into consideration, its
learned visual representations are supposed to be invariant
to different object locations. Some recent research [19] has
demonstrated competitive performance on object detection
and instance segmentation with models trained from scratch.
12167

