Towards Accurate Alignment in Real-time 3D Hand-Mesh Reconstruction
Xiao Tang Tianyu Wang Chi-Wing Fu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xtang,wangty,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
3D hand-mesh reconstruction from RGB images facilitates many applications, including augmented reality (AR).
However, this requires not only real-time speed and accurate hand pose and shape but also plausible mesh-image
alignment. While existing works already achieve promising results, meeting all three requirements is very challenging. This paper presents a novel pipeline by decoupling
the hand-mesh reconstruction task into three stages: a joint
stage to predict hand joints and segmentation; a mesh stage
to predict a rough hand mesh; and a refine stage to finetune it with an offset mesh for mesh-image alignment. With
careful design in the network structure and in the loss functions, we can promote high-quality finger-level mesh-image
alignment and drive the models together to deliver real-time
predictions. Extensive quantitative and qualitative results
on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the quality of our
results outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on handmesh/pose precision and hand-image alignment. In the end,
we also showcase several real-time AR scenarios.

1. Introduction
3D hand-mesh reconstruction from a single monocular
view is a long-standing task in computer vision that has
great potentials for supporting and enhancing many applications, e.g., human-computer interactions, augmented reality (AR), etc. By recognizing the 3D shape and pose of
the user’s hand in the AR view, we not only can augment
the appearance of the hand and attach virtual objects onto
the hand but can also enable the user to directly use his/her
hand to grab and manipulate virtual 3D objects in the AR
view. These are exciting but very challenging applications
in AR that require the support of computer vision methods.
To put a hand-mesh reconstruction method into practice
for direct hand interactions in AR, there are three requirements to meet. (i) The reconstruction should run in real
time to give interactive feedback. (ii) The overall pose and
shape of the reconstructed hand should match the user’s real
hand in AR. (iii) Beyond that, the reconstructed hand should

Figure 1. Comparing 3D hand meshes (top row) reconstructed
by I2L-MeshNet [32] (ECCV 2020) and by our method. Taking
these meshes to support AR interaction (bottom row), our predicted hand mesh delivers better finger-level alignment and more
natural hand occlusion with the virtual ping pong racket.

plausibly align with the user’s real hand in the image space
to improve the perceptual realism in the AR interactions.
At present, research works on hand-mesh reconstruction
can roughly be divided into two categories based on the type
of the input image, i.e., RGB or depth. Despite the categorization, recent works are mostly deep-learning-based, e.g.,
a typical approach is to use a deep neural network to predict
the 2D/3D hand joint coordinates for guiding the regression of hand-mesh vertices [32] or parameters in a parametric hand model [60], e.g., MANO [39]. Other works
encode the image features to latent features and then use
the Graph-CNN [15] or spiral filters [27] to directly reconstruct the hand mesh. Concerning the goal of supporting
hand interactions in AR, existing works on hand-mesh reconstruction can mainly cater requirements (i) and (ii) but
not requirement (iii), since they do not effectively utilize
the 2D cues, e.g., hand boundary, in their framework, while
aiming for speed and gesture matching. A misaligned hand
mesh may lead to obvious artifacts in the AR interactions;
see the left column in Figure 1. While some recent works try
to explore a better image-space alignment via differentiable
rendering [1, 58] for meeting requirement (iii), they tend
to struggle with requirement (i) due to the time-consuming
iterative refinement process for the hand alignment.

11698

