Contextually Plausible and Diverse 3D Human Motion Prediction
Sadegh Aliakbarian*
Microsoft

Fatemeh Saleh
ACRV, ANU

Lars Petersson
Data61, CSIRO

Stephen Gould
ACRV, ANU

Mathieu Salzmann
CVLab, EPFL

Abstract
We tackle the task of diverse 3D human motion prediction, that is, forecasting multiple plausible future 3D poses
given a sequence of observed 3D poses. In this context,
a popular approach consists of using a Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE). However, existing approaches
that do so either fail to capture the diversity in human motion, or generate diverse but semantically implausible continuations of the observed motion. In this paper, we address both of these problems by developing a new variational framework that accounts for both diversity and context of the generated future motion. To this end, and in contrast to existing approaches, we condition the sampling of
the latent variable that acts as source of diversity on the representation of the past observation, thus encouraging it to
carry relevant information. Our experiments demonstrate
that our approach yields motions not only of higher quality
while retaining diversity, but also that preserve the contextual information contained in the observed motion.

1. Introduction
Human motion prediction is the task of forecasting plausible 3D human motion continuation(s) given a sequence
of past 3D human poses. To address this problem, prior
work mostly relies on recurrent encoder-decoder architectures, where the encoder processes the observed motion,
and the decoder generates a single future trajectory given
the encoded representation of the past [5, 10, 16, 22, 23, 24,
28, 21]. While this approach yields valid future motion, it
tends to ignore the fact that human motion is stochastic in
nature; given one single observation, multiple diverse continuations of the motion are likely and plausible. The lack
of stochasticity of these encoder-decoder methods ensues
from the fact that both the network operations and the sequences in the training dataset are deterministic1 . In this
* Work done while at the Australian National University.
1 For complicated tasks such as motion prediction, the training data is

typically insufficiently sampled, in that, for any given condition, the dataset
contains only a single sample, in effect making the data appear deterministic. For instance, in motion prediction, we never observed twice the same

Figure 1. Evaluating the quality, diversity, and context of stochastic motion prediction models. We show each model as a circle in
a Context vs. Quality plot, further indicating Diversity with the
radius of the marker. These three metrics are defined in Section 5.
Our LCP-VAE approach (in black) yields diverse predictions of
higher-quality than those of other methods, while better preserving the context of the observations.

paper, we introduce an approach to modeling this stochasticity by learning multiple modes of human motion. We
focus on generating both diverse and contextually and semantically plausible motion predictions. By contextually
plausible, we mean motions that are natural continuations of
an observed sequence of 3D poses, preserving and continuing the context depicted by the observation. For instance,
when the observed poses depict a person walking, we expect the network to predominantly predict future motions
corresponding to different walking modes. This is crucial
in certain scenarios, such as pedestrian intention forecasting
in autonomous driving, user interaction in AR/VR applications, and automatic animation generation, in which context
is as important as diversity.
Recent attempts to account for motion stochasticity
mostly rely on combining a random vector with an encoding
of the observed pose sequence [4, 5, 7, 16, 19, 28, 29, 31].
In particular, the state-of-the-art approaches to diverse human motion prediction [4, 29, 31] use conditional variational autoencoders (CVAEs). Here, we argue that standard CVAEs are ill-suited to generate motions that are dipast motion with two different future ones.

11333

