A Broad Study on the Transferability of Visual Representations with
Contrastive Learning
Ashraful Islam1 *, Chun-Fu Chen2,3 , Rameswar Panda2,3 , Leonid Karlinsky3 , Richard Radke1 , Rogerio Feris2,3
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 IBM Research
islama6@rpi.edu, chenrich@us.ibm.com, rpanda@ibm.com
leonidka@il.ibm.com, rjradke@ecse.rpi.edu, rsferis@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Tremendous progress has been made in visual representation learning, notably with the recent success of selfsupervised contrastive learning methods. Supervised contrastive learning has also been shown to outperform its
cross-entropy counterparts by leveraging labels for choosing where to contrast. However, there has been little work
to explore the transfer capability of contrastive learning to
a different domain. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive study on the transferability of learned representations of different contrastive approaches for linear evaluation, full-network transfer, and few-shot recognition on 12
downstream datasets from different domains, and object detection tasks on MSCOCO and VOC0712. The results show
that the contrastive approaches learn representations that
are easily transferable to a different downstream task. We
further observe that the joint objective of self-supervised
contrastive loss with cross-entropy/supervised-contrastive
loss leads to better transferability of these models over their
supervised counterparts. Our analysis reveals that the representations learned from the contrastive approaches contain more low/mid-level semantics than cross-entropy models, which enables them to quickly adapt to a new task. Our
codes and models will be publicly available to facilitate future research on transferability of visual representations. 1

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning is an important research area
whose goal is to learn superior data representations without any labelled supervision. Recently, self-supervised
contrastive learning has shown promising results in image
classification tasks [21, 7, 4]. In the contrastive learning
paradigm, a model is trained to recognize different augmentations of the same image (commonly referred as positives)
while discriminating them from other random images (re* This work was done while the author was an intern at IBM.
1 https://github.com/asrafulashiq/transfer broad

(a) Linear evaluation

(b) Few-shot classification

Figure 1: Average top-1 accuracy of different models on the
downstream datasets. (a) Linear evaluation with a fixed feature
extractor and (b) 5-way 5-shot few-shot classification. In both
cases, we observe that contrastive pretrained models achieve superior performance compared to cross-entropy pretrained models. Adding a self-supervised contrastive loss (SelfSupCon)
improves the performance for both supervised cross-entropy and
supervised contrastive pretrained models. We argue that incorporating a self-supervised contrastive loss (SelfSupCon) increases
the variability within the same-class features and makes the models learn both high-level semantics and low-level cues.

ferred as negatives) in the dataset. The promising performance of self-supervised contrastive learning led to the idea
of leveraging label information in the contrastive learning
paradigm. To this end, Khosla et al. [30] proposed a supervised contrastive learning framework that achieves better
ImageNet accuracy than the standard cross-entropy model.
Representations learned from contrastive learning have
been shown to perform better than supervised cross-entropy
models in various downstream tasks, particularly the object
detection task [21, 7, 30, 45, 54]. Despite recent progress,
it is unclear why contrastive representations transfer better to other tasks, since most prior work focuses on indomain evaluation, particularly ImageNet classification accuracy. In this paper, our goal is to understand the underlying mechanism of the superior transferability of contrastive learning. Towards this end, we conduct a comprehensive study regarding transfer learning of contrastive
approaches on downstream image classification, few-shot
evaluation, and object detection. We rigorously benchmark five methods with different training objective losses:
cross-entropy, self-supervised contrastive, supervised con-

8845

