Differentiable Dynamic Wirings for Neural Networks
Kun Yuan1 , Quanquan Li1 , Shaopeng Guo2 , Dapeng Chen1 , Aojun Zhou1 ,
Fengwei Yu1 and Ziwei Liu3
1
2
SenseTime Research, HKUST, 3 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
yuankunbupt@gmail.com, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
A standard practice of deploying deep neural networks
is to apply the same architecture to all the input instances.
However, a fixed architecture may not be suitable for different data with high diversity. To boost the model capacity, existing methods usually employ larger convolutional
kernels or deeper network layers, which incurs prohibitive
computational costs. In this paper, we address this issue by
proposing Differentiable Dynamic Wirings (DDW), which
learns the instance-aware connectivity that creates different wiring patterns for different instances. 1) Specifically,
the network is initialized as a complete directed acyclic
graph, where the nodes represent convolutional blocks and
the edges represent the connection paths. 2) We generate
edge weights by a learnable module, Router, and select the
edges whose weights are larger than a threshold, to adjust
the connectivity of the neural network structure. 3) Instead
of using the same path of the network, DDW aggregates features dynamically in each node, which allows the network
to have more representation power.
To facilitate effective training, we further represent the
network connectivity of each sample as an adjacency matrix. The matrix is updated to aggregate features in the forward pass, cached in the memory, and used for gradient
computing in the backward pass. We validate the effectiveness of our approach with several mainstream architectures,
including MobileNetV2, ResNet, ResNeXt, and RegNet. Extensive experiments are performed on ImageNet classification and COCO object detection, which demonstrates the
effectiveness and generalization ability of our approach.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have driven a shift from feature
engineering to feature learning. The great progress largely
comes from well-designed networks with increasing capacity of models [10, 41, 13, 34]. To achieve the superior
performance, a useful practice is to add more layers [33]
or expand the size of existing convolutions (kernel width,

number of channels) [14, 34, 21]. Meantime, the computational cost significantly increases, hindering the deployment
of these models in realistic scenarios. Instead of adding
much more computational burden, we prefer adding inputdependent modules to networks, increasing the model capacity by accommodating the data variance.
Several existing work attempt to augment the inputdependent modules into network. For example, Squeezeand-Excitation network (SENet) [12] learns to scale the activations in the channel dimension conditionally on the input. Conditionally Parameterized Convolution (CondConv)
[43] uses over-parameterization weights and generates individual convolutional kernels for each sample. GaterNet
[4] adopts a gate network to extract features and generate
sparse binary masks for selecting filters in the backbone network based upon inputs. All these methods focus on the
adjustment of the micro structure of neural networks, using
a data-dependent module to influence the feature representation at the same level. Recall the deep neural network to
mammalian brain mechanism in biology [26], the neurons
are linked by synapses and responsible for sensing different
information, the synapses are activated to varying degrees
when the neurons perceive external information. Such a
phenomenon inspires us to design a network where different
samples activate different network paths.
In this paper, we learn to optimize the connectivity
of neural networks based upon inputs. Instead of using
stacked-style or hand-designed manners, we allow a more
flexible selection for wiring patterns. Specifically, we reformulate the network into a directed acyclic graph, where
nodes represent the convolution block while edges indicate connections. Different from randomly wired neural
networks [42] that generate random graphs as connectivity using predefined generators, we rewire the graph as a
complete graph so that all nodes establish connections with
each other. Such a setting allows more possible connections
and makes the task of finding the most suitable connectivity for each sample equivalent to finding the optimal subgraph in the complete graph. In the graph, each node aggregates features from the preceding nodes, performs feature

327

