Meta Navigator:
Search for a Good Adaptation Policy for Few-shot Learning
Chi Zhang1
1

Henghui Ding1,2

Guosheng Lin1 * Ruibo Li1

Nanyang Technological University

2

Changhu Wang2
3

ByteDance

chi007@e.ntu.edu.sg

Chunhua Shen3

Monash University

gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

90

ProtoNets

MatchNets

MAML

finetune

80

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have become
indispensable in a variety of computer vision tasks [27,
39–41, 55, 58, 59]. A crucial reason is that the knowledge
learned by CNNs can be transferred across different vision
tasks in the form of hierarchical feature representations.
Nevertheless, a sufficiently large amount of annotated data
is still necessary to achieve good generalization accuracy
due to CNNs’ data-hungry properties, which inevitably hinders the application of CNNs in real-world scenarios.
* Corresponding author: G. Lin (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

70

Acc(%)

Few-shot learning aims to adapt knowledge learned from
previous tasks to novel tasks with only a limited amount of
labeled data. Research literature on few-shot learning exhibits great diversity, while different algorithms often excel at different few-shot learning scenarios. It is therefore
tricky to decide which learning strategies to use under different task conditions. Inspired by the recent success in Automated Machine Learning literature (AutoML), in this paper, we present Meta Navigator, a framework that attempts
to solve the aforementioned limitation in few-shot learning
by seeking a higher-level strategy and proffer to automate
the selection from various few-shot learning designs. The
goal of our work is to search for good parameter adaptation policies that are applied to different stages in the network for few-shot classification. We present a search space
that covers many popular few-shot learning algorithms in
the literature, and develop a differentiable searching and
decoding algorithm based on meta-learning that supports
gradient-based optimization. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our searching-based method on multiple benchmark
datasets. Extensive experiments show that our approach
significantly outperforms baselines and demonstrates performance advantages over many state-of-the-art methods.

60
50
40
30

5-way 1-shot
in-domain

5-way 10-shot
in-domain

5-way 1-shot
cross-domain

5-way 10-shot
cross-domain

Figure 1 – Comparison of some popular few-shot learning algorithms under various few-shot learning task settings. All models are
based on the same network architecture, with weights pre-trained on
miniImageNet dataset. Cross-domain experiments are evaluated on the
CUB dataset. Existing few-shot learning algorithms are highly taskspecific and are outperformed by a simple fine-tune baseline when the
domain difference is large and more support data are available.

Few-shot learning is proposed as a promising direction
to alleviate the need for exhaustively labeled data by exploring an extreme case where only a few labeled data is available to undertake a novel task based on prior knowledge
learned on previous tasks. A typical application scenario is
few-shot image classification [11,37,44]. Literature on fewshot learning exhibits great diversity, while different algorithms often excel at different few-shot learning scenarios.
Fig. 1 compares some popular few-shot learning algorithms
on different few-shot learning tasks. Here we consider three
test cases, including 1) the extreme low-shot case, i.e., 1shot; 2) a medium-shot case, where the size of support set
is relatively larger than the common benchmarks, e.g., 10shot; 3) a cross-domain case where the training and testing
tasks are sampled from different domains. As is shown, existing few-shot learning algorithms are highly task-specific
and no single algorithm can show superiority over others
across all tasks. In particular, when the domain difference
is large, the compared few-shot learning algorithms can not
sufficiently utilize the increasing number of support data to
accommodate the domain difference, while the simple fine-

9435

