Learning Bias-Invariant Representation by Cross-Sample Mutual
Information Minimization
Wei Zhu1 , Haitian Zheng1 , Haofu Liao * 2 , Weijian Li1 , and Jiebo Luo1
1

University of Rochester
Amazon Web Services
{wzhu15,hzheng15,wli69}@ur.rochester.edu, liaohaofu@gmail.com, jluo@cs.rochester.edu
2

Abstract
Deep learning algorithms mine knowledge from the
training data and thus would likely inherit the dataset’s
bias information. As a result, the obtained model would
generalize poorly and even mislead the decision process in real-life applications. We propose to remove the
bias information misused by the target task with a crosssample adversarial debiasing (CSAD) method. CSAD
explicitly extracts target and bias features disentangled
from the latent representation generated by a feature extractor and then learns to discover and remove the correlation between the target and bias features. The correlation measurement plays a critical role in adversarial debiasing and is conducted by a cross-sample neural mutual information estimator. Moreover, we propose
joint content and local structural representation learning to boost mutual information estimation for better
performance. We conduct thorough experiments on publicly available datasets to validate the advantages of the
proposed method over state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning is built on collected and
contributed data. However, real-world data inevitably
contains noise and bias and may not be well-distributed.
Such flawed datasets may make the learned model unreliable and pose threats to the learned model’s generalization capacity to unseen data. This problem is particularly crucial for medical and healthcare-related applications [10]. For example, Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is
* This work was done when Haofu Liao was at the University of
Rochester.

Figure 1. A brief illustration of CSAD for a color-biased binary
classification task. Our objective is to obtain a color-invariant
digit classifier. Given the i-th training sample xi as a red “0”,
most existing methods eliminate the correlation between hi
and red information from the i-th sample (solid line), where hi
is the extracted features. By contrast, CSAD could reduce the
correlation between hi and various red colors extracted from
other samples. A cross-sample mutual information estimator
measures the correlation with joint content and local structural
representation.

associated with age, and the PD patients are primarily
composed of older people in the related datasets [41, 8,
27]. A model learned on these datasets may predict PD
by the age of patients instead of the symptoms of the disease. As a result, the age bias renders the learned model
hardly useful for real-life disease diagnosis and analysis.
Several methods have been proposed to learn to remove the dataset bias [22, 1, 36, 51, 30, 5]. Among
them, some methods regularize the model to not learn
bias with additional regularization terms [30, 5], and
others learn to eliminate the learned bias information by
adversarial learning [22, 36, 51]. Our work follows the

15002

