Waypoint Models for Instruction-guided
Navigation in Continuous Environments
Jacob Krantz1 * Aaron Gokaslan2,3
1

Dhruv Batra2,4
2

Stefan Lee1

Oleksandr Maksymets2

3

Oregon State University Facebook AI Research Cornell University
4
Georgia Institute of Technology

Project Webpage:

https://jacobkrantz.github.io/waypoint-vlnce

Abstract
Little inquiry has explicitly addressed the role of action spaces in language-guided visual navigation – either
in terms of its effect on navigation success or the efficiency
with which a robotic agent could execute the resulting trajectory. Building on the recently released VLN-CE [24] setting for instruction following in continuous environments,
we develop a class of language-conditioned waypoint prediction networks to examine this question. We vary the expressivity of these models to explore a spectrum between
low-level actions and continuous waypoint prediction. We
measure task performance and estimated execution time on
a profiled LoCoBot [1] robot. We find more expressive
models result in simpler, faster to execute trajectories, but
lower-level actions can achieve better navigation metrics
by approximating shortest paths better. Further, our models
outperform prior work in VLN-CE and set a new state-ofthe-art on the public leaderboard – increasing success rate
by 4% with our best model on this challenging task.

1. Introduction
A long-term goal of instruction-guided visual navigation
research is to develop AI for robotic agents that can reliably
follow paths described by natural language navigation instructions in new environments. Much of the existing work
in this domain is robot-agnostic and has focused on highlyabstract simulators where agents navigate by choosing between a small, fixed set of nearby locations that the agent
then transitions to deterministically [4, 15, 22, 25] – essentially assuming some underlying robot-specific control
system can perform navigation. The Vision-and-Language
Navigation (VLN) [4] task is representative of this class of
problem settings.
In sim-to-real experiments, Anderson et al. [3] demonstrate that a major performance bottleneck for transferring
* Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.
Correspondence: krantzja@oregonstate.edu

Figure 1. Our approach decomposes the task of following navigation instructions in continuous environments into languageconditioned waypoint prediction and low-level navigation.

VLN agents trained in high-level simulators to real robotic
systems is producing appropriate sets of nearby locations
(or waypoints) to choose from; however, it is infeasible to
study waypoint prediction in the discrete, highly-abstract
simulator as the agent can only occupy predefined locations.
Recently, Krantz et al. [24] introduced a variant of VLN
instantiated in continuous simulated environments (denoted
VLN-CE) such that agents can move to arbitrary positions.
In contrast to the highly-abstract action space in VLN,
agents in [24] navigate by executing a sequence of lowlevel actions such as moving forward 0.25 meters or turning by 15 degree increments. This end-to-end, instructionto-low-level-control design choice has implications both in
simulation and for potential sim-to-real transfer to a robotic
platform. During training, these policies must jointly learn

15162

