Rethinking Transformer-based Set Prediction for Object Detection
Zhiqing Sun∗

Shengcao Cao∗ Yiming Yang
Carnegie Mellon University

Kris Kitani

{zhiqings,shengcao,yiming,kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
DETR is a recently proposed Transformer-based method
which views object detection as a set prediction problem and achieves state-of-the-art performance but demands
extra-long training time to converge. In this paper, we investigate the causes of the optimization difficulty in the training of DETR. Our examinations reveal several factors contributing to the slow convergence of DETR, primarily the
issues with the Hungarian loss and the Transformer crossattention mechanism. To overcome these issues we propose two solutions, namely, TSP-FCOS (Transformer-based
Set Prediction with FCOS) and TSP-RCNN (Transformerbased Set Prediction with RCNN). Experimental results
show that the proposed methods not only converge much
faster than the original DETR, but also significantly outperform DETR and other baselines in terms of detection
accuracy. Code is released at https://github.com/
Edward-Sun/TSP-Detection.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims at finding all objects of interest in
an image and predicting their category labels and bounding
boxes, which is essentially a set prediction problem, as the
ordering of the predicted objects is not required. Most of the
state-of-the-art neural detectors [21, 24, 19, 25, 38, 26, 11]
are developed in a detect-and-merge fashion that is, instead
of directly optimizing the predicted set in an end-to-end
fashion, those methods usually first make predictions on a
set of region proposals or sliding windows, and then perform a post-processing step (e.g., “non-maximum suppression” or NMS) for merging the the detection results in different proposals or windows that might belong to the same
object. As the detection model is trained agnostically with
respect to the merging step, the model optimization in those
object detectors is not end-to-end and arguably sub-optimal.
DEtection TRansformer (DETR) [2] is recently proposed as the first fully end-to-end object detector. It uses
∗ indicates equal contribution.

Transformer [32] to directly output a final set of predictions
without further post-processing. However, it takes extralong training time to converge. For example, the popular
Faster RCNN model [26] only requires about 30 epochs
to convergence, but DETR needs 500 epochs, which takes
at least 10 days on 8 V100 GPUs. Such expensive training cost would be practically prohibitive in large applications. Therefore, in what manner should we accelerate the
training process towards fast convergence for DETR-like
Transformer-based detectors is a challenging research question and is the main focus of this paper.
For analyzing the causes of DETR’s optimization difficulty we conduct extensive experiments and find that the
cross-attention module, by which the Transformer decoder
obtains object information from images, is mainly responsible for the slow convergence. In pursuit of faster convergence, we further examine an encoder-only version of
DETR by removing the cross-attention module. We find
that the encoder-only DETR yields a substantial improvement for the detection of small objects in particular but suboptimal performance on large objects. In addition, our analysis shows that the instability of the bipartite matching in
DETR’s Hungarian loss also contributes to the slow convergence.
Based on the above analysis we propose two models for significantly accelerating the training process of
Transformer-based set prediction methods, both of which
can be regarded as improved versions of encoder-only
DETR with feature pyramids [18]. Specifically, we present
TSP-FCOS (Transformer-based Set Prediction with FCOS)
and TSP-RCNN (Transformer-based Set Prediction with
RCNN), which are inspired by a classic one-stage detector
FCOS [30] (Fully Convolutional One-Stage object detector)
and a classic two-stage detector Faster RCNN [26], respectively. A novel Feature of Interest (FoI) selection mechanism is developed in TSP-FCOS to help Transformer encoder handle multi-level features. To resolve the instability
of the bipartite matching in the Hungarian loss, we also design a new bipartite matching scheme for each of our two
models for accelerating the convergence in training. In our
evaluation on the COCO 2017 detection benchmark [20]

3611

