FairNAS: Rethinking Evaluation Fairness of Weight Sharing Neural
Architecture Search
Xiangxiang Chu* Bo Zhang Ruijun Xu
{chuxiangxiang,zhangbo11,xuruijun}@xiaomi.com
Abstract
One of the most critical problems in weight-sharing neural architecture search is the evaluation of candidate models
within a predefined search space. In practice, a one-shot supernet is trained to serve as an evaluator. A faithful ranking
certainly leads to more accurate searching results. However,
current methods are prone to making misjudgments. In this
paper, we prove that their biased evaluation is due to inherent unfairness in the supernet training. In view of this, we
propose two levels of constraints: expectation fairness and
strict fairness. Particularly, strict fairness ensures equal
optimization opportunities for all choice blocks throughout
the training, which neither overestimates nor underestimates
their capacity. We demonstrate that this is crucial for improving the confidence of models’ ranking. Incorporating the
one-shot supernet trained under the proposed fairness constraints with a multi-objective evolutionary search algorithm,
we obtain various state-of-the-art models, e.g., FairNAS-A
attains 77.5% top-1 validation accuracy on ImageNet.

1. Introduction
The advent of neural architecture search (NAS) has
brought deep learning into an era of automation [54]. Abundant efforts have been dedicated to searching within carefully
designed search space [55, 37, 44, 31, 45]. Meanwhile, the
evaluation of a network’s performance is an important building block for NAS. Conventional approaches evaluate an
enormous amount of models based on resource-devouring
training [55, 44]. Recent attention has been drawn to improve its efficiency via parameter sharing [2, 29, 35, 48].
Generally speaking, the weight-sharing approaches all
involve training a supernet that incorporates many candidate subnetworks. They can be roughly classified into two
categories: those who couple searching and training within
one stage [35, 29, 4, 41, 48] and others who decouple them
into two stages, where the trained supernet is treated as an
evaluator for final searching [2, 1, 16, 32]. The supernet is a
* This work was done when all the authors were at Xiaomi AI Lab.

so-called one-shot model.
Despite being widely utilized due to searching efficiency,
weight sharing approaches are roughly built on empirical
experiments instead of solid theoretical ground. Several
fundamental issues remain to be addressed. Namely, a) Why
is there a large gap between the range of supernet predicted
accuracies and that of “ground-truth” ones by stand-alone
training from scratch [2, 1]? b) How to build a good evaluator
that neither overestimates nor underestimates subnetworks?
c) Why does the weight-sharing mechanism work, if under
some conditions?
In this paper, we attempt to answer the above three questions for two-stage weight-sharing approaches. We present
Fair Neural Architecture Search (FairNAS) in which we
train the supernet under the proposed fairness constraints
to improve evaluation confidence. Our analysis and experiments are conducted in a widely used search space as in
[4, 48, 16, 41], as well as a cell-based search space from a
common benchmark NAS-Bench-201 [14]. The contributions can be summarized as follows.
Firstly, we prove it is due to unfair bias that the supernet
misjudges submodels’ performance, which is inevitable in
current one-shot approaches [2, 1].
Secondly, we propose two levels of fairness constraints:
Expectation Fairness (EF) and Strict Fairness (SF). They are
enforced to alleviate supernet bias and to boost evaluation
capability. Both outperform the existing unfair approaches
while SF performs best with a ranking (τ ) of 0.7412 on
NAS-Bench-201.
Thirdly, we unveil the root cause of the validity of singlepath supernet training under our fairness perspective. That
is, different choice blocks are interchangeable during the supernet training as they learn similar feature maps, according
to their high cosine similarity measure, see Figure 2.
Last but not the least, our fair single-path sampling is
memory-friendly, and its GPU costs can also be linearly
amortized to the number of target models, see Fig. 1. We then
incorporate our supernet with an EA-based multi-objective
searching framework, from which we obtain three state-ofthe-art networks within a single proxyless run at a cost of 12
GPU days on ImageNet.
12239

