GDP: Stabilized Neural Network Pruning via Gates with Differentiable
Polarization
Yi Guo1 , Huan Yuan,1 , Jianchao Tan1 , Zhangyang Wang2 , Sen Yang1 , Ji Liu1
1
Kuaishou Technology, 2 University of Texas at Austin
{guoyi03,yuanhuan,jianchaotan,senyang,jiliu}@kuaishou.com, {atlaswang}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Model compression techniques are recently gaining explosive attention for obtaining efficient AI models for various real time applications. Channel pruning is one important compression strategy, and widely used in slimming
various DNNs. Previous gate-based or importance-based
pruning methods aim to remove channels whose “importance” are smallest. However, it remains unclear what criteria the channel importance should be measured on, leading to various channel selection heuristics. Some other
sampling-based pruning methods deploy sampling strategy
to train sub-nets, which often causes the training instability and the compressed model’s degraded performance. In
view of the research gaps, we present a new module named
Gates with Differentiable Polarization (GDP), inspired by
principled optimization ideas. GDP can be plugged before
convolutional layers without bells and whistles, to control
the on-and-off of each channel or whole layer block. During the training process, the polarization effect will drive
a subset of gates to smoothly decrease to exact zero, while
other gates gradually stay away from zero by a large margin. When training terminates, those zero-gated channels
can be painlessly removed, while other non-zero gates can
be absorbed into the succeeding convolution kernel, causing completely no interruption to training nor damage to
the trained model. Experiments conducted over CIFAR-10
and ImageNet datasets show that the proposed GDP algorithm achieves the state-of-the-art performance on various
benchmark DNNs at a broad range of pruning ratios. We
also apply GDP to DeepLabV3Plus-ResNet50 on the challenging Pascal VOC segmentation task, whose test performance sees no drop (even slightly improved) with over 60%
FLOPs saving.

1. Introduction
Model compression techniques recently attract many attentions from both industry and academic research commu-

nities for compressing Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to
satisfy devices with limited computing and storage capabilities. One common model compression method is pruning,
which includes unstructured pruning (i.e., weights sparsification) [4, 20, 38, 46, 66] and structured pruning (e.g.,
channel pruning and kernel pruning) [78]. Unstructured
pruning removes individual weight, which results in sparse
connection and requires sparse matrix operations supports.
The structured pruning eliminates an entire neuron or a
block at once, leaving the model’s structure and connections
intact and thus having no special requirements for hardware
or specific libraries. In this paper, we focus on the latter.
Importance-based pruning methods usually prune channels/blocks whose importance are small, but it remains unclear what criteria the importance should be measured on,
leading to various importance selection heuristics, such as
the magnitude of weights [74], first-order or second-order
information of weights [11, 56, 59], knockoff features of
filters [69] and so on. One recent track of works follow the
sparse learning optimization routines, utilizing LASSO or
group LASSO [24, 48, 74] to regularize training weights.
However, these methods need to prune from a skewed yet
continuous histogram of weights values, and the selection of
the pruning threshold [20] is critical yet ad-hoc, taking Figure 1(a) for example. Moreover, removing many small yet
non-zero weights will inevitably damage the network, and
often need to fine-tune before the next pruning schedule,
causing iterative pruning-finetuning loop [19, 42, 48, 55].
Besides the importance-based pruning methods, some
sampling-based methods [14, 34, 53, 87, 22, 84] either sample a sub-network or calculate expectations over whole network to train, utilizing Gambul-Softmax [31], STE [1] or
Bernoulli distribution [66, 84] strategies. These methods may potentially cause either unstable training due to
equiprobable sampling (i.e. sample a completely different
sub-net when the probability is nearly uniformly distributed
at the beginning of training), or converging at local minimum due to deterministic sampling (i.e. sample nearly the
same sub-net when the probability becomes deterministic),
thus need various ad-hoc manual designs [14].

5239

