Efficient and Differentiable Shadow Computation for Inverse Problems
Linjie Lyu, Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Mallikarjun B R, Ayush Tewari, and Christian Theobalt
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
1. Introduction

Figure 1. We propose a fast and differentiable visibility approximation for rendering which allows us to account for shadow effects. To this end, we approximate the geometry with a sphere set
and compute visibility in the spherical harmonics space.

Abstract
Differentiable rendering has received increasing interest for image-based inverse problems. It can benefit traditional optimization-based solutions to inverse problems,
but also allows for self-supervision of learning-based approaches for which training data with ground truth annotation is hard to obtain. However, existing differentiable
renderers either do not model visibility of the light sources
from the different points in the scene, responsible for shadows in the images, or are very slow which makes it difficult
to train deep architectures over thousands of iterations. To
this end, we propose an accurate yet efficient approach for
differentiable visibility and soft shadow computation. Our
approach is based on the spherical harmonics approximations of the scene illumination and visibility, where the occluding surface is approximated with spheres. This allows
for a significantly more efficient shadow computation compared to methods based on ray tracing. As our formulation
is differentiable, it can be used to solve inverse problems
such as texture, illumination, rigid pose, and geometric deformation recovery from images using analysis-by-synthesis
optimization.

Rendering virtual scenes, objects, and characters has a
wide range of applications in movies, video games, and
many other areas which require synthesis of realistic images. While in these computer graphics applications the
main interest is the generation of images from scene parameters like geometry, lighting, and texture, rendering
can also be used to solve inverse problems, which attempts to recover exactly these scene parameters from real
images. Analysis-by-synthesis optimization is commonly
used [36, 3] where the estimated scene parameters are rendered as a synthetic image and then compared with the reference. If the renderer is differentiable, an energy function which compares the renderings and the ground truth
images can be used for optimization. Differentiable rendering is also interesting for learning-based, notably neural network-based, approaches where ground truth annotations, e.g. of the dense geometry, are not easily available
for large image-based training corpora. Instead, differentiable rendering allows for self-supervised learning using
an analysis-by-synthesis approach where the rendered image is compared to the real one. This has been widely used
in the vision and machine learning community, for solving problems such as reflectance estimation [1, 4, 20], freeviewpoint synthesis [35, 22], and human performance capture [10, 9, 34, 33].
Most differentiable rendering methods rely on
rasterization-based techniques which only consider direct illumination effects [14, 26, 21, 18]. Shadows are
global illumination effects, i.e., for any point in the scene,
any other point could be occluding the light source, see
Fig. 1. Thus, they are not modeled by the direct illumination renderers. As a result, inverse methods supervised with
such differentiable renderers produce undesired artifacts.
For instance, the estimated texture, geometry, and illumination may exhibit baked in errors trying to represent real
world effects, in particular due to shadows which are not
accounted for by these simplified rendering assumptions.
In this paper, we address the problem of illumination
visibility, i.e., whether the light source in a direction is
visible from any point in the scene. Illumination visibility

13107

