Occluded Person Re-Identification with Single-scale Global Representations
Cheng Yan1 ,* Guansong Pang2∗† , Jile Jiao3 Xiao Bai1† , Xuetao Feng3 , Chunhua Shen4
1
Beihang University 2 The University of Adelaide 3 Alibaba Group 4 Monash University

Abstract

Training
Pose Estimation

Occluded person re-identification (ReID) aims at reidentifying occluded pedestrians from occluded or holistic
images taken across multiple cameras. Current state-ofthe-art (SOTA) occluded ReID models rely on some auxiliary modules, including pose estimation, feature pyramid
and graph matching modules, to learn multi-scale and/or
part-level features to tackle the occlusion challenges. This
unfortunately leads to complex ReID models that (i) fail
to generalize to challenging occlusions of diverse appearance, shape or size, and (ii) become ineffective in handling
non-occluded pedestrians. However, real-world ReID applications typically have highly diverse occlusions and involve a hybrid of occluded and non-occluded pedestrians.
To address these two issues, we introduce a novel ReID
model that learns discriminative single-scale global-level
pedestrian features by enforcing a novel exponentially sensitive yet bounded distance loss on occlusion-based augmented data. We show for the first time that learning singlescale global features without using these auxiliary modules
is able to outperform the SOTA multi-scale and/or partlevel feature-based models. Further, our simple model can
achieve new SOTA performance in both occluded and nonoccluded ReID, as shown by extensive results on three occluded and two general ReID benchmarks. Additionally,
we create a large-scale occluded person ReID dataset with
various occlusions in different scenes, which is significantly
larger and contains more diverse occlusions and pedestrian
dressings than existing occluded ReID datasets, providing
a more faithful occluded ReID benchmark. The dataset is
available at: https: // git. io/ OPReID

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to search for the
same person from a gallery of pedestrian images taken from
different cameras, which is a critical task in computer vision
* CY and GP equally contributed to this work. CY and XB are with
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University. †XB and GP are corresponding authors, e-mail: baixiao@buaa.edu.cn, pangguansong@gmail.com

Testing
Graph/Global feature
Graph/Feature
matching

Backbone

Input images

A
Feature pyramid
Backbone

Feature pyramid
matching

B
Global feature Global feature
Backbone

Global feature
matching

C

Figure 1 – Overview of three occluded ReID approaches. Existing approaches (A&B) rely on auxiliary modules, such as pose
estimation and feature pyramid, to learn multi-scale or part-level
features for occluded ReID, while our proposed approach (C)
can address the problem with significantly simplified models
that learn single-scale global features with single backbone.

due to its broad applications in multi-camera tracking, video
surveillance, and forensic search. Most existing ReID approaches [7, 16, 32, 36, 43] generally assume that the whole
body of the person is visible. However, in real applications,
many pedestrian images can be occluded by various obstacles such as cars, trees, and crowd. It is challenging for the
general ReID approaches to learn effective representations
of these occluded images [6, 15, 26, 34, 37, 39], leading to
ineffective performance for occluded ReID [22, 47].
A number of occluded ReID methods [8, 12, 14, 22, 33]
have been proposed to tackle this problem. The current
state-of-the-arts can be roughly divided into two categories,
key-points based methods and feature pyramid matching
methods. As shown in Figure 1 (A), the key-points based
methods [8, 22, 33] often utilize pose estimation models to
obtain some extra semantic information such as key-points
heat-maps/graphs for identity matching in the training or
inference stage. These part-level features or graph matching strategies help overcome the occlusion problem. However, the ReID performance is heavily relied on the performance of pose estimation models. Further, these pose es-

11875

