Flow-Guided Video Inpainting with Scene Templates
Dong Lao

Peihao Zhu Peter Wonka Ganesh Sundaramoorthi
KAUST, Saudi Arabia

{dong.lao, peihao.zhu, peter.wonka, ganesh.sundaramoorthi}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We consider the problem of filling in missing spatiotemporal regions of a video. We provide a novel flow-based
solution by introducing a generative model of images in relation to the scene (without missing regions) and mappings
from the scene to images. We use the model to jointly infer the scene template, a 2D representation of the scene,
and the mappings. This ensures consistency of the frame-toframe flows generated to the underlying scene, reducing geometric distortions in flow based inpainting. The template is
mapped to the missing regions in the video by a new (L2 -L1 )
interpolation scheme, creating crisp inpaintings and reducing common blur and distortion artifacts. We show on two
benchmark datasets that our approach out-performs stateof-the-art quantitatively and in user studies.1

1. Introduction
Video inpainting is the problem of filling spatialtemporal regions, i.e., masked regions, with content that
naturally blends with the remaining parts of the video. This
is useful in video editing tasks, including removing watermarks or unwanted objects and video restoration. As videos
exhibit temporal regularity, to inpaint a given frame, it is
natural to use data from other frames, as the data in other
frames may correspond to parts of the scene behind the
masked region. Many state-of-the-art methods for video inpainting are flow-guided [7, 29, 19, 5], which take the approach of copying unmasked data from other frames into
the masked region of a given frame by using optical flow.
While these approaches inpaint with plausible data from
the scene through other frames, unlike single image inpainting methods (e.g. [3, 35]) that attempt to halluncinate image
values in the masked region from other regions in the image
or learned through datasets, they are highly dependent on
the quality of the optical flow. Even though optical flow has
advanced significantly with the progress of deep learning
to the point that recent methods on benchmark optical flow
1 Dataset and code: https://github.com/donglao/videoinpainting

Figure 1: Comparison with state-of-the-art. Our approach uses a generative model of formation of images from
the scene to infer flows that are consistent with the scene.
This reduces visual distortions in inpainting compared with
state-of-the-art: DFG [29], STTN [37], OnionPeel [19],
FGVC [5]. Animation in the supplementary materials.
datasets produce only small errors, there are two complications in applying optical flow to inpainting. First, the flow
that is needed in the masked region for inpainting is the flow
had the contents within the masked region been removed to
reveal the part of the scene that the mask occludes. As this
is not possible to determine directly, it is hallucinated, typically learned through data [29, 5]. However, there is no
guarantee that this is consistent with the scene or hallucinations from other frames, producing visual distortions in
inpainting. Secondly, even small errors in optical flow can
produce noticeable visual distortions in the inpainted video,
which is further amplified as flow is aggregated over multiple frames as data from far away frames may be needed.
Attempts have been made to reduce these errors by applying temporal regularity to the flow [29, 38, 37, 5], but these
naive regularizers (flow between frames is close) may not
be consistent with the scene geometry and can still produce
visual distortions (Figure 1).
In this paper, we aim to reduce visual distortions in video
inpainting due to physically implausible and temporally inconsistent flows by deriving a generative model that closely
models the physical image formation process in generating images from the scene, and using it to infer flow. This
model represents the 3D scene (all of the scene correspond-

14599

