Invisible Backdoor Attack with Sample-Specific Triggers
Yuezun Li1 , Yiming Li4 , Baoyuan Wu2,3,† , Longkang Li2,3 , Ran He5 , and Siwei Lyu6,†
1
Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China
2
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
Secure Computing Lab of Big Data, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
5
NLPR/CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
6
University at Buffalo, SUNY, NY, USA

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely and
successfully adopted in many areas [11, 25, 49, 19]. Large
amounts of training data and increasing computational
power are the key factors to their success, but the lengthy
and involved training procedure becomes the bottleneck for
to

BadNets

Goldfish

Bee

Classifier
Train

Goldfish

Trigger
Benign Image

Classifier
Poisoned Image
Goldfish

Bee

Ours

Recently, backdoor attacks pose a new security threat to
the training process of deep neural networks (DNNs). Attackers intend to inject hidden backdoors into DNNs, such
that the attacked model performs well on benign samples,
whereas its prediction will be maliciously changed if hidden
backdoors are activated by the attacker-defined trigger. Existing backdoor attacks usually adopt the setting that triggers are sample-agnostic, i.e., different poisoned samples
contain the same trigger, resulting in that the attacks could
be easily mitigated by current backdoor defenses. In this
work, we explore a novel attack paradigm, where backdoor
triggers are sample-specific. In our attack, we only need
to modify certain training samples with invisible perturbation, while not need to manipulate other training components (e.g., training loss, and model structure) as required
in many existing attacks. Specifically, inspired by the recent
advance in DNN-based image steganography, we generate
sample-specific invisible additive noises as backdoor triggers by encoding an attacker-specified string into benign
images through an encoder-decoder network. The mapping
from the string to the target label will be generated when
DNNs are trained on the poisoned dataset. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets verify the effectiveness of
our method in attacking models with or without defenses.
The code will be available at https://github.com/
yuezunli/ISSBA.

† indicates corresponding authors.
Corresponds
wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn and siweilyu@buffalo.edu.

Poisoned Image

Benign Image

Classifier
Train

Goldfish

Trigger

Classifier

Figure 1. The comparison of triggers in previous attacks (e.g.,
BadNets [8]) and in our attack. The triggers of previous attacks
are sample-agnostic (i.e., different poisoned samples contain the
same trigger), while those of our method are sample-specific.

users and researchers. To reduce the overhead, third-party
resources are usually utilized in training DNNs. For example, one can use third-party data (e.g., data from the Internet
or third-party companies), train their model with third-party
servers (e.g., Google Cloud), or even adopt third-party APIs
directly. However, the opacity of the training process brings
new security threats.
Backdoor attack1 is an emerging threat in the training
process of DNNs. It maliciously manipulates the prediction of the attacked DNN model by poisoning a portion
of training samples. Specifically, backdoor attackers inject some attacker-specified patterns (dubbed backdoor triggers) in the poisoned image and replace the corresponding
label with a pre-defined target label. Accordingly, attackers can embed some hidden backdoors to the model trained
with the poisoned training set. The attacked model will
behave normally on benign samples, whereas its predic1 Backdoor attack is also commonly called ‘neural trojan’ or ‘trojan at-

tack’ [26]. In this paper, we focus on the poisoning-based backdoor attack
[21] towards image classification, although the backdoor threat could also
happen in other scenarios [1, 46, 43, 20, 29, 36, 44].

16463

