Cross-Modality Person Re-Identification via Modality Confusion
and Center Aggregation
Xin Hao1 , Sanyuan Zhao1 , Mang Ye2 *, Jianbing Shen3
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
3
State Key Laboratory of IoT for Smart City, Department of Computer and Information Science,
University of Macau, Macau, China
1

haoxin@bit.edu.cn, yemang@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-modality person re-identification is a challenging task due to large cross-modality discrepancy and intramodality variations. Currently, most existing methods focus on learning modality-specific or modality-shareable
features by using the identity supervision or modality label. Different from existing methods, this paper presents
a novel Modality Confusion Learning Network (MCLNet).
Its basic idea is to confuse two modalities, ensuring that
the optimization is explicitly concentrated on the modalityirrelevant perspective. Specifically, MCLNet is designed to
learn modality-invariant features by simultaneously minimizing inter-modality discrepancy while maximizing crossmodality similarity among instances in a single framework.
Furthermore, an identity-aware marginal center aggregation strategy is introduced to extract the centralization features, while keeping diversity with a marginal constraint.
Finally, we design a camera-aware learning scheme to enrich the discriminability. Extensive experiments on SYSUMM01 and RegDB datasets show that MCLNet outperforms
the state-of-the-art by a large margin. On the large-scale
SYSU-MM01 dataset, our model can achieve 65.40 % and
61.98 % in terms of Rank-1 accuracy and mAP value.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) is a technique that uses
computer vision technology to determine whether there is
a specific person from a gallery set captured by surveillance cameras [17]. It has gained increasing attention in
computer vision area for both research and application.
However, there are relatively few works paying attention
to the ReID between visible images and infrared images.
* Corresponding Author: Mang Ye

Modality B
Modalityέ

Modalityϋ

Confused

Modality A
(a) Modality confusion

(b) Identity-aware

(c) Camera-aware

Figure 1. Idea illustration. (a) is the modality confusion learning
process. After that, the two modalities are difficult to be correctly
classified, narrowing the modality discrepancy. (b) and (c) are the
designed identity-aware and camera-aware marginal constrained
center aggregation for person ID and camera ID prediction.

This cross-modality visible-infrared person re-identification
(cm-ReID) [40] problem is also an important issue in nighttime surveillance application. Compared to the widely studied single-modality ReID [5, 52], the cm-ReID is much
more challenging due to large visual differences between
the two modalities and different camera environments.
To narrow the gap between two modalities, existing
methods mainly focus on learning shareable common feature representations, via either one [37, 40] or two-stream
networks [45, 9]. [15] designs a spectrum dispelling branch
to eliminate the influence of the spectrum. Besides, some
methods generate a common intermediate modality [16] to
eliminate the influences caused by modality discrepancy. A
similar approach adopts GAN technique [10] to generate
cross-modality images for person matching. However, gen-

16403

