CTRL-C: Camera calibration TRansformer with Line-Classification
Jinwoo Lee

Hyunsung Go

Hyunjoon Lee

Sunghyun Cho

Minhyuk Sung

Junho Kim*

Kakao Brain

Kookmin University

Kakao Brain

POSTECH

KAIST

Kookmin University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Single image camera calibration is a task of inferring
intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters by analyzing the
distortion in an input image caused by the perspective projection. It is a key problem in various computer vision
applications, including image rotation correction [11, 28],
photo upright adjustment [21, 5], metrology [8, 42], visual
aesthetics assessment [3, 28], object composition for augmented reality [15, 18, 19], and so on.
Single view geometry is highly related to projective geometric cues such as vanishing points (VPs) and the horizon line, which are the intersections of the world parallel
lines and planes, respectively [13, 27]. Hence, for single
image camera calibration, a classical approach is first to
detect line segments in an input image and then find inlier
line segments that account for VPs and the horizon line using RANSAC or other sampling strategies [29, 34, 21, 31].
However, this approach relies solely on lines and may degrade when inlier lines are falsely detected.
* Corresponding author: junho@kookmin.ac.kr

(a) Input Image

ResNet

Single image camera calibration is the task of estimating the camera parameters from a single input image, such
as the vanishing points, focal length, and horizon line. In
this work, we propose Camera calibration TRansformer
with Line-Classification (CTRL-C), an end-to-end neural
network-based approach to single image camera calibration, which directly estimates the camera parameters from
an image and a set of line segments. Our network adopts
the transformer architecture to capture the global structure of an image with multi-modal inputs in an end-to-end
manner. We also propose an auxiliary task of line classification to train the network to extract the global geometric information from lines effectively. Our experiments
demonstrate that CTRL-C outperforms the previous stateof-the-art methods on the Google Street View and SUN360
benchmark datasets. Code is available at https:// github.
com/ jwlee-vcl/ CTRL-C.

Transformer
Encoder

(b) Calibration Results

Transformer
Decoder

Positional
Encoding
LSD

…

(c) Detected Line Segments

Convergence Lines to Zenith VP (GT)
and Horizontal VPs (Pseudo GT)

(d) Line Classification

Figure 1. Overview of CTRL-C. From a given image (a), CTRLC predicts camera parameters including the zenith, FoV, and horizon line (b) by taking multi-modal cues; semantic ones from (a)
and geometric ones from detected line segments in (c). While directly regressing the camera parameters, CTRL-C classifies line
segments into vertical and horizontal convergence lines, as in (d).
This auxiliary line classification task assists the network to have a
better understanding of the geometric structure in the image and
thus helps improve the accuracy of camera parameter prediction.

Several deep learning-based approaches have recently
been proposed to overcome such limitations [37, 16, 38].
These methods directly infer the camera parameters from
an input image using semantic cues learned by deep neural networks. While they achieve more accurate calibration
results than classical methods, their networks need to learn
geometric structures from an image without any explicit supervision, limiting their performance. Recently, a few deep
learning-based methods [41, 22] leveraging geometric and
semantic cues have been proposed and achieved superior results. Nonetheless, their approaches to leveraging lines are
still limited to conducting post-processing [41] or building
multiple networks that are trained separately [22]. Moreover, all the existing neural network-based approaches rely

16228

