Unaligned Image-to-Image Translation by Learning to Reweight
Shaoan Xie1 , Mingming Gong2 , Yanwu Xu3 , and Kun Zhang1
1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 The University of Melbourne, 3 University of Pittsburgh

Abstract
Unsupervised image-to-image translation aims at learning the mapping from the source to target domain without
using paired images for training. An essential yet restrictive assumption for unsupervised image translation is that
the two domains are aligned, e.g., for the selfie2anime task,
the anime (selfie) domain must contain only anime (selfie)
face images that can be translated to some images in the
other domain. Collecting aligned domains can be laborious
and needs lots of attention. In this paper, we consider the
task of image translation between two unaligned domains,
which may arise for various possible reasons. To solve this
problem, we propose to select images based on importance
reweighting and develop a method to learn the weights and
perform translation simultaneously and automatically. We
compare the proposed method with state-of-the-art image
translation approaches and present qualitative and quantitative results on different tasks with unaligned domains.
Extensive empirical evidence demonstrates the usefulness
of the proposed problem formulation and the superiority of
our method.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Image-to-Image (I2I) translation has
been achieving remarkable success in transferring complex
appearance changes across domains [61, 34]. In addition,
many related tasks could also be formulated as I2I problems such as image super-resolution [57, 11] and domain
adaptation [23, 42].
In supervised image translation, we are given paired data
from source and target domains. Pix2pix [28] applies conditional Generative Adversarial Network [17, 40] to map the
the source images to the target domain while enforcing a L1
distance loss between translated images and target images.
Pix2pix can generate a sharp target image with sufficient
paired training data. However, paired data are very difficult
to collect or even do not exist (e.g., Van Gogh’s painting to
real photos). In the absence of paired data, unsupervised I2I

,

,

Figure 1: Example of aligned and unaligned domains. Left:
selfie images as domain X and anime face images as domain Y . Images in two domains are carefully selected and
processed. Right: many unwanted anime images may appear in the domain Y for many possible reasons, e.g., lack
of human supervision.
translation methods have achieved impressive performance
by combining GAN with proper constraints, such as cycle
consistency [61] and shared latent space assumption [34].
An essential assumption of unsupervised image translation is then that the domains used for training are aligned,
which means that each image in one domain can be translated to some image in the other domain in a meaningful
manner; in other words, there is some underlying relationship between the domains [61]. For example, each of the
two domains in the selfie2anime task include only female
face images (Figure 1, left) of a similar style.
However, collecting images for two domains which are
guaranteed to be aligned needs a lot of attention. For instance, to collect the anime domain, Kim et al. [29] first
constructed an initial dataset consisting of 69,926 anime
character images. Then they applied pre-trained anime face
detector to extract 27,073 face images and then manually
selected 3500 female face images as the training set. To
collect the animal face dataset, Liu et al. [35] manually labeled bounding boxes of 10,000 carnivorous animal faces in
the images and selected images with high detection scores

14174

