Voxel Transformer for 3D Object Detection
Jiageng Mao 1∗

Yujing Xue 2∗
Xiaodan Liang 5

Minzhe Niu 3
Hang Xu 3†

Haoyue Bai 4
Chunjing Xu 3

Jiashi Feng 2

Abstract
We present Voxel Transformer (VoTr), a novel and effective voxel-based Transformer backbone for 3D object detection from point clouds. Conventional 3D convolutional
backbones in voxel-based 3D detectors cannot efficiently
capture large context information, which is crucial for object recognition and localization, owing to the limited receptive fields. In this paper, we resolve the problem by introducing a Transformer-based architecture that enables longrange relationships between voxels by self-attention. Given
the fact that non-empty voxels are naturally sparse but numerous, directly applying standard Transformer on voxels is
non-trivial. To this end, we propose the sparse voxel module
and the submanifold voxel module, which can operate on
the empty and non-empty voxel positions effectively. To further enlarge the attention range while maintaining comparable computational overhead to the convolutional counterparts, we propose two attention mechanisms for multi-head
attention in those two modules: Local Attention and Dilated
Attention, and we further propose Fast Voxel Query to accelerate the querying process in multi-head attention. VoTr
contains a series of sparse and submanifold voxel modules,
and can be applied in most voxel-based detectors. Our proposed VoTr shows consistent improvement over the convolutional baselines while maintaining computational efficiency
on the KITTI dataset and the Waymo Open dataset.

1. Introduction
3D object detection has received increasing attention in
autonomous driving and robotics. Detecting 3D objects
from point clouds remains challenging to the research community, mainly because point clouds are naturally sparse
and unstructured. Voxel-based detectors transform irregular point clouds into regular voxel-grids and show superior
performance in this task. In this paper, we propose Voxel
Transformer (VoTr), an effective Transformer-based backbone that can be applied in most voxel-based detectors to
∗ Equal contribution. 1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 National University of Singapore 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 HKUST 5 Sun
Yat-Sen University † Corresponding author: xu.hang@huawei.com

(a) 3D convolutional network

(b) Voxel Transformer

Figure 1. Illustration of the receptive field obtained by the 3D convolutional network and our proposed VoTr. In (a), the orange cube
denotes a single 3D convolutional kernel, and the yellow voxels
are covered by the maximum receptive field centered at the red
voxel. In (b), the red voxel denotes a querying voxel, and the blue
voxels are the respective attending voxels for this query in voxel
attention. Our observation is that a single self-attention layer in
VoTr can cover a larger region than the whole convolutional backbone, and it can also maintain enough fine-grained 3D structures.

further enhance detection performance.
Previous approaches can be divided into two branches.
Point-based approaches [26, 19, 34, 35] directly operate
and generate 3D bounding boxes on point clouds. Those
approaches generally apply point operators [23, 16] to extract features directly from point clouds, but suffer from
the sparse and non-uniform point distribution and the timeconsuming process of sampling and searching for neighboring points. Alternatively, voxel-based approaches [43, 33,
37, 5, 36] first rasterize point clouds into voxels and apply
3D convolutional networks to extract voxel features, and
then voxels are transformed into a Bird-Eye-View (BEV)
feature map and 3D boxes are generated on the BEV map.
Compared with the point-based methods which heavily
rely on time-consuming point operators, voxel-based approaches are more efficient with sparse convolutions, and
can achieve state-of-the-art detection performance.
The 3D sparse convolutional network is a crucial component in most voxel-based detection models. Despite its
advantageous efficiency, the 3D convolutional backbones
cannot capture rich context information with limited receptive fields, which hampers the detection of 3D objects that have only a few voxels. For instance, with a
commonly-used 3D convolutional backbone [33] and the
voxel size as (0.05m, 0.05m, 0.1m) on the KITTI dataset,
the maximum receptive field in the last layer is only

3164

