Video Annotation for Visual Tracking via Selection and Refinement
Kenan Dai1 , Jie Zhao1 , Lijun Wang1 *, Dong Wang1 , Jianhua Li1 , Huchuan Lu1,2 , Xuesheng Qian3 ,
Xiaoyun Yang4
1

Dalian University of Technology, China, 2 Peng Cheng Lab, 3 CSA Intellicloud Ltd, 4 Remark Holdings

dkn10088@gmail.com, zj982853200@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {ljwang,wdice,jianhual,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, xuesheng.qian@intellicloud.ai,
xyang@remarkholdings.com

Abstract
Deep learning based visual trackers entail offline pretraining on large volumes of video datasets with accurate bounding box annotations that are labor-expensive to
achieve. We present a new framework to facilitate bounding
box annotations for video sequences, which investigates a
selection-and-refinement strategy to automatically improve
the preliminary annotations generated by tracking algorithms. A temporal assessment network (T-Assess Net) is
proposed which is able to capture the temporal coherence
of target locations and select reliable tracking results by
measuring their quality. Meanwhile, a visual-geometry refinement network (VG-Refine Net) is also designed to further enhance the selected tracking results by considering
both target appearance and temporal geometry constraints,
allowing inaccurate tracking results to be corrected. The
combination of the above two networks provides a principled approach to ensure the quality of automatic video annotation. Experiments on large scale tracking benchmarks
demonstrate that our method can deliver highly accurate
bounding box annotations and significantly reduce human
labor by 94.0%, yielding an effective means to further boost
tracking performance with augmented training data.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking aims to address the challenging problem of video target localization based on target appearance
models. Recent studies [1, 34, 32, 13, 33] propose to perform tracking with offline pre-trained deep features, yielding record-breaking results on most benchmarks. Their success is highly reliant on the availability of large-scale video
datasets [10, 20, 7, 18] with accurate annotations. However, manually annotating target bounding boxes is tedious
and labor-intensive. Therefore, labeled datasets for training
* Corresponding author

trackers are still rare and expensive to achieve, which restricts the potential performance boost of existing trackers.
To mitigate the above issue, some recent works [18, 25,
24, 15] explore machine learning techniques to facilitate
video annotation. The basic principle is to ask human annotators to label ground truth bounding boxes for only a sparse
set of frames, while the reset annotations are automatically
produced using either temporal interpolation or state-ofthe-art tracking algorithms. Significant progress has been
achieved by recent studies along this line which effectively
reduce human labors required by video annotation.
One major concern of the above solutions lies on the reliability of the adopted tracking algorithms for label generation. The cutting-edge visual trackers are still not robust
enough and may easily suffer from drift or other tracking
failures under challenging scenarios. However, many existing methods [18] directly adopt the tracking results as
the generated annotation, leading to unreliable video annotation. For one thing, these approaches mostly fail to
select reliable tracking results by measuring their quality.
For another, there does not exist an effective mechanism
to automatically refine or correct the inaccurate tracking
results. Compared to tracking algorithms based on visual
content, temporal interpolation with box geometry modeling across frames are often more robust against severe occlusion and target appearance variations. Some recent attempts [12] have also been made to combine visual trackers with temporal interpolation based on heuristics for more
accurate bounding box annotation. Nevertheless, how to
jointly model appearance and temporal geometry in a principled manner is still an open question in the video annotation community.
Based on the above observation, we propose Video
Annotation by Selection-and-Refinement (VASR), a new
framework for video annotation with target bounding boxes.
Following prior works, we first run an existing tracker initialized by sparse manual annotations to obtain preliminary

10296

