ReStyle: A Residual-Based StyleGAN Encoder via Iterative Refinement
Yuval Alaluf

Or Patashnik

Daniel Cohen-Or

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Recently, the power of unconditional image synthesis has
significantly advanced through the use of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). The task of inverting an image
into its corresponding latent code of the trained GAN is of
utmost importance as it allows for the manipulation of real
images, leveraging the rich semantics learned by the network. Recognizing the limitations of current inversion approaches, in this work we present a novel inversion scheme
that extends current encoder-based inversion methods by introducing an iterative refinement mechanism. Instead of directly predicting the latent code of a given real image using a single pass, the encoder is tasked with predicting a
residual with respect to the current estimate of the inverted
latent code in a self-correcting manner. Our residualbased encoder, named ReStyle, attains improved accuracy
compared to current state-of-the-art encoder-based methods with a negligible increase in inference time. We analyze the behavior of ReStyle to gain valuable insights into
its iterative nature. We then evaluate the performance
of our residual encoder and analyze its robustness compared to optimization-based inversion and state-of-the-art
encoders. Code is available via our project page: https:
//yuval-alaluf.github.io/restyle-encoder/

1. Introduction
Recently, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
have grown in popularity thanks to their ability to synthesize images of high visual quality and diversity. Beyond their phenomenal realism and fidelity on numerous
domains, recent works have shown that GANs, e.g., StyleGAN [24, 25, 23], effectively encode semantic information
in their latent spaces [16, 36, 21]. Notably, it has been
shown that StyleGAN’s learnt latent space W has disentanglement properties [9, 36, 46] which allow one to perform
extensive image manipulations by leveraging a well-trained
StyleGAN generator. Such manipulations, however, have
often been applied to synthetic images generated by the
GAN itself. To apply such edits on real images, one must

Input

Iterative Outputs −→

Figure 1. Different from conventional encoder-based inversion
techniques, our residual-based ReStyle scheme incorporates an iterative refinement mechanism to progressively converge to an accurate inversion of real images. For each domain, we show the
input image on the left followed by intermediate inversion outputs.

first invert the given image into StyleGAN’s latent space.
That is, retrieve the latent code w such that passing w to
the pre-trained StyleGAN generator returns the original image. To do so, it has become common practice to invert real
images into an extension of W, denoted W+ [1].
Previous works have explored learning-based inversion
approaches and train encoders to map a given real image
into its corresponding latent code [10, 32, 50, 15, 35, 40].
Compared to per-image latent vector optimization [28, 10,
1, 2, 25], encoders are significantly faster, as they invert
using a single forward pass, and converge to areas of the
latent space which are more suitable for editing [50, 40].
However, in terms of reconstruction accuracy, there remains
a significant gap between learning-based and optimizationbased inversion methods. Hence, while significant progress
has been made in learning-based inversions, designing a
proper encoder and training scheme remains a challenge
with many works still resorting to using a per-image optimization.

6711

