De-rendering Stylized Texts
Wataru Shimoda1

Daichi Haraguchi2
1

CyberAgent

Seiichi Uchida2
2

Kyushu University

Abstract
Editing raster text is a promising but challenging task.
We propose to apply text vectorization for the task of raster
text editing in display media, such as posters, web pages, or
advertisements. In our approach, instead of applying image
transformation or generation in the raster domain, we learn
a text vectorization model to parse all the rendering parameters including text, location, size, font, style, effects, and
hidden background, then utilize those parameters for reconstruction and any editing task. Our text vectorization takes
advantage of differentiable text rendering to accurately reproduce the input raster text in a resolution-free parametric
format. We show in the experiments that our approach can
successfully parse text, styling, and background information
in the unified model, and produces artifact-free text editing
compared to a raster baseline.

1. Introduction
Typography is the art of visually arranging letters and
text. Typography greatly affects how people perceive textual content in graphic design. Graphic designers carefully
arrange and stylize text to convey their message in display media, such as posters, web pages, or advertisements.
In computer vision, letters and texts have been predominantly the subject of optical character recognition (OCR),
where the goal is to identify characters in the given image.
This includes both OCR in printed documents or automatic
scene text recognition for navigation. However, often, typographic information of text, such as font, outline, or shadow,
is ignored in text recognition because the OCR does not target at reproducing typography in the output.
In this paper, we consider raster text editing as a text
vectorization problem. There have been a few attempts at
editing raster text mainly in scene images [32, 43, 45]. Previous work frames text editing as a style transfer problem
in the pixel domain, where the goal is to apply the original
style and effect in the input image to the target characters in
the destination. However, the major limitation of the style

Kota Yamaguchi1

Input image

Render parameters

Color edit

Text edit

Resolution: [1699,
1280]
Location: [247, 1130,
748, 1280]
Text: "WANT"
Font: Barlow Semi
Condensed ExtraBold
Fill:
RGB: [44, 34, 41]
Border:
Visible: True
RGB: [217, 91, 97]
Width: 2
Shadow:
Visible: False
Background: <pixels>

Figure 1. The proposed text editing approach. Once the rendering
parameters are recovered, we can apply any text editing and style
manipulation.

transfer approach is that 1) it is hard to avoid artifacts in the
resulting image, and 2) a pixel-based model is resolutiondependent. Our main target is display media. Compared
to scene text images [32, 43, 45] that often involve external
noise due to lighting condition, we often observe noise-free
texts in display media which is prone to small artifacts on
reconstruction. Editing in the vector format has a clear advantage in display media, as rendering results in consistent
and sharp drawing at any resolution. Our approach is equivalent to viewing text recognition as a de-rendering problem [42], where the goal is to predict rendering parameters.
Figure 1 illustrates our approach to the task of raster text
editing.
Text vectorization can be an ill-posed problem. For editing raster text in the vector format, we need to first parse
characters, text styling information such as font and effects, and hidden background pixels. Once those rendering parameters are recovered from the input image, we can
edit and render the target text using a rasterizer. Our approach hence has to solve three sub-problems: 1) OCR, 2)
background inpainting, and 3) styling attribute recognition.
OCR has a long history of research that dates back to the
1870s [34]. In parallel, inpainting has been studied in numerous literature [25, 50, 31, 24]. It might look straightforward to add styling attribute recognition to those two
problems for our task. However, parsing various stylistic attributes is not trivial, as the presence of multiple rendering
effects can easily lead to an ill-posed decomposition prob-

1076

