Neural Video Portrait Relighting in Real-time via Consistency Modeling
Longwen Zhang1,2 *
1

Qixuan Zhang1,2 *

Minye Wu1,3

Jingyi Yu1

Lan Xu1

2
ShanghaiTech University
Deemos Technology
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

{zhanglw2,zhangqx1,wumy,yujingyi,xulan1}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
{zhanglw,zhangqx}@deemos.com

Abstract
Video portraits relighting is critical in user-facing human photography, especially for immersive VR/AR experience. Recent advances still fail to recover consistent relit
result under dynamic illuminations from monocular RGB
stream, suffering from the lack of video consistency supervision. In this paper, we propose a neural approach for realtime, high-quality and coherent video portrait relighting,
which jointly models the semantic, temporal and lighting
consistency using a new dynamic OLAT dataset. We propose a hybrid structure and lighting disentanglement in an
encoder-decoder architecture, which combines a multi-task
and adversarial training strategy for semantic-aware consistency modeling. We adopt a temporal modeling scheme
via flow-based supervision to encode the conjugated temporal consistency in a cross manner. We also propose a lighting sampling strategy to model the illumination consistency
and mutation for natural portrait light manipulation in realworld. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach for consistent video portrait light-editing
and relighting, even using mobile computing.

1. Introduction
The past ten years have witnessed a rapid development
of digital portrait photography with the rise of mobile cameras. Relighting evolves as a cutting-edge technique in such
portrait photography for immersive visual effects of VR/AR
experience. How to further enable consistent relit video
results under challenging dynamic illumination conditions
conveniently remains unsolved and has received substantive
attention in both industry and academia.
For video portrait relighting, early solutions [14, 57] rely
on a sophisticated studio setup which is expensive and difficult to be deployed. Modern approaches [41, 44, 42] further
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Our approach achieves high-quality and consistent video
portrait relighting under dynamic illuminations in real-time, using
only mobile computing and monocular RGB video input.

apply color or style transfer techniques to ease the hardware requirements. However, they still require two to four
orders of magnitude more time than is available for interactive video application. The recent learning techniques
bring huge potential for human portrait modeling and relighting [69, 67, 46, 31, 56] from only monocular RGB input. In particular, the methods [43, 39] perform explicit
neural inverse rendering but are limited to the low-quality
face and Spherical Harmonics (SH) lighting models. Recent methods [67, 46] remove the explicit inverse rendering
by learning an efficient end-to-end mapping between the input headshots and relit ones, while the method [56] further
models reflectance attributes explicitly to handle lighting effects like specular or shadow. However, they still focus on
single image input without modeling the temporal consistency for video portrait relighting, leading to severe jittery
artifacts, especially under the challenging dynamic illuminations. Some recent mobile devices [2, 18] enables the
“Portrait Lighting” mode for video editing of lighting conditions. Critically, they only modify existing illumination
rather than relight the captured video into various scenes.

802

