Bayesian Triplet Loss: Uncertainty Quantification in Image Retrieval
Frederik Warburg†, Martin Jørgensen‡, Javier Civera§, and Søren Hauberg†
†
Technical University of Denmark, ‡University of Oxford, §University of Zaragoza
†

{frwa,sohau}@dtu.dk, ‡martinj@robots.ox.ac.uk, §jcivera@unizar.es

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification in image retrieval is crucial for
downstream decisions, yet it remains a challenging and largely
unexplored problem. Current methods for estimating uncertainties are poorly calibrated, computationally expensive, or based
on heuristics. We present a new method that views image embeddings as stochastic features rather than deterministic features.
Our two main contributions are (1) a likelihood that matches the
triplet constraint and that evaluates the probability of an anchor
being closer to a positive than a negative; and (2) a prior over
the feature space that justifies the conventional l2 normalization.
To ensure computational efficiency, we derive a variational
approximation of the posterior, called the Bayesian triplet loss,
that produces state-of-the-art uncertainty estimates and matches
the predictive performance of current state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Image-based retrieval systems show impressive performance
in challenging tasks such as face verification [43, 52, 56],
instance retrieval [63], landmark retrieval [38] and place
recognition [1, 41]. These systems typically embed images into
high-level features and retrieve with a nearest neighbor search.
While this is efficient, the retrieval comes with no notion of
confidence, which is particularly problematic in safety-critical
applications. For instance, a self-driving car relying on visual
place recognition should be able to filter out place estimates
drawn from uninformative images. In a less critical but still
relevant application, quantifying the retrieval uncertainty can
significantly improve the user experience in human-computer
interfaces by not showing low-confidence results for a query.
Practical retrieval systems do not have a small set of
predefined classes as output targets, but rather need high-level
features that generalize to unseen classes. For instance, a visual
place recognition system may be deployed in a city in which
it has not been trained [58]. This is achieved by keeping the
encoder fixed and relying on nearest neighbor searches. This
pipeline does not easily match current methods for posterior
inference, and current uncertainty estimators for retrieval are
often impractical and heuristic in nature. To construct a fully

Figure 1: We model embeddings as distributions rather than
point estimates, such that data uncertainty is propagated to
retrieval. We phrase a Bayesian model that mirrors the triplet
loss, which enables us to learn the stochastic features.
Bayesian retrieval system that fits with existing computational
pipelines, we first recall the elementary equation


2
E k∆k2 =kE[∆]k +trace(cov[∆]),
∆∈RD , (1)
which follows directly from the definition of variance. From this
we see thatthe expected
squared distance between two random

features, E k∆k2 , grows with the covariance of such distance,
cov[∆], which in turn depends on the uncertainty of the features
(Figure 1). This intuition forms the basis of this paper.
In this paper we propose to use stochastic image embeddings instead of the usual deterministic ones. Given an image
X, we consider the posterior distribution over possible features
P (F |X). From this distribution we get direct uncertainty
estimates and can assign probabilities to events such as ‘two
images belonging to the same place’. To realize this, we derive a
likelihood corresponding to the probability that the conventional
triplet constraint is satisfied, and a prior over the feature space
that mimics conventional l2 normalization. To build a system
that is computationally efficient at both train and test time, we
derive a variational approximation to the posterior P (F |X),
such that in practice, we encode an image to a distribution in feature space. Across several datasets, we show that the proposed
model matches the state-of-the-art in predictive performance,
while attaining state-of-the-art uncertainty estimates.
12158

