Adaptive Surface Normal Constraint for Depth Estimation
Xiaoxiao Long1
Cheng Lin1,4
Lingjie Liu2
Wei Li3
Christian Theobalt2
Ruigang Yang3
Wenping Wang5
1
2
3
The University of Hong Kong
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Inceptio
4
5
Digital Content Technology Center, CROS, Tencent Games
Texas A&M University

1. Introduction
Estimating depth from a single RGB image, one of the
most fundamental computer vision tasks, has been extensively researched for decades. With the recent advances of
deep learning, depth estimation using neural networks has
drawn increasing attention. Earlier works [6, 22, 9, 35, 32]
in this field directly minimize the pixel-wise depth errors,
of which results cannot faithfully capture the 3D geometric
features. Therefore, the latest efforts incorporate geometric
constraints into the network and show promising results.
Among various geometric attributes, surface normal is
predominantly adopted due to the following two reasons.
First, surface normal can be estimated by the 3D points
converted from depth. Second, surface normal is determined by a surface tangent plane, which inherently encodes
the local geometric context. Consequently, to extract nor-

Normal
Point cloud

We present a novel method for single image depth estimation using surface normal constraints. Existing depth
estimation methods either suffer from the lack of geometric constraints, or are limited to the difficulty of reliably
capturing geometric context, which leads to a bottleneck
of depth estimation quality. We therefore introduce a simple yet effective method, named Adaptive Surface Normal
(ASN) constraint, to effectively correlate the depth estimation with geometric consistency. Our key idea is to adaptively determine the reliable local geometry from a set of
randomly sampled candidates to derive surface normal constraint, for which we measure the consistency of the geometric contextual features. As a result, our method can
faithfully reconstruct the 3D geometry and is robust to local
shape variations, such as boundaries, sharp corners and
noises. We conduct extensive evaluations and comparisons
using public datasets. The experimental results demonstrate
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods and
has superior efficiency and robustness. Codes are available
at: https://github.com/xxlong0/ASNDepth

Depth

Abstract

VNL

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Example results of ground truth, ours and VNL [48].
By enforcing our proposed Adaptive Surface Normal (ASN) constraint, our reconstructed point cloud preserves both global structural information and local geometric features. The recovered surface normal is more accurate and less noisy than that of VNL.

mals from depth maps as geometric constraints, previous
works propose various strategies, including random sampling [48], Sobel-like operator [13, 16] and differentiable
least square [29, 27].
Despite the improvements brought about by the existing
efforts, a critical issue remains unsolved, i.e., how to determine the reliable local geometry to correlate the normal
constraint with the depth estimation. For example, at shape
boundaries or corners, the neighboring pixels for a point
could belong to different geometries, where the local plane
assumption is not satisfied. Due to this challenge, these
methods either struggle to capture the local features [48], or
are sensitive to local geometric variations (noises or boundaries) [13, 16], or computationally expensive [29, 27].
Given the significance of local context constraints, there
is a multitude of works on how to incorporate shape-ware
regularization in monocular reconstruction tasks, ranging from sophisticated variational approaches for optical
flow [34, 43, 33, 1] to edge-aware filtering in stereo [37] and
monocular reconstruction [14, 30]. However, these methods

12849

