An Empirical Study of Training Self-Supervised Vision Transformers
Xinlei Chen∗
Saining Xie∗
Kaiming He
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/moco-v3

Abstract
This paper does not describe a novel method. Instead,
it studies a straightforward, incremental, yet must-know
baseline given the recent progress in computer vision: selfsupervised learning for Vision Transformers (ViT). While
the training recipes for standard convolutional networks
have been highly mature and robust, the recipes for ViT are
yet to be built, especially in the self-supervised scenarios
where training becomes more challenging. In this work, we
go back to basics and investigate the effects of several fundamental components for training self-supervised ViT. We
observe that instability is a major issue that degrades accuracy, and it can be hidden by apparently good results. We
reveal that these results are indeed partial failure, and they
can be improved when training is made more stable. We
benchmark ViT results in MoCo v3 and several other selfsupervised frameworks, with ablations in various aspects.
We discuss the currently positive evidence as well as challenges and open questions. We hope that this work will provide useful data points and experience for future research.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised pre-training has revolutionized natural
language processing (NLP) [36, 15, 37, 4]. In computer vision, the un-/self-supervised pre-training paradigms differ
from their NLP counterparts in at least two aspects: (i) the
learners in NLP are masked auto-encoders, while in vision
the recently popular choices are Siamese networks (e.g.,
[20, 10, 18, 7]); (ii) the backbone architectures in NLP are
self-attentional Transformers [42], while in vision the common choice is convolutional [27]—yet non-attentional—
deep residual networks (ResNets) [21]. To complete the big
picture of self-supervised learning in vision, and towards
closing the gap of pre-training methodology between vision
and language, it is of scientific merit to investigate these
differences.
This work focuses on training Transformers with the
leading self-supervised frameworks in vision. This investigation is a straightforward extension given the recent
progress on Vision Transformers (ViT) [16]. In contrast to
prior works [9, 16] that train self-supervised Transformers
with masked auto-encoding, we study the frameworks that
are based on Siamese networks, including MoCo [20] and

framework
linear probing:
iGPT [9]
iGPT [9]
MoCo v3
MoCo v3
MoCo v3
MoCo v3
MoCo v3
end-to-end fine-tuning:
masked patch pred. [16]
MoCo v3
MoCo v3

model

params

acc. (%)

iGPT-L
iGPT-XL
ViT-B
ViT-L
ViT-H
ViT-BN-H
ViT-BN-L/7

1362M
6801M
86M
304M
632M
632M
304M

69.0
72.0
76.7
77.6
78.1
79.1
81.0

ViT-B
ViT-B
ViT-L

86M
86M
304M

79.9†
83.2
84.1

Table 1.
State-of-the-art Self-supervised Transformers in
ImageNet classification, evaluated by linear probing (top panel)
or end-to-end fine-tuning (bottom panel). Both iGPT [9] and
masked patch prediction [16] belong to the masked auto-encoding
paradigm. MoCo v3 is a contrastive learning method that compares two (224×224) crops. ViT-B, -L, -H are the Vision Transformers proposed in [16]. ViT-BN is modified with BatchNorm,
and “/7” denotes a patch size of 7×7. † : pre-trained in JFT-300M.

others [10, 18, 7].
Unlike standard convolutional networks whose training
practice has been extensively studied thanks to continuous
community effort, ViT models are new and their recipes
are yet to be established. In this work, we go back to basics and investigate the fundamental components of training deep neural networks: the batch size, learning rate, and
optimizer. We find that under various cases, instability is a
major issue that impacts self-supervised ViT training.
Interestingly, we observe that unstable ViT training may
not result in catastrophic failure (e.g., divergence); instead,
it can cause mild degradation in accuracy (e.g., 1∼3%).
Such a degree of degradation may not be noticeable, unless
a more stable counterpart is available for comparison. To
the best of our knowledge, this phenomena is rare in the literature of training convolutional networks1 , and we believe
this problem and its hidden degradation are worth noticing.
To demonstrate the possible harm of instability, we
investigate a simple trick that can improve stability in
practice. Based on an empirical observation on gradient
changes, we freeze the patch projection layer in ViT, i.e.,
we use fixed random patch projection. We empirically show
that this trick alleviates the instability issue in several scenarios and consistently increases accuracy.
1 See also postscript on a related discussion.

*: equal contribution.

9640

