Exploring Relational Context for Multi-Task Dense Prediction
David Bruggemann, Menelaos Kanakis, Anton Obukhov, Stamatios Georgoulis, Luc Van Gool
ETH Zurich
{brdavid, kanakism, obukhova, georgous, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
The timeline of computer vision research is marked with
advances in learning and utilizing efficient contextual representations. Most of them, however, are targeted at improving model performance on a single downstream task.
We consider a multi-task environment for dense prediction
tasks, represented by a common backbone and independent
task-specific heads. Our goal is to find the most efficient
way to refine each task prediction by capturing cross-task
contexts dependent on tasks’ relations. We explore various
attention-based contexts, such as global and local, in the
multi-task setting and analyze their behavior when applied
to refine each task independently. Empirical findings confirm
that different source-target task pairs benefit from different
context types. To automate the selection process, we propose an Adaptive Task-Relational Context (ATRC) module,
which samples the pool of all available contexts for each
task pair using neural architecture search and outputs the
optimal configuration for deployment. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on two important multi-task
benchmarks, namely NYUD-v2 and PASCAL-Context. The
proposed ATRC has a low computational toll and can be
used as a drop-in refinement module for any supervised
multi-task architecture.

1. Introduction
The role of context in computer vision is hard to overstate; most notable breakthroughs boil down to a clever
extraction [30], learning [26], and utilization [25] of contextual representations. The success of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) is largely due to their inherent ability to
capture the local context and build very deep [41] contextual
hierarchies within the model. Recently, the progressive adoption of the attention mechanism in computer vision [51] has
brought forth more flexible context descriptions conditioned
on the interdependence of individual pixels, while steadily
replacing the traditional convolutional building blocks [11].
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [6] is concerned with sharing representations between tasks. Motivated by the obser-

Source tasks
SemSeg

Normal

Depth

Bound
Global
Local
T-Label
S-Label

0

0

0

0

None
Context type

SemSeg

Figure 1. Schematic of the task relational context (orange overlay)
for the marked pixel (orange cross) of target task semantic segmentation. Our algorithm selects one distillation context type for each
source task (dashed lines represent a switch). Alternatively, the
connection can be severed by choosing none. The procedure is
analogous for all other target tasks.

vation that representations of visual tasks are often highly
correlated [56], recent works [50, 44] focusing on multi-task
dense prediction have extended context extraction across
tasks through soft-gated message passing. Referred to as
multi-modal distillation in the literature [50], the idea is to
augment the high-level representations of downstream target
tasks by selectively aggregating complementary features of
a set of source tasks. The gating function in the distillation
thereby learns to focus on useful cross-task information flow.
Despite their effectiveness, current multi-modal distillation schemes [50, 44] suffer from two main limitations: (1)
The employed gates only regulate information flow based
on the source task feature values. As such, the distillation
module fails to capture task interactions fully. (2) Each target pixel exclusively receives information from its source
counterpart, i.e., the message passing is restricted locally.
Compelled by these drawbacks, we propose a new type of

15869

