Field Convolutions for Surface CNNs
Thomas W. Mitchel

Vladimir G. Kim

Michael Kazhdan

Johns Hopkins University

Adobe Research

Johns Hopkins University

tmitchel@jhu.edu

vokim@adobe.com

misha@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We present a novel surface convolution operator acting
on vector fields that is based on a simple observation: instead of combining neighboring features with respect to a
single coordinate parameterization defined at a given point,
we have every neighbor describe the position of the point
within its own coordinate frame. This formulation combines intrinsic spatial convolution with parallel transport in
a scattering operation while placing no constraints on the
filters themselves, providing a definition of convolution that
commutes with the action of isometries, has increased descriptive potential, and is robust to noise and other nuisance
factors. The result is a rich notion of convolution which
we call field convolution, well-suited for CNNs on surfaces.
Field convolutions are flexible, straight-forward to incorporate into surface learning frameworks, and their highly
discriminating nature has cascading effects throughout the
learning pipeline. Using simple networks constructed from
residual field convolution blocks, we achieve state-of-theart results on standard benchmarks in fundamental geometry processing tasks, such as shape classification, segmentation, correspondence, and sparse matching.

1. Introduction
The advent of deep learning in imaging, vision, and
graphics has coincided with the development of numerous
techniques for the analysis and processing of curved surfaces based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The
challenge in reproducing the success of CNNs on surfaces is
that classical notions of convolution and correlation in Euclidean spaces cannot simply be transposed onto curved domains. Unlike images, points on a surface have no canonical
orientation, without which simple operations fundamental
to the spatial propagation of information, such as moving
dot products, cannot be computed in a repeatable manner.
Geometric deep learning is a young field, and many
successful methods can be broadly categorized in relation
to two emerging paradigms characterized by specific approaches to convolution: diffusive propagation and equiv-

q3

q3
q4

p

q1

q2

Surface Convolution via Gathering

q4

q1

p

q2

Surface Convolution via Scattering

Figure 1. Prior approaches define patch-based convolution operators as gathering operations (left), which are sensitive to noise or
disruptions in the local coordinate system. Field convolution is a
scattering operation and is robust under perturbations as it does
not rely on a single coordinate system to aggregate features.

ariant propagation. Diffusive approaches closely intertwine convolution operations with heat diffusion on manifolds wherein filters represented by anisotropic heat kernels or Gaussians are used to propagate scalar features
[35, 6, 5, 39, 31, 47]. In contrast, equivariant convolutions
distribute vector or tensor features that transform with local
coordinate systems [41, 55, 46, 7, 9, 61, 62].
Critically, virtually all state-of-the-art approaches sacrifice filter descriptiveness to define a notion of convolution that does not depend on the choice of local coordinate
frames. Gaussian filters can facilitate efficient evaluations
in the spectral domain but are individually undiscriminating. Extensions to anisotropic filtering mitigate these limitations by extending the class of filters that can be used.
However, this requires defining a frame field over the surface – itself a hard problem.
Equivariant approaches have the potential to provide expressive notions of convolution on surfaces due to the encoding of geometric information in the transport of tangent
vector features. However, equivariance of the response is
almost universally achieved by placing constraints on the
filters themselves [41, 42, 8, 9, 25, 61], limiting descriptiveness and necessitating complex architectures to support
the algebraic relationships between kernels. Furthermore,
these regimes formulate spatial propagation as a gathering
operation, analogous to correlations on Euclidean domains;
features are weighted based on their position relative to a
coordinate frame defined at a single point (Figure 1, left),

10001

