Multi-Scale Separable Network for Ultra-High-Definition Video Deblurring
Senyou Deng1 , Wenqi Ren1, 2, B , Yanyang Yan1 , Tao Wang3 , Fenglong Song3 , and Xiaochun Cao1
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China;
2
State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University; 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
{dengsenyou,yanyanyang,caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn; rwq.renwenqi@gmail.com;
{wangtao10,songfenglong}@huawei.com.

Abstract
Although recent research has witnessed a significant
progress on the video deblurring task, these methods struggle to reconcile inference efficiency and visual quality simultaneously, especially on ultra-high-definition (UHD)
videos (e.g., 4K resolution). To address the problem, we
propose a novel deep model for fast and accurate UHD
Video Deblurring (UHDVD). The proposed UHDVD is
achieved by a separable-patch architecture, which collaborates with a multi-scale integration scheme to achieve a
large receptive field without adding the number of generic
convolutional layers and kernels. Additionally, we design
a residual channel-spatial attention (RCSA) module to improve accuracy and reduce the depth of the network appropriately. The proposed UHDVD is the first real-time deblurring model for 4K videos at 35 fps. To train the proposed model, we build a new dataset comprised of 4K blurry
videos and corresponding sharp frames using three different smartphones. Comprehensive experimental results show
that our network performs favorably against the state-ofthe-art methods on both the 4K dataset and public benchmarks in terms of accuracy, speed, and model size.

1. Introduction
Ultra-High-Definition (UHD, i.e., 12 megapixels or 4K)
becomes a trend during the last several years. Many device
manufacturers have released new devices (e.g., smartphones
and DSLR cameras) with 4K support. Unfortunately, irregular camera shakes and high-speed movements often generate undesirable blurs in captured UHD videos. The blurred
video leads to visually low quality and hampers high-level
vision tasks [27].
Numerous image and video deblurring methods have
been proposed to recover the sharp frames from a captured blurry video. Conventional methods usually make assumptions on motion blurs and latent frames. Among these
methods, motion blurs are usually modeled as uniform ker-

Figure 1. PSNR(dB) vs. runtime(ms) of several deblurring methods and our method on different datasets. The green region indicates real-time inference at 30 fps. The blue PSNR and icons are
methods on the HD dataset and the red ones with the same shape
are on the 4K dataset. Clearly, our method is better not only in
efficiency but also in accuracy. Furthermore, we try to handle the
4K resolution and achieve considerable results.

nels [35, 57, 54] or non-uniform kernels (e.g., region-wise
[11, 1, 9, 45, 4] and pixel-wise [10, 33]). While the sharp
frames are usually constrained by hand-crafted image priors
[19, 39, 24, 8] to regularize the solution space. However,
these assumptions do not usually hold for real cases, which
leads to an inaccurate estimation of the blur kernel and the
quality of the deblurred image is not desirable.
To address these issues, deep learning deblurring algorithms have been proposed recently. These methods use
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to explicitly learn
features from blurry input and regress the blur kernel [34, 7,
38] or directly recover the clean image [26, 52, 53, 56, 50].
These algorithms can remove blur effects caused by camera shakes and object motions, and achieve state-of-the-art
results on image deblurring task. However, existing CNNbased methods have two major problems. The first one is
that the computation and memory usage are too large for
practical applications, especially when the resolution of input images is high. For example, the recent video deblurring
method of CDVD-TSP [30] needs about four seconds and
one minute to deblur a single frame from HD (720p) and

14030

