Unsupervised Non-Rigid Image Distortion Removal via Grid Deformation
Nianyi Li1,3 , Simron Thapa1 , Cameron Whyte2 , Albert Reed2 , Suren Jayasuriya2 , and Jinwei Ye1
1

Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
2
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
3
Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634, USA

Abstract
Many computer vision problems face difficulties when
imaging through turbulent refractive media (e.g., air and
water) due to the refraction and scattering of light. These
effects cause geometric distortion that requires either handcrafted physical priors or supervised learning methods to
remove. In this paper, we present a novel unsupervised
network to recover the latent distortion-free image. The
key idea is to model non-rigid distortions as deformable
grids. Our network consists of a grid deformer that estimates the distortion field and an image generator that outputs the distortion-free image. By leveraging the positional
encoding operator, we can simplify the network structure
while maintaining fine spatial details in the recovered images. Our method doesn’t need to be trained on labeled
data and has good transferability across various turbulent
image datasets with different types of distortions. Extensive
experiments on both simulated and real-captured turbulent
images demonstrate that our method can remove both air
and water distortions without much customization.

1. Introduction
Imaging through turbulent refractive medium (e.g., hot
air, in-homogeneous gas, fluid flow) is challenging, since
the non-linear light transport through the medium (e.g., refraction and scattering) causes non-rigid distortions in perceived images. However, most computer vision algorithms
rely on sharp and distortion-free images to achieve the expected performance. Removal of these non-rigid image distortions is therefore critical and beneficial for many vision
applications, from segmentation to recognition.
Air turbulence distortion is caused by the constantly
changing refractive index field of the air flow. It typically
occurs when imaging through long-range atmospheric turbulence or short-range hot air turbulence (e.g., fire flames,

Figure 1. We present a novel unsupervised network to estimate the
non-rigid distortion and latent distortion-free image when imaging
through turbulent media. Our method works for both air (Row
One) and water (Row Two) distortions.

vapor streams). Water turbulence distortion, in contrast, is
induced by the refraction of light at the water-air interface.
Although these two types of distortions share certain visual
similarities, they are fundamentally different as they are induced by different physical mechanisms. Air and water turbulent images are usually enhanced in different ways. For
air turbulence, physics-based approaches use complex turbulence models (e.g., the Kolmogorov model [22, 23]) to
simulate the perturbation, and then restore clear images by
inverting the models. For water turbulence, classical methods model the distortion as a function of the water surface
height or normal by applying Snell’s law [46, 57]. Recently,
several learning-based methods are separately proposed to
enhance either the air [13, 32] or the water [26] turbulent
images. These methods typically require training on a large
labeled dataset. Since it is difficult to obtain real turbulent
images with ground truth sharp references, these methods
use simulated images to augment their datasets and bootstrap the learning.
Motivated by the aforementioned issues, we design an
unsupervised network that is able to remove non-rigid dis-

2522

