Learn to Match: Automatic Matching Network Design for Visual Tracking

1

Zhipeng Zhang1,2 , Yihao Liu2 , Xiao Wang3 , Bing Li1,2,† , and Weiming Hu1,2,4,†
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of AI, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
Abstract

Siamese tracking has achieved groundbreaking performance in recent years, where the essence is the efﬁcient
matching operator cross-correlation and its variants. Besides the remarkable success, it is important to note that
the heuristic matching network design relies heavily on expert experience. Moreover, we experimentally ﬁnd that one
sole matching operator is difﬁcult to guarantee stable tracking in all challenging environments. Thus, in this work, we
introduce six novel matching operators from the perspective of feature fusion instead of explicit similarity learning, namely Concatenation, Pointwise-Addition, PairwiseRelation, FiLM, Simple-Transformer and TransductiveGuidance, to explore more feasibility on matching operator selection. The analyses reveal these operators’ selective adaptability on different environment degradation
types, which inspires us to combine them to explore complementary features. To this end, we propose binary channel
manipulation (BCM) to search for the optimal combination
of these operators. BCM determines to retrain or discard
one operator by learning its contribution to other tracking steps. By inserting the learned matching networks to a
strong baseline tracker Ocean [47], our model achieves favorable gains by 67.2 → 71.4, 52.6 → 58.3, 70.3 → 76.0
success on OTB100, LaSOT, and TrackingNet, respectively.
Notably, Our tracker, dubbed AutoMatch, uses less than
half of training data/time than the baseline tracker, and runs
at 50 FPS using PyTorch. Code and model are released at
https://github.com/JudasDie/SOTS.

1. Introduction
Generic object tracking, aiming to infer the location and
scale of an arbitrary object in a video sequence, is one of the
fundamental problems in computer vision [16, 21, 25, 33].
The recent prevailing Siamese methods [3, 6, 11, 18, 41, 42,
Email: zhangzhipeng2017@ia.ac.cn

† Corresponding authors.

Ours

SiamRPN++

Ocean

Figure 1: Comparisons of our approach with depthwise cross-correlation based trackers SiamRPN++ [18] and
Ocean [47]. Our model, employing the automatically
searched matching networks, can better handle different
challenging factors, e.g., distractor in the ﬁrst video, occlusion and scale change of the second one, background clutter
and fast motion of the third sequence.

47], decompose the tracking problem into a relation learning task and a state estimation task. In the former case, the
goal is to measure the similarity between exemplar and candidate (search) images. The second task, which is normally
comprised of foreground classiﬁcation and scale regression
[8, 18, 47], is followed to estimate the target state.
Fuelled by the emergence of object detection that facilitates bounding box regression, the network design for
state estimation has substantially advanced in recent years
[6, 8, 19, 41, 47]. However, the advancements in relation
learning have been limited. Previous works generally perform relation learning with heuristically designed matching
operators. Concretely, the seminal work SiamFC [3] employs cross-correlation to model the relation between exemplar and candidate images. The follow-ups propose upchannel cross-correlation [19] and depthwise cross-correlation
[18] to learn ﬁne-grained feature similarities. Besides their
great success, it is important to note that the heuristic

13339

