Knowledge Mining and Transferring for Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Kun Tian†‡ Chenghao Zhang†‡ Ying Wang† Shiming Xiang†‡ Chunhong Pan†
†
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
‡
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Email:{kun.tian, chenghao.zhang, ywang, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
With the thriving of deep learning, CNN-based object detectors have made great progress in the past decade. However, the domain gap between training and testing data
leads to a prominent performance degradation and thus hinders their application in the real world. To alleviate this
problem, Knowledge Transfer Network (KTNet) is proposed
as a new paradigm for domain adaption. Specifically, KTNet is constructed on a base detector with intrinsic knowledge mining and relational knowledge constraints. First, we
design a foreground/background classifier shared by source
domain and target domain to extract the common attribute
knowledge of objects in different scenarios. Second, we
model the relational knowledge graph and explicitly constrain the consistency of category correlation under source
domain, target domain, as well as cross-domain conditions.
As a result, the detector is guided to learn object-related
and domain-independent representation. Extensive experiments and visualizations confirm that transferring objectspecific knowledge can yield notable performance gains.
The proposed KTNet achieves state-of-the-art results on
three cross-domain detection benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Object detection is the task of identifying where and
what the interested targets are in the image. It is a key
component of visual perception and scene understanding,
and also the basic module of many advanced visual applications, such as multi object tracking [47, 4, 53], behavior
analysis [41, 2] and visual question answering [1, 39, 7].
With the development of deep learning, neural networkbased models [32, 30, 31, 24, 5, 43, 42] have gradually replaced traditional machine vision methods and become the
mainstream algorithm in the field of object detection. Although remarkable progress has been witnessed in modern
Computer Vision systems such as autonomous driving and
intelligent surveillance, the deep learning methods suffer
from significant performance degradation when faced with

Figure 1. Detected objects in source domain (1st row) and target
domain (2nd row). The results are collected from a detector only
trained on Cityscapes. Green, red, and blue boxes are true positives, false positives and false negatives. We can observe that many
targets have been missed in the domain-shifted Foggy Cityscapes.

variations of object appearance, weather and illumination.
As illustrated in Figure 1, the detector trained with
source domain dataset performs well on testing set with
the same distribution. But if there is a severe disparity between the source and target domain, the output results are
prone to missing detection (blue boxes) or false alarm (red
boxes), which leads to a prominent performance degradation and hinders the deployment in real-world situations. In
practice, we can mitigate this impact by establishing a taskspecific dataset that covers various training samples. Unfortunately, the massive and high-quality annotation could
be costly and laborious, thus being not always feasible to
acquire adequate training images from new environments.
To deal with this urgent dilemma, many unsupervised
domain adaptive algorithms have been proposed to improve
detection accuracy in the target domain. Almost all adaptive
detectors have added adversarial training modules that are
actually some domain classifiers. This idea is drawn from
the classification task [44]. From coarse to fine, the domain alignment modules can be divided into image-level,
instance-level and pixel-level. Although adversarial training can mitigate the domain shift to a certain extent, it still
has three defeats leading to deteriorated detection perfor-

9133

