Shape-aware Multi-Person Pose Estimation from Multi-View Images
Zijian Dong1 Jie Song1 Xu Chen1,2 Chen Guo1 Otmar Hilliges1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Abstract
In this paper we contribute a simple yet effective approach for estimating 3D poses of multiple people from
multi-view images. Our proposed coarse-to-fine pipeline
first aggregates noisy 2D observations from multiple camera views into 3D space and then associates them into individual instances based on a confidence-aware majority voting technique. The final pose estimates are attained from
a novel optimization scheme which links high-confidence
multi-view 2D observations and 3D joint candidates. Moreover, a statistical parametric body model such as SMPL is
leveraged as a regularizing prior for these 3D joint candidates. Specifically, both 3D poses and SMPL parameters
are optimized jointly in an alternating fashion. Here the
parametric models help in correcting implausible 3D pose
estimates and filling in missing joint detections while updated 3D poses in turn guide obtaining better SMPL estimations. By linking 2D and 3D observations, our method
is both accurate and generalizes to different data sources
because it better decouples the final 3D pose from the interperson constellation and is more robust to noisy 2D detections. We systematically evaluate our method on public datasets and achieve state-of-the-art performance. The
code and video will be available on the project page:
https://ait.ethz.ch/projects/2021/multi-human-pose/.

1. Introduction
Markerless human motion capture is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. In recent years
much progress has been made in estimating the configuration of the human body in 2D [5, 16, 34, 37, 50] and
3D [4, 25, 31, 32, 52] from a single RGB image as input.
However, if we consider settings in which multiple people
are depicted and in particular if these people are interacting
with each other at close range, we can expect a multitude
of difficulties due to the heavy and complicated occlusions
and depth ambiguities. To robustly estimate the poses of
such groups, multi-camera setups are indispensable to provide additional observations from different views which can
resolve occlusion and provide stereo cues for 3D estimation.

Figure 1. Shape-aware multi-person pose estimation: We propose a novel pipeline for robust recovery of 3D poses and shapes
of multiple people from a few camera views. A formulation that
links 2D and 3D observations and that is regularized via a parametric body model is robust to noisy and missing 2D detections.
Articulated poses can even be recovered under heavy occlusion.

Due to the real-world importance of this problem, several recent approaches have attempted to predict the poses
of multiple people, observed from multiple cameras [6, 10,
18, 45, 46, 54]. Such methods can loosely be categorized
into two groups. The first group formulates the problem as
a cross-view matching and association problem [6, 10, 54].
For example, Zhang et al. [54] introduce an optimization
formulation that attempts to jointly solve the per-view parsing and cross-view matching problems as an instance of
the multicut problem. The formulation is based on an association graph that links joints within and across multiple
views. While the formulation is elegant, in practice it requires traversing the dense, cyclic association graph which
results in an NP-hard problem. To attain a computationally
tractable approach, the authors revert to a greedy heuristic
which is sensitive to noisy 2D joint detections and imperfect
visual features which limits the accuracy of the method.
Other methods, such as Tu et al. [46] combine the features from individual camera views into a 3D voxel space.
This volume is then segmented into sub-volumes by a
learned person detector. The final 3D human pose configurations are regressed from these sub-volumes. Because the

11158

