HuMoR: 3D Human Motion Model for Robust Pose Estimation
Davis Rempe1
1

Tolga Birdal1
Srinath Sridhar3

Stanford University

2

Aaron Hertzmann2
Jimei Yang2
Leonidas J. Guibas1

Adobe Research

3

Brown University

Figure 1: Overview. HuMoR is a 3D Human Motion model for Robust estimation of temporal pose formulated as a conditional variational autoencoder. (Left) The proposed approach can operate on many input modalities and is designed to handle
partial and noisy observations. (Middle/Right) A test-time optimization fits 3D motion and shape to an input sequence using
HuMoR as a prior; additional outputs include the ground and person-ground contacts (colored as ground plane and contacts).

Abstract
We introduce HuMoR: a 3D Human Motion Model for
Robust Estimation of temporal pose and shape. Though
substantial progress has been made in estimating 3D human motion and shape from dynamic observations, recovering plausible pose sequences in the presence of noise
and occlusions remains a challenge. For this purpose,
we propose an expressive generative model in the form
of a conditional variational autoencoder, which learns
a distribution of the change in pose at each step of a
motion sequence. Furthermore, we introduce a flexible optimization-based approach that leverages HuMoR
as a motion prior to robustly estimate plausible pose and
shape from ambiguous observations. Through extensive
evaluations, we demonstrate that our model generalizes
to diverse motions and body shapes after training on a
large motion capture dataset, and enables motion reconstruction from multiple input modalities including 3D keypoints and RGB(-D) videos. See the project page at
geometry.stanford.edu/projects/humor.

1. Introduction
As humans, we are constantly moving in, interacting
with, and manipulating the world around us. Thus, applications such as action recognition [79, 80] or holistic dynamic

indoor scene understanding [15] require accurate perception of 3D human pose, shape, motion, contacts, and interaction. Extensive previous work has focused on estimating 2D or 3D human pose [13, 52, 53], shape [57, 26, 67],
and motion [37] from videos. These are challenging problems due to the large space of articulations, body shape,
and appearance variations. Even the best methods struggle
to accurately capture a wide variety of motions from varying input modalities, producing noisy or overly-smoothed
motions (especially at ground contact, i.e., footskate), and
struggle with occlusions (e.g., walking behind a couch as
in Fig. 1).
We focus on the problem of building a robust human motion model that can address these challenges. To date, most
motion models directly represent sequences of likely poses
— e.g., in PCA space [55, 77, 70] or via future-predicting
autoregressive processes [75, 76, 61]. However, purely
pose-based predictions either make modeling environment
interactions and generalization beyond training poses difficult, or quickly diverge from the space of realistic motions. On the other hand, explicit physical dynamics models [63, 43, 69, 62, 12, 11] are resource intensive and require knowledge of unobservable physical quantities. While
generative models potentially offer the required flexibility,
building an expressive, generalizable and robust model for
realistic 3D human motions remains an open problem.
To address this, we introduce a learned, autoregressive,
generative model that captures the dynamics of 3D human

11488

