Tk ML-AP: Adversarial Attacks to Top-k Multi-Label Learning
Shu Hu1 , Lipeng Ke1 , Xin Wang2 , Siwei Lyu1
1
University at Buffalo, State University of New York 2 Keya Medical
{shuhu, lipengke, siweilyu}@buffalo.edu, xinw@keyamedna.com

Abstract
Top-k multi-label learning, which returns the top-k predicted labels from an input, has many practical applications
such as image annotation, document analysis, and web
search engine. However, the vulnerabilities of such algorithms with regards to dedicated adversarial perturbation
attacks have not been extensively studied previously. In this
work, we develop methods to create adversarial perturbations that can be used to attack top-k multi-label learningbased image annotation systems (Tk ML-AP). Our methods
explicitly consider the top-k ranking relation and are based
on novel loss functions. Experimental evaluations on largescale benchmark datasets including PASCAL VOC and MS
COCO demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods in reducing the performance of state-of-the-art top-k multi-label
learning methods, under both untargeted and targeted attacks.

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed the tour de force of modern deep neural networks (DNNs), which have significantly
improved, or in some cases, revolutionized, the state-ofthe-art performance of many computer vision problems.
Notwithstanding this tremendous success, the omnipotent
DNN models are surprisingly vulnerable to adversarial attacks [24, 6, 12]. In particular, inputs with specially designed perturbations, commonly known as adversarial examples, can easily mislead a DNN model to make erroneous
predictions. The vulnerabilities of DNN models to adversarial examples impede the safe adoptions of machine learning systems in practical applications. It also motivates the
explorations of algorithms generating adversarial examples
[3, 17, 14] as a means to analyze the vulnerabilities of DNN
models and improve their security.
Most existing works on generating adversarial examples
have been focused on the case of multi-class classification
[1, 24, 6, 19, 3, 17], where one instance can only be assigned
to exactly one out of a set of mutually exclusive classes
(labels). Because of the singleness of the labels, existing

Figure 1: Illustrative examples of the untargeted and targeted attacks to the top-3 multi-label image annotation for an image from
the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset. The green icons correspond to the
ground truth labels. The red icons represent the targeted labels for
attacking. The figure is better viewed in color.

adversarial perturbation generation schemes for multi-class
classification are based on the top-1 attack (i.e., C&W [3],
Deepfool [17]), only aiming to alter the top predicted label
using the adversarial perturbation.
However, in many real-world applications such as image annotation, document categorization, and web search
engines, it is more natural to solve the multi-label learning
problem, where an instance is associated with a non-empty
subset of labels. Furthermore, in these applications, the output of the system is usually a set of labels of a fixed size,
corresponding to the top-k predicted labels. We term this as
the top-k multi-label learning (Tk ML). The practical cases
of Tk ML open more opportunities for attackers and leading
to larger uncertainties for defenders. There are two common settings that we will consider subsequently for Tk ML
adversarial attacks. The untargeted attack aims to only replace the top-k labels with a set of arbitrary k labels that are

7649

