Once Quantization-Aware Training: High Performance
Extremely Low-bit Architecture Search
Mingzhu Shen1 Feng Liang1 Ruihao Gong1 Yuhang Li1 Chuming Li1
Chen Lin2 Fengwei Yu1 Junjie Yan1 Wanli Ouyang3
1
Sensetime Research 2 University of Oxford 3 The University of Sydney
shenmingzhu@sensetime.com, liangfeng@sensetime.com, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Quantization Neural Networks (QNN) have attracted a
lot of attention due to their high efﬁciency. To enhance
the quantization accuracy, prior works mainly focus on
designing advanced quantization algorithms but still fail
to achieve satisfactory results under the extremely low-bit
case. In this work, we take an architecture perspective to
investigate the potential of high-performance QNN. Therefore, we propose to combine Network Architecture Search
methods with quantization to enjoy the merits of the two
sides. However, a naive combination inevitably faces unacceptable time consumption or unstable training problem.
To alleviate these problems, we ﬁrst propose the joint training of architecture and quantization with a shared step size
to acquire a large number of quantized models. Then a
bit-inheritance scheme is introduced to transfer the quantized models to the lower bit, which further reduces the
time cost and meanwhile improves the quantization accuracy. Equipped with this overall framework, dubbed as
Once Quantization-Aware Training (OQAT), our searched
model family, OQATNets, achieves a new state-of-the-art
compared with various architectures under different bitwidths. In particular, OQAT-2bit-M achieves 61.6% ImageNet Top-1 accuracy, outperforming 2-bit counterpart MobileNetV3 by a large margin of 9% with 10% less computation cost. A series of quantization-friendly architectures are identiﬁed easily and extensive analysis can be
made to summarize the interaction between quantization
and neural architectures. Codes and models are released
at https://github.com/LaVieEnRoseSMZ/OQA

1. Introduction
Quantization Neural Networks (QNN) is a promising research direction to deploy deep neural networks on edge
devices. Extensive efforts have been devoted to improving
quantization performance with Quantization-Aware Train-

(a) 3-bit.

(b) 2-bit.

Figure 1. Comparison with the state-of-the-art extremely low-bit
neural networks on the ImageNet dataset. Our OQATNets achieve
a new state-of-the-art under various bit-widths.

ing [4, 41, 10, 20, 9, 2, 15] or Post-Training Quantization [28, 21]. Recent studies [27, 26] investigate the quantization impact on architecture and thus take the architecture
perspective to pursue high-performance quantized models
with expert efforts and manual design. Compared with the
laborious manual trials, the combination of Network Architecture Search (NAS) and quantization seems to be a more
natural solution.
The existing combination of NAS and quantization
methods could either be classiﬁed as NAS-then-Quantize or
Quantization-aware NAS as shown in Figure 2. NAS-thenQuantize (Figure 2(a)) usually results in sub-optimal performance because the ranking order of full precision networks
is not identical to that of quantized networks. Thus, this traditional routine may fail to get a good quantized model. Directly searching with quantized models’ performance (Figure 2(b)) seems to be an alternative. However, due to the
instability brought by quantization-aware training, simply
combining quantization and NAS results in inferior performance and sub-optimal quantized models as explained
in [3]. Moreover, when quantized into 2-bit, the traditional
training process is highly unstable and introduces very large
accuracy degradation.
Furthermore, all the existing methods [34, 31, 3, 11, 35]
15340

