Personalized Image Semantic Segmentation
Yu Zhang1

Chang-Bin Zhang1
Peng-Tao Jiang 1
1
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University

zhangyuygss@gmail.com

pt.jiang@mail.nankai.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a well-studied task in the computer vision society. The goal of this task is to assign a
semantic label to each pixel of a given image. As with
other computer vision tasks, deep learning has greatly empowered semantic segmentation [4,5,30,33,37,57,58] with
its great representation learning ability. These state-of-theart methods mainly focus on the publicly available datasets
like Pascal VOC [10], ADE20K [61], CityScapes [7], in
which images are assumed to be independent and identically distributed. However, this assumption does not stand
in real-world scenarios. For example, in mobile photography, a user may take pictures to record his/her own life
and form a personalized image set. On the one hand, the
personalized data does not have an identical distribution
with public datasets, leading to a generalization issue when
* MM Cheng is the corresponding author.

Personalized

Adaptation

Semantic segmentation models trained on public
datasets have achieved great success in recent years. However, these models didn’t consider the personalization issue
of segmentation though it is important in practice. In this
paper, we address the problem of personalized image segmentation. The objective is to generate more accurate segmentation results on unlabeled personalized images by investigating the data’s personalized traits. To open up future
research in this area, we collect a large dataset containing
various users’ personalized images called PSS (Personalized Semantic Segmentation). We also survey some recent
researches related to this problem and report their performance on our dataset. Furthermore, by observing the correlation among a user’s personalized images, we propose a
baseline method that incorporates the inter-image context
when segmenting certain images. Extensive experiments
show that our method outperforms the existing methods on
the proposed dataset. The code and the PSS dataset are
available at https://mmcheng.net/pss/.

cmm@nankai.edu.cn

Source

Abstract

Feng Mao2

Ming-Ming Cheng1 *
2
Alibaba Group

Group-1

…

User-1
Group-K

User-2
Group-1

…

Group-K

Figure 1. Samples of the proposed personalized image dataset. We
investigate how to utilize the personalized property of users’ images when adapting from source data. One notable property we
can observe is that images from the same user are correlated (similar objects, scenes, etc.).

adopting well-trained segmentation models trained on public datasets. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 1, images
from the same user are correlated. It yields potential studies
on utilizing this interrelated property to facilitate segmentation.
This paper addresses personalized image segmentation,
a problem that has not been discussed in previous works.
The difficulties mainly lie in the following two aspects: (i)
Firstly, there exists a large distribution gap between the public datasets and a user’s personal data. A simple method is
to use extra annotations of the user’s data to train the model,
which is very costly. So it is urged to learn directly from
unlabeled personalized data. However, there is no available
personalized dataset to learn. (ii) Additionally, the personalized images from the same user usually have some personal traits. How to properly utilize these personalized traits
in semantic segmentation remains an unaddressed problem.
Despite the above difficulties, there are great demands for
the personalized image segmentation in practice. For example, camera apps may need to generate high-quality segmentation masks for user’s images to assist photography. To
tackle these challenges and open up further studies on personalized image segmentation, we propose a personalized

10549

