Score-Based Point Cloud Denoising
Shitong Luo, Wei Hu*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology
Peking University
{luost, forhuwei}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Clean

Point clouds acquired from scanning devices are often
perturbed by noise, which affects downstream tasks such as
surface reconstruction and analysis. The distribution of a
noisy point cloud can be viewed as the distribution of a
set of noise-free samples p(x) convolved with some noise
model n, leading to (p ∗ n)(x) whose mode is the underlying clean surface. To denoise a noisy point cloud, we propose to increase the log-likelihood of each point from p ∗ n
via gradient ascent—iteratively updating each point’s position. Since p ∗ n is unknown at test-time, and we only
need the score (i.e., the gradient of the log-probability function) to perform gradient ascent, we propose a neural network architecture to estimate the score of p ∗ n given only
noisy point clouds as input. We derive objective functions
for training the network and develop a denoising algorithm
leveraging on the estimated scores. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art
methods under a variety of noise models, and shows the
potential to be applied in other tasks such as point cloud
upsampling.

1. Introduction
Point clouds consist of discrete 3D points irregularly
sampled from continuous surfaces. It is an increasingly
popular representation widely applied in autonomous driving, robotics and immersive tele-presence. However, point
clouds are often perturbed by noise due to the inherent limitations of acquisition equipments or matching ambiguities
in the reconstruction from images. Noise in point clouds
significantly affects downstream tasks such as rendering,
reconstruction and analysis since the underlying structures
are deformed. Hence, point cloud denoising is crucial to
relevant 3D vision applications. Nevertheless, point cloud
denoising is challenging due to the irregular and unordered
* Corresponding author:
Wei Hu (forhuwei@pku.edu.cn).
This
work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(61972009).

Noisy

Gradient Ascent

Es.mated Score Func.on
Point

Score

Underlying Surface

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed point cloud denoising
method. We first estimate the score of the noise-convolved distribution ∇x log[(p ∗ n)(x)] from the noisy point cloud. Then, we
perform gradient ascent using the estimated score to denoise the
point cloud.

characteristics of point clouds.
Early point cloud denoising methods are optimizationbased [6, 16, 4, 1, 2, 22, 31, 36], which rely heavily on
geometric priors and are sometimes challenging to strike
a balance between the detail preservation and denoising
effectiveness. Recently, deep-learning-based approaches
have emerged and achieved promising denoising performance thanks to the advent of neural network architectures crafted for point clouds [24, 25, 32]. The majority of
deep-learning-based denoising models predict the displacement of noisy points from the underlying surface and then
apply the inverse displacement to the noisy point clouds
[7, 26, 11, 23]. This class of methods mainly suffer from
two types of artifacts: shrinkage and outliers, which arise
from over-estimation or under-estimation of the displacement. Instead, Luo et al. [21] proposed to learn the underlying manifold of a noisy point cloud for reconstruction in
a downsample-upsample architecture, which alleviates the
issue of outliers by learning to filter out high-noise points in
the downsampling stage. However, the downsampling stage

4583

