OpenGAN: Open-Set Recognition via Open Data Generation
Shu Kong∗ , Deva Ramanan∗,†
∗Carnegie Mellon University †Argo AI
{shuk, deva}@andrew.cmu.edu
K-way softmax
closed-set images

G
fake images

closed-set images

closed-set images

closed-set images

D

D

closed vs. fake

closed vs. open

outlier images

G

outlier images

D
closed vs. open

fake images

G

outlier images

D
closed vs. open

fake features

pix

(a) GAN
(b) Outlier Exposure
(c) OpenGAN
(d) OpenGANf ea
Figure 1: We explore open-set recognition, which requires the ability to discriminate open-set test examples outside K classes of interest.
(a) Past work has suggested that GAN discriminators can serve as open-set likelihood functions, but this does not work well due to instable
training of GANs [47, 44, 39, 56, 30]. (b) Outlier Exposure [25] exploits some outlier data to learn a binary discriminator D for openset discrimination. Because outliers observed during training will not exhaustively span the open-world, the discriminator D tends to
generalize poorly to diverse open data [48]. (c) We introduce OpenGAN, which augments training outliers with fake open data synthesized
by a generator G trained to fool the discriminator D. Importantly, we ﬁnd that a small number of outliers stabilizes training by enabling
effective model selection of the discriminator D. (d) Because we are concerned with accurate discrimination rather than realistic pixel
generation, we ﬁnd it more efﬁcient to generate (and discriminate) features from the off-the-shelf K-way classiﬁcation network. This
allows OpenGAN to be implemented via a lightweight discriminator head built on top of an existing K-way network, enabling closedworld systems to be readily modiﬁed for open-set recognition.

Abstract
Real-world machine learning systems need to analyze
novel testing data that differs from the training data. In
K-way classiﬁcation, this is crisply formulated as openset recognition, core to which is the ability to discriminate open-set data outside the K closed-set classes. Two
conceptually elegant ideas for open-set discrimination are:
1) discriminatively learning an open-vs-closed binary discriminator by exploiting some outlier data as the open-set,
and 2) unsupervised learning the closed-set data distribution with a GAN and using its discriminator as the openset likelihood function. However, the former generalizes
poorly to diverse open test data due to overﬁtting to the
training outliers, which unlikely exhaustively span the openworld. The latter does not work well, presumably due to
the instable training of GANs. Motivated by the above,
we propose OpenGAN, which addresses the limitation of
each approach by combining them with several technical
insights. First, we show that a carefully selected GANdiscriminator on some real outlier data already achieves
the state-of-the-art. Second, we augment the available set of
real open training examples with adversarially synthesized
“fake” data. Third and most importantly, we build the discriminator over the features computed by the closed-world
K-way networks. Extensive experiments show that OpenGAN signiﬁcantly outperforms prior open-set methods.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems that operate in the real openworld invariably encounter test-time data that is unlike
training examples, such as anomalies or rare objects that
were insufﬁciently or even never observed during training. Fig. 2 illustrates two cases in which a state-of-the-art
semantic segmentation network misclassiﬁes a “stroller”/
“street-market” — a rare occurrence in either training or
testing — as a “motorcycle”/“building”. This failure could
be catastrophic for an autonomous vehicle.
Addressing the open-world has been explored through
anomaly detection [59, 25] and out-of-distribution detection [29]. In K-way classiﬁcation, it can be crisply formulated as open-set recognition, which requires discriminating
open-set data that belongs to a (K+1)th “other” class, outside the K closed-set classes [45]. Typically, open-set discrimination assumes no training examples from the “other”
class (i.e., open-training data) [5, 54, 35]. In this setup, an
elegant idea is to learn the closed-set data distribution with
a GAN and use a GAN-discriminator as the open-set likelihood function (Fig. 1a) [47, 44, 39, 56, 30]. However, it
does not work well due to instable training of GANs. Recent work has shown that outlier exposure (Fig. 1b), or the
ability to train on some outlier data as open-training examples, can work surprisingly well via the training of a simple open-vs-closed binary discriminator [15, 25]. However,
1813

