Conditional Variational Capsule Network for Open Set Recognition
Yunrui Guo∗1,2 , Guglielmo Camporese∗2 , Wenjing Yang1 , Alessandro Sperduti2 , and Lamberto Ballan2
1

2

National University of Defense Technology, China
Department of Mathematics “Tullio Levi-Civita”, University of Padova, Italy

Abstract
In open set recognition, a classifier has to detect unknown classes that are not known at training time. In order to recognize new categories, the classifier has to project
the input samples of known classes in very compact and
separated regions of the features space for discriminating
samples of unknown classes. Recently proposed Capsule
Networks have shown to outperform alternatives in many
fields, particularly in image recognition, however they have
not been fully applied yet to open-set recognition. In capsule networks, scalar neurons are replaced by capsule vectors or matrices, whose entries represent different properties of objects. In our proposal, during training, capsules
features of the same known class are encouraged to match
a pre-defined gaussian, one for each class. To this end, we
use the variational autoencoder framework, with a set of
gaussian priors as the approximation for the posterior distribution. In this way, we are able to control the compactness of the features of the same class around the center of
the gaussians, thus controlling the ability of the classifier
in detecting samples from unknown classes. We conducted
several experiments and ablation of our model, obtaining
state of the art results on different datasets in the open set
recognition and unknown detection tasks.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, deep learning has become the dominant approach in many computer vision problems, achieving spectacular results on many visual recognition tasks
[13, 27, 7, 29]. However, most of these results have been
obtained in a closed set scenario, where a critical assumption is that all samples should belong to at least one labeled
category. When observing a sample from an unknown category, closed-set approaches are forced to choose a class
label from one of the known classes, thus limiting their applicability in dynamic and ever-changing scenarios.
∗ Indicates equal contributions.

Figure 1: CVAECapOSR Model. Input samples are fed into
the Capsule Network that produces distributions over the
latent space. Each class has its own prior gaussian distribution in the feature space, that in the figure are represented as
spheres. After training, the known samples (represented as
small points) are clustered around the class target gaussians.
The samples belonging to unknown classes are represented
as black triangles, far from the target distributions.

To overcome such a limitation, open set recognition has
been introduced to enable a classification system to identify all of known categories, while simultaneously detecting unknown test samples [25, 1]. In the open set scenario,
samples included/excluded in label space are referred to as
knowns/unknowns. Therefore, open set classifiers need to
use incomplete knowledge learned from a finite set of accessible categories to devise effective representations able to
separate knowns from unknowns. Early works have identified this issue, thus proposing methods employing different
thresholding strategies for rejection of unknowns [25, 1].
Deep neural networks, despite demonstrating strong
capabilities in learning discriminative representations in
closed scenarios, show accuracy degradation within open
set settings [2]. As a naive strategy, modeling a thresh1103

