Out-of-Core Surface Reconstruction via Global T GV Minimization
Nikolai Poliarnyi
Agisoft LLC, St. Petersburg, Russia
polarnick@agisoft.com

Abstract
We present an out-of-core variational approach for surface reconstruction from a set of aligned depth maps. Input
depth maps are supposed to be reconstructed from regular
photos or/and can be a representation of terrestrial LIDAR
point clouds. Our approach is based on surface reconstruction via total generalized variation minimization (T GV )
because of its strong visibility-based noise-filtering properties and GPU-friendliness. Our main contribution is an
out-of-core OpenCL-accelerated adaptation of this numerical algorithm which can handle arbitrarily large real-world
scenes with scale diversity.

1. Introduction
The structure from motion pipeline makes it possible
to take photos of the same object/scene and then not only
align and calibrate these photos, but also reconstruct an
observed surface with a high amount of details. At the
moment, the progress in camera sensor development opens
a possibility for a regular user to take photos with a size
up to hundreds of megapixels, the number which has been
increasing rapidly over the past decades. Additionally, due
to help of UAVs, affordable quadrocopters and automatic
flight planners, it becomes possible to gradually increase
the amount of pictures one can take in a short span of time.
Therefore, in the area of photogrammetry, the task of being
able to use all of the available data for a detailed noise-free
surface reconstruction in an out-of-core fashion is necessary
to make a highly detailed large scale reconstruction possible
on affordable computers with limited RAM.
We present a surface reconstruction method that has
strong noise-filtering properties and can take both depth
maps and terrestrial LIDAR scans as an input. The whole
method is implemented in an out-of-core way: the required
memory usage is low even for very large datasets - we targeted the usage to be around 16 GB even for a Copenhagen
city dataset with 27472 photos - see Fig. 1. Each processing stage is divided into independent parts for out-of-core
guarantees, thus additionally obtaining a massive parallelism

Figure 1. Our method can handle an arbitrary large scene – even
425 km2 of the Copenhagen city (this polygonal model was reconstructed from 27472 aerial photos – see supplementary for details).

property (i.e. pipeline is cluster-friendly). Calculation-heavy
stages (the computation of histograms and iterative numeric
scheme) are accelerated with GPUs via OpenCL API.

2. Related Work
Poisson surface reconstruction method [18] performs
well in local geometry details preservation by respecting
normals of input point clouds, however it normally fails to
handle scale diversity and often fails to filter noise between
the surface and the sensor origins. It should be noted that
handling of scale diversity can be added, and noise filtering
can be implemented on an early stage as a depth map fil-

5641

