Modelling Neighbor Relation in Joint Space-Time Graph
for Video Correspondence Learning
Zixu Zhao
Yueming Jin
Pheng-Ann Heng
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zxzhao, ymjin, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper presents a self-supervised method for learning reliable visual correspondence from unlabeled videos.
We formulate the correspondence as finding paths in a joint
space-time graph, where nodes are grid patches sampled
from frames, and are linked by two type of edges: (i) neighbor relations that determine the aggregation strength from
intra-frame neighbors in space, and (ii) similarity relations
that indicate the transition probability of inter-frame paths
across time. Leveraging the cycle-consistency in videos, our
contrastive learning objective discriminates dynamic objects from both their neighboring views and temporal views.
Compared with prior works, our approach actively explores
the neighbor relations of central instances to learn a latent
association between center-neighbor pairs (e.g., “hand –
arm”) across time, thus improving the instance discrimination. Without fine-tuning, our learned representation outperforms the state-of-the-art self-supervised methods on a
variety of visual tasks including video object propagation,
part propagation, and pose keypoint tracking. Our selfsupervised method also surpasses some fully supervised algorithms designed for the specific tasks.

1. Introduction
Learning temporal correspondence — a problem of
learning “what went where”— is closely related to many
fundamental vision tasks, such as video object tracking [46,
26, 45], video object segmentation [48, 4, 44, 29, 32], and
flow estimation [7, 14]. In essence, it corresponds to a
query-target matching problem, which relies on an affinity
to match a physical point (or patch) in the query frame t to
that in the target frame t + k. One practical issue is collecting dense annotations from large-scale videos, which
costs large human efforts. It motivates numerous selfsupervised methods [45, 50, 24, 22, 21, 47, 15] to learn
dynamic objects from unlabeled videos by leveraging the
cycle-consistency in time as a free supervisory signal.

Figure 1. How to find the correspondence of a small object such as
the dog tail in a video? We argue that the query-target matching
desires both longer views (temporal dynamics) and broader views
(neighbor relations) to distinguish similar instances. We capture
these two cues in a graph to learn correspondence.

Recent approaches learn strong representations by constructing long-range views mainly from two perspectives:
(i) learning pixel-level correspondences by a single-step association [24, 47], or (ii) learning patch-level correspondences by a multi-step association [15]. The single-step
association can be viewed as a pixel-level affinity between
two patches at timesteps t and t + k, aiming to transform
the pixel colors. Such transformation requires a deterministic correspondence to locate the target patch at t + k,
which is achieved by training an extra unsupervised patch
tracker [50]. However, the underlying assumption that corresponding pixels have the same color may be violated,
e.g., inevitable lighting changes and deformation in future
frames, thereby hindering the model from using longer temporal cues. Recently, Jabri et al. [15] formulate a multistep association that connects corresponding patches at every timestep between t and t + k in a form of Markov chain.
At each step, the patch-level affinity links all patches of two
adjacent frames, preserving all possible correspondences in
the video. The learning process thus benefits from a longerrange clip with all intermediate views available. Unfortunately, finding an “optimal” correspondence is not easy due

9960

