Towards Discriminative Representation Learning for Unsupervised Person
Re-identification
Takashi Isobe1,2 , Dong Li1 , Lu Tian1 ,
Weihua Chen3 , Yi Shan1 , Shengjin Wang2 *
1
Xilinx Inc., Beijing, China.
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
{dongl, lutian, yishan}@xilinx.com
wgsg@tsinghua.edu.cn

jbj18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

kugang.cwh@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Labeled Source Domain

Target Class Recognition
Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation

In this work, we address the problem of unsupervised
domain adaptation for person re-ID where annotations are
available for the source domain but not for target. Previous
methods typically follow a two-stage optimization pipeline,
where the network is first pre-trained on source and then
fine-tuned on target with pseudo labels created by feature
clustering. Such methods sustain two main limitations. (1)
The label noise may hinder the learning of discriminative
features for recognizing target classes. (2) The domain gap
may hinder knowledge transferring from source to target.
We propose three types of technical schemes to alleviate
these issues. First, we propose a cluster-wise contrastive
learning algorithm (CCL) by iterative optimization of feature learning and cluster refinery to learn noise-tolerant
representations in the unsupervised manner. Second, we
adopt a progressive domain adaptation (PDA) strategy to
gradually mitigate the domain gap between source and target data. Third, we propose Fourier augmentation (FA) for
further maximizing the class separability of re-ID models by
imposing extra constraints in the Fourier space. We observe
that these proposed schemes are capable of facilitating the
learning of discriminative feature representations. Experiments demonstrate that our method consistently achieves
notable improvements over the state-of-the-art unsupervised
re-ID methods on multiple benchmarks, e.g., surpassing
MMT largely by 8.1%, 9.9%, 11.4% and 11.1% mAP on
the Market-to-Duke, Duke-to-Market, Market-to-MSMT and
Duke-to-MSMT tasks, respectively.

* Corresponding author

Unlabeled Target Domain

𝝀𝒔 ↓

Source

Clustering
Spatial
Space
𝒙 𝒙𝒄𝒖𝒓𝒓
𝒑

𝝀t ↑

𝒑𝒂𝒔𝒕

Target

𝒙 𝒙𝒏
Cross-Batch Samples

(a)

(b)

Fourier
Space

(c)

Figure 1. Given labeled source data and unlabeled target data, our
goal is to learn feature representations for recognizing target classes.
For this unsupervised domain adaptation task, we propose three
technical schemes to learn discriminative target features: (a) clusterwise contrastive learning, (b) progressive domain adaptation (c)
Fourier augmentation.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) is an important task in
intelligent surveillance, which aims at identifying the person across different camera views. Recent person re-ID
methods have achieved impressive performance owing to the
advancement of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[52, 67, 51, 31, 6, 88, 27]. However, the success is mainly attributed to supervised learning over massive human-labeled
data. The need of time-consuming manual annotations substantially limits the scalability of re-ID models. Besides,
directly applying a pre-trained re-ID model to other new
domains may cause significant performance drop due to the
inherent data distribution shift across different surveillance
cameras. Recently, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)

8526

