Distilling Holistic Knowledge with Graph Neural Networks
Sheng Zhou1,2 ,* Yucheng Wang1 * , Defang Chen1 ,Jiawei Chen3 ,Xin Wang4 ,Can Wang1 , Jiajun Bu1†
1
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Service Robot, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
University of Science and Technology of China 4 Tsinghua University
{zhousheng zju,wangyuc,defchen}@zju.edu.cn, cjwustc@ustc.edu.cn, xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
{wcan,bjj}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Input Data

Knowledge Distillation (KD) aims at transferring knowledge from a larger well-optimized teacher network to a
smaller learnable student network. Existing KD methods
have mainly considered two types of knowledge, namely the
individual knowledge and the relational knowledge. However, these two types of knowledge are usually modeled independently while the inherent correlations between them
are largely ignored. It is critical for sufficient student network learning to integrate both individual knowledge and
relational knowledge while reserving their inherent correlation. In this paper, we propose to distill the novel holistic knowledge based on an attributed graph constructed
among instances. The holistic knowledge is represented as
a unified graph-based embedding by aggregating individual knowledge from relational neighborhood samples with
graph neural networks, the student network is learned by
distilling the holistic knowledge in a contrastive manner.
Extensive experiments and ablation studies are conducted
on benchmark datasets, the results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The code has been published in https://github.com/wyc-ruiker/HKD

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown tremendous
success in various applications [11, 26, 10, 25, 7, 36]. However, their success heavily relies on extensive computational
and storage resources, which are usually unavailable in embedded and mobile systems. To reduce the cost while maintaining satisfactory, knowledge distillation [12] is proposed
to transfer knowledge from a larger well-trained teacher
network to a smaller learnable student network, hoping that
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Backbone
Output

Individual KD

Relational KD

Holistic KD

Figure 1. Comparison between Individual/Relational/Holistic
Knowledge Distillation. The blue circle indicates the teacher representation, and the green circle indicates the student representation. The red arrow denotes the knowledge transfer from the
teacher network to the student network. The yellow area in the
holistic KD indicates the unified graph-based representation.

the transferred knowledge will benefit the student network.
The knowledge distilled from the teacher network has
played the central role in knowledge distillation. Among
existing knowledge distillation methods, two types of
knowledge have been widely studied, namely the individual knowledge and the relational knowledge. The individual knowledge is extracted from each data instance independently and provides more favorable supervision than the
discrete labels, including logits [12], feature representations
[27, 21] and feature maps [24, 35, 17], etc. The relational
knowledge [22, 18, 20, 16] is extracted from pairs of instances which is invariant to the difference between architectures of the teacher network and the student network.
Despite the success of the above two types of knowledge, existing methods have extracted them independently,
ignoring their inherent correlations. However, each type of
knowledge that extracted independently will be insufficient
for the student network learning, especially when the capability of the teacher network is limited. Intuitively, the

10387

