Boundary-sensitive Pre-training for Temporal Localization in Videos
Juan-Manuel Pérez-Rúa3
Victor Escorcia1
Brais Martinez1
Mengmeng Xu1,2 *
Xiatian Zhu1
Li Zhang4
Bernard Ghanem2
Tao Xiang5
1

Samsung AI Centre Cambridge, UK 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia
3

Facebook AI, UK 4 School of Data Science, Fudan University, China 5 University of Surrey, UK

mengmeng.xu@kaust.edu.sa, jmpr@fb.com, v.castillo@samsung.com, brais.mart@gmail.com,
eddy.zhuxt@gmail.com, lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa, t.xiang@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Many video analysis tasks require temporal localization
for the detection of content changes. However, most existing
models developed for these tasks are pre-trained on general
video action classification tasks. This is due to large scale
annotation of temporal boundaries in untrimmed videos being expensive. Therefore, no suitable datasets exist that enable pre-training in a manner sensitive to temporal boundaries. In this paper for the first time, we investigate
model pre-training for temporal localization by introducing
a novel boundary-sensitive pretext (BSP) task. Instead of relying on costly manual annotations of temporal boundaries,
we propose to synthesize temporal boundaries in existing
video action classification datasets. By defining different
ways of synthesizing boundaries, BSP can then be simply
conducted in a self-supervised manner via the classification
of the boundary types. This enables the learning of video
representations that are much more transferable to downstream temporal localization tasks. Extensive experiments
show that the proposed BSP is superior and complementary to the existing action classification-based pre-training
counterpart, and achieves new state-of-the-art performance
on several temporal localization tasks. Please visit our website for more details https://frostinassiky.github.io/bsp.

1. Introduction
Recently, the focus on video analysis has shifted beyond trimmed video action classification to video temporal localization. This is because in many real-world applications, instead of short (e.g., few seconds long) video
clips, long, untrimmed videos are often presented (e.g., from
social media websites as YouTube, Instagram) with both
non-interesting background and foreground contained e.g.,
a particular action of interest. This requires a video model
* Work done during an internship at Samsung AI Centre.

Pre-training Dataset

Task
✓
Image Classification

KINETICS

✓
?

BSP (ours)

Action Recognition

✓
Temporal Localization

Figure 1. Pre-training datasets for different tasks. The wellestablished pre-training-then-fine-tuning paradigm for image and
video classification model optimization is effective thanks to the
availability of large related datasets (e.g., ImageNet and Kinetics).
For video temporal localization tasks however, existing datasets
are either too small for model pre-training or less effective due to
the lack of temporal boundary annotations. We solve this problem
by introducing a novel boundary-sensitive pretext (BSP) task.

to conduct temporal localization tasks. Examples of these
tasks include temporal action localization [65, 5], video
grounding [2, 44] and step localization [79].
As in most other visual recognition tasks, recent models designed for video temporal localization are based on
deep learning. As such, model pre-training is critical. In
particular, a two-staged model training strategy is commonly adopted [19, 56, 18, 4]: first, a video encoder is
pre-trained on a large action classification dataset (e.g., Kinetics [6]1 , Sports-1M [28]), then, a temporal localization
head is trained on the target small-scale temporal localiza1 Kinetics was created by trimming 10s clips around a frame manually
labelled as containing the target action. Therefore the rest of the untrimmed
video cannot be treated as background.

7220

