Geography-Aware Self-Supervised Learning
Kumar Ayush* 1 , Burak Uzkent∗1 , Chenlin Meng1 , Kumar Tanmay2 , Marshall Burke1 , David Lobell1 ,
and Stefano Ermon1
1

Stanford University

Abstract
Contrastive learning methods have significantly narrowed the gap between supervised and unsupervised learning on computer vision tasks. In this paper, we explore their
application to geo-located datasets, e.g. remote sensing,
where unlabeled data is often abundant but labeled data
is scarce. We first show that due to their different characteristics, a non-trivial gap persists between contrastive
and supervised learning on standard benchmarks. To close
the gap, we propose novel training methods that exploit the
spatio-temporal structure of remote sensing data. We leverage spatially aligned images over time to construct temporal positive pairs in contrastive learning and geo-location
to design pre-text tasks. Our experiments show that our
proposed method closes the gap between contrastive and
supervised learning on image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation for remote sensing. Moreover, we demonstrate that the proposed method can also be
applied to geo-tagged ImageNet images, improving downstream performance on various tasks.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the success of self-supervised learning methods [2, 12], we explore their application to large-scale remote sensing datasets (satellite images) and geo-tagged natural image datasets. It has been recently shown that selfsupervised learning methods perform comparably well or
even better than their supervised learning counterpart on image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation on traditional computer vision datasets [20, 9, 12, 2, 1].
However, their application to remote sensing images is
largely unexplored, despite the fact that collecting and labeling remote sensing images is particularly costly as annotations often require domain expertise [33, 15, 4].
In this direction, we first experimentally evaluate the per* Equal Contribution. Contact: {kayush, buzkent}@cs.stanford.edu

2

IIT Kharagpur

formance of an existing self-supervised contrastive learning
method, MoCo-v2 [12], on remote sensing datasets, finding
a performance gap with supervised learning using labels.
For instance, on the Functional Map of the World (fMoW)
image classification benchmark [4], we observe an 8% gap
in top 1 accuracy between supervised and self-supervised
methods.
To bridge this gap, we propose geography-aware contrastive learning to leverage the spatio-temporal structure
of remote sensing data. In contrast to typical computer vision images, remote sensing data are often geo-located and
might provide multiple images of the same location over
time. Contrastive methods encourage closeness of representations of images that are likely to be semantically similar
(positive pairs). Unlike contrastive learning for traditional
computer vision images where different views (augmentations) of the same image serve as a positive pair, we propose to use temporal positive pairs from spatially aligned
images over time. Utilizing such information allows the
representations to be invariant to subtle variations over time
(e.g., due to seasonality). This can in turn result in more
discriminative features for tasks focusing on spatial variation, such as object detection or semantic segmentation
(but not necessarily for tasks involving temporal variation
such as change detection). In addition, we design a novel
unsupervised learning method that leverages geo-location
information, i.e., knowledge about where the images were
taken. More specifically, we consider the pretext task of
predicting where in the world an image comes from, similar
to [10, 11]. This can complement the information-theoretic
objectives typically used by self-supervised learning methods by encouraging representations that reflect geographical
information, which is often useful in remote sensing tasks.
Finally, we integrate the two proposed methods into a single
geography-aware contrastive learning objective.
Our experiments on the functional Map of the World [4]
dataset consisting of high spatial resolution satellite images
show that we improve MoCo-v2 baseline significantly. In
particular, we improve it by ∼ 8% classification accuracy

10181

