The Center of Attention: Center-Keypoint Grouping via Attention for
Multi-Person Pose Estimation
Guillem Brasó

Nikita Kister
Laura Leal-Taixé
Technical University of Munich

{guillem.braso,

n.kister,

lealtaixe}@tum.de

Abstract
We introduce CenterGroup, an attention-based framework to estimate human poses from a set of identity-agnostic
keypoints and person center predictions in an image. Our
approach uses a transformer to obtain context-aware
embeddings for all detected keypoints and centers and then
applies multi-head attention to directly group joints into
their corresponding person centers. While most bottom-up
methods rely on non-learnable clustering at inference,
CenterGroup uses a fully differentiable attention mechanism that we train end-to-end together with our keypoint
detector. As a result, our method obtains state-of-the-art
performance with up to 2.5x faster inference time than
competing bottom-up approaches. Our code is available at
https://github.com/dvl-tum/center-group

1. Introduction
Localizing the anatomical 2D keypoints of all humans
in an image is a fundamental task in computer vision, with
the ability to enable progress in applications such as virtual
reality, human computer interaction, and human behavior
analysis. It is also a common key component of algorithms
for tasks such as action recognition [60, 13], multi-object
tracking [21, 29], and generative models [8, 48].
Current methods typically follow one of two paradigms:
bottom-up and top-down. Top-down approaches [10, 17, 18,
25, 31, 41, 59, 51, 52] divide the problem into two subtasks:
(i) bounding box detection for all persons in the image, and
(ii) joint localization for each person individually. Despite
their success in some benchmarks [2, 1, 32], these two-step
approaches lack efficiency due to their need to use a separate object detector, and their performance tends to degrade
severely under heavy occlusions [31]. Bottom-up methods
[6, 44, 26, 37, 40, 12, 28] follow a different approach, as
they first detect identity-agnostic keypoints, and then group
them into separate poses. Their lack of reliance on external object detectors and their ability to operate jointly over
the entire set of keypoints in the image has allowed them

Center
Group

Person Centers

Center-Keypoint Attention

Set of Keypoints

Figure 1: Given a set of predicted identity-agnostic keypoints and person centers, CenterGroup learns to assign
keypoints into their corresponding centers with attention.
to outperform top-down approaches in benchmarks where
occlusions are common [31]. While recent work has significantly advanced the ability of bottom-up methods to accurately predict identity-free keypoints [12], current grouping algorithms still face significant drawbacks: since they
generally rely on optimization algorithms, they cannot be
trained end-to-end, and are often slow.
The keypoint grouping task can be formulated as a graph
optimization problem in which nodes represent keypoints,
and edge weights, which can be learned, represent their
likelihood of belonging to the same human pose. Approaches ranging from integer linear programming [44, 26,
45], heuristics [37, 40, 6] or graph clustering [28] are then
used to find the correct assignment. A common problem
of bottom-up methods is that their learning objectives are
poorly aligned with the real inference procedure: they learn
affinities between keypoints but, at test time, grouping is
performed by a separate algorithm which is not differentiable per se.
One-shot methods are an efficient alternative [39, 65, 58]
to optimization-based bottom-up methods. Their general
formulation consists in regressing a root node location per
person, and then predicting offsets to keypoint locations.
Since they are able to avoid the optimization-based group-

11853

