What You Can Learn by Staring at a Blank Wall
Prafull Sharma1
Miika Aittala1,2
Yoav Y. Schechner3
Antonio Torralba1
Gregory W. Wornell1
William T. Freeman1
Frédo Durand1
1

MIT

2

NVIDIA

3

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract
We present a passive non-line-of-sight method that infers
the number of people or activity of a person from the observation of a blank wall in an unknown room. Our technique
analyzes complex imperceptible changes in indirect illumination in a video of the wall to reveal a signal that is correlated with motion in the hidden part of a scene. We use this
signal to classify between zero, one, or two moving people,
or the activity of a person in the hidden scene. We train two
convolutional neural networks using data collected from 20
different scenes, and achieve an accuracy of ≈ 94% for both
tasks in unseen test environments and real-time online settings. Unlike other passive non-line-of-sight methods, the
technique does not rely on known occluders or controllable
light sources, and generalizes to unknown rooms with no recalibration. We analyze the generalization and robustness
of our method with both real and synthetic data, and study
the effect of the scene parameters on the signal quality.1

1. Introduction
Consider a situation where one would like to recover information about a hidden scene in an unknown room without directly peeking inside. Staring at the blank wall of the
room from outside may reveal nothing to the naked eye,
yet the wall reflects extremely faint but meaningful patterns
of light from the hidden scene. We show that by analyzing a video of the blank wall, we can infer information
about a person’s activity or classify the number of people
in a hidden region of the scene, with no prior calibration
or knowledge of the environment. Real-time in-situ use of
such a non-line-of-sight (NLOS) method can be critical for
search and rescue operations, law enforcement, emergency
response, fall detection for the elderly, and detection of hidden pedestrians for intelligent vehicles [6, 29].
NLOS imaging techniques have previously explored related imaging setups using both active and passive meth1 Code, data, and video available at wallcamera.csail.mit.edu.

Figure 1: The light originating from the lamps takes infinitely many paths to reach the wall on the left. Motion of
people in the room changes the mutual visibility between
the wall and the rest of the scene, which induces subtle
changes in patterns of light observed on the wall. Notice
that there are no direct shadows, as the persons do not occlude the direct paths connecting the left wall and the lamps.

ods. Active methods interact with the environment using
flashlights, projectors, lasers, WiFi signals, or sound to extract information about the hidden scenes [1, 3, 10, 12, 16,
20, 23, 24, 28, 42]. Removing the requirement for probing devices, passive approaches only use cameras, without
controlling the lighting conditions or interacting with the
environment in any manner. Existing passive methods typically exploit known occluders such as a visible corner or
a hidden table fan, which act as accidental imaging devices
[4, 5, 7, 32, 34, 35, 38, 39, 40, 45]. In such work, the occluders provide structure to the light transport, enabling reconstruction of human-readable images and tracks of motion in
the hidden scene from the observed indirect illumination.
In contrast, we do not rely on occluders between the
scene of interest (the persons) and the observed blank wall.
Instead, we leverage the complex temporal variation of indirect illumination between a person, the room, and potentially a second person. We use a video of the blank wall and
show that a learning-based approach is able to recover information about the hidden scene. Specifically, we demon-

2330

