Multispectral illumination estimation using deep unrolling network
Yuqi Li
Qiang Fu
Wolfgang Heidrich
King Abdullah University of Science & Technology, Saudi Arabia
{yuqi.li, qiang.fu, wolfgang.heidrich}@kaust.edu.sa

Compare

Abstract
This paper examines the problem of illumination spectra estimation in multispectral images. We cast the problem into a constrained matrix factorization problem and
present a method for both single-global and multiple illumination estimation in which a deep unrolling network is
constructed from the alternating direction method of multipliers(ADMM) optimization for solving the matrix factorization problem. To alleviate the lack of multispectral training data, we build a large multispectral reﬂectance image
dataset for generating synthesized data and use them for
training and evaluating our model. The results of simulations and real experiments demonstrate that the proposed
method is able to outperform state-of-the-art spectral illumination estimation methods, and that it generalizes well to
a wide variety of scenes and spectra.

1. Introduction
As an intrinsic physical property of materials, spectral
reﬂectance is a rich information source for a wide range of
vision tasks, including object recognition and material reproduction, as well as man technical and scientiﬁc imaging
problems. However, the acquisition of accurate spectral reﬂectance images requires an extra per-image calibration to
compensate for the illumination conditions in the scene, for
example with a known reference [21] or a dedicated measurement device [2]. Unfortunately this calibration is generally cumbersome and frequently fails in complex lighting
situations with multiple, different illumination sources.
A practical solution is estimating the illumination spectra from captured multispectral images and separating the
reﬂectance and illumination spectral for further purposes. This illumination estimation problem is highly underdetermined; thus, regularizations are required to constrain
the solution to satisfy the image priors of multispectral reﬂectances and illumination. Recently, many approaches
have been studied to estimate illumination spectra. Most
of them either utilize the statistics of multispectral images
or extract the specular reﬂection component to estimate illu-

Multi-stage
Estimation Network

Estimated spectral
reflectance

Real spectral
reflectance

Synthesized
multispectral Image

Illumination
spectra

Compare

Estimated
illumination

Figure 1. The framework of our spectral reﬂectance and illumination estimation method.

mination spectra, but don’t sufﬁciently consider the image
priors of multispectral reﬂectance and illumination. There
are also some attempts applying convolutional neural networks (CNN) to estimate illumination spectra. However, in
our opinion, such methods are not ﬂexible to adapt to various illumination spectra, and they are limited in the lack
of large image datasets. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, none of the existing methods can handle multiple illuminants in multispectral images. These limitations motivate
us to build a large image dataset of multispectral reﬂectance
and put forward a ﬂexible illumination estimation method
based on deep neural network (DNN).
Our method leverages a multispectral image dataset
synthesized by using real spectral reﬂectance images and
illumination spectra to train the network, as shown in
Fig. 1. We cast the illumination estimation problem as
a constrained matrix factorization problem, and propose
an optimization-inspired unrolling multi-stage network to
solve the problem. Our network can achieve more accurate
estimation than previous methods by training on the synthesized dataset and utilizing the non-local prior of reﬂectance
images, and the low-rank and total-variation (TV) prior of
illumination spectra. The contributions of this paper can be
summarized as follows:
• We present a new take on constrained matrix factorization using a multi-stage loop-unrolled neural net-

2672

