Towards Learning Spatially Discriminative Feature Representations
Chaofei Wang∗ , Jiayu Xiao∗ , Yizeng Han, Qisen Yang, Shiji Song, Gao Huang†
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

Abstract
The backbone of traditional CNN classifier is generally
considered as a feature extractor, followed by a linear layer
which performs the classification. We propose a novel loss
function, termed as CAM-loss, to constrain the embedded
feature maps with the class activation maps (CAMs) which
indicate the spatially discriminative regions of an image for
particular categories. CAM-loss drives the backbone to express the features of target category and suppress the features of non-target categories or background, so as to obtain more discriminative feature representations. It can be
simply applied in any CNN architecture with neglectable
additional parameters and calculations. Experimental results show that CAM-loss is applicable to a variety of network structures and can be combined with mainstream regularization methods to improve the performance of image
classification. The strong generalization ability of CAMloss is validated in the transfer learning and few shot learning tasks. Based on CAM-loss, we also propose a novel
CAAM-CAM matching knowledge distillation method. This
method directly uses the CAM generated by the teacher network to supervise the CAAM generated by the student network, which effectively improves the accuracy and convergence rate of the student network.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have achieved excellent performance in many visual classification tasks. To handle the increasingly complex data, CNNs have continuously been improved with
deeper structures (AlexNet [22], VGGNet [32], ResNet
[14], ResNext [46], DenseNet [18]). However, deep networks are prone to overfitting while they get stronger learning ability. Many researchers have proposed effective regularization solutions, such as Dropout [33], Weight Decay
[10], Stochastic Depth [19], Mixup [54], Shakedrop [47],
Cutmix [51]. An alternative solution is to design different loss functions to obtain more distinguishing feature rep∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

GT: cannon

traffic light: 0.938;
cannon: 0.026;
pole: 0.008.

GT: ox

black bear: 0.537;
ox: 0.435;
ox: 0.167;
water ox: 0.242;
labrador retriever: 0.106. black bear: 0.059.

GT: sorrel

norfolk terrier: 0.335; sorrel: 0.642;
sorrel: 0.154;
langur: 0.024;
langur: 0.142.
saluki: 0.022.

GT: lhasa apso

(a) Input image

cannon: 0.672;
tank: 0.225;
rifle: 0.008.

maltese dog: 0.895; lhasa apso: 0.834;
lhasa apso: 0.064;
maltese dog: 0.107;
tibetan terrier: 0.013. shih-tzu: 0.005.
(b) CAM

(c) CAAM (CE) (d) CAAM (ours)

(e) Labels (CE)

(f) Labels (ours)

Figure 1. Some examples to illustrate our motivation. A ResNet50 model trained on ImageNet is adopted. “GT” represents the
ground truth label. “CE” represents cross entropy loss. “ours” represents CAM-loss. Black bounding boxes show main differences
between (b) and (c), while white ones show main differences between (c) and (d).

resentations, which increase intra-class compactness and
inter-class separability. Inspired by such idea, contrastive
loss [12], triplet loss [30], center loss [45] are proposed to
bring in additional constraints on the basis of cross entropy
loss. Unfortunately, they usually dramatically increase the
computational cost. L-Softmax [26] and SM-Softmax [25]
are proposed to modify the original softmax function mathematically, leading to potentially larger angular separability between feature vectors. Implicit semantic data augmentation (ISDA) loss [41] is proposed to optimize the upper bound of expected cross-entropy loss. However, when
adopting the above loss functions, an input image is represented by a one-dimensional feature vector, which collapses
the spatial information.
In this paper, we propose to construct a novel loss function by leveraging the class activation maps (CAMs [56])
with rich spatial information. CAM indicates the spatial
discriminative regions to identify a particular category. It
is easily obtained by computing a weighted sum of the feature maps of the last convolutional layer. In fact, we can
also obtain a class-agnostic activation map (CAAM [2]) by
computing the sum of the feature maps directly, which indicates the spatial distribution of the embedded features. To
describe our motivation visually, in Figure 1 we show some
validation images misclassified by a pre-trained ResNet-

1326

