THDA: Treasure Hunt Data Augmentation for Semantic Navigation
Oleksandr Maksymets1 * Vincent Cartillier2 Aaron Gokaslan1,4 Erik Wijmans2
Stefan Lee3 Dhruv Batra1,2
1

Wojciech Galuba1

Facebook AI Research 2 Georgia Institute of Technology 3 Oregon State University 4 Cornell University
Project Webpage: http://thda.maksymets.com

Abstract
Can general-purpose neural models learn to navigate?
For PointGoal navigation (‘go to ∆x, ∆y’), the answer is
a clear ‘yes’ – mapless neural models composed of taskagnostic components (CNNs and RNNs) trained with largescale model-free reinforcement learning achieve nearperfect performance [27]. However, for ObjectGoal navigation (‘find a TV’), this is an open question; one we tackle
in this paper. The current best-known result on ObjectNav
with general-purpose models is 6% success rate [25].
First, we show that the key problem is overfitting. Largescale training results in 94% success rate on training environments and only 8% in validation. We observe that this
stems from agents memorizing environment layouts during
training – sidestepping the need for exploration and directly
learning shortest paths to nearby goal objects. We show
that this is a natural consequence of optimizing for the task
metric (which in fact penalizes exploration), is enabled by
powerful observation encoders, and is possible due to the
finite set of training environment configurations.
Informed by our findings, we introduce Treasure Hunt
Data Augmentation (THDA) to address overfitting in ObjectNav. THDA inserts 3D scans of household objects at arbitrary scene locations and uses them as ObjectNav goals
– augmenting and greatly expanding the set of training layouts. Taken together with our other proposed changes, we
improve the state of art on the Habitat ObjectGoal Navigation benchmark by 90% (from 14% success rate to 27%)
and path efficiency by 48% (from 7.5 SPL to 11.1 SPL).

1. Introduction
Consider an agent given a task such as ‘Bring me a
teapot’ in a new environment. In order to successfully perform the command, it first must navigate around the environment to find the teapot. This search subtask is referred
to as ObjectNav [1, 3] and is illustrated in Fig. 1.
* Correspondence to maksymets@facebook.com

In this work, we examine if general-purpose neural models learn to navigate when given their goal specified as
an object name. Specifically, models that are composed
of navigation-agnostic general architectural components
(CNNs, RNNs, fully-connected layers, etc.) and trained under an experimental setup that provides no inductive bias
towards how humans believe this problem should be solved
e.g. no map-like or spatial structural components in the
agent, no mapping supervision, no auxiliary tasks – nothing
other than the task of navigation to a goal object. We find
this question interesting both from a scientific perspective
(what are the fundamental limits of learnability?) and an
engineering perspective (general-purpose architectures are
widely applicable across tasks and any advances made are
likely to have significant ripple effects).
In recent work studying PointGoal Navigation (or navigating to a relative waypoint), task-agnostic neural models
trained with large-scale model-free reinforcement learning
(RL) achieve near-perfect performance [27]. We find however that similar models are unable to achieve even nontrivial performance in unseen environments when applied
directly to ObjectNav. We show that the key problem is extreme overfitting – even in the presence of standard tricks
like early stopping. Large-scale training results in 97% success rate in training environments and only 8% success unseen environments from validation.1
We identify three key reasons for this poor generalization
and demonstrate techniques to reduce their effect:
1) Overly rich sensors. Given that ObjectNav relies on semantic information, agents are often provided observations
in the form of RGB-D images and a semantic segmentation
of the current frame (via either ground-truth or a separately
trained network). However, we argue that this sensor suite is
‘too rich’ for the task, i.e. makes memorizing environments
1 We encourage the reader to fight hindsight bias at this point – it is not
at all obvious that general-purpose neural networks trained with modelfree reinforcement learning should be able to achieve such high performance on a large number of diverse training environments. We could very
well have found ourselves in a world where both training and validation
performance was poor, with approximation or optimization error to blame.

15374

