Hybrid Neural Fusion for Full-frame Video Stabilization
Yu-Lun Liu1 Wei-Sheng Lai2 Ming-Hsuan Yang2,4,5 Yung-Yu Chuang1 Jia-Bin Huang3
National Taiwan University 2 Google 3 Virginia Tech 4 UC Merced 5 Yonsei University

1

Our results

Input

https://alex04072000.github.io/FuSta/

Figure 1: Full-frame video stabilization of challenging videos. Our method takes a shaky input video (top) and produces a
stabilized and distortion-free video (bottom), as indicated by less fluctuation in the y −t epipolar plane image. Furthermore,
by robustly fusing multiple neighboring frames, our results do not suffer from aggressive cropping of frame borders in
the stabilized video and can even expand the field of view of the original video. Our approach significantly outperforms
representative state-of-the-art video stabilization algorithms on these challenging scenarios (see Figure 2).

Abstract
Existing video stabilization methods often generate visible distortion or require aggressive cropping of frame
boundaries, resulting in smaller field of views. In this work,
we present a frame synthesis algorithm to achieve full-frame
video stabilization. We first estimate dense warp fields from
neighboring frames and then synthesize the stabilized frame
by fusing the warped contents. Our core technical novelty
lies in the learning-based hybrid-space fusion that alleviates artifacts caused by optical flow inaccuracy and fastmoving objects. We validate the effectiveness of our method
on the NUS, selfie, and DeepStab video datasets. Extensive
experiment results demonstrate the merits of our approach
over prior video stabilization methods.

1. Introduction
Video stabilization has become increasingly important
with the rapid growth of video content on the Internet

platforms, such as YouTube, Vimeo, and Instagram. Casually captured cellphone videos without a professional
video stabilizer are often shaky and unpleasant to watch.
These videos pose significant challenges for video stabilization algorithms. For example, videos are often noisy due
to small image sensors, particularly in low-light environments. Handheld captured videos may contain large camera shake/jitter, resulting in severe motion blur and wobble
artifacts from a rolling shutter camera.
Existing video stabilization methods usually consist of
three main components: 1) motion estimation, 2) motion
smoothing and 3) stable frame generation. First, the motion
estimation step involves estimating motion through 2D feature detection/tracking [28, 33, 15, 62], dense flow [69, 70],
or recovering camera motion and scene structures [32, 73,
5, 52, 34]. Second, the motion smoothing step then removes the high-frequency jittering in the estimated motion
and predicts the spatial transformations to stabilize each
frame in the form of homography [38], mixture of homography [35, 17], or per-pixel warp fields [36, 69, 70]. Third,
the stable frame generation step uses the predicted spatial
12299

