Adaptive Label Noise Cleaning with Meta-Supervision for Deep Face Recognition
Yaobin Zhang, Weihong Deng,* Yaoyao Zhong, Jiani Hu
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{zhangyaobin, whdeng, zhongyaoyao, jnhu}@bupt.edu.cn

Xian Li, Dongyue Zhao, Dongchao Wen
Canon Innovative Solution (Beijing) Co., Ltd
{lixian, zhaodongyue, wendongchao}@canon-is.com.cn

Abstract
The training of a deep face recognition system usually
faces the interference of label noise in the training data.
However, it is difficult to obtain a high-precision cleaning
model to remove these noises. In this paper, we propose
an adaptive label noise cleaning algorithm based on metalearning for face recognition datasets, which can learn the
distribution of the data to be cleaned and make automatic
adjustments based on class differences. It first learns reliable cleaning knowledge from well-labeled noisy data,
then gradually transfers it to the target data with metasupervision to improve performance. A threshold adapter
module is also proposed to address the drift problem in
transfer learning methods. Extensive experiments clean two
noisy in-the-wild face recognition datasets and show the effectiveness of the proposed method to reach state-of-the-art
performance on the IJB-C face recognition benchmark.

1. Introduction
Deep face recognition depends heavily on the training
data [57, 58, 59]. Due to the deficiencies in data collection and preprocessing, there is usually label noise in the
dataset. For the face datasets, it refers to the existence
of one to multiple faces of different people in one class.
In recent years, increasing the data scale of face recognition datasets is proved essential for training deep models [6, 20, 24, 56, 60], but the label noise rate also inevitably
improved [47]. Some studies [4, 9, 47, 48] reveal the heavy
harm of label noise in the training sets to face recognition
accuracy. This leads to a contradiction between data size
and cleanliness, which gives birth to the data cleaning task.
It goals to keep the face images of one person (noted as
“signals”), delete the face images of other people (noted as
“noise”), and keep as many images as possible in one class.
Many data cleaning solutions [1, 6, 47] are proposed to

signal

(a) w/o meta-learning guidance
noise

(b) with meta-learning guidance (c) with adaptive threshold
Real signal/noise distribution

Signal/noise vertex on the graph

Learned signal/noise distribution

Threshold adaptor

Figure 1: Main idea of AMC for face data cleaning. (a)(b)
With meta-learning guidance, the learned signal-noise distribution is closer to the real distribution. (c) Learn adaptive
threshold of one class on the signal-noise graph manifold.
eliminate label noise. For example, FaceGraph [56] deploys
a global-local Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [21,
27] as a binary classifier to classify signal and noise on a
k-NN graph. The biggest contradiction in these kinds of
methods is that the target data to be cleaned is generally
unlabeled, so the cleaning model is usually trained on additional labeled data. Assuming that the additional labeled
data is the source domain, and the unlabeled target data is
the target domain, due to the domain gap, the trained model
is difficult to adapt to the distribution of the target data.
In Figure 1(a), red triangles and rectangles represent the
real signal-noise distribution of the target domain. When
a cleaning model trained on the source domain is deployed
to clean them, the signal and noise may not be separated
well as the blue triangles and rectangles. To solve this problem, many transfer learning methods [18, 31, 32, 39, 44] are

15065

