Spatio-Temporal Representation Factorization
for Video-based Person Re-Identification
Abhishek Aich⋆,2 , Meng Zheng1 , Srikrishna Karanam1 , Terrence Chen1 ,
Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury2 , and Ziyan Wu1
1
United Imaging Intelligence, Cambridge MA, 2 University of California, Riverside CA
{aaich001@, amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu, {first.last}@uii-ai.com

Abstract
Despite much recent progress in video-based person
re-identification (re-ID), the current state-of-the-art still
suffers from common real-world challenges such as appearance similarity among various people, occlusions,
and frame misalignment. To alleviate these problems,
we propose Spatio-Temporal Representation Factorization
(STRF), a flexible new computational unit that can be
used in conjunction with most existing 3D convolutional
neural network architectures for re-ID. The key innovations of STRF over prior work include explicit pathways
for learning discriminative temporal and spatial features,
with each component further factorized to capture complementary person-specific appearance and motion information. Specifically, temporal factorization comprises two
branches, one each for static features (e.g., the color of
clothes) that do not change much over time, and dynamic
features (e.g., walking patterns) that change over time. Further, spatial factorization also comprises two branches to
learn both global (coarse segments) as well as local (finer
segments) appearance features, with the local features particularly useful in cases of occlusion or spatial misalignment. These two factorization operations taken together result in a modular architecture for our parameter-wise light
STRF unit that can be plugged in between any two 3D
convolutional layers, resulting in an end-to-end learning
framework. We empirically show that STRF improves performance of various existing baseline architectures while
demonstrating new state-of-the-art results using standard
person re-ID evaluation protocols on three benchmarks.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of video-based person reIDentification (re-ID). Given a video tracklet of a person of
interest, the task is to retrieve the closest match (which ideally should be the true match) among a gallery set of video
⋆ This work was done during Abhishek Aich’s internship with United
Imaging Intelligence. Corresponding author: Srikrishna Karanam.

Figure 1: Illustration of proposed concept and its efficacy. We
present the intuition behind our proposed Spatio-Temporal Representation Factorization (STRF) module designed to overcome
common real-world re-ID system issues, e.g., similar-appearance
identities, occlusions and misaligned frame. By capturing temporally static/dynamic and spatially coarse/fine information at different layers of a 3D-CNN, STRF produces robust discriminative representation to tackle these challenges as demonstrated here
through attention maps of penultimate layer of feature extractor.

tracklets. With numerous applications in security, surveillance, and forensics [2], this problem has seen a dramatic
increase in interest and various methodologies in the vision
community [7, 13, 28, 29, 32, 36, 50, 54].
While there has been admirable progress in image-based
re-ID as evidenced by recent quantitative results [7], there
are many challenges that still preclude the ubiquitous use
of re-ID algorithms in real-world systems. One such issue
is appearance similarity, where multiple people wear similar looking clothes (e.g., large conferences or public events
with a strict dress code). Other challenging issues include
occlusions and frame misalignment that are a direct consequence of large crowd flow densities (e.g., in airports just
after flight arrival) and inter-camera viewpoint disparities.

152

