Normalization Matters in Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Jeesoo Kim1
1

Junsuk Choe3 * Sangdoo Yun2

Nojun Kwak1

Department of Intelligence and Information, Seoul National University
3

2

NAVER AI Lab

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sogang University

Abstract
Weakly-supervised object localization (WSOL) enables
finding an object using a dataset without any localization
information. By simply training a classification model using
only image-level annotations, the feature map of the model
can be utilized as a score map for localization. In spite
of many WSOL methods proposing novel strategies, there
has not been any de facto standard about how to normalize the class activation map (CAM). Consequently, many
WSOL methods have failed to fully exploit their own capacity because of the misuse of a normalization method. In this
paper, we review many existing normalization methods and
point out that they should be used according to the property
of the given dataset. Additionally, we propose a new normalization method which substantially enhances the performance of any CAM-based WSOL methods. Using the proposed normalization method, we provide a comprehensive
evaluation over three datasets (CUB, ImageNet and OpenImages) on three different architectures and observe significant performance gains over the conventional min-max normalization method in all the evaluated cases (See Fig. 1).

1. Introduction
Given nothing but the class information of an object,
weakly-supervised object localization (WSOL) allows a
convolutional neural network (CNN) to localize the object
in a scene. Although many fully-supervised object detectors
guarantee considerable performance in locating objects in
an image, localization techniques in the absence of bounding box annotations are still in need.
WSOL using neural networks has been initially introduced by the class activation map (CAM) [30] approach.
Training a convolutional neural network (CNN) model with
a classification problem enables the model to generate an
activation map from the last layer of it. After that, simply
cutting out the activation map with a proper threshold en* Work done as a research scientist at NAVER AI Lab.

Figure 1: Comparison of several WSOL methods with different kinds of normalization methods for a class activation map.
The accuracy has been evaluated under the evaluation metric suggested in [6] with CUB-200-2011 dataset. All scores in this figure
are the average scores of ResNet50, VGG16, and InceptionV3.
In all WSOL methods, the performance using our normalization
method, IVR, is the best.

ables the localization of an object. In spite of the plausible
axiom that features contributing better to a specific class are
likely to represent the location of the object, the problem
still exists that the discriminative parts of an object hoax the
activation of the model to make an inaccurate localization
of the target object. Many methods have been proposed to
overcome this problem [21, 27, 28, 7, 25] and persuasive
evidences of performance improvement have been demonstrated qualitatively and quantitatively.
However, prior works have been evaluated under different conditions and their hyperparameters have been chosen empirically. Usually, the feature from the last layer of
the model is post-processed to be used as a class activation
map. The normalization scheme used by every method differs each other and makes the comparison unfair. The work
of [6] has proposed a new evaluation protocol and offered

3427

