SelfReg: Self-supervised Contrastive Regularization for Domain Generalization
Daehee Kim1,2 , Youngjun Yoo1 , Seunghyun Park2 , Jinkyu Kim3∗ , and Jaekoo Lee1∗
1

College of Computer Science, Kookmin University
3

2

Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University

Abstract
In general, an experimental environment for deep learning assumes that the training and the test dataset are sampled from the same distribution. However, in real-world
situations, a difference in the distribution between two
datasets, i.e. domain shift, may occur, which becomes a
major factor impeding the generalization performance of
the model. The research field to solve this problem is called
domain generalization, and it alleviates the domain shift
problem by extracting domain-invariant features explicitly
or implicitly. In recent studies, contrastive learning-based
domain generalization approaches have been proposed and
achieved high performance. These approaches require sampling of the negative data pair. However, the performance
of contrastive learning fundamentally depends on quality
and quantity of negative data pairs. To address this issue, we propose a new regularization method for domain
generalization based on contrastive learning, called selfsupervised contrastive regularization (SelfReg). The proposed approach use only positive data pairs, thus it resolves various problems caused by negative pair sampling.
Moreover, we propose a class-specific domain perturbation
layer (CDPL), which makes it possible to effectively apply
mixup augmentation even when only positive data pairs are
used. The experimental results show that the techniques incorporated by SelfReg contributed to the performance in a
compatible manner. In the recent benchmark, DomainBed,
the proposed method shows comparable performance to the
conventional state-of-the-art alternatives.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems often fail to generalize out-ofsample distribution as they assume that in-samples and outof-samples are independent and identically distributed – this
assumption rarely holds during deployment in real-world
scenarios where the data is highly likely to change over time
∗ Corresponding authors: J. Kim (jinkyukim@korea.ac.kr) and J. Lee
(jaekoo@kookmin.ac.kr)

SelfReg

Train
Test

: Inter-domain Self-supervised
Dissimilarity Loss
Target: Domains
: Classes

Target

Figure 1. Our model utilizes the self-supervised contrastive losses
for the model to learn domain-invariant representation by mapping
the latent representation of the same-class samples close together.
Note that different shapes (i.e. circles, stars, and squares) indicate
different classes Ci∈{1,2,3} , and we differently color-code according to their domain Di∈{1,2,3,4,Target} .

and space. Deep convolutional neural network features are
often domain-invariant to low-level visual cues [35], some
studies [10] suggest that they are still susceptible to domain
shift.
There have been increasing efforts to develop models
that can generalize well to out-of-distribution. The literature in domain generalization (DG) aims to learn the invariances across multiple different domains so that a classifier can robustly leverage such invariances in unseen test
domains [40, 15, 29, 28, 31, 38]. In the domain generalization task, it is assumed that multiple source domains
are accessible during training, but the target domains are
not [4, 31]. This is different from domain adaptation (DA),
semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA), and unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problems, where examples
from the target domain are available during training. In this
paper, we focus on the domain generalization task.
Some recent studies [7, 20, 33] suggest that contrastive
learning can be successfully used in a self-supervised learning task by mapping the latent representations of the posi-

9619

