Meta Pairwise Relationship Distillation for Unsupervised
Person Re-identification
Haoxuanye Ji1 Le Wang1∗ Sanping Zhou1 Wei Tang2 Nanning Zheng1 Gang Hua3
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
University of Illinois at Chicago 3 Wormpex AI Research
Ranking list

Abstract

Pairwise Similarity
(q,i1)

q

i2

i1

Pairwise Pseudo
Labels

if K<2

(q,i3)

(q,i2)

if K=2

i3

if K>2

Pairs

Unsupervised person re-identification (Re-ID) remains
challenging due to the lack of ground-truth labels. Existing
methods often rely on estimated pseudo labels via iterative clustering and classification, and they are unfortunately
highly susceptible to performance penalties incurred by the
inaccurate estimated number of clusters. Alternatively, we
propose the Meta Pairwise Relationship Distillation (MPRD)
method to estimate the pseudo labels of sample pairs for
unsupervised person Re-ID. Specifically, it consists of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN), in which the GCN estimates the pseudo labels of sample pairs based on the current features extracted
by CNN, and the CNN learns better features by involving
high-fidelity positive and negative sample pairs imposed
by GCN. To achieve this goal, a small amount of labeled
samples are used to guide GCN training, which can distill
meta knowledge to judge the difference in the neighborhood
structure between positive and negative sample pairs. Extensive experiments on Market-1501, DukeMTMC-reID and
MSMT17 datasets show that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Given a query pedestrian image, person re-identification
(Re-ID) aims to match it with target pedestrian images of
the same identity. It remains challenging due to the large
appearance variations caused by different viewing angles,
light conditions and background clutters in disjoint scenes.
Existing methods usually learn discriminative features in a
supervised manner [39, 35, 2, 1, 25], which requires extensive manual labeling efforts. Due to the prohibitively high
cost of such annotation, training person Re-ID systems in
the unsupervised manner has become a popular and practical
research topic.
* Corresponding author.

KNN

(1,0,0)
(1,1,0)
(1,1,1)

(a) Only Similarity
q

Baseline
Network

(q,i1)

i1

Pairwise
Pseudo

(q,i2)

q i2

Labels

GCN

Pairwise Label
Estimation

(1,0,1)

(q,i3)
i3
Pairwise Neighborhoods
Structure
q

Pairs

i3

i2

i1

Ranking list

(b) Our method

Ranking list

Ranking list

Figure 1. Illustrations of two pseudo label estimation methods,
in which (a) the traditional method directly take the pairwise similarity to estimate pseudo labels, while (b) our method takes the
pairwise neighborhood structures to estimate pseudo labels. Each
circle denotes an individual image. The green circles represent the
same identity as the query image, dark color indicates high visual
similarity, while red circles represent other identities.

Recent unsupervised person Re-ID methods [13, 14, 6]
attempted to learn discriminative feature embeddings from
unlabeled training data based on iterative clustering and
classification. However, it is often nontrivial to determine the
number of clusters, and mishaps that wrongly estimate the
cluster numbers often incurs excessive noise in the pseudo
labels.
To address these issues, we reformulate the unsupervised
discriminative feature learning as a pairwise relationship
estimation problem. In this paper, we use the term positive
pair to denote a pair of the pedestrian images of the same
perceived identity; and conversely, negative pair to denote
images with different perceived identities. In the embedding specified by a GCN, positive pairs are pulled closer;
while negative pairs are pushed away from one another. With
this soft semantic preserving rule replacing the clustering

3661

