Parallel Multi-Resolution Fusion Network for Image Inpainting
Wentao Wang1 *, Jianfu Zhang2∗ , Li Niu1†, Haoyu Ling1 ,Xue Yang1 ,Liqing Zhang1†
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Tensor Learning Team, RIKEN AIP
{wwt117,ustcnewly,smallling,yangxue-2019-sjtu,lqzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, jianfu.zhang@riken.jp

Abstract
Conventional deep image inpainting methods are based
on auto-encoder architecture, in which the spatial details
of images will be lost in the down-sampling process, leading to the degradation of generated results. Also, the structure information in deep layers and texture information in
shallow layers of the auto-encoder architecture can not be
well integrated. Differing from the conventional image inpainting architecture, we design a parallel multi-resolution
inpainting network with multi-resolution partial convolution, in which low-resolution branches focus on the global
structure while high-resolution branches focus on the local
texture details. All these high- and low-resolution streams
are in parallel and fused repeatedly with multi-resolution
masked representation fusion so that the reconstructed images are semantically robust and textually plausible. Experimental results show that our method can effectively fuse
structure and texture information, producing more realistic
results than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting, which aims at synthesizing meaningful and plausible contents in missing regions, is a fundamental computer vision task. This process not only demands meaningful texture content but also expects harmony
between the filled regions and the background. Conventional image inpainting methods [2, 3, 4, 10] utilize the
background information to fill the missing regions. They
can inpaint simple low-resolution images with promising
results, but fail to inpaint high-resolution images with affordable time. Also, these methods perform poorly for images with complex scenes or large missing regions.
In recent years, deep neural network has made a huge
breakthrough in the field of image inpainting, such as
* Equal Contributions.
† Corresponding author.

[26, 18, 38, 25, 39, 28, 35, 41]. In general, most of the
deep image inpainting networks are based on auto-encoder
architecture which is prevalent in image generation tasks.
Some other deep inpainting networks employ the variants
of auto-encoder like U-net architecture [34, 23]. Further, a
series of methods [40, 15, 37] integrate the idea of multiresolution into auto-encoder architecture. However, there
exist two drawbacks for applying auto-encoder architecture
to image inpainting. Firstly, all these methods are composed
of series-connected high-to-low resolution sub-networks,
following low-to-high resolution sub-networks, with downsampling and up-sampling. Due to down-sampling, there
will be high-resolution information loss and high-resolution
inpainting cannot be maintained all the time. Secondly, considering the receptive field size for each layer in a deep neural network, it is generally believed that low-resolution feature maps (representations) from the deeper layers contain
high-level information (i.e., global structure information)
while high-resolution feature maps (representations) from
the shallower layers contain low-level information (i.e., local texture details) [22, 31]. Hence, texture information and
structure information can not be well integrated into a serial conventional network like auto-encoder structure. To
solve the second problem, a mutual encoder-decoder with
feature equalization is proposed to correlate filled structures
with textures in [22]. Although the consistency between
structures and textures within missing regions is enhanced,
this method lacks sufficient information exchange between
high-resolution and low-resolution feature maps, which still
leads to blur and artifacts.
In order to maintain the high quality of image restoration
as well as enhance the coherence between structure and texture, we propose a parallel multi-resolution fusion network
for image inpainting. There have been a wide range of computer vision tasks benefited from multi-resolution networks,
like classification [33, 29, 16, 31], object detection [5, 36],
human pose estimate [30], segmentation [7, 45, 27, 13],
and face parsing [49]. Similar to [30], our overall network
architecture has four parallel branches with four different

14559

