Point-set Distances for Learning Representations of 3D Point Clouds
Trung Nguyen1

Quang-Hieu Pham3 Tam Le4 Tung Pham1 Nhat Ho5 Binh-Son Hua1,2
1
VinAI Research, Vietnam 2 VinUniversity, Vietnam
3
Woven Planet North America, Level 5 4 RIKEN AIP, Japan 5 University of Texas, Austin

Abstract
Learning an effective representation of 3D point clouds
requires a good metric to measure the discrepancy between
two 3D point sets, which is non-trivial due to their irregularity. Most of the previous works resort to using the Chamfer
discrepancy or Earth Mover’s distance, but those metrics
are either ineffective in measuring the differences between
point clouds or computationally expensive. In this paper, we
conduct a systematic study with extensive experiments on
distance metrics for 3D point clouds. From this study, we
propose to use sliced Wasserstein distance and its variants
for learning representations of 3D point clouds. In addition,
we introduce a new algorithm to estimate sliced Wasserstein
distance that guarantees that the estimated value is close
enough to the true one. Experiments show that the sliced
Wasserstein distance and its variants allow the neural network to learn a more efficient representation compared to
the Chamfer discrepancy. We demonstrate the efficiency of
the sliced Wasserstein metric and its variants on several
tasks in 3D computer vision including training a point cloud
autoencoder, generative modeling, transfer learning, and
point cloud registration.

1. Introduction
Since the spark of the modern artificial intelligence,
3D deep learning on point clouds has become a powerful technique for solving recognition problems such as object classification [44, 21], object detection [43], and semantic segmentation [41]. Generative modeling with 3D
point clouds has also been studied with some promising results [51, 46, 32, 22, 47, 33]. Another 3D computer vision
problem that has seen the rise of deep learning approaches is
point cloud matching [8, 11, 10, 17]. All of these problems
share a common task — that is to learn a robust representation of 3D point clouds.
One of the most important steps in learning representations of 3D point clouds is to choose a metric to measure the discrepancy between two point sets. There are two
popular choices for such metric: the Chamfer divergence

and the Earth Mover’s distance (EMD) [16]. While earlier
works [16, 1] has shown that EMD performs better than
Chamfer in terms of learning representations, Chamfer is
more favored [10, 52, 18, 15, 12, 19] due to its significantly
lower computational cost.
In this article, we revisit the similarity metric problem in
3D point cloud deep learning. We propose to use the sliced
Wasserstein distance (SWD) [5], which is based on projecting the points in point clouds into a line, and its variants as
effective metrics to supervise 3D point cloud autoencoders.
Compared to Chamfer divergence, SWD is more suitable for
point cloud reconstruction, while remaining computationally
efficient (cf. Figure 1). We show that Chamfer divergence
is weaker than the EMD and sliced Wasserstein distance (cf.
Lemma 1) while the EMD and sliced Wasserstein distance
are equivalent. It suggests that even when two point clouds
are close in Chamfer divergence, they may not be close in
either the EMD or sliced Wasserstein distance. Furthermore,
the sliced Wasserstein distance has a computational complexity in the order of N log N [5], which is comparable to that
of the Chamfer divergence, while EMD has a complexity
in the order of N 3 [39] where N is the number of points in
3D point clouds. Finally, under the standard point clouds
settings, since the dimension of points is usually three, the
projection step in sliced Wasserstein distance will only lead
to small loss of information of the original point clouds. As a
consequence, the sliced Wasserstein distance possesses both
the computational and statistical advantages for point cloud
learning over Chamfer divergence and EMD. To improve
the quality of slices from SWD, we also discuss variants of
sliced Wasserstein distance, including max-sliced Wasserstein distance [13] and the proposed adaptive sliced Wasserstein algorithm.By conducting a case study on learning a
3D point cloud auto-encoder, we provide a comprehensive
benchmark on the performance of different metrics. These
results align with our theoretical development. In summary,
our main findings are:
• A first theoretical study about the relation between
Chamfer divergence, EMD, and sliced Wasserstein distance for point cloud learning (Section 4).

10478

