COOKIE: Contrastive Cross-Modal Knowledge Sharing Pre-training
for Vision-Language Representation
Keyu Wen1

Jin Xia1
1

Yuanyuan Huang1
ByteDance AI Lab

Linyang Li2
2

Jiayan Xu1

Jie Shao1

Fudan University

Abstract
There has been a recent surge of interest in crossmodal pre-training. However, existed approaches pre-train
a one-stream model to learn joint vision-language representation, which suffers from calculation explosion when
conducting cross-modal retrieval. In this work, we propose the Contrastive Cross-Modal Knowledge Sharing Pretraining (COOKIE) method to learn universal text-image
representations. There are two key designs in it, one is
the weight-sharing transformer on top of the visual and
textual encoders to align text and image semantically, the
other is three kinds of contrastive learning designed for
sharing knowledge between different modalities. Crossmodal knowledge sharing greatly promotes the learning
of unimodal representation. Experiments on multi-modal
matching tasks including cross-modal retrieval, text matching, and image retrieval show the effectiveness and efficiency of our pre-training framework. Our COOKIE finetuned on cross-modal datasets MSCOCO, Flickr30K, and
MSRVTT achieves new state-of-the-art results while using
only 3/1000 inference time comparing to one-stream models. There are also 5.7% and 3.9% improvements in the
task of image retrieval and text matching. Source code will
be available at https://github.com/kywen1119/COOKIE.

1. Introduction
Cross-modal pre-training has significantly advanced the
progress of representation learning in vision-language field.
It aims at narrowing the heterogeneous gap between vision
and language [27, 11, 30]. Recent vision-language pretraining(VLP) methods utilize large-scale image-text pairs
to learn the unified representation of visual and textual inputs, which greatly improve the performance of V+L tasks
such as cross-modal retrieval [19, 48, 12], image captioning
[46, 15] and visual question answering [2, 1]. In this paper we focus on multi-modal retrieval tasks including crossmodal retrieval (image-text matching and video-text matching) and single-modal matching (text matching and image

A person is waiting
on a bus stop next
to luggage.
Unmatched

Matched

A woman sitting
next to two pieces
of luggage.

Image Embedding
Text Embedding

Figure 1: Illustration of cross-modal knowledge sharing.
Images with similar semantics are sometimes different in
structure, subject, background, and style, which leads to inaccurate matching. By matching with the semantics of the
corresponding texts, the distance of their embeddings in the
common space is narrowed.

retrieval).
Humans do not perceive the world with just one sense.
It is the same for model pre-training: simply using singlemodal supervision seems not enough. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, two images having the same semantic meaning could
look totally different. In this case, we need to resort to
cross-modal pre-training. One-stream VLP methods were
recently used for cross-modal pre-training. They use multilayer transformers [45] as the joint encoder. The input is the
concatenation of visual tokens and textual tokens. However,
there are two obvious shortcomings for such methods: a)
Two-stage visual feature extraction with Faster R-CNN [41]
is time-consuming and may lose some global information,
as discussed in [48]. b) One-stream methods need to process the concatenation of image and text tokens. Such calculation will lead to inference time explosion for retrieval
tasks. Double-stream methods are also commonly used
for cross-modal pre-training. They use a visual path and
a textual path to encode images and texts separately. This
leads to high efficiency but very limited performance for
cross-modal retrieval. There are two obvious constraints: a)
The lack of cross-modal interactions weakens the semantic
alignment of images and texts. b) Simple supervision from
cross-modal contrastive learning(CCL) loses the knowledge

2208

