Mip-NeRF: A Multiscale Representation for Anti-Aliasing Neural Radiance Fields
Jonathan T. Barron1 Ben Mildenhall1 Matthew Tancik2
Peter Hedman1 Ricardo Martin-Brualla1 Pratul P. Srinivasan1
1
Google 2 UC Berkeley

Abstract
The rendering procedure used by neural radiance fields
(NeRF) samples a scene with a single ray per pixel and may
therefore produce renderings that are excessively blurred or
aliased when training or testing images observe scene content at different resolutions. The straightforward solution of
supersampling by rendering with multiple rays per pixel is
impractical for NeRF, because rendering each ray requires
querying a multilayer perceptron hundreds of times. Our
solution, which we call “mip-NeRF” (à la “mipmap”), extends NeRF to represent the scene at a continuously-valued
scale. By efficiently rendering anti-aliased conical frustums
instead of rays, mip-NeRF reduces objectionable aliasing
artifacts and significantly improves NeRF’s ability to represent fine details, while also being 7% faster than NeRF and
half the size. Compared to NeRF, mip-NeRF reduces average error rates by 17% on the dataset presented with NeRF
and by 60% on a challenging multiscale variant of that
dataset that we present. Mip-NeRF is also able to match
the accuracy of a brute-force supersampled NeRF on our
multiscale dataset while being 22× faster.

1. Introduction
Neural volumetric representations such as neural radiance fields (NeRF) [30] have emerged as a compelling strategy for learning to represent 3D objects and scenes from images for the purpose of rendering photorealistic novel views.
Although NeRF and its variants have demonstrated impressive results across a range of view synthesis tasks, NeRF’s
rendering model is flawed in a manner that can cause excessive blurring and aliasing. NeRF replaces traditional discrete sampled geometry with a continuous volumetric function, parameterized as a multilayer perceptron (MLP) that
maps from an input 5D coordinate (3D position and 2D
viewing direction) to properties of the scene (volume density and view-dependent emitted radiance) at that location.
To render a pixel’s color, NeRF casts a single ray through
that pixel and out into its volumetric representation, queries

a) NeRF

b) Mip-NeRF

Figure 1: NeRF (a) samples points x along rays that are
traced from the camera center of projection through each
pixel, then encodes those points with a positional encoding
(PE) γ to produce a feature γ(x). Mip-NeRF (b) instead
reasons about the 3D conical frustum defined by a camera
pixel. These conical frustums are then featurized with our
integrated positional encoding (IPE), which works by approximating the frustum with a multivariate Gaussian and
then computing the (closed form) integral E[γ(x)] over the
positional encodings of the coordinates within the Gaussian.

the MLP for scene properties at samples along that ray, and
composites these values into a single color.
While this approach works well when all training and
testing images observe scene content from a roughly constant distance (as done in NeRF and most follow-ups),
NeRF renderings exhibit significant artifacts in less contrived scenarios. When the training images observe scene
content at multiple resolutions, renderings from the recovered NeRF appear excessively blurred in close-up views and
contain aliasing artifacts in distant views. A straightforward solution is to adopt the strategy used in offline raytracing: supersampling each pixel by marching multiple rays
through its footprint. But this is prohibitively expensive for
neural volumetric representations such as NeRF, which require hundreds of MLP evaluations to render a single ray
and several hours to reconstruct a single scene.
In this paper, we take inspiration from the mipmapping
approach used to prevent aliasing in computer graphics rendering pipelines. A mipmap represents a signal (typically
an image or a texture map) at a set of different discrete
downsampling scales and selects the appropriate scale to
use for a ray based on the projection of the pixel footprint

5855

