Online-trained Upsampler for Deep Low Complexity Video Compression
Jan P. Klopp
National Taiwan University

Keng-Chi Liu
Taiwan AI Labs

kloppjp@gmail.com

calvin89029@gmail.com

Shao-Yi Chien Liang-Gee Chen
National Taiwan University
sychien@ntu.edu.tw

lgchen@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Deep learning for image and video compression has
demonstrated promising results both as a standalone technology and a hybrid combination with existing codecs.
However, these systems still come with high computational
costs. Deep learning models are typically applied directly
in pixel space, making them expensive when resolutions become large.
In this work, we propose an online-trained upsampler to
augment an existing codec. The upsampler is a small neural
network trained on an isolated group of frames. Its parameters are signalled to the decoder. This hybrid solution has
a small scope of only 10s or 100s of frames and allows for a
low complexity both on the encoding and the decoding side.
Our algorithm works in offline and in zero-latency settings. Our evaluation employs the popular x265 codec on
several high-resolution datasets ranging from Full HD to
8K. We demonstrate rate savings between 8.6% and 27.5%
and provide ablation studies to show the impact of our design decisions. In comparison to similar works, our approach performs favourably.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of deep learning to image and
video compression, steady improvements have led to
learning algorithms outperforming many commonly used
codecs. However, their principles are similar to those of
conventional codecs. The main algorithmic drivers are
modelling the distribution within a receptive field, sometimes also its neighbours, and the motion between two successive images. A large-scale video corpus enables learning
the necessary functions. On the other hand, conventional
codecs are hand-tuned and use block-wise transforms and
predictions together with motion estimation.
This work proposes a method to exploit an extended

Conventional
Codecs
Hand-tuning

Onlinetrained
Upsampler
(this work)

Scope

Sequence
Datasets

Learned
Codecs
Machine Learning

100s of
Frames
10s of
Frames

Motion Vectors

Several
Frames

Frame-Level
Filters

Single
Frame

Blockwise
Transform

Block or
Recep. Field

(Optical) Flow

Learned Transf.
& Dist.

Figure 1. Exploitation of different Scopes. Qualitative degree
and key methods that exploit redundancies in various scopes for
conventional and learned codecs.

scope of 10s or 100s of frames using an online-trained
upsampler. The online-trained design has the advantage
that computational expenses can be kept low, especially on
the decoding side, compared to deep learning compression
models or deep denoisers. The latter two may require 100K
operations for a single pixel, while we add less than 600 operations to the conventional codec, which in turn requires
only several dozens of operations.
Compared to how machine learning is most often applied, the scope of data we consider is small. However, it is
large compared to what conventional codecs typically deal
with (see Fig. 1 for a qualitative overview). Note that there
are exceptions for some data, for example, a sequence of

7929

