Hierarchical Object-to-Zone Graph for Object Navigation
Sixian Zhang1,2 , Xinhang Song1,2 ,* Yubing Bai1,2 , Weijie Li1,2 , Yakui Chu4 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2,3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing

3

Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou, CAS 4 Huawei Application Innovate Laboratory, Beijing
{sixian.zhang, xinhang.song, yubing.bai, weijie.li}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
chuyakui@huawei.com; sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

Path Planning: Zone-to-zone

Mapping from Zone to Environment

Living Room

The goal of object navigation is to reach the expected
objects according to visual information in the unseen environments. Previous works usually implement deep models
to train an agent to predict actions in real-time. However,
in the unseen environment, when the target object is not in
egocentric view, the agent may not be able to make wise
decisions due to the lack of guidance. In this paper, we propose a hierarchical object-to-zone (HOZ) graph to guide the
agent in a coarse-to-fine manner, and an online-learning
mechanism is also proposed to update HOZ according to
the real-time observation in new environments. In particular, the HOZ graph is composed of scene nodes, zone nodes
and object nodes. With the pre-learned HOZ graph, the
real-time observation and the target goal, the agent can
constantly plan an optimal path from zone to zone. In the
estimated path, the next potential zone is regarded as subgoal, which is also fed into the deep reinforcement learning
model for action prediction. Our methods are evaluated on
the AI2-Thor simulator. In addition to widely used evaluation metrics SR and SPL, we also propose a new evaluation metric of SAE that focuses on the effective action rate.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed method. The code is available at
https://github.com/sx-zhang/HOZ.git.

1. Introduction
Visual navigation task requires the agent to reach a specified goal. Conventional methods usually require spatial layout information, such as maps of the environments, which
can be easily obtained in seen environments while unavailable in unseen environments. Therefore, how to efficiently
navigate to the target in unseen environments is typically
challenging.
* Corresponding author.

Goal

zone 2

Current Zone
zone 1

zone 4

zone 6

Target Zone

Television

GarbageCan
FloorLamp

Target Object

Egocentric View

Agent

Figure 1. Overview of object navigation with HOZ graph. At the
beginning, agent locates at the Current Zone (zone6 , blue) and the
goal FloorLamp belongs to Target Zone (zone4 , red). The HOZ
graph plans a real-time optimal path (zone6 − zone1 − zone2 −
zone4 ). Then agent’s next sub-goal is zone1 (green). In the same
way, the agent keeps updating sub-goal until it arrives at the target.
Note that each color implies specific location and direction where
agent can observe similar views.

With the visual input of egocentric observation, previous
works [29, 27, 28] learn a deep reinforcement learning policy by maximizing the reward. The key challenge in those
works is the generalization to unseen environments [38],
especially when the target is not in the sight. Therefore,
more recent works [40, 9] attempt to embed prior knowledge, such as object graph and relation graph, to improve
the navigation model’s generalization ability. In particular,
Yang et al. [40] construct an object-to-object graph, which
provides correlated objects as auxiliary information to locate the target object. Their object graph is too general to fit
into specific environments. Additionally, Du et al. [9] propose to learn object relation graph, which fits the testing environments better than the general object graph. The above
approaches focus on constructing object-oriented graph to
provide some clues to the navigation when the target is not

15130

