StructDepth: Leveraging the structural regularities for self-supervised indoor
depth estimation
Boying Li∗ , Yuan Huang∗, Zeyu Liu, Danping Zou† , and Wenxian Yu
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Navigation and Location-Based Services
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Sensing and Recognition
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation has
achieved impressive performance on outdoor datasets. Its
performance however degrades notably in indoor environments because of the lack of textures. Without rich textures,
the photometric consistency is too weak to train a good
depth network. Inspired by the early works on indoor modeling, we leverage the structural regularities exhibited in
indoor scenes, to train a better depth network. Specifically,
we adopt two extra supervisory signals for self-supervised
training: 1) the Manhattan normal constraint and 2) the
co-planar constraint. The Manhattan normal constraint
enforces the major surfaces (the floor, ceiling, and walls)
to be aligned with dominant directions. The co-planar
constraint states that the 3D points be well fitted by a plane
if they are located within the same planar region. To generate the supervisory signals, we adopt two components to
classify the major surface normal into dominant directions
and detect the planar regions on the fly during training.
As the predicted depth becomes more accurate after more
training epochs, the supervisory signals also improve and
in turn feedback to obtain a better depth model. Through
extensive experiments on indoor benchmark datasets, the
results show that our network outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/SJTU-ViSYS/StructDepth.

1. Introduction
Inferring the dense 3D map from a single image is a
challenging problem without satisfactory solutions until the
booming of deep neural networks. With the deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), we can predict the accurate depth from a single image, via training the network
∗ Both are the first authors with equal contributions. † Corresponding
author: Danping Zou (dpzou@sjtu.edu.cn). This work was supported by NSFC (62073214).

Figure 1. Our self-supervised monocular depth learning leverages
the structural regularities of indoor environments for training. The
aligned normal (with Manhattan directions) and the planar regions
provide extra losses in training and lead to better 3D structures at
inference.

with a lot of ground-truth depth labels. The recent selfsupervised learning paradigm does not require the groundtruth depth, while still obtaining high-quality results on
benchmark datasets, using the photometric consistency as
the major supervisory signal. Nevertheless, when existing
self-supervised methods are trained on indoor images, the
quality of depth estimation degrades notably[51][3]. The
main reason is the lack of textures in indoor images. Unlike
outdoor scenes, the indoor scenes are full of texture-less regions, such as white walls, ceilings, and floors. Without rich
textures, the photometric loss becomes too weak to train a
good depth model. Seeking stronger or extra supervisory
signals is therefore necessary for training a better depth network.
There have been a few attempts. An optical-flow
field propagated from the sparse SURF[1] flow by a selfsupervised network, is used to guide training on textureless regions [51]. Another attempt [48] is to use an image
patch instead of individual pixels to compute the photometric loss and apply extra constraints to the depth within the
planar regions extracted from image segmentation. Though
those attempts improve the results, they did not fully ex-

12663

