End-to-End Trainable Trident Person Search Network
Using Adaptive Gradient Propagation
Byeong-Ju Han, Kuhyeun Ko, and Jae-Young Sim*
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, Republic of Korea
{bjhan, khko, jysim}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Person search suffers from the conflicting objectives of
commonness and uniqueness between the person detection
and re-identification tasks that make the end-to-end training of person search networks difficult. In this paper, we
propose a trident network for person search that performs
detection, re-identification, and part classification together.
We also devise a novel end-to-end training method using
adaptive gradient weighting that controls the flow of backpropagated gradients through the re-identification and part
classification networks according to the quality of the person detection. The proposed method not only prevents the
over-fitting but encourages to exploit fine-grained features
by incorporating the part classification branch into the person search framework. Experimental results on the CUHKSYSU and PRW datasets demonstrate that the proposed
method achieves the best performance among the state-ofthe-art end-to-end person search methods.

1. Introduction
Person search has drawn considerable attention recently
with the increasing demand for person re-identification in
real world images. The conventional methods of person reidentification consider a set of cropped person images and
find the person images matching to a given query person.
On the other hand, the person search methods directly find
the target persons from a set of scene images where multiple persons may appear in a single image. Therefore, person search has a strong potential to be applied to numerous
practical applications. For example, it can be used to deploy visual surveillance systems to monitor and trace the
suspects from video sequences. Also, it can be applied to
augmented reality systems with mobile camera devices that
provide useful visual information for social entertainment.
The person search is an integrated task of person detection and re-identification. According to the relationship between these two sub-tasks, the existing person search methods are classified into two categories: end-to-end frame-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: The concept of adaptive training for the proposed
person search network. (a) Conventional end-to-end training. (b) The proposed end-to-end training.
work [21, 7, 18, 22, 3, 2, 24, 16, 5, 14, 13, 1] and twostep framework [23, 4, 12, 9, 19, 8]. The end-to-end methods share the features for detection and re-identification
and train the networks to minimize both the detection and
re-identification losses simultaneously. While the person
detection tries to model the common features of persons
distinct from the background, the re-identification pursues
unique features to recognize the identity of each person. It
is, therefore, one of the main challenges in person search
to jointly train the detection and re-identification networks
by coordinating these two inconsistent objectives. On the
other hand, the two-step methods explicitly divide the person search task into detection and re-identification, and train
the corresponding two sub-networks independently. Thus,
the two-step networks are relatively easy to be trained, but
at the same time, suffer from the difficulty of reflecting the
re-identification results to detection.
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end person search
network and its adaptive training algorithm for taskconsistency between person detection and re-identification.
While the objectives conflict between detection and reidentification, the re-identification performance depends

925

