Asymmetric Bilateral Motion Estimation for Video Frame Interpolation
Junheum Park
Korea University

Chul Lee
Dongguk University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

jhpark@mcl.korea.ac.kr

chullee@dongguk.edu

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel video frame interpolation algorithm
based on asymmetric bilateral motion estimation (ABME),
which synthesizes an intermediate frame between two input
frames. First, we predict symmetric bilateral motion fields
to interpolate an anchor frame. Second, we estimate asymmetric bilateral motions fields from the anchor frame to the
input frames. Third, we use the asymmetric fields to warp
the input frames backward and reconstruct the intermediate
frame. Last, to refine the intermediate frame, we develop
a new synthesis network that generates a set of dynamic
filters and a residual frame using local and global information. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm achieves excellent performance on various datasets.
The source codes and pretrained models are available at
https://github.com/JunHeum/ABME.

𝑡=0

𝐼0

𝑡 = 0.5

𝑡=1

(a)

𝐼1

Input

𝐼0.5

Symmetric

𝐼0.5

Asymmetric

(b)

Figure 1. Symmetric vs. asymmetric bilateral motion models.
In (a), the asymmetric model represents bilateral motion vectors
from an intermediate frame I0.5 to two input frames I0 and I1 accurately, where the symmetric one fails, by loosening the linear
constraint. In (b), when I0.5 is interpolated from I0 and I1 , the
asymmetric model provides more faithful reconstruction with less
artifacts, especially around the head, than the symmetric one does.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation is a low-level vision task to
increase the frame rate of a video sequence by interpolating intermediate frames between successive input frames.
It is widely used in applications, including video enhancement [42], video compression [25], slow-motion generation
[16], and view synthesis [11,18]. Due to its practical importance, various algorithms have been proposed to increase
video frame rates [2, 3, 6–8, 13, 15, 16, 20, 22–24, 30–34].
These algorithms can be classified into three categories:
kernel-based [2, 3, 6, 20, 32, 33], phase-based [27, 28], and
motion-based [2,3,13,16,22,23,30,31,34]. With the recent
advances in optical flow estimation [9,14,17,21,35,39,43],
motion-based algorithms have been developed most actively. They use optical flows to predict an intermediate frame by warping two successive frames forward or
backward. For example, Niklaus and Liu [30] predict bidirectional optical flows between two frames and halve
them to generate intermediate frames based on forward
warping. However, forward warping may cause interpolation artifacts in holes and overlapped regions [41]. To overcome the hole issue, they develop a synthesis network that

learns to fill in holes. The overlapping issue, however, remains, so they propose softmax-splatting [31] to combine
overlapping pixel information adaptively and render the target pixel more faithfully.
On the other hand, many algorithms [2,3,7,16,22,30,42]
are based on backward warping, which is free from the hole
and overlapping issues. Backward warping needs motion
vectors from intermediate frames to input frames, but intermediate frames, which should be interpolated, are unavailable at the time of motion estimation. Thus, conventional algorithms [2, 3, 16] approximate those intermediate
motion vectors using optical flows between input frames.
However, the approximation errors may degrade frame interpolation performance. Park et al. [34] employ the symmetric bilateral motion estimation to improve the accuracy
of the intermediate motion, assuming that motion trajectories between input frames are linear. The linear motion constraint, however, may cause inaccurate motion estimation in
regions where the constraint is invalid, such as occluded regions around motion boundaries, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In this paper, we propose a novel video frame interpola-

14539

