Why Approximate Matrix Square Root Outperforms Accurate SVD in Global
Covariance Pooling?

Yue Song, Nicu Sebe, and Wei Wang
DISI, University of Trento, Trento, Italy
{yue.song nicu.sebe wei.wang}@unitn.it

Abstract
Global Covariance Pooling (GCP) aims at exploiting
the second-order statistics of the convolutional feature. Its
effectiveness has been demonstrated in boosting the classification performance of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) is used in
GCP to compute the matrix square root. However, the
approximate matrix square root calculated using NewtonSchulz iteration [14] outperforms the accurate one computed via SVD [15]. We empirically analyze the reason
behind the performance gap from the perspectives of data
precision and gradient smoothness. Various remedies for
computing smooth SVD gradients are investigated. Based
on our observation and analyses, a hybrid training protocol is proposed for SVD-based GCP meta-layers such that
competitive performances can be achieved against NewtonSchulz iteration. Moreover, we propose a new GCP metalayer that uses SVD in the forward pass, and Padé approximants in the backward propagation to compute the gradients. The proposed meta-layer has been integrated into
different CNN models and achieves state-of-the-art performances on both large-scale and fine-grained datasets.

1. Introduction
Global Covariance Pooling (GCP) explores the secondorder statistics by normalizing the covariance matrix of the
convolutional features before feeding them to the fullyconnected layer. It has been shown to outperform the
first-order pooling methods (e.g., max-pooling and averagepooling) [9, 17, 15, 16, 14]. Generally, a GCP metalayer computes the covariance matrix of the features as the
global representation, and then performs eigendecomposition to derive the corresponding eigenvalues and eigenvectors, followed by normalization using either matrix logarithm [9, 17] or the matrix square root [15, 16, 14]. How-

Figure 1. (Left) The training top-5 error of AlexNet. The performance gap is gradually minimizing as the learning rate decays.
(Right) The validation top-1 error in the last stage. These SVD
remedies marginally improve the performance but are not comparable against iSQRT-COV [14]. Our proposed SVD-Padé achieves
the best results among the SVD methods.

ever, the logarithm may change the magnitude of eigenvalues significantly and over-stretch the small ones. Besides, the matrix square root has been proved to amount to
robust covariance estimation and to approximately exploit
Riemannian geometry [15]. Thus, the matrix square root is
often preferred over logarithm normalization.
One can either use SVD to compute the accurate square
root [15] or use the Newton-Schulz iteration method to derive the approximate square root [14, 16]. Intuitively, the
accurate one should yield better performance. Surprisingly,
the approximate square root outperforms the exact one continuously [14]. Our paper starts with this intriguing observation and intends to find out the underlying reasons.
One crucial issue of SVD is the numerical instability
of its gradients which is derived from the skew-symmetric
matrix K whose off-diagonal elements are defined as
Kij =1/(λi −λj ), where λi and λj are eigenvalues. Kij
can be reformulated as λ1i 1−λ1j /λi . When the two eigenvalues are very small and close to each other, λ1i and 1−λ1j /λi
will move towards infinity. As a consequence, the gradient
Kij will explode. To avoid this issue, several attempts have
been made to smooth the gradients [16, 7, 25]. These methods consistently outperform ordinary SVD in other tasks,
but none of them has been validated in GCP yet.

1115

