Contrastive Learning for Label Efficient Semantic Segmentation
Xiangyun Zhao1,2 *

Raviteja Vemulapalli2

Philip Andrew Mansfield2

zhaoxiangyun915@gmail.com

ravitejavemu@google.com

memes@google.com

Boqing Gong2

Bradley Green2

Lior Shapira2

Ying Wu1

bgong@google.com

brg@google.com

liorshap@google.com

yingwu@northwestern.edu

1

Northwestern University 2 Google Research

Abstract
Collecting labeled data for the task of semantic segmentation is expensive and time-consuming, as it requires dense
pixel-level annotations. While recent Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) based semantic segmentation approaches
have achieved impressive results by using large amounts of
labeled training data, their performance drops significantly
as the amount of labeled data decreases. This happens because deep CNNs trained with the de facto cross-entropy
loss can easily overfit to small amounts of labeled data. To
address this issue, we propose a simple and effective contrastive learning-based training strategy in which we first
pretrain the network using a pixel-wise, label-based contrastive loss, and then fine-tune it using the cross-entropy
loss. This approach increases intra-class compactness and
inter-class separability, thereby resulting in a better pixel
classifier. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
training strategy using the Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC
2012 segmentation datasets. Our results show that pretraining with the proposed contrastive loss results in large performance gains (more than 20% absolute improvement in
some settings) when the amount of labeled data is limited.
In many settings, the proposed contrastive pretraining strategy, which does not use any additional data, is able to match
or outperform the widely-used ImageNet pretraining strategy that uses more than a million additional labeled images.

1. Introduction
In the recent past, various approaches based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [6, 8, 64] have reported
excellent results on several semantic segmentation datasets
by first pretraining their models on the large-scale ImageNet [13] classification dataset and then fine-tuning them
with large amounts of pixel-level annotations. This training
* This work was done when Xiangyun Zhao was interning at Google.

strategy has several disadvantages: First, collecting a large,
pixel-level annotated dataset is time-consuming and expensive. For example, the average time taken to label a single
image in the Cityscapes dataset is 90 minutes [11]. Second,
the ImageNet dataset can only be used for non-commercial
research, making the ImageNet pretraining strategy unsuitable for building real-world products. Collecting a proprietary large-scale classification dataset similar to ImageNet
would be expensive and time-consuming. Third, ImageNet
pretraining does not necessarily help segmentation of nonnatural images, such as medical images [44].
To reduce the need for large amounts of dense pixel-level
annotations and the additional large-scale labeled ImageNet
dataset, this work focuses on training semantic segmentation models using only a limited number of pixel-level annotated images (no ImageNet dataset). This is challenging
since CNN models can easily overfit to limited training data.
Typical semantic segmentation models consist of a deep
CNN feature extractor followed by a pixel-wise softmax
classifier, and are trained using a pixel-wise cross-entropy
loss. While these models perform well when trained with a
large number of pixel-level annotated images, their performance drops significantly as the number of labeled training images decreases (see Fig. 1). This happens because
CNNs trained with the cross-entropy loss can easily overfit
to small amounts of labeled data, as the cross-entropy loss
focuses on creating class decision boundaries and does not
explicitly encourage intra-class compactness or large margins between classes [15, 37, 49].
To address this issue, we propose to first pretrain the
feature extractor using a pixel-wise, label-based contrastive
loss (referred to as contrastive pretraining), and then finetune the entire network including the pixel-wise softmax
classifier using the cross-entropy loss (referred to as softmax fine-tuning). This approach increases both intra-class
compactness and inter-class separability as the label-based
contrastive loss [32] encourages the features of pixels from
the same class to be close to each other and the features of

10623

