Calibrated and Partially Calibrated Semi-Generalized Homographies
Snehal Bhayani1

Torsten Sattler2 Daniel Barath3 Patrik Beliansky4
Janne Heikkilä 1 Zuzana Kukelova5
1
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
2
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague
3
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
4
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Prague
5
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
In this paper, we propose the first minimal solutions for
estimating the semi-generalized homography given a perspective and a generalized camera. The proposed solvers
use five 2D-2D image point correspondences induced by a
scene plane. One group of solvers assumes the perspective
camera to be fully calibrated, while the other estimates the
unknown focal length together with the absolute pose parameters. This setup is particularly important in structurefrom-motion and visual localization pipelines, where a new
camera is localized in each step with respect to a set of
known cameras and 2D-3D correspondences might not be
available. Thanks to a clever parametrization and the elimination ideal method, our solvers only need to solve a univariate polynomial of degree five or three, respectively a
system of polynomial equations in two variables. All proposed solvers are stable and efficient as demonstrated by a
number of synthetic and real-world experiments.

1. Introduction
Estimating the homography between two cameras observing a planar scene is a crucial problem in computer vision
with applications, e.g., in structure-from-motion (SfM) [44,
46,51,56], localization [7,39,41], visual odometry [33,34],
camera calibration [45, 57], and image retrieval [37, 55].
It is one of the oldest camera geometry problems with
many solutions including the well-known normalized direct linear transform (DLT) method [20] for estimating
the homography from a minimum of four point correspondences; the minimal solutions based on affine [3, 24] or
SIFT correspondences [2, 4]; solutions assuming known
gravity direction [15, 43] or cameras with radial distortion [8, 11, 17, 20, 22, 27]. All above-mentioned algorithms
assume that both cameras satisfy the central perspective

Figure 1. An illustration of the problem configuration.

projection model (potentially, with radial distortion), i.e.,
they assume that both cameras have a single center of projection. Surprisingly, the problem of estimating a homography has not been studied for generalized cameras.
A generalized camera [38] is a camera that captures
some arbitrary set of rays and does not adhere to the central
perspective projection model. Such a camera model is practical and appears, e.g., in applications that exploit multicamera configurations, like stereo-pairs, SfM [58], or in localization pipelines [47, 54]. Such pipelines often are based
on sequences of images, where there might be a set of cameras with known poses and we are given a new image which
is to be registered to a generalized camera composed of the
known perspective ones. Estimating the camera pose, w.r.t.
the generalized camera, in such situations often leads to results superior, in terms of accuracy, to considering only pairwise epipolar geometries, especially thanks to a larger fieldof-view of the generalized camera [50]. Also, it has the advantage of recovering the absolute pose [58], i.e., the scale
of the translation, which is a severe deficiency of epipolar
geometry-based relative pose estimation.
While the problem of estimating the absolute pose of a
generalized camera can be solved very efficiently [28], i.e.,
there exists a solution that solves only 3 quadratic equations in 3 unknowns and runs in a few µs, the problem of
estimating the relative pose of two generalized cameras is

5936

