DenseTNT: End-to-end Trajectory Prediction from Dense Goal Sets
Junru Gu1
Chen Sun2
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University

Hang Zhao1 *
2
Brown University

Goal-based trajectory prediction

Abstract
Due to the stochasticity of human behaviors, predicting the future trajectories of road agents is challenging for
autonomous driving. Recently, goal-based multi-trajectory
prediction methods are proved to be effective, where they
first score over-sampled goal candidates and then select
a final set from them. However, these methods usually involve goal predictions based on sparse pre-defined anchors
and heuristic goal selection algorithms. In this work, we
propose an anchor-free and end-to-end trajectory prediction model, named DenseTNT, that directly outputs a set of
trajectories from dense goal candidates. In addition, we
introduce an offline optimization-based technique to provide multi-future pseudo-labels for our final online model.
Experiments show that DenseTNT achieves state-of-the-art
performance, ranking 1st on the Argoverse motion forecasting benchmark and being the 1st place winner of the 2021
Waymo Open Dataset Motion Prediction Challenge.

Goal
prediction

Context
encoding

...

Trajectory
completion

Previous

Ours

Sparse candidate scoring

Dense candidate scoring

Rule-based selection

Learning-based selection

Figure 1. A typical goal-based trajectory prediction pipeline is
shown in the upper part of the figure. Existing goal prediction
methods (lower left) first define sparse goal anchors heuristically,
and regress and classify these anchors to estimate the goals; then
rules like non-maximum suppression (NMS) are used for goal selection. In contrast, our method (lower right) estimates the probabilities of dense goal candidates without relying on the heuristic anchors (anchor-free). And it gets rid of rule-based postprocessing by generating a set of goals in an end-to-end manner.

1. Introduction
For a safe and smooth autonomous driving system, an
essential technology is to predict the future behaviors of
road participants. For example, knowing whether other vehicles intend to cut in better helps us to make brake decisions. However, motion prediction is a highly challenging
task due to the inherent stochasticity and multimodality of
human behaviors.
To model this high degree of uncertainty, some approaches predict multiple future trajectories by sampling
from the distribution represented by the latent variables, e.g.
VAEs [18, 36] and GANs [12]. Other approaches generate a
set of trajectories but only perform regression on the closest
one during training [12, 20, 8], namely using variety loss.
However, sampling-based methods cannot output the likelihood of the predicted futures and the variety loss lacks
interpretability on the outputs.
More recently, goal-based methods [39, 30, 37] have
gained popularity and achieved state-of-the-art perfor* Corresponding to: hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

mance. Their key observation is that the goal (endpoint)
carries most of the uncertainty of a trajectory, therefore they
first predict the goal(s) of an agent, and then further complete the corresponding full trajectory for each goal. The
final goal positions are obtained by classifying and regressing predefined sparse anchors, as shown in the lower-left
part of Figure 1. For example, TNT [39] defines anchors as
the points sampled on the lane centerlines; some others [37]
take the lane segments as anchors and predicted a goal for
each lane segment. Another technique commonly adopted
by these methods is to apply a rule-based algorithm to select
a final small number of goals. The most notable algorithm is
non-maximum suppression (NMS) [39], where only locally
high-scored goals are selected.
The limitations of these methods are two-folds. First,
the prediction performance of these methods heavily depends on the quality of the goal anchors. Since an anchor
can only generate one goal, a model cannot make multiple
trajectory predictions around one anchor. Besides, sparse

15303

Goa
Context
encoding

Previous

Sparse Candidate

Rule-based s

