Adversarial Attacks are Reversible with Natural Supervision
Chengzhi Mao1 , Mia Chiquier1 , Hao Wang2 , Junfeng Yang1 , Carl Vondrick1
1
Columbia University, 2 Rutgers University
{mcz, mia.chiquier, junfeng, vondrick}@cs.columbia.edu, hoguewang@gmail.com

Abstract
We find that images contain intrinsic structure that enables the reversal of many adversarial attacks. Attack vectors cause not only image classifiers to fail, but also collaterally disrupt incidental structure in the image. We demonstrate that modifying the attacked image to restore the natural structure will reverse many types of attacks, providing a defense. Experiments demonstrate significantly improved robustness for several state-of-the-art models across
the CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN, and ImageNet datasets.
Our results show that our defense is still effective even if the
attacker is aware of the defense mechanism. Since our defense is deployed during inference instead of training, it is
compatible with pre-trained networks as well as most other
defenses. Our results suggest deep networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples partly because their representations do not enforce the natural structure of images.

1. Introduction
Deep networks achieve strong performance over a number of computer vision tasks, yet they remain brittle under adversarial attacks [13, 7, 19, 57]. With crafted perturbations, attackers can undermine predictions from the
state-of-the-art models by changing the features in the representation [38]. These limitations prevent application of
deep networks to sensitive and safety-critical applications
[48, 54, 34, 55], underscoring the gap between current machine learning algorithms and human-level abilities [6].
A large body of work has studied how to train deep
networks such that they are robust to adversarial attacks.
Adversarial training and its variants [36, 38, 57, 44, 49],
including multitask learning [37, 28] and semi-supervised
learning [60], significantly improve robustness. However,
while existing methods focus on improving the training algorithm, they are burdened because they need to find a single representation that also works for all possible corruptions and attacks. Training-based defenses cannot adapt to
the individual characteristics of each attack at testing-time.
In this paper, we introduce an approach for reversing the

Original Image

Attacker

+
Prediction:
Italian Greyhound

Counter-Attacker
Reverse Attack Vector

Attack Vector

+
Prediction:
Whippet

Prediction:
Italian Greyhound

Figure 1: Reverse Attacks: Adversarial attacks are small
perturbations that cause classification networks to fail [36,
57]. In this paper, we show there are intrinsic signals in
natural images to reverse many types of attacks. In the right
column, we visualize our reverse attack on an ImageNet image. Note that both attack vectors have been multiplied by
ten for visualization purposes only.
attack process, allowing us to formulate a defense strategy
that adapts to each attack during the testing phase. Just as
an attacker finds the right additive perturbation to break the
input, our approach will find the right additive perturbation
to repair the input. Figure 1 shows our reverse attack on
a poisoned ImageNet image. However, reverse attacks are
more challenging to produce than standard attacks because
the category label is unknown to us during testing.
Our key insight is that images contain natural and intrinsic structure that we can leverage to reverse many types of
adversarial attacks. We found that, although adversarial attacks aim to fool the image classifier, they also collaterally
damage self-supervised objectives. Our approach shows
how to capitalize on this incidental signal in order to create
adversarial defenses. By using self-supervision for defense
at test time, we can guarantee that even the strongest adversary cannot manipulate the intrinsic signals that naturally
come with the images, providing a more robust defense than
training-based methods.
A key advantage of our framework is that it factors out
the defense strategy from the visual representation. Since
reverse attacks are adaptive, this defense is able to efficiently scale to any corruption that violates the natural image manifold. Moreover, the modularity of our approach

661

