Calibrated Adversarial Refinement for Stochastic Semantic Segmentation
Elias Kassapis1,2,∗
1

Georgi Dikov2

Deepak K. Gupta1

Cedric Nugteren2

Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
TomTom, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
∗
kassapiselias@hotmail.co.uk

Abstract
In semantic segmentation tasks, input images can often
have more than one plausible interpretation, thus allowing
for multiple valid labels. To capture such ambiguities, recent work has explored the use of probabilistic networks that
can learn a distribution over predictions. However, these
do not necessarily represent the empirical distribution accurately. In this work, we present a strategy for learning a
calibrated predictive distribution over semantic maps, where
the probability associated with each prediction reflects its
ground truth correctness likelihood. To this end, we propose
a novel two-stage, cascaded approach for calibrated adversarial refinement: (i) a standard segmentation network is
trained with categorical cross entropy to predict a pixelwise
probability distribution over semantic classes and (ii) an
adversarially trained stochastic network is used to model
the inter-pixel correlations to refine the output of the first
network into coherent samples. Importantly, to calibrate
the refinement network and prevent mode collapse, the expectation of the samples in the second stage is matched to
the probabilities predicted in the first. We demonstrate the
versatility and robustness of the approach by achieving stateof-the-art results on the multigrader LIDC dataset and on
a modified Cityscapes dataset with injected ambiguities. In
addition, we show that the core design can be adapted to
other tasks requiring learning a calibrated predictive distribution by experimenting on a toy regression dataset. We
provide an open source implementation of our method at
https://github.com/EliasKassapis/CARSSS.

1. Introduction
Real-world datasets are often riddled with ambiguities,
allowing for multiple valid solutions for a given input. These
can emanate from an array of sources, such as sensor noise,
occlusions, inconsistencies during manual data annotation,
or an ambiguous label space [38]. Despite the fact that the
empirical distribution can be multimodal, the majority of the

conventional segmentation pipeline

ambiguous data
input image

unconfident
prediction

argmax

sampling

F

CAR
p()
sample labels

G

Figure 1: Conceptual diagram of stochastic semantic segmentation: blue and red pixels are separable by several different vertical boundaries, resulting in multiple valid labels. F
is a network parametrising a factorised categorical likelihood,
which captures the pixelwise data ambiguity. Extracting the
mode via the argmax operation deterministically yields a
single coherent prediction, while direct sampling gives multiple incoherent ones. Instead, calibrated adversarial refinement (CAR) uses a second stochastic adversarial network, G,
which refines the output of F into diverse, coherent labels.

research encompassing semantic segmentation focuses on
optimising models that assign only a single solution to each
input image [47, 26, 53, 9, 10, 11, 7, 8], and are thus often
incapable of capturing the entire empirical distribution.
These approaches typically model each pixel independently with a factorised categorical likelihood, and therefore do not consider inter-pixel correlations during sampling
(see Fig. 13b in Appendix B.3). Further, since maximising
the likelihood on noisy datasets leads to unconfident predictions in regions of label inconsistencies, direct sampling
yields incoherent semantic maps. Alternatively, coherent
predictions can be obtained by applying the argmax function, essentially extracting the mode of the likelihood. This,
however, comes at the cost of limiting the model’s representation capabilities to deterministic, one-to-one mappings
between inputs and outputs (see Fig. 1).

7057

