SNARF: Differentiable Forward Skinning for
Animating Non-Rigid Neural Implicit Shapes
Xu Chen1,3 Yufeng Zheng1,3 Michael J. Black3 Otmar Hilliges1 Andreas Geiger2,3
1
ETH Zürich, Department of Computer Science 2 University of Tübingen
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Abstract
Neural implicit surface representations have emerged as
a promising paradigm to capture 3D shapes in a continuous and resolution-independent manner. However, adapting them to articulated shapes is non-trivial. Existing approaches learn a backward warp field that maps deformed
to canonical points. However, this is problematic since the
backward warp field is pose dependent and thus requires
large amounts of data to learn. To address this, we introduce SNARF, which combines the advantages of linear
blend skinning (LBS) for polygonal meshes with those of
neural implicit surfaces by learning a forward deformation field without direct supervision. This deformation field
is defined in canonical, pose-independent, space, enabling
generalization to unseen poses. Learning the deformation
field from posed meshes alone is challenging since the correspondences of deformed points are defined implicitly and
may not be unique under changes of topology. We propose a
forward skinning model that finds all canonical correspondences of any deformed point using iterative root finding.
We derive analytical gradients via implicit differentiation,
enabling end-to-end training from 3D meshes with bone
transformations. Compared to state-of-the-art neural implicit representations, our approach generalizes better to
unseen poses while preserving accuracy. We demonstrate
our method in challenging scenarios on (clothed) 3D humans in diverse and unseen poses.

1. Introduction
Modeling the shape and deformation of articulated 3D
objects has traditionally been achieved by deforming a
polygonal mesh via linear blend skinning (LBS) with posecorrectives. However, meshes are inherently limited by
their resolution-to-memory ratio and their fixed topology.
Therefore, neural implicit surface representations [10, 30,
31, 38] have recently attracted much attention because they
provide a resolution-independent, smooth and continuous
alternative to discrete meshes. However, updating an im-

Input 3D Posed Meshes

Learned Canonical 3D Shape and Skinning Weights

Continuous Implicit Surfaces in Unseen Poses

Figure 1: SNARF: From a sequence of posed meshes (top),
we learn a neural implicit 3D shape and a skinning field
in canonical pose (middle) without supervision of skinning
weights or part correspondences. Learned forward skinning
enables generalization to unseen poses (bottom) while capturing local details via pose conditioning.
plicit surface representation as a function of the underlying
pose changes is challenging since it requires modifying a
continuous function rather than a discrete set of points.
To address this, we propose SNARF (Skinned Neural Articulated Representations with Forward skinning), a novel
approach to learning articulated 3D shapes represented by
neural implicit surfaces directly from 3D watertight meshes
and corresponding bone transformations with no need for
supervision via pre-defined skinning weights. SNARF combines the simplicity of skeletal-driven deformation of LBS
with the fidelity and topological flexibility of implicit sur-

11594

