Distance-aware Quantization
Dohyung Kim
Junghyup Lee
Bumsub Ham*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/DAQ

Abstract
We address the problem of network quantization, that is,
reducing bit-widths of weights and/or activations to lighten
network architectures. Quantization methods use a rounding
function to map full-precision values to the nearest quantized ones, but this operation is not differentiable. There
are mainly two approaches to training quantized networks
with gradient-based optimizers. First, a straight-through
estimator (STE) replaces the zero derivative of the rounding
with that of an identity function, which causes a gradient
mismatch problem. Second, soft quantizers approximate the
rounding with continuous functions at training time, and
exploit the rounding for quantization at test time. This alleviates the gradient mismatch, but causes a quantizer gap problem. We alleviate both problems in a unified framework. To
this end, we introduce a novel quantizer, dubbed a distanceaware quantizer (DAQ), that mainly consists of a distanceaware soft rounding (DASR) and a temperature controller.
To alleviate the gradient mismatch problem, DASR approximates the discrete rounding with the kernel soft argmax,
which is based on our insight that the quantization can be
formulated as a distance-based assignment problem between
full-precision values and quantized ones. The controller
adjusts the temperature parameter in DASR adaptively according to the input, addressing the quantizer gap problem.
Experimental results on standard benchmarks show that
DAQ outperforms the state of the art significantly for various
bit-widths without bells and whistles.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have made significant progress in the field of computer vision, such as image
recognition [27, 48], object detection [2, 43], and semantic
segmentation [7, 34]. Deeper [15, 46] and wider [45] CNNs,
however, require lots of parameters and FLOPs, making it
difficult to deploy modern network architectures on edge
devices (e.g., mobile phones, televisions, or drones). Recent works focus on compressing networks to lighten the
* Corresponding author

Discretizer (Rounding function)
𝑞!

(

argmin
𝑞1

𝑞1 , 𝑞!

Distance
: Full-precision value

: quantized value

)

𝑞"
Quantized
output
: non-differentiable

Figure 1: The discretizer takes a full-precision input, and then
assigns it to the nearest quantized value, e.g., q1 in this example.
We interpret the assignment process of a discretizer as follows: It
first computes the distances between the full-precision input and
quantized values, q1 and q2 , and then applies an argmin operator
over the distances to choose the quantized value. Since this operator
is non-differentiable, the quantized network cannot be trained endto-end with gradient-based optimizers. (Best viewed in color.)

network architectures. Pruning [14] and distillation [16]
are representative techniques for network compression. The
pruning removes redundant weights in a network, and the
distillation encourages a compact network to have features
similar to the ones obtained from a large network. The networks compressed by these techniques still exploit floatingpoint computations, indicating that they are not suitable for
edge devices favoring fixed-point operations for power efficiency. Network quantization [42] is an alternative approach
that converts full-precision weights and/or activations into
low-precision ones, enabling a fixed-point inference, while
reducing memory and computational cost.
Quantization methods typically use a staircase function as
a quantizer, where it normalizes a full-precision value within
a quantization interval, and assigns the normalized one to the
nearest quantized value using a discretizer (i.e., a rounding
function) [11, 12, 22]. Since the derivative of the rounding is
zero at almost everywhere, gradient-based optimizers could
not be used to train quantized networks. To address this, the
straight-through estimator (STE) [3] replaces the derivative
of the rounding with that of identity or hard tanh functions
for backward propagation. This, however, causes a gradient
mismatch between forward and backward passes at training time, making the training process noisy and degrading

5271

