Rethinking the Backdoor Attacks’ Triggers: A Frequency Perspective
Yi Zeng* 1 , Won Park* 2 , Z. Morley Mao2 and Ruoxi Jia1
1

2

Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

Abstract
Backdoor attacks have been considered a severe security
threat to deep learning. Such attacks can make models perform abnormally on inputs with predefined triggers and still
retain state-of-the-art performance on clean data. While
backdoor attacks have been thoroughly investigated in the
image domain from both attackers’ and defenders’ sides, an
analysis in the frequency domain has been missing thus far.
This paper first revisits existing backdoor triggers from a
frequency perspective and performs a comprehensive analysis. Our results show that many current backdoor attacks
exhibit severe high-frequency artifacts, which persist across
different datasets and resolutions. We further demonstrate
these high-frequency artifacts enable a simple way to detect existing backdoor triggers at a detection rate of 98.50%
without prior knowledge of the attack details and the target
model. Acknowledging previous attacks’ weaknesses, we
propose a practical way to create smooth backdoor triggers without high-frequency artifacts and study their detectability. We show that existing defense works can benefit by incorporating these smooth triggers into their design
consideration. Moreover, we show that the detector tuned
over stronger smooth triggers can generalize well to unseen
weak smooth triggers. In short, our work emphasizes the
importance of considering frequency analysis when designing both backdoor attacks and defenses in deep learning.

1. Introduction
Backdoor attacks are the attacks where adversaries deliberately manipulate a proportion of the training data [11, 5],
or the model’s parameters [18], to make the model recognize a backdoor trigger as the desired target label(s).
When the backdoor trigger is introduced during test-time,
the poisoned model exhibits a particular output behavior of
the adversary’s choosing (e.g., a misclassification). Back* Yi Zeng and Won Park contributed equally.

door triggers have been demonstrated to perform malicious
tasks on security-concerned deep learning services, such as
converting the label of a stop sign [11] or misidentifying
faces [5], thereby posing significant risks.
State-of-the-art backdoor triggers are designed to be inconspicuous to human observers. One idea of generating
such triggers is to use patterns of commonplace objects [18,
30]. For instance, one could use glasses–commonplace objects appearing in a face image–as a trigger to backdoor
a face recognition model, thereby hiding the triggers “in
the human psyche.” Another approach to generate “hidden”
or “invisible” triggers is to inject imperceptible perturbations via solving a norm-constrained optimal attack problem [17, 24] or leveraging GANs [25].
Previous research on backdoor data detection either
identifies outliers directly in the image space [22] or analyzes the network activations based on an image input [23,
20, 3, 15]. In contrast, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the frequency spectrum across various existing triggers and multiple datasets. We find that all existing ideas
of generating samples contain triggers exhibit severe highfrequency artifacts. We provide a detailed analysis of the
causes of the high-frequency artifacts for different triggers
and show that these artifacts stem from either the trigger
pattern per se or the methodology of inserting the trigger.
Based on these insights, we demonstrate that the frequency domain can efficiently identify potential backdoor
data in both the training and test phase. We build a detection pipeline based on a simple supervised learning framework and proper data augmentation as a demonstration. It
can identify existing backdoor triggers at a detection rate
of 98.5% without prior knowledge of the types of backdoor
attacks used. A high detection rate is still maintained even
when the data used for training and testing the detector have
different input distributions and are from different datasets.
Given that present triggers are easily detectable in the
frequency domain, our natural question is whether or not
effective backdoor triggers can be designed without highfrequency artifacts (which we will refer to as smooth trig16473

