Frequency-Aware Spatiotemporal Transformers for Video Inpainting Detection
Bingyao Yu1,3 , Wanhua Li1,2 , Xiu Li1,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,∗ , Jie Zhou1,2
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
3
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
{yby18,li-wh17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Time

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Frequency-Aware Spatiotemporal Transformer (FAST) for video inpainting detection,
which aims to simultaneously mine the traces of video inpainting from spatial, temporal, and frequency domains.
Unlike existing deep video inpainting detection methods
that usually rely on hand-designed attention modules and
memory mechanism, our proposed FAST have innate global
self-attention mechanisms to capture the long-range relations. While existing video inpainting methods usually exploit the spatial and temporal connections in a video, our
method employs a spatiotemporal transformer framework
to detect the spatial connections between patches and temporal dependency between frames. As the inpainted videos
usually lack high frequency details, our proposed FAST synchronously exploits the frequency domain information with
a specifically designed decoder. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves very competitive performance and generalizes well.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting has attracted much attention over the
past years [18, 17, 35, 23, 6], which is a task of repairing
the missing or corrupter regions in a video sequence with
visually plausible pixels. Video inpainting has been widely
used as a video editing technique in multiple applications
such as video completion and virtual reality. However, the
increasing progress and rapid development of video inpainting also result in enticing malicious attackers to forge video
sequences to release some fake news, aiming to mislead the
direction of public opinion. Recently, as a consequence
of advances in deep learning, a variety of studies [15, 24]
have shown spectacular progress in video inpainting, which
enables editing the special area of a video, e.g. removing
objects that could be key evidence. Inpainted videos have
∗ Corresponding author

Input frame

VDINet

Ours

Ground
truth

Figure 1. Compared with the first video inpainting detection
method VDINet [39], we can observe that our FAST approach
can preserve more detailed information of prediction masks when
guaranteeing the temporal consistency.

become more and more difficult to be distinguished even by
eyes in pace with the remarkable success in video inpainting
methods. Furthermore, the misuse of video inpainting techniques may pose potential threats and cause legal issues in
society. Therefore, there is a justified demand for effective
video inpainting detection methods, which attempt to detect
whether the videos presented are pristine or inpainted.
There have been a variety of studies about video inpainting [2, 15, 23, 17], which fall into two main classes: patchbased methods and learning-based methods. However, there
is an important problem with the above two methods – the
video inpainting turns out to obtain corresponding pixels
from similar regions or frames, or learn related distributions
from similar scenes. Therefore, these methods inevitably
leave clues and artifacts such as the inconsistency between
regional pixels, sharp change at the edge of the regions and
the blurred area caused by the failure to acquire complete
distribution. Accordingly, more recent approaches have
been developed for inpainting detection, but most existing
inpainting detection methods are frame-level based on the
single input image. Further, [39] first proposed the LSTM-

8188

