Salient Object Ranking with Position-Preserved Attention
Hao Fang1,2 , Daoxin Zhang2 , Yi Zhang1 , Minghao Chen1 , Jiawei Li2 , Yao Hu2 , Deng Cai1,2,3 ,* Xiaofei He1,3
1
Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Group 3 Fabu Inc.

Abstract
Instance segmentation can detect where the objects are
in an image, but hard to understand the relationship between them. We pay attention to a typical relationship,
relative saliency. A closely related task, salient object
detection, predicts a binary map highlighting a visually
salient region while hard to distinguish multiple objects. Directly combining two tasks by post-processing also leads to
poor performance. There is a lack of research on relative
saliency at present, limiting the practical applications such
as content-aware image cropping, video summary, and image labeling.
In this paper, we study the Salient Object Ranking (SOR)
task, which manages to assign a ranking order of each detected object according to its visual saliency. We propose
the first end-to-end framework of the SOR task and solve
it in a multi-task learning fashion. The framework handles instance segmentation and salient object ranking simultaneously. In this framework, the SOR branch is independent and flexible to cooperate with different detection
methods, so that easy to use as a plugin. We also introduce a Position-Preserved Attention (PPA) module tailored
for the SOR branch. It consists of the position embedding
stage and feature interaction stage. Considering the importance of position in saliency comparison, we preserve
absolute coordinates of objects in ROI pooling operation
and then fuse positional information with semantic features
in the first stage. In the feature interaction stage, we apply the attention mechanism to obtain proposals’ contextualized representations to predict their relative ranking orders. Extensive experiments have been conducted on the
ASR dataset. Without bells and whistles, our proposed
method outperforms the former state-of-the-art method significantly. The code will be released publicly available on
https://github.com/EricFH/SOR.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation has made tremendous progress
in recent years [14, 28]. To get a deeper understanding
of images, exploring the relationship between objects af* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The salient object ranking (SOR) task assigns a ranking
order to each detected object according to their visual saliency.
Instance segmentation can detect objects but can not obtain the relationship between them. In the meantime, salient object detection
can highlighting the most attractive regions but can not distinguish
them. (Best viewed in color.)

ter detecting their locations is meaningful for researchers.
A typical relationship is relative saliency that compares
which one is more attractive than another. Salient Object Detection (SOD) is a closely related task aiming to
locate regions where attract human visual attention. Most
works formulate this task as a pixel-wise binary prediction task [54, 55, 16, 19, 43, 45, 20, 29, 26, 32, 36, 53].
Since SOD predicts all salient areas at pixel-level rather
than instance-level, it has limitations distinguishing multiple objects in real scenes. (shown in Fig. 1)
Salient Object Ranking (SOR) is a recently proposed
problem introduced by [22] handling scenes of multiple objects. It assigns a unique ranking order to every detected object according to its visual saliency. The salient ranking orders of objects in an image reflect human attention shifting
process [39], which helps researchers explore how humans

16331

