Vector-Decomposed Disentanglement for Domain-Invariant Object Detection
Aming Wu1,2∗ Rui Liu1,2∗ Yahong Han1,2,3† Linchao Zhu4 Yi Yang4
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
{tjwam, ruiliu, yahong}@tju.edu.cn, {Linchao.Zhu, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
To improve the generalization of detectors, for domain
adaptive object detection (DAOD), recent advances mainly
explore aligning feature-level distributions between the
source and single-target domain, which may neglect the impact of domain-specific information existing in the aligned
features. Towards DAOD, it is important to extract domaininvariant object representations. To this end, in this paper, we try to disentangle domain-invariant representations
from domain-specific representations. And we propose a
novel disentangled method based on vector decomposition.
Firstly, an extractor is devised to separate domain-invariant
representations from the input, which are used for extracting object proposals. Secondly, domain-specific representations are introduced as the differences between the input
and domain-invariant representations. Through the difference operation, the gap between the domain-specific and
domain-invariant representations is enlarged, which promotes domain-invariant representations to contain more
domain-irrelevant information. In the experiment, we separately evaluate our method on the single- and compoundtarget case. For the single-target case, experimental results
of four domain-shift scenes show our method obtains a significant performance gain over baseline methods. Moreover, for the compound-target case (i.e., the target is a compound of two different domains without domain labels), our
method outperforms baseline methods by around 4%, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Though object detection has achieved many advances
[27, 9, 42, 19, 26, 21], when the training and test data
are from different domains, these methods usually suffer
∗ Equal contributions
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. To further verify the proposed method, we construct two
new adaptive scenes with different weather conditions.

from poor generalization. To this end, the task of domain
adaptive object detection (DAOD) [4] has been proposed,
in which a domain gap always exists between the training/source and test/target domain, e.g., different weather
conditions (as shown in Fig. 1).
To address DAOD, many methods [31, 18, 35, 46] explored to reduce the domain gap by aligning the featurelevel distribution of the source and single-target domain,
which may neglect the impact of the domain-specific information existing in the aligned features. Towards DAOD,
it is important to obtain domain-invariant representations
(DIR), which is a bridge to alleviate the domain-shift impact and can help extract domain-invariant object features.
In this paper, we focus on extracting DIR. We explore to
employ disentangled representation learning (DRL) [1, 24]
to disentangle DIR from domain-specific representations
(DSR). As a method of feature decomposition, the purpose of DRL is to uncover a set of independent factors
that give rise to the current observation [6]. And these factors should contain all the information in the observation.
Inspired by the idea, we explore to utilize DRL to solve
DAOD and propose a novel disentangled method to extract

9342

