This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Causal Disentanglement and Cross-Modal Alignment for Enhanced Few-Shot
Learning
Tianjiao Jiang, Zhen Zhang, Yuhang Liu*, Javen Qinfeng Shi
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide, Australia
{tianjiao.jiang, zhen.zhang02, yuhang.liu01, javen.shi}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) often requires effective adaptation
of models using limited labeled data. However, most existing FSL methods rely on entangled representations, requiring the model to implicitly recover the unmixing process to obtain disentangled representations using only limited supervision, which hinders effective adaptation. Recent theoretical studies show that multimodal contrastive
learning methods, such as CLIP, can disentangle latent
representations up to linear transformations. In light of
this, we propose the Causal CLIP Adapter (CCA), a novel
framework that explicitly disentangles visual features extracted from CLIP using unsupervised Independent Component Analysis (ICA). This removes the need to learn the unmixing process from the labeled data, thereby reducing the
number of trainable parameters and mitigating overfitting.
Taking a step further, while ICA can obtain visual disentangled representations, it may also disrupt CLIP’s intraand inter-modal alignment. To counteract this, CCA further leverages CLIP’s inherent cross-modal alignment by
enhancing it in two ways: unidirectionally, through finetuning a CLIP-based text classifier, and bidirectionally, via
a cross-attention mechanism that enriches visual and textual representations through mutual interaction. Both unimodal and cross-modal classification outputs can be effectively combined linearly to improve classification accuracy.
Extensive experiments on 11 benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches in terms of few-shot performance and
robustness to distributional shifts, while maintaining computational efficiency. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/tianjiao-j/CCA.

Figure 1. In the causal generative model, we assume that images
are generated by an unknown mixing function g(·) from a set of
latent variables z1 , z2 , . . . , zn . The outputs of the CLIP image
encoder are entangled representations where each z′i is a linear
mixture of the true latent variables. Existing methods directly use
these entangled CLIP features for downstream tasks, which necessitates implicit learning of a dense weight matrix Wdense that
can be regarded as the product of an unmixing matrix Wunmix and
′
a sparse matrix Wsparse
. In contrast, our method first disentangles the CLIP features using an unmixing matrix U obtained by
ICA, resulting in disentangled features where ẑ approximates z up
to permutation and scaling. These disentangled features are then
used for downstream tasks, requiring only the learning of a sparse
weight matrix Wsparse .

tectures effectively and achieve strong performance. However, in many real-world applications, labeled data can be
scarce, costly, or impractical to obtain. Few-shot learning (FSL) addresses this limitation by adapting models to
new tasks with only a small number of samples, mimicking
the human ability to learn from limited data and generalize
to unseen instances [48, 52, 57]. Two primary approaches
are commonly used in FSL: meta-learning [1, 9, 55] and
transfer learning [21, 47, 60]. In meta-learning, a model is
trained using a support set to develop the ability to learn
from only a few samples, and its performance is evaluated on a query set. In contrast, transfer learning leverages
pre-trained models trained on large datasets to capture rich
semantic representations and rapidly adapt to new tasks.
These pre-trained models range from smaller architectures,
such as ResNet-50 [18], to larger multi-modal frameworks

1. Introduction
Conventional machine learning models typically require
large amounts of labeled data to train parameter-rich archi* Corresponding author. Email: yuhang.liu01@adelaide.edu.au

890

