This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TRKT: Weakly Supervised Dynamic Scene Graph Generation with
Temporal-enhanced Relation-aware Knowledge Transferring
Zhu Xu1

Ting Lei1 Zhimin Li2 Guan Wang3 Qingchao Chen4 Yuxin Peng1 Yang Liu1 *
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Tencent Inc. 3 Baidu Inc. 4 National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
xuzhu@stu.pku.edu.cn {ting lei, qingchao.chen, pengyuxin, yangliu}@pku.edu.cn
zhiminli.cn@outlook.com wangguan15@baidu.com

Abstract
Dynamic Scene Graph Generation (DSGG) aims to create
a scene graph for each video frame by detecting objects and
predicting their relationships. Weakly Supervised DSGG
(WS-DSGG) reduces annotation workload by using an unlocalized scene graph from a single frame per video for
training. Existing WS-DSGG methods depend on an off-theshelf external object detector to generate pseudo labels for
subsequent DSGG training. However, detectors trained on
static, object-centric images struggle in dynamic, relationaware scenarios required for DSGG, leading to inaccurate
localization and low-confidence proposals. To address the
challenges posed by external object detectors in WS-DSGG,
we propose a Temporal-enhanced Relation-aware Knowledge Transferring (TRKT) method, which leverages knowledge to enhance detection in relation-aware dynamic scenarios. TRKT is built on two key components:(1)Relationaware knowledge mining: we first employ object and relation class decoders that generate category-specific attention maps to highlight both object regions and interactive
areas. Then we propose an Inter-frame Attention Augmentation strategy that exploits optical flow for neighboring
frames to enhance the attention maps, making them motionaware and robust to motion blur. This step yields relationand motion-aware knowledge mining for WS-DSGG. (2)
we introduce a Dual-stream Fusion Module that integrates
category-specific attention maps into external detections
to refine object localization and boost confidence scores
for object proposals. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that TRKT achieves state-of-the-art performance on Action Genome dataset. Our code is avaliable at https:
//github.com/XZPKU/TRKT.git.

Figure 1. Performance Comparison between different methods in
object detection and WS-DSGG.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author

Dynamic Scene Graph Generation (DSGG) aims to represent complex visual scenes in a video sequence as structured graphs, with nodes representing object instances while
edges capture the relationships between objects, which is
valuable for visual-language tasks like Human Object Interaction Detection [13–15], Visual Grounding [20, 37], Visual
Question Answering [5, 26]. However, annotating for video
scene graphs is highly challenging and resource-intensive,
hindering the scaling of DSGG. To address it, weakly supervised DSGG [3] (WS-DSGG) has been proposed, which
relies on only one unlocalized scene graph from one frame
of video as supervision, making it a practical solution for
expanding DSGG to more complex video data.
Existing WS-DSGG approaches, such as the state-ofthe-art model PLA [3], rely on off-the-shelf external object detectors to generate object labels, which are then used
to construct pseudo-localized scene graphs for training a

15812

