This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AllTracker: Efficient Dense Point Tracking at High Resolution
Adam W. Harley1 Yang You1 Xinglong Sun1 Yang Zheng1 Nikhil Raghuraman1
Yunqi Gu1 Sheldon Liang2 Wen-Hsuan Chu2 Achal Dave3 Suya You4
Rares Ambrus3 Katerina Fragkiadaki2 Leonidas Guibas1
1

Stanford University

2

Carnegie Mellon University

3

Toyota Research Institute

4

Army Research Laboratory

Abstract
trajectory
sampling

We introduce AllTracker: a model that estimates longrange point tracks by way of estimating the flow field between a query frame and every other frame of a video. Unlike existing point tracking methods, our approach delivers
high-resolution and dense (all-pixel) correspondence fields,
which can be visualized as flow maps. Unlike existing optical flow methods, our approach corresponds one frame
to hundreds of subsequent frames, rather than just the next
frame. We develop a new architecture for this task, blending techniques from existing work in optical flow and point
tracking: the model performs iterative inference on lowresolution grids of correspondence estimates, propagating
information spatially via 2D convolution layers, and propagating information temporally via pixel-aligned attention
layers. The model is fast and parameter-efficient (16 million
parameters), and delivers state-of-the-art point tracking accuracy at high resolution (i.e., tracking 768 → 1024 pixels,
on a 40G GPU). A benefit of our design is that we can train
jointly on optical flow datasets and point tracking datasets,
and we find that doing so is crucial for top performance.
We provide an extensive ablation study on our architecture
details and training recipe, making it clear which details
matter most. Our code and model weights are available:
https://alltracker.github.io

optical flow
from query
to every
other frame

sliding
window
inference

query

AllTracker

input
frames

Figure 1. AllTracker estimates high-resolution optical flow between a “query frame” and every other frame of a video, using a
sliding-window strategy. Point samples from these outputs can be
interpreted as long-term point trajectories.

occlusions [40]. An attractive shortcut here is to directly
compute the flow between a reference frame and each other
frame, and thus track drift-free and across occlusions, but
estimating “long-range flow” becomes increasingly difficult
as the time interval widens between the reference frame
and the target, due to increasing variation in perspective,
illumination, and scene geometry.

1. Introduction

In light of these challenges, recent work has side-stepped
optical flow and created a line of bespoke point trackers
focused on learning multi-frame temporal priors for reducing
drift and tracking through occlusions [12, 19, 24, 25, 59].
These works explicitly highlight that the limited temporal
context in flow-based methods is a severe weakness, and
have made substantial progress by addressing this. However,
the proposed solutions add temporal awareness at the cost of
spatial awareness, and only deliver tracks for sparse sets of
points. Recent attempts at “dense” point tracking [27, 37, 50]
are not as accurate as the latest sparse trackers, and struggle
with high-resolution input.

Estimating the long-range trajectories of arbitrary points in
the world, using sequences of 2D images as input, has been
a concrete and competitive challenge in computer vision
since at least 2006 [40]. The utility of optical flow (i.e.,
the instantaneous velocity of pixels [16]) toward this goal
has long been obvious, yet it has remained challenging to
upgrade flows into long-range tracks.
Instantaneous flows can be “chained” into multi-frame
tracks, by interpolating in one flow field at the endpoints of
the previous flow field, but imperfect flows will accumulate
drift, and such chains must also be carefully stopped at

5253

