This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D Gaussian Splatting SLAM
Yanyan Li1,2 , Youxu Fang1 , Zunjie Zhu1† , Kunyi Li2 , Yong Ding3 , Federico Tombari2,4
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, 2 Technical University of Munich
3
Zhejiang University, 4 Google, † Corresponding author
Project Page:

https://github.com/yanyan-li/4DGS-SLAM

Figure 1. Example results from the proposed 4D-GS SLAM system. The top row showcases novel view synthesis and Gaussian
visualizations in the BONN balloon (top left) and person tracking (top right) sequences. The appearance and geometry of static and
dynamic scenes are shown in the bottom row, respectively.

Abstract

and quantitative evaluation results show that the proposed
method achieves robust tracking and high-quality view synthesis performance in real-world environments.

Simultaneously localizing camera poses and constructing
Gaussian radiance fields in dynamic scenes establish a crucial bridge between 2D images and the 4D real world. Instead of removing dynamic objects as distractors and reconstructing only static environments, this paper proposes
an efficient architecture that incrementally tracks camera
poses and establishes the 4D Gaussian radiance fields in
unknown scenarios by using a sequence of RGB-D images.
First, by generating motion masks, we obtain static and dynamic priors for each pixel. To eliminate the influence of
static scenes and improve the efficiency of learning the motion of dynamic objects, we classify the Gaussian primitives
into static and dynamic Gaussian sets, while the sparse control points along with an MLP are utilized to model the
transformation fields of the dynamic Gaussians. To more
accurately learn the motion of dynamic Gaussians, a novel
2D optical flow map reconstruction algorithm is designed
to render optical flows of dynamic objects between neighbor images, which are further used to supervise the 4D
Gaussian radiance fields along with traditional photometric and geometric constraints. In experiments, qualitative

1. Introduction

25019

Tracking [25, 32], mapping [10, 19], and rendering [22, 36]
in dynamic 3D scenes remain a fundamental challenge in
computer vision, with important applications in robotics,
augmented reality, and autonomous systems. While traditional methods [30, 50, 53] have demonstrated impressive localization and view synthesis capabilities in static
environments, the presence of moving objects and diverse
lighting conditions in real-world scenarios still significantly
limit the performance of current solutions.
3D Gaussian primitives [22, 54] have recently emerged
as a powerful representation for novel view synthesis and
scene reconstruction, demonstrating efficient performance
in training and rendering compared to Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) methods [2, 36]. However, pioneering Gaussian Splatting SLAM algorithms [11, 30] mostly assumed a
static working space. Based on photometric and geometric constraints, these methods can incrementally localize

