This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CHORDS: Diffusion Sampling Accelerator with
Multi-core Hierarchical ODE Solvers
Jiaqi Han∗ , Haotian Ye∗ , Puheng Li, Minkai Xu, James Zou, Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
{jiaqihan,haotianye,puhengli,minkai,jamesz,ermon}@stanford.edu
“ Musical chords rendered as interlocking ribbons of swirling color and particles, weaving together in midair”

“Imagine a magnificent city hovering among the clouds, connected by elegant bridges and adorned with lush vertical gardens
cascading down crystalline skyscrapers. Today, the city celebrates its annual festival,[…]”

“Cinematic closeup and detailed portrait of a reindeer in a snowy forest at sunset. The lighting is cinematic and gorgeous and soft
and sun-kissed, with golden backlight and dreamy bokeh and lens flares. The color grade is cinematic and magical”

“ A surreal dreamscape […] on
the word CHORDS […]”

“ A superhero rabbit sits upon a
wooden post in front of sheep […]”

“ A man is on a snowboard
above his […]”

“ The exterior of an upmarket
department store in Paris […]”

Figure 1. We apply C HORDS, our proposed multi-core diffusion sampling accelerator on state-of-the-art video generation model (HunyuanVideo) and image generation model (Flux). It achieves a significant 2.1× ∼ 2.9× speedup with four to eight computation cores.

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models have become dominant
generators of high-fidelity images and videos but remain
limited by their computationally expensive inference pro-

cedures. Existing acceleration techniques either require
extensive model retraining or compromise significantly on
sample quality. This paper explores a general, trainingfree, and model-agnostic acceleration strategy via multicore parallelism. Our framework views multi-core diffusion
sampling as an ODE solver pipeline, where slower yet accurate solvers progressively rectify faster solvers through

* Equal contribution.

19386

