This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScanEdit: Hierarchically-Guided Functional 3D Scan Editing
Mohamed El Amine Boudjoghra1
1

Ivan Laptev2

Technical University of Munich

2

Angela Dai1

MBZUAI

Figure 1. ScanEdit enables instruction-driven editing of complex, real-world scenes by rearranging their 3D scans. Given an input 3D
scan and its object-level decomposition, we formulate a hierarchically-guided, multi-stage LLM-based approach that transforms high-level
user instructions into concrete, tractable local instructions for objects, which can then be globally optimized to achieve the functional
instruction. In this example, ScanEdit rearranges chairs, tables and a coffee machine to create a coffee drinking area.

Abstract
With the fast pace of 3D capture technology and resulting
abundance of 3D data, effective 3D scene editing becomes
essential for a variety of graphics applications. In this
work we present ScanEdit, an instruction-driven method
for functional editing of complex, real-world 3D scans. To
model large and interdependent sets of objects, we propose
a hierarchically-guided approach. Given a 3D scan decomposed into its object instances, we first construct a hierarchical scene graph representation to enable effective,
tractable editing. We then leverage reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) and translate highlevel language instructions into actionable commands applied hierarchically to the scene graph. Finally, ScanEdit
integrates LLM-based guidance with explicit physical constraints and generates realistic scenes where object arrangements obey both physics and common sense. In our
extensive experimental evaluation ScanEdit outperforms
state of the art and demonstrates excellent results for a variety of real-world scenes and input instructions. Our code
is available at aminebdj.github.io/scanedit

nient capture and detailed reconstruction of complex realworld 3D scenes. This opens up exciting possibilities for
various applications in content creation, virtual and augmented reality, architectural design, robotics, and more. To
fully leverage the captured 3D data, however, it is often essential to perform editing and rearrangement of the captured
scenes – for instance, re-organizing objects for content creation where iterative editing is a fundamental paradigm, or
enabling a robot to visualize the goal state of the environment given the target task.

1. Introduction

Recent works have established the potential of leveraging powerful, pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs)
for 3D scene synthesis, employing object retrieval from a
synthetic 3D object database [11, 44, 56] to populate constructed 3D layouts to produce a 3D scene. Such VLMs
enable interpretation of a natural language prompt to construct a 3D scene layout supporting synthetic 3D object
assets adhering to the prompt. While this showcases the
potential for leveraging high-level VLM-based reasoning,
such generated 3D layouts populated with synthetic assets
are much simpler than complex, cluttered, real-world environments (e.g., often hundreds of objects in the real-world
scans we operate on, while synthetic scene synthesis approaches often generate an average number of 5 objects per
scene) [29, 45]). We thus propose the first approach to address text-based editing of complex, real-world 3D scans
by leveraging a localized prompting approach which can

The abundance of multi-view RGB and RGB-D sensors,
now available even on commodity phones, enables conve-

27105

