This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedMeNF: Privacy-Preserving Federated Meta-Learning for Neural Fields
Junhyeog Yun Minui Hong Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
{junhyeog, alsdml123, gunhee}@snu.ac.kr
https://github.com/junhyeog/FedMeNF

Abstract

new object with just a few images.
Nevertheless, meta-learning itself requires a large and diverse set of tasks to learn an effective initialization or optimization strategy. Unfortunately, in many practical scenarios, users only have data for one or a few tasks. For
example, most users typically take photos of only a single instance of privacy-sensitive objects such as their face,
body, pet, or car. To enable meta-learning in such scenarios, we can leverage Federated Meta-Learning (FML) [8,
18, 29], which collaboratively trains a global meta-learner
using private data from numerous distributed clients. FML
builds upon Federated Learning (FL) [4, 13, 27, 36, 41], a
paradigm designed to train a global model while ensuring
client data remains on local devices to preserve privacy.
Yet, applying FML to NFs introduces a critical challenge that fundamentally undermines the privacy guarantee of FL. The privacy protection in traditional FL relies
on the assumption that sharing trained model parameters,
rather than the raw data itself, is safe. This assumption completely breaks down for NFs for two main reasons. First,
in our scenario, each client has data for only a single or
a few task instances (e.g., a single image or 3D object).
If even one client has only a single task instance, the local meta-optimization is like standard supervised training
on that specific task [26]. Consequently, the trained local
meta-learner functions as an optimized NF for that private
data. Second, NFs are, in essence, a compressed representation of the data and inherently encapsulate it. Thus, even
if only the NF parameters are shared, a malicious server
can reconstruct the private data. Due to this inherent privacy leakage issue, existing studies often limit FL applications for NFs to public data such as landmarks [59] or
cityscapes [24, 55, 68], where privacy is less of a concern.
For these reasons, naively applying FML methods to private
data results in severe privacy issues, as the server can reconstruct the private data from the shared local meta-learner.
To address this critical challenge, we propose FedMeNF
(Federated Meta-Learning for Neural Fields), a novel FML
framework designed to collaboratively train a global NF
meta-learner while preserving privacy as overviewed in

Neural fields provide a memory-efficient representation of
data, which can effectively handle diverse modalities and
large-scale data. However, learning to map neural fields
often requires large amounts of training data and computations, which can be limited to resource-constrained edge
devices. One approach to tackle this limitation is to leverage Federated Meta-Learning (FML), but traditional FML
approaches suffer from privacy leakage. To address these
issues, we introduce a novel FML approach called FedMeNF. FedMeNF utilizes a new privacy-preserving loss
function that regulates privacy leakage in the local metaoptimization. This enables the local meta-learner to optimize quickly and efficiently without retaining the client’s
private data. Our experiments demonstrate that FedMeNF
achieves fast optimization speed and robust reconstruction
performance, even with few-shot or non-IID data across diverse data modalities, while preserving client data privacy.

1. Introduction
Neural Fields (NFs), also known as Implicit Neural Representations (INRs), use a deep neural network to approximate continuous signals [12, 46, 47, 57, 60]. They enable memory-efficient representation and fast processing of
data [14]. Thanks to this, NFs effectively handle both largescale data and diverse modalities, including audio, images,
videos, and 3D objects [10, 11, 33, 40, 45, 48, 52, 53, 71].
However, optimizing NFs is often slow and requires
large amounts of data, which can be a serious issue on
resource-constrained edge devices. Consider a practical
scenario: a user takes a few photos of an object using their
phone and wants to get a high-fidelity 3D model of it. Training an NF from scratch with such limited data and resources
would be time-consuming and likely yield poor results. One
approach to address this issue is meta-learning [19, 44],
which aims to train a meta-learner that can quickly adapt to
new tasks with only a few samples. Using the meta-learner,
the user can quickly optimize a high-performing NF for the

2161

