This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DisCoPatch: Taming Adversarially-driven Batch Statistics for Improved
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Francisco Caetano1,∗ , Christiaan Viviers1,∗ , Luis A. Zavala-Mondragón1 ,
Peter H.N. De With1 , Fons van der Sommen1
1
Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
∗
Equal contribution

Abstract

known information of in-distribution (ID) data. It is often
employed as a preliminary step in image-based systems,
aiming to mitigate the risks associated with feeding OOD
inputs to a model. Besides safeguarding a system against
erroneous predictions, it also facilitates the safe handling
of OOD samples, either by rejection or transfer to human
intervention. However, the significance of OOD lies not
only in bolstering the reliability of image processing systems, but also in its standalone role for anomaly and fault
detection. A simple example of this use case can be found
in the visual inspection of industrial image data, where it
is easy to acquire imagery of normal samples yet virtually
impossible to define the expected defects [50]. In the OOD
context, these anomalies can be broadly classified into two
types: (1) anomalous objects in images which refer to unexpected or rare items appearing in the frame, and (2) faulty
equipment or products which refer to malfunctions or irregularities in the machinery or products under inspection. As
a consequence, this task is typically cast as an OOD classification problem.
OOD detection comprises various types of shifts in data.
(a) Semantic shifts, such as encountering unseen classes,
and (b) domain shifts, like distinguishing between real images and drawings, have easily established boundaries and
are well-defined in literature [19, 32]. On the other hand,
(c) covariate shifts, which involve perturbations in data or
subtle changes in its expected variability, are often conflated
with domain shifts [69]. It is essential to differentiate covariate shifts, since they pose unique challenges requiring
tailored detection mechanisms.
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed framework for interpreting shifts in a data distribution. In our definition, the
ID range covers an expected semantic shift, containing a
pre-defined number of different classes, as exemplified by
ImageNet-1K [51], along with some degree of variability
in terms of domain and covariate shifts. For instance, introducing a novel class such as bagpipes in NINCO [3]
represents an OOD semantic shift, as ImageNet-1K lacks
such examples. An extreme change in domain, such as

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection holds significant importance across many applications. While semantic and
domain-shift OOD problems are well-studied, this work focuses on covariate shifts - subtle variations in the data distribution that can degrade machine learning performance.
We hypothesize that detecting these subtle shifts can improve our understanding of in-distribution boundaries, ultimately improving OOD detection. In adversarial discriminators trained with Batch Normalization (BN), real
and adversarial samples form distinct domains with unique
batch statistics — a property we exploit for OOD detection. We introduce DisCoPatch, an unsupervised Adversarial Variational Autoencoder (VAE) framework that harnesses this mechanism. During inference, batches consist of patches from the same image, ensuring a consistent data distribution that allows the model to rely on
batch statistics. DisCoPatch uses the VAE’s suboptimal
outputs (generated and reconstructed) as negative samples to train the discriminator, thereby improving its ability
to delineate the boundary between in-distribution samples
and covariate shifts. By tightening this boundary, DisCoPatch achieves state-of-the-art results in public OOD detection benchmarks. The proposed model not only excels
in detecting covariate shifts, achieving 95.5% AUROC on
ImageNet-1K(-C), but also outperforms all prior methods
on public Near-OOD (95.0%) benchmarks. With a compact model size of 25MB, it achieves high OOD detection
performance at notably lower latency than existing methods, making it an efficient and practical solution for realworld OOD detection applications. The code is available
at github.com/caetas/DisCoPatch.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection consists of identifying
whether a given test sample significantly deviates from the

2898

