This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointGAC: Geometric-Aware Codebook for Masked Point Cloud Modeling
Abiao Li1 , Chenlei Lv2 *, Yuming Fang1 , Yifan Zuo1 , Jian Zhang3 , Guofeng Mei4
1
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics 2 Shenzhen University
3
University of Technology Sydney 4 Fondazione Bruno Kessler

1. Introduction
Self-supervised point cloud representation learning aims
to extract robust and generalizable feature representations
from large-scale unlabeled data [32, 33]. These learned representations can signiﬁcantly improve various downstream
applications, including object classiﬁcation [30], semantic
segmentation [21, 23, 24], point cloud completion [50], and
other 3D understanding tasks [35, 38, 39]. Due to its ability
to learn without relying on annotated data, self-supervised
point cloud representation learning has attracted increas* Corresponding author.(chenleilv@mail.bnu.edu.cn)

Second
Stage

...

...
Teacher
Feature

Assign
&Update
Assign

Assign
&Update

c2 Center 1

... cn

Mechanism

Dead Vector

Online Codebook

Student
Model

Visble
Patch Emb.

c1

Cernter 2 Maintenance

...
...

Geometry-aware
Partitioning Strategy

Teacher
Model

Complete
Patch Emb.

Embedding
&Mask

Most masked point cloud modeling (MPM) methods follow a regression paradigm to reconstruct the coordinate
or feature of masked regions. However, they tend to overconstrain the model to learn the details of the masked region, resulting in failure to capture generalized features.
To address this limitation, we propose PointGAC, a novel
clustering-based MPM method that aims to align the feature distribution of masked regions. Specially, it features an online codebook-guided teacher-student framework. Firstly, it presents a geometry-aware partitioning strategy to extract initial patches. Then, the teacher
model updates a codebook via online k-means based on
features extracted from the complete patches. This procedure facilitates codebook vectors to become cluster centers. Afterward, we assigns the unmasked features to
their corresponding cluster centers, and the student model
aligns the assignment for the reconstructed masked features. This strategy focuses on identifying the cluster centers to which the masked features belong, enabling the
model to learn more generalized feature representations.
Beneﬁting from a proposed codebook maintenance mechanism, codebook vectors are actively updated, which further increases the efﬁciency of semantic feature learning. Experiments validate the effectiveness of the proposed
method on various downstream tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/LAB123-tech/PointGAC.

First
Stage

Embedding

Abstract

...

Feature Alignment
over the Codebook

Reconstructed
Masked Feature

Figure 1. Fundamental concept of PointGAC. Both the unmasked
teacher features and the reconstructed masked features at corresponding positions are assigned to the same cluster center over
the codebook. This clustering paradigm avoids forcing the student
model to overﬁt the exact feature details of the teacher model.

ing research interest. This is achieved by designing pretext
tasks that encourage the model to capture meaningful geometric features. Among these, masked point cloud modeling is a prominent approach in vision transformers.
Inspired by the success of MAE [16], masked point
cloud modeling [7, 28, 34, 44, 56, 58] aims to train models capable of reconstructing the coordinates of masked regions using the visible portions of the point cloud. However, these coordinate-based reconstruction approaches focus on capturing surface details, limiting their effectiveness
in learning semantic information and resulting in inferior
performance in downstream tasks. To mitigate this limitation, recent works [10, 17, 25, 42, 43, 48, 53] adopt a
teacher-student framework, where instead of reconstructing
coordinates, the student model is trained to align with the
masked features extracted by the teacher model. However,
a notable drawback of these approaches is that they tend to
over-constrain the student model, forcing it to regress the
point-wise feature details of the teacher, which prevents it
from learning more generalized features. Moreover, these
methods often overlook geometric consistency when constructing local point cloud patches, making it challenging
for the model to learn meaningful representations.
To address these issues, we propose PointGAC, a novel
clustering-based approach that aims to learning the similarity of features in their distribution, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
PointGAC begins by partitioning the input point cloud into

24989

