This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure-Guided Diffusion Models for High-Fidelity Portrait Shadow Removal
Wanchang Yu1 Qing Zhang1,2 * Rongjia Zheng1 Wei-Shi Zheng1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China

Input

ShdowDiffusion [11]

IC-light [52]

BSR [28]

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Comparison on portrait shadow removal. Our method allows to robustly remove facial cast shadows while faithfully preserving
the portrait identities as well as structure details in shadow regions and also ensuring the overall naturalness.

Abstract

able at https://github.com/wanchang-yu/Structure-GuidedDiffusion-for-Portrait-Shadow-Removal.

We present a diffusion-based portrait shadow removal approach that can robustly produce high-fidelity results. Unlike previous methods, we cast shadow removal as diffusionbased inpainting. To this end, we first train a shadowindependent structure extraction network on a real-world
portrait dataset with various synthetic lighting conditions,
which allows to generate a shadow-independent structure map including facial details while excluding the unwanted shadow boundaries. The structure map is then used
as condition to train a structure-guided inpainting diffusion model for removing shadows in a generative manner. Finally, to restore the fine-scale details (e.g., eyelashes, moles and spots) that may not be captured by the
structure map, we take the gradients inside the shadow
regions as guidance and train a detail restoration diffusion model to refine the shadow removal result. Extensive experiments on the benchmark datasets show that our
method clearly outperforms existing methods, and is effective to avoid previously common issues such as facial
identity tampering, shadow residual, color distortion, structure blurring, and loss of details. Our code is avail-

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding author (zhangq93@mail.sysu.edu.cn).

Taking selfies is very popular nowadays due to the readilyavailable cameras on various devices, particularly the mobile phones. However, portrait photos taken in the wild
lacking professional lighting conditions often suffer from
undesired foreign shadows cast by external objects (see Figure 1 for examples). The presence of facial shadows not
only severely degrade the overall visual appeal of the portraits, but also adversely affect many downstream vision
tasks, such as face detection and recognition [4, 5, 41, 55],
and portrait image editing [21, 27, 47]. Hence, portrait
shadow removal techniques are widely required.
Currently, portrait shadow removal remains a challenge
despite the remarkable progress in natural image shadow
removal. The reason behind is twofold. First of all,
due to factors such as privacy and difficulty in data collection, large-scale paired data for portrait shadow is extremely scarce, which significantly limits the development
of portrait shadow removal methods, especially learningbased solutions. On the other hand, as this task is portrait-

11675

