This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Personal Concept in
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Sunghyun Park∗ Jungsoo Lee* Shubhankar Borse Munawar Hayat
Sungha Choi† Kyuwoong Hwang Fatih Porikli
Qualcomm AI Research‡
{sunpar, jungsool, sborse, hayat, sunghac, kyuwoong, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Personalized OVSS

OVSS

Could you make me some
coffee in my mug cup?

(a)

Could you make me some
coffee in my mug cup?

Sorry, I don’t know
your mug cup.
There are two mug cups
with that description.
Which one is yours?

Sure, I’ll prepare coffee in
your mug cup.

Now I get it. I will prepare
coffee with that cup.

: finetuning

The blue one with stars
The one on the left
between those two

: inference
wall

my plush toy images & masks

(b)

Understanding
Personal Concepts

Personalized
OVSS

my plush toy

cup

plush toy

my plush toy

table

Open vocab. + Personal Words

Figure 1. Description of personalized open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (personalized OVSS). (a) While existing OVSS models
require detailed descriptions to find ‘my mug cup’, personalized OVSS enables to find it directly. (b) Given a few images and masks of
my personal concept (e.g. my plush toy), our proposed framework finetunes an existing OVSS model to distinguish the personal concept
among objects within the same class (e.g. my plush toy among multiple plush toys).

Abstract
While open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) can
segment an image into semantic regions based on arbitrarily given text descriptions even for classes unseen during training, it fails to understand personal texts (e.g. ‘my
mug cup’) for segmenting regions of specific interest to
users. This paper addresses challenges like recognizing
‘my mug cup’ among ‘multiple mug cups’. To overcome
this challenge, we introduce a novel task termed personalized open-vocabulary semantic segmentation and propose a
text prompt tuning-based plug-in method designed to recognize personal visual concepts using a few pairs of images
and masks, while maintaining the performance of the original OVSS. Based on the observation that reducing false
predictions is essential when applying text prompt tuning
* These two authors contributed equally to this work. † Project lead.
‡ Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

to this task, our proposed method employs ‘negative mask
proposal’ that captures visual concepts other than the personalized concept. We further improve the performance by
enriching the representation of text prompts by injecting visual embeddings of the personal concept into them. This
approach enhances personalized OVSS without compromising the original OVSS performance. We demonstrate the
superiority of our method on our newly established benchmarks for this task, including FSSper , CUBper , and ADEper .

1. Introduction
Due to the recent advances in large-scale vision-language
models (e.g. CLIP [32]), open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) [37, 38], the task of performing segmentation with a set of arbitrary open-vocabulary texts, has
recently shown large improvements. Unlike traditional semantic segmentation [5] that is limited to making segmen-

19957

