This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Online Reasoning Video Segmentation with Just-in-Time Digital Twins
Yiqing Shen, Bohan Liu, Chenjia Li, Lalithkumar Seenivasan, Mathias Unberath
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
{yshen92,unberath}@jhu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep learning in computer vision and natural language processing has enabled visual understanding [7]. Visual foundation models have sometimes achieved super-human performance on specific tasks [2, 28]. However, bridging the
gap between high-level human instructions and low-level
visual perception remains challenging for embodied AI
agents, as they must interpret and act upon natural language
commands to perform meaningful actions in dynamic realworld environments [6, 19]. To this end, embodied AI must
be able to interpret implicit, context-dependent commands
and translate them into precise visual understanding tasks
[3]. The need for this capability has led to the emergence of
Reasoning Segmentation (RS), which aims to identify and
segment objects based on implicit text queries [12, 31]. Unlike traditional approaches such as semantic segmentation
with predefined categories or referring segmentation with
explicit object descriptions [10, 20], RS requires the perception model to process complex natural language queries
through multi-step reasoning to identify and segment target
objects [1]. For example, rather than responding to direct
commands like “the coffee cup”, RS must handle implicit
queries like “segment the object used for holding hot beverages”, which requires both visual perception and semantic
reasoning about object functionality [12]. This RS problem
setting also departs from existing visual foundation models
like Segment Anything Models (SAM) [11, 23] that rely on
explicit visual prompts e.g., bounding box or clicks.
The current paradigm in RS heavily relies on multimodal
large language models (LLMs) for both visual perception
and reasoning. For example, Language Instructed Segmentation Assistant (LISA) [12] fine-tuned LLaVA [15] for RS
in static images through an embedding-as-mask paradigm.
The Video-based Language Instructed Segmentation Assistant (VISA) [29] then extended this approach to video domains. Despite promising performance in some settings,
these methods struggle with queries that require complex
chains of reasoning or understanding of intricate spatial and
temporal relationships [16], as the LLMs must compress
rich visual information into a limited number of tokens
which may lose fine-grained spatial or temporal details. Ad-

Reasoning segmentation (RS) aims to identify and segment
objects of interest based on implicit text queries. As such,
RS is a catalyst for embodied AI agents, enabling them
to interpret high-level commands without requiring explicit
step-by-step guidance. However, current RS approaches
rely heavily on the visual perception capabilities of multimodal large language models (LLMs), leading to several
major limitations. First, they struggle with queries that
require multiple steps of reasoning or those that involve
complex spatial/temporal relationships. Second, they necessitate LLM fine-tuning, which may require frequent updates to maintain compatibility with contemporary LLMs
and may increase risks of catastrophic forgetting during
fine-tuning. Finally, being primarily designed for static images or offline video processing, they scale poorly to online video data. To address these limitations, we propose
an agent framework that disentangles perception and reasoning for online video RS without LLM fine-tuning. Our
innovation is the introduction of a just-in-time digital twin
concept, where – given an implicit query – a LLM plans the
construction of a low-level scene representation from highlevel video using specialist vision models. We refer to this
approach to creating a digital twin as “just-in-time” because the LLM planner will anticipate the need for specific
information and only request this limited subset instead of
always evaluating every specialist model. The LLM then
performs reasoning on this digital twin representation to
identify target objects. To evaluate our approach, we introduce a new comprehensive video reasoning segmentation benchmark comprising 200 videos with 895 implicit
text queries. The benchmark spans three reasoning categories (semantic, spatial, and temporal) with three different
reasoning chain complexity. Experimental results demonstrate that our method performs best across all reasoning categories, suggesting that our just-in-time digital twin
can bridge the gap between high-level reasoning and lowlevel perception in embodied AI. Benchmark is available at
https://github.com/yiqings/jitbench/.

24698

