This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification via Heterogeneous
Expert Collaborative Consistency Learning

1

Yafei Zhang1 , Lingqi Kong1 , Huafeng Li1 *, Jie Wen2
Faculty of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
zyfeimail@163.com, lingqikong2333@gmail.com, hfchina99@163.com, jiewen pr@126.com

Abstract
To reduce the reliance of visible-infrared person reidentification (ReID) models on labeled cross-modal samples, this paper explores a weakly supervised cross-modal
person ReID method that uses only single-modal sample
identity labels, addressing scenarios where cross-modal
identity labels are unavailable. To mitigate the impact
of missing cross-modal labels on model performance, we
propose a heterogeneous expert collaborative consistency
learning framework, designed to establish robust crossmodal identity correspondences in a weakly supervised
manner. This framework leverages labeled data from each
modality to independently train dedicated classification experts. To associate cross-modal samples, these classification experts act as heterogeneous predictors, predicting
the identities of samples from the other modality. To improve prediction accuracy, we design a cross-modal relationship fusion mechanism that effectively integrates predictions from different experts. Under the implicit supervision provided by cross-modal identity correspondences,
collaborative and consistent learning among the experts
is encouraged, significantly enhancing the model’s ability
to extract modality-invariant features and improve crossmodal identity recognition. Experimental results on two
challenging datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Code is available at https://github.
com/KongLingqi2333/WSL-VIReID.

Figure 1. VIReID faces two key challenges: asynchronous visibleinfrared (VIS-IR) camera operation causes missing cross-modal
identity correspondences, while large appearance differences raise
annotation costs beyond those in single-modality scenarios.

in nighttime and low-light conditions. However, due to the
inherent differences in imaging principles between visible
and infrared images, significant visual discrepancies exist
between them. These modality-specific differences not only
make annotating cross-modal datasets significantly more
challenging and costly but also pose formidable challenges
for cross-modal pedestrian retrieval.

1. Introduction

Existing approaches typically fall into three learning
paradigms: fully supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised. Fully supervised approaches [10, 27, 28, 54] rely on
accurately labeled cross-modal identity samples for model
training. Semi-supervised approaches [30, 33, 56] leverage a combination of partially labeled and unlabeled data,
thereby reducing the reliance on labeled samples. These
approaches typically label samples from a single modality
to alleviate the challenges of cross-modal labeling. Unsupervised approaches [4, 36, 43, 50] operate under the assumption that both intra-modal and inter-modal samples
are unlabeled. Effective training requires accurate and reliable pseudo-label prediction to enable supervised learning.
However, existing pseudo-label prediction methods are sensitive to the quantity of cross-modal positive samples and
modality discrepancies, often leading to predictions with

Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification (VIReID), a core
task in cross-modal person re-identification (ReID), plays
a pivotal role in intelligent security surveillance and smart
city construction. This task involves matching pedestrian
images from one modality (infrared or visible) with those
from the other to accurately identify target pedestrians. It
effectively overcomes the limitations of RGB-based ReID
* Corresponding author: Huafeng Li (hfchina99@163.com).

12659

