This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SEREP: Semantic Facial Expression Representation
for Robust In-the-Wild Capture and Retargeting
Arthur Josi 1,2 * Luiz Gustavo Hafemann2∗ Abdallah Dib2 Emeline Got2 Rafael M. O. Cruz1
Marc-André Carbonneau2
Ecole de Technologie Supérieure1

Ubisoft LaForge2

Figure 1. SEREP extracts facial expressions from in-the-wild monocular images and applies them to a given neutral mesh, enabling
accurate expression reconstruction and identity-preserving retargeting.

Abstract

ring them to new identities. Results in the project page.

Monocular facial performance capture in-the-wild is
challenging due to varied capture conditions, face shapes,
and expressions. Most current methods rely on linear 3D
Morphable Models, which represent facial expressions independently of identity at the vertex displacement level. We
propose SEREP (Semantic Expression Representation), a
model that disentangles expression from identity at the semantic level. We start by learning an expression representation from high-quality 3D data of unpaired facial expressions. Then, we train a model to predict expression
from monocular images relying on a novel semi-supervised
scheme using low quality synthetic data. In addition, we
introduce MultiREX, a benchmark addressing the lack of
evaluation resources for the expression capture task. Our
experiments show that SEREP outperforms state-of-the-art
methods, capturing challenging expressions and transfer-

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution

Facial performance capture is essential for applications
where users interact with 3D avatars, such as multimedia
and video games. For widespread adoption, capturing facial expressions from everyday devices like webcams and
smartphones is crucial. Furthermore, for creative applications with fictional characters, the ability to retarget captured expressions to different facial morphologies is equally
important, allowing the preservation of performance expressivity while adapting to unique character appearances.
Capturing a facial performance that can be applied to different characters necessitates the disentanglement of identity from expression information, which is our motivation
for this work.
Current methods for in-the-wild facial expression capture [9–11, 16, 18, 36, 41] predominantly rely on 3D Morphable Models (3DMM) [26, 31], which represent facial

14538

