This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal Unlearnable Examples: Preventing Personal Video Data from
Unauthorized Exploitation by Object Tracking
Qiangqiang Wu1 * Yi Yu2 * Chenqi Kong2† Ziquan Liu3 Jia Wan4
Haoliang Li1 Alex C. Kot2 Antoni B. Chan1
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
ROSE Lab, Nanyang Technological University
3
Queen Mary University of London 4 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
qiangqwu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {yuyi0010, chenqi.kong, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg,
ziquan.liu@qmul.ac.uk, jiawan1998@gmail.com, {haoliang.li, abchan}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

Train

With the rise of social media, vast amounts of useruploaded videos (e.g., YouTube) are utilized as training data for Visual Object Tracking (VOT). However,
the VOT community has largely overlooked video dataprivacy issues, as many private videos have been collected and used for training commercial models without authorization. To alleviate these issues, this paper
presents the first investigation on preventing personal
video data from unauthorized exploitation by deep trackers. Existing methods for preventing unauthorized data
use primarily focus on image-based tasks (e.g., image
classification), directly applying them to videos reveals
several limitations, including inefficiency, limited effectiveness, and poor generalizability. To address these issues, we propose a novel generative framework for generating Temporal Unlearnable Examples (TUEs), and
whose efficient computation makes it scalable for usage on large-scale video datasets. The trackers trained
w/ TUEs heavily rely on unlearnable noises for temporal matching, ignoring the original data structure
and thus ensuring training video data-privacy. To enhance the effectiveness of TUEs, we introduce a temporal contrastive loss, which further corrupts the learning
of existing trackers when using our TUEs for training.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance in video dataprivacy protection, with strong transferability across
VOT models, datasets, and temporal matching tasks.

1

Unauthorized
Database

Test

High Test
Performance

VOT Model

Imperceptible
TUE Injection

Train

Unauthorized
Database

Test

VOT Model

Low Test
Performance
Data Privacy
Protection

Figure 1. Illustration of our TUEs for preventing video data
from unauthorized exploitation by deep VOT models. Adding
imperceptible TUEs to training videos limits deep VOT models to only learning shortcuts information, resulting in poor
generalization and degraded test performance.

Introduction

ing boxes in each video frame based on the initial target
state, playing a key role in applications like intelligent
surveillance and autonomous driving. Recent advances
in deep trackers, driven by large-scale training videos
from the internet, have significantly improved VOT
performance. However, concerns over unauthorized
data exploitation by Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are
growing. For instance, personal videos uploaded to social media (e.g., YouTube) may be used for VOT training without consent, raising privacy and copyright issues. Large-scale VOT datasets like TrackingNet [51],
LaSOT [19, 20], and GOT-10k [32] primarily consist of
such user-uploaded videos. Protecting sensitive trajectories—such as those of individuals, vehicles, and military
assets—requires preventing unauthorized use of tracking data. Hence, safeguarding video data from exploitation in VOT training is essential.
In the context of 2D images, Unlearnable Examples
(UEs) [23, 31, 86, 89] is a typical solution to protect private data from unauthorized exploitation by DNNs. UEs

Visual Object Tracking (VOT) estimates target bound* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

11110

