This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-ended Hierarchical Streaming Video Understanding
with Vision Language Models
Hyolim Kang* Yunsu Park∗

Youngbeom Yoo Yeeun Choi Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University
{hyolimkang,ysp7954,youngbeom.yoo,yeeun-choi,seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr
Streaming Video

Abstract

…

We introduce Hierarchical Streaming Video Understanding,
a task that combines online temporal action localization
with free-form description generation. Given the scarcity
of datasets with hierarchical and fine-grained temporal annotations, we demonstrate that LLMs can effectively group
atomic actions into higher-level events, enriching existing
datasets. We then propose OpenHOUSE (Open-ended Hierarchical Online Understanding System for Events), which
extends streaming action perception beyond action classification. OpenHOUSE features a specialized streaming module that accurately detects boundaries between closely adjacent actions, nearly doubling the performance of direct
extensions of existing methods. We envision the future of
streaming action perception in the integration of powerful
generative models, with OpenHOUSE representing a key
step in that direction.

…
Time(s)
“Current”

Generate
Description
Substep

Step

Goal

Generate
Description

Generate
Description

Lifting a wheel Tightening a bolt

Connecting brake

Changing the wheel

Repairing the brake

Repairing the bike
: Action Instance

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of the Hierarchical Streaming Video Understanding task. When action instances are detected, the corresponding hierarchical descriptions are generated instantly. The hierarchy
consists of three levels: Goal, Step, and Substep. The Goal description can be generated before the entire video concludes.

Imagine a cyclist wearing an egocentric camera while repairing a bicycle. If we are designing a system to assist
the cyclist, it must not only recognize the fine-grained action of “tightening a bolt,” but also understand that it is a
substep of “changing the wheel,” which in turn contributes
to the larger goal of “repairing the bike.” Recognizing the
importance of the hierarchical structure, we argue that such
understanding must be acquired instantaneously for effective real-time assistance. Given this complexity, relying on
predefined class categories is suboptimal, as their limited
expressiveness restricts the system’s ability to capture the
hierarchical structure in detail.
This highlights the need for an instantaneous, openended and hierarchical understanding of streaming input
(Figure 1). Large-scale Vision Language Models (VLMs)
[1, 27, 28], with their powerful reasoning capabilities, are
well-suited for handling this challenge. However, applying VLMs to continuous visual streams presents unique
* equal contribution

20715

challenges beyond standard offline video understanding
[25, 29]. First, the model must determine “when” to generate output within the task hierarchy. Continuously calling the VLM is computationally expensive, and generating descriptions for every frame would result in excessive,
fragmented, and inaccurate descriptions. Second, given the
untrimmed, extensive nature of the video, the model must
determine which segment is relevant to the ongoing action,
as processing the entire history is impractical. Finally, using
this information, the model should provide an immediate
description of the ongoing action.
Rather than devising a single model, we decouple the
task into two parts: (i) a lightweight “streaming” perception
module that processes each frame and performs hierarchyaware action detection in real time, calling the VLM only
when needed, and (ii) a VLM that generates descriptions
only when called by the perception module. This disentanglement offers distinct advantages over a single model
approach. First, it enables efficient operation by continuously running the lightweight module and sparingly acti-

