This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LawDIS: Language-Window-based
Controllable Dichotomous Image Segmentation
Xinyu Yan1,2,6 Meijun Sun1,2 Ge-Peng Ji3
Fahad Shahbaz Khan6 Salman Khan6 Deng-Ping Fan4,5 *
1
4

Tianjin University

2

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Machine Learning

Nankai Institute of Advanced Research (SHENZHEN FUTIAN)

Abstract

5

3

Australian National University

Nankai University

6

MBZUAI

Macro mode (Language-controlled Segmentation)

We present LawDIS, a language-window-based controllable dichotomous image segmentation (DIS) framework
that produces high-quality object masks. Our framework
recasts DIS as an image-conditioned mask generation task
within a latent diffusion model, enabling seamless integration of user controls. LawDIS is enhanced with macro-tomicro control modes. Specifically, in macro mode, we introduce a language-controlled segmentation strategy (LS) to
generate an initial mask based on user-provided language
prompts. In micro mode, a window-controlled refinement
strategy (WR) allows flexible refinement of user-defined regions (i.e., size-adjustable windows) within the initial mask.
Coordinated by a mode switcher, these modes can operate independently or jointly, making the framework wellsuited for high-accuracy, personalised applications. Extensive experiments on the DIS5K benchmark reveal that our
LawDIS significantly outperforms 11 cutting-edge methods
across all metrics. Notably, compared to the second-best
model MVANet, we achieve Fεω gains of 4.6% with both
the LS and WR strategies and 3.6% gains with only the
LS strategy on DIS-TE. Codes will be made available at
https://github.com/XinyuYanTJU/LawDIS.

“Three men beside
a UAV.”

“Black camera drone
with a camera
mounted on a gimbal.”

< >

< >

Seg

Seg

Micro mode
(Window-controlled Refinement)

Crop & Zoom-in

Refine

Local patch

Local pred
(Ours)

Refined pred
(Ours)

Refined pred
(MVANet)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed macro and micro controls
for the DIS task. The macro mode enables users to segment objects with customised language prompts, while micro mode supports post-refinement on user-defined windows at any scale. After
refinement, our results become more precise, whereas the runnerup model, MVANet [45], lacks adaptability to the cropped local
patches, resulting to inferior predictions.

With the popularity of high-quality camera equipment, segmentation task in computer vision has evolved from rough
localisation [23, 37] to high-precision delineation [47]. As
a result, the dichotomous image segmentation (DIS) task
[32] – focused on segmenting highly accurate foreground
object(s) – has garnered significant attention due to its broad
range of applications, e.g., 3D reconstruction [22, 38], image editing [10, 21], augmented reality [31, 44], and medical image segmentation [12, 14].
Compared to general segmentation tasks [19, 20, 36], the
DIS task presents greater challenges in two key aspects.
* Corresponding author: Deng-Ping Fan (dengpfan@gmail.com)

First, the widely recognised DIS benchmark [32] covers
more than 200 object categories and diverse visual traits,
such as salient [8, 51] and camouflaged [6, 9, 13] objects.
This diversity requires models to exhibit strong holistic understanding to accurately identify foreground objects across
varied scenarios. Additionally, this task emphasizes highly
precise object delineation in high-resolution images, capturing even the internal details of objects. Therefore, models
should exhibit fine-grained feature extraction capabilities to
effectively segment complex structures and shapes.
Current DIS methods [16, 26, 32, 45, 49, 50] often adopt
a discriminative learning paradigm (i.e., per-pixel classifi-

23902

