This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Precise Action-to-Video Generation Through Visual Action Prompts
∗

Yuang Wang2

Sida Peng2 Minghan Qin4
†
Ruizhen Hu1,5

Xiangjiang Lab 2 Zhejiang University 3 Fudan University
4
Tsinghua University 5 Shenzhen University

Action-to-Video Generation

1

∗

∗

Haoyu Guo2
Chao Wen3
Hujun Bao2 Xiaowei Zhou2

Input Image

Visual Action Prompts

Generated Scene Dynamics

Figure 1. We propose visual action prompts as unified representations for complex, high-degree-of-freedom actions (e.g., simulating scene
dynamics driven by human hands or robotic grippers). Visual action prompts are “renderings” of subjects’ action-induced 3D strucutres,
among which we use skeleton as the primary representaion for its acquisition efficiency. This paradigm enables training action-driven video
generation models across heterogeneous datasets while facilitating cross-domain knowledge transfer.

Abstract
We present visual action prompts, a unified action representation for action-to-video generation of complex high-DoF
interactions while maintaining transferable visual dynamics across domains. Action-driven video generation faces
a precision-generality tradeoff: existing methods using text,
primitive actions, or coarse masks offer generality but lack
precision, while agent-centric action signals provide precision at the cost of cross-domain transferability. To balance action precision and dynamic transferability, we propose to “render” actions into precise visual prompts as
domain-agnostic representations that preserve both geometric precision and cross-domain adaptability for complex
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author: Ruizhen Hu.

actions; specifically, we choose visual skeletons for their
generality and accessibility. We propose robust pipelines to
construct skeletons from two interaction-rich data sources
— human-object interactions (HOI) and dexterous robotic
manipulation — enabling cross-domain training of actiondriven generative models. By integrating visual skeletons
into pretrained video generation models via lightweight finetuning, we enable precise action control of complex interaction while preserving the learning of cross-domain dynamics.
Experiments on EgoVid [64], RT-1 [11] and DROID [35]
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

1. Introduction
With improvements in quality and controllability of visual
generative models [7, 46, 50, 72], action-driven generative
models are now widely applied in gaming [12, 14, 21, 61,

12713

