This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D Visual Pre-training for Robot Learning
Chengkai Hou1 , Yanjie Ze3 , Yankai Fu1 , Zeyu Gao4 , Songbo Hu2 , Yue Yu2
Shanghang Zhang1,† , Huazhe Xu2,3,5,†
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Tsinghua University 3 Shanghai Qizhi Institute 4 CASIA 5 Shanghai AI Lab
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. FVP is a novel 3D point cloud representation learning pipeline for robotic manipulation. Different from prior works in Contrastive
Learning and Masked Signal Modeling, FVP trains 3D visual representations by leveraging the preceding frame point cloud and employing
a diffusion model to predict the point cloud of the current frame.

Abstract

twelve real-world manipulation tasks, FVP boosts the average success rate of 3D Diffusion Policy (DP3) for these
tasks by 28%. The FVP pre-trained DP3 achieves stateof-the-art performance across imitation learning methods.
Moreover, the efficacy of FVP adapts across various point
cloud encoders and datasets. Finally, we apply FVP to the
RDT-1B, a larger Vision-Language-Action robotic model,
enhancing its performance on various robot tasks. Our
project page is available at: https://4d- visualpretraining.github.io/.

General visual representations learned from web-scale
datasets for robotics have achieved great success in recent years, enabling data-efficient robot learning on manipulation tasks; yet these pre-trained representations are
mostly on 2D images, neglecting the inherent 3D nature of
the world. However, due to the scarcity of large-scale 3D
data, it is still hard to extract a universal 3D representation from web datasets. Instead, we are seeking a general
visual pre-training framework that could improve all 3D
representations as an alternative. Our framework, called
FVP, is a novel 4D Visual Pre-training framework for realworld robot learning. FVP frames the visual pre-training
objective as a next-point-cloud-prediction problem, models
the prediction model as a diffusion model, and pre-trains
the model on the larger public datasets directly. Across

1. Introduction
Learning generalizable visual representations from largescale datasets is crucial for robotic tasks [22, 30, 31, 49, 54].
Currently, robot representation learning is predominantly
pre-trained with large-scale 2D images [19, 22, 31, 49].

8451

