This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NullSwap: Proactive Identity Cloaking Against Deepfake Face Swapping
Tianyi Wang1
1

Shuaicheng Niu1

Nanyang Technological University

Harry Cheng2
2

Xiao Zhang3

Shandong University

3

Yinglong Wang3, *

Qilu University of Technology

{terry.ai.wang, xaCheng1996, zhang0510x}@gmail.com
shuaicheng.niu@ntu.edu.sg, wangyinglong@qlu.edu.cn

Abstract
𝐼 #!!
⋅⋅⋅

⋅⋅⋅

⋅⋅⋅

⋅⋅⋅

Suffering from performance bottlenecks in passively detecting high-quality Deepfake images due to the advancement of generative models, proactive perturbations offer a
promising approach to disabling Deepfake manipulations
by inserting signals into benign images. However, existing proactive perturbation approaches remain unsatisfactory in several aspects: 1) visual degradation due to direct
element-wise addition; 2) limited effectiveness against face
swapping manipulation; 3) unavoidable reliance on whiteand grey-box settings to involve generative models during
training. In this study, we analyze the essence of Deepfake face swapping and argue the necessity of protecting
source identities rather than target images, and we propose
NullSwap, a novel proactive defense approach that cloaks
source image identities and nullifies face swapping under a
pure black-box scenario. We design an Identity Extraction
module to obtain facial identity features from the source image, while a Perturbation Block is then devised to generate
identity-guided perturbations accordingly. Meanwhile, a
Feature Block extracts shallow-level image features, which
are then fused with the perturbation in the Cloaking Block
for image reconstruction. Furthermore, to ensure adaptability across different identity extractors in face swapping
algorithms, we propose Dynamic Loss Weighting to adaptively balance identity losses. Experiments demonstrate the
outstanding ability of our approach to fool various identity
recognition models, outperforming state-of-the-art proactive perturbations in preventing face swapping models from
generating images with correct source identities.

𝑒 #!!
𝐼!!
NullSwap

cos 𝑒! " , 𝑒!#! << cos(𝑒!! , 𝑒!" )
cos 𝑒!! , 𝑒!" → Matched Identity

𝑒!!

𝑒!"

cos 𝑒! " , 𝑒!#! → Mismatched Identity

Figure 1. ArcFace [6] extracted embeddings of images for two facial identities, clustered via t-SNE [12]. NullSwap aims to insert
the perturbation that blinds the identity extractors of face swap′
ping models, such that the perturbed embedding (es1 ) no longer
belongs to the original identity of embeddings (es1 and es2 ).

tion has reached bottlenecks in uncovering synthetic artifacts. Therefore, in recent years, researchers have moved on
to proactively protect potential victim images in advance.
While traditional passive detection approaches [3, 5, 8,
28, 30, 33, 34, 45] distinguish real and fake after Deepfake
manipulations occur, proactive defense [16, 32, 35, 36, 40]
against Deepfake aims to insert invisible signals into benign images in advance of potential Deepfake manipulations. Proactive perturbations, designed to be imperceptible to human eyes, act as countermoves to distort or nullify
Deepfake face manipulations. The perturbations are usually
trained to bring significant visual distortions and artifacts to
synthetic results regarding certain types of Deepfake manipulations.
Besides reasonable defensive effects achieved by existing studies, several issues remain unresolved. First, although manipulations such as facial attribute editing and
face reenactment have been promisingly handled [16, 27,
39], due to the additional difficulty, nullifying Deepfake
face swapping remains largely unattempted and unachieved.
Secondly, while most proactive algorithms aim to insert per-

1. Introduction
The flourishing of deep generative models has brought significant development to Deepfake face manipulation techniques [18, 38]. Due to the improving visual quality of
Deepfake images, the domain of passive Deepfake detec* Corresponding author.

9945

