This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CARP: Visuomotor Policy Learning
via Coarse-to-Fine Autoregressive Prediction
Zhefei Gong1
Pengxiang Ding12†
12
Mingyang Sun
Wei Zhao1
3

Shangke Lyu1
Siteng Huang12
3
Zhaoxin Fan
Donglin Wang1B

1
2
Westlake University
Zhejiang University
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing

{gongzhefei, dingpengxiang, lyushangke, huangsiteng, wangdonglin}@westlake.edu.cn
https://carp-robot.github.io

1. Introduction
Policy learning from demonstrations, formulated as the supervised regression task of mapping observations to actions,
has proven highly effective across a wide range of robotic
tasks, even in its simplest form. Replacing the traditional
policies with generative models, particularly those stemming

Low
Performance

😭

Success Rate (%)

In robotic visuomotor policy learning, diffusion-based
models have achieved significant success in improving the
accuracy of action trajectory generation compared to traditional autoregressive models. However, they suffer from inefficiency due to multiple denoising steps and limited flexibility
from complex constraints. In this paper, we introduce Coarseto-Fine AutoRegressive Policy (CARP), a novel paradigm
for visuomotor policy learning that redefines the autoregressive action generation process as a coarse-to-fine, nextscale approach. CARP decouples action generation into
two stages: first, an action autoencoder learns multi-scale
representations of the entire action sequence; then, a GPTstyle transformer refines the sequence prediction through a
coarse-to-fine autoregressive process. This straightforward
and intuitive approach produces highly accurate and smooth
actions, matching or even surpassing the performance of
diffusion-based policies while maintaining efficiency on par
with autoregressive policies. We conduct extensive evaluations across diverse settings, including single-task and multitask scenarios on state-based and image-based simulation
benchmarks, as well as real-world tasks. CARP achieves
competitive success rates, with up to a 10% improvement,
and delivers 10× faster inference compared to state-of-theart policies, establishing a high-performance, efficient, and
flexible paradigm for action generation in robotic tasks.

† Project lead. B Corresponding author.

CARP

Autoregressive Policy
High
Efficiency

172.8

Diffusion Policy
Low
Efficiency

High
Performance

😊

😭

98.3

94.2

130.4

54.4

Behavior Transformer

Inference Speed (Hz)

Abstract

9.6

Diffusion Policy

CARP (Ours)

Figure 1. Policy Comparison. The representative performance
among Behavior Transformer [39] served as an autoregressive
policy, Diffusion Policy [7], and our approach in the state-based
Robomimic Square task experiment. CARP demonstrates an effective balance between task performance and inference efficiency.

from the vision community, has opened new avenues for
improving performance, enabling robots to achieve the high
precision required for complex tasks in robotic scenarios.
Existing approaches have explored different generative
modeling techniques to address challenges in visuomotor policy learning. Autoregressive Modeling (AM) [8, 21, 39, 56]
provides a straightforward and efficient out-of-the-box solution, benefitting from its scalability, flexibility, and mature
exploration at lower computation requirements. However,
AM’s next-token prediction paradigm often fails to capture
long-range dependencies, global structure, and temporal coherence [19], leading to poor performance, which is essential
for many robotic tasks. Recently, Diffusion Modeling (DM)
[7, 38, 47] has emerged as a promising alternative, bridging
the precision gap in AM by modeling the gradient of the
action score function to learn multimodal distributions. Nevertheless, DM requires multiple steps of sequential denoising,
making it computationally prohibitive for robotic tasks, espe-

13460

