This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LaCoOT: Layer Collapse through Optimal Transport
Victor Quétu1 Zhu Liao1 Nour Hezbri2 Fabio Pizzati3 Enzo Tartaglione1
1
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2
ENSAE, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
3
MBZUAI, UAE
victor.quetu@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Although deep neural networks are well-known for their
outstanding performance in tackling complex tasks, their
hunger for computational resources remains a significant
hurdle, posing energy-consumption issues and restricting
their deployment on resource-constrained devices, preventing their widespread adoption.
In this paper, we present an optimal transport-based method
to reduce the depth of over-parametrized deep neural networks, alleviating their computational burden. More specifically, we propose a new regularization strategy based on
the Max-Sliced Wasserstein distance to minimize the distance between the intermediate feature distributions in the
neural network. We show that minimizing this distance enables the complete removal of intermediate layers in the
network, achieving better performance/depth trade-off compared to existing techniques. We assess the effectiveness of
our method on traditional image classification setups and
extend it to generative image models. Our code is available
at https://github.com/VGCQ/LaCoOT.

Train set

d

Optimal Transport
Figure 1. With LaCoOT, we finetune existing networks with an
OT-inspired regularization R augmenting the loss L, reducing intermediate feature distribution discrepancy. This enables the complete removal of layers.

1. Introduction

(consisting of billions of parameters) comes at the price of
higher computational costs, consuming more energy, thus
contributing to carbon emissions [62]. For instance, training
a generative model is comparable to driving a car for 10km,
while generating 10k samples is estimated to be equivalent
to driving 160 km [56]. Although training costs are expensive, the open-sourcing of these foundation models multiplies inference costs across multiple users and contributes
to carbon emissions in a significant manner. The need to reduce the environmental impact of these models at inference
by proposing computational reduction is therefore apparent.
Consequently, the rise of complexity-reduction approaches
such as pruning [21], quantization [18], and knowledge distillation [25] is motivated by the need for more efficient architectures to alleviate their resource demands. Reducing
deep neural network (DNN) complexity is not an easy task:
generalization and model complexity are inextricably related [23], but since pre-trained models are often employed
for downstream tasks, they tend to be over-parameterized.
This gives us hope: in principle, it is possible to compress
these models without any (or only little) performance degradation [59]. This observation is further supported by the

Over the last few years, the field of deep learning has undergone a significant transformation with the advent of foundation models. These are large-scale, pre-trained models
capable of performing a wide range of tasks across different domains, including computer vision. As exemplars we
can mention CLIP [52] and ALIGN [26] for image classification, DiT [47], Stable Diffusion [54] and DALL-E [53]
for image generation, or SAM [29] for semantic segmentation. The effectiveness of these foundation models is primarily driven by empirical patterns observed through scaling laws [23]: the improvements achieved by these models correlate with the exponential increase in computational
requirements due to the growth of both their size and the
number of training data [10, 55].
However, the progress enabled by these new models

20497

