This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Light-A-Video: Training-free Video Relighting via Progressive Light Fusion
Yujie Zhou1,7* , Jiazi Bu1,7* , Pengyang Ling2,7* , Pan Zhang7† , Tong Wu5 , Qidong Huang2,7 ,
Jinsong Li3,7 , Xiaoyi Dong7 , Yuhang Zang7 , Yuhang Cao7 , Anyi Rao4 , Jiaqi Wang7 , Li Niu1,6†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of Science and Technology of China 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 5 Stanford University 6 Miguo AI 7 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Relight Foreground Sequence

Relight Video Sequence

Input Video

Light

Relighted Video Frames

“..., sci-fi
RGB glowing,
”

“..., red
and blue

”

“..., on the desk,
”

“...,
city night”

,

Figure 1. Training-free video relighting. Equipped with an image relighting model (e.g., IC-Light [68]) and a video diffusion model (e.g.,
CogVideoX [64] and AnimateDiff [16]), Light-A-Video enables training-free video relighting for input videos or foreground sequences.

Abstract
Recent advancements in image relighting models, driven
by large-scale datasets and pre-trained diffusion models,
have enabled the imposition of consistent lighting. However, video relighting still lags, primarily due to the excessive training costs and the scarcity of diverse, high-quality

video relighting datasets. A simple application of image relighting models on a frame-by-frame basis leads to several
issues: lighting source inconsistency and relighted appearance inconsistency, resulting in flickers in the generated
videos. In this work, we propose Light-A-Video, a trainingfree approach to achieve temporally smooth video relighting. Adapted from image relighting models, Light-A-Video
introduces two key techniques to enhance lighting consis-

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

13315

