This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aligning Global Semantics and Local Textures in Generative Video Enhancement*
Zhikai Chen1 , Fuchen Long2†, Zhaofan Qiu2 , Ting Yao2 , Wengang Zhou1†, Jiebo Luo3 , and Tao Mei2
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
2
HiDream.ai Inc. 3 University of Rochester, Rochester, NY USA
czk654@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {longfuchen, qiuzhaofan, tiyao}@hidream.ai
zhwg@ustc.edu.cn, jluo@cs.rochester.edu, tmei@hidream.ai

Abstract

Global Semantic Alignment
#1
#1

Recent advances in video generation have demonstrated
the utility of powerful diffusion models. One important
direction among them is to enhance the visual quality of
the AI-synthesized videos for artistic creation. Nevertheless, solely relying on the knowledge embedded in the pretrained video diffusion models might limit the generalization ability of local details (e.g., texture). In this paper,
we address this issue by exploring the visual cues from a
high-quality (HQ) image reference to facilitate visual details generation in video enhancement. We present GenVE,
a new recipe of generative video enhancement framework
that pursues the semantic and texture alignment between
HQ image reference and denoised video in diffusion. Technically, GenVE first leverages an image diffusion model to
magnify a key frame of the input video to attain a semanticsaligned HQ image reference. Then, a video controller is
integrated into 3D-UNet to capture patch-level texture of
the image reference to enhance fine-grained details generation at the corresponding region of low-quality (LQ) video.
Moreover, a series of conditioning augmentation strategies are implemented for effective model training and algorithm robustness. Extensive experiments conducted on
the public YouHQ40 and VideoLQ, as well as self-built
AIGC-Vid dataset, quantitatively and qualitatively demonstrate the efficacy of our GenVE over the state-of-the-art
video enhancement approaches. Source code is available at
https://github.com/HiDream-ai/GenVE.

#1

#2
Cloth
#2

LQ Video

#2

Cat

Semantic Layout

Reference

Local Texture Alignment

Reference

Texture Patterns

HQ Video

Figure 1. An illustration of visual alignment in our generative
video enhancement (GenVE), including the global semantic alignment between LQ video and image reference, and the local texture
alignment between image reference and HQ video.

1. Introduction

quality (LQ) video to achieve better appearance and motion quality, adding more innovative details and endowing
smoother temporal dynamics to the input video. Several
studies [14, 39, 50, 55] have tackled this issue by treating
it as a conditioning video diffusion paradigm. The prior
knowledge of the input LQ video is exploited to regulate
the video denoising procedure to produce the high-quality
(HQ) counterpart. Despite having impressive results in the
realm of video enhancement, such recipe still faces the challenge of generating fine-grained details (e.g., texture) due to
the lack of some content prior knowledge.
Instead of solely relying on the input LQ video as the
condition, we consider involving an additional knowledge
connection, i.e., high-quality image reference, to bridge the
gap of fine-grained details between LQ and HQ videos. One
intuition behind this is that the visual quality of image is
usually higher than that of video with the same resolution,
which is caused by degradation brought by temporal dynamics (e.g., motion blur). Technically, we formulate our

With the rapid development of video diffusion models
[18, 39], there is a growing demand to elevate the visual
quality of the synthesized video contents. Video enhancement, as an emerging compute vision topic distinct from
traditional video super-resolution, aims to refine the low* This work was performed at HiDream.ai.
† Co-corresponding author.

17087

