This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoMan: Temporally Consistent Human Geometry Estimation using
Image-to-Video Diffusion
Gwanghyun Kim1,2˚ , Xueting Li1 , Ye Yuan1 , Koki Nagano1 , Tianye Li1 ,
Jan Kautz1 , Se Young Chun2 , Umar Iqbal1
1
NVIDIA 2 Seoul National University
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/dair/geoman

Abstract
Estimating accurate and temporally consistent 3D human
geometry from videos is a challenging problem in computer
vision. Existing methods, primarily optimized for single images, often suffer from temporal inconsistencies and fail to
capture fine-grained dynamic details. To address these limitations, we present GeoMan, a novel architecture designed
to produce accurate and temporally consistent depth and
normal estimations from monocular human videos. GeoMan addresses two key challenges: the scarcity of highquality 4D training data and the need for metric depth estimation to accurately model human size. To overcome the
first challenge, GeoMan employs an image-based model to
estimate depth and normals for the first frame of a video,
which then conditions a video diffusion model, reframing
video geometry estimation task as an image-to-video generation problem. This design offloads the heavy lifting of
geometric estimation to the image model and simplifies the
video model’s role to focus on intricate details while using priors learned from large-scale video datasets. Consequently, GeoMan improves temporal consistency and generalizability while requiring minimal 4D training data. To
address the challenge of accurate human size estimation,
we introduce a root-relative depth representation that retains critical human-scale details and is easier to be estimated from monocular inputs, overcoming the limitations
of traditional affine-invariant and metric depth representations. GeoMan achieves state-of-the-art performance in
both qualitative and quantitative evaluations, demonstrating its effectiveness in overcoming longstanding challenges
in 3D human geometry estimation from videos.

Figure 1. GeoMan provides accurate and temporally stable geometric predictions for human videos, surpassing existing methods.

image geometric estimation. When applied to videos, these
methods often struggle with temporal inconsistency, causing visible flickering artifacts and missing fine dynamic details such as subtle facial deformations, clothing wrinkles,
and hair movements. These details are crucial for applications involving human motion, as shown in Fig. 1 This work
aims to estimate highly accurate and temporally consistent
depth and normal from monocular human videos.

1. Introduction
Estimating human 3D geometry [44, 45, 56] from images or
videos has enabled numerous applications in digital human
and virtual reality. While significant progress [27, 58, 59]
has been made, most methods [17, 28, 29] focus on single* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

7451

