This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Borrowing Eyes for the Blind Spot: Overcoming Data Scarcity in
Malicious Video Detection via Cross-Domain Retrieval Augmentation
Rongpei Hong1 *, Jian Lang1 *, Ting Zhong1 , Fan Zhou1,2†
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
2
Intelligent Digital Media Technology Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province
1

{rongpei.hong,jian lang}@std.uestc.edu.cn

{zhongting,fan.zhou}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
The rapid proliferation of online video-sharing platforms
has accelerated the spread of malicious videos, creating
an urgent need for robust detection methods. However, the
performance and generalizability of existing detection approaches are severely limited by the scarcity of annotated
video data, as manually curating large-scale malicious detection datasets is both labor-intensive and impractical. To
address this challenge, we propose CRAVE, a novel CRossdomAin retrieVal augmEntation framework that transfers
knowledge from resource-rich image-text domain to enhance
malicious video detection. Specifically, CRAVE introduces
a Pseudo-Pair Retriever to identify semantically relevant
image-text data for high-quality cross-domain augmentation. Additionally, a Contrastive Cross-Domain Augmenter
is designed to disentangle domain-shared and -unique representations, effectively bridging the domain gaps during
knowledge transfer. These shared image-text representations
are then leveraged to refine video representations, yielding
more discriminative features for accurate malicious content
detection. Experiments on four video datasets demonstrate
that CRAVE largely outperforms competitive baselines in
both performance and generalization, providing an innovative and strong solution to the issue of video data-scarcity.
The code is available at https://github.com/ronpay/CRAVE.

1. Introduction
Online video-sharing platforms have seamlessly integrated
into people’s daily lives, fundamentally transforming how
information is consumed and shared. However, the rise of
malicious content (e.g., rumors and hateful messages) has
become common on video-sharing platforms, significantly
damaging politics, finance, and public health [2, 5, 35]. To
curb the spreading of the harmful videos, numerous works
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author.

Video Title,
on-screen
Text,
Transcript

Video
Input

...

Video Title,
on-screen
Text,
Transcript

Classifier

(b) Our CRAVE

Video Title,
on-screen
Text,
Transcript

massive
tornado
carves path
across eastern
kansas

(a) Prior Work

Video Input

Classifier
Text

tornado
creeped out by
man who keeps
following it in
truck and

Image-Text Data
Malicious Class

...

Knowledge
Transfer

Video Title,
on-screen
Text,
Transcript

Benign Class

Figure 1. Prior malicious detection methods (Uni-Domain Data
Only) vs. our CRAVE (Cross-Domain Knowledge Transfer).

were proposed and they designed various multimodal approaches [10, 15, 20, 22, 29] to effectively identify the malicious content in videos.
Nevertheless, in the domain of malicious video detection,
the datasets remain scarce in scale due to the labor-intensive
nature of dataset construction, which requires substantial
human effort to carefully watch and accurately annotate each
video [36]. Most datasets [6, 10, 29, 35] in malicious video
detection contain few samples (e.g., less than 1,000 samples
in hate video detection [10, 35]). As a result, the limited
scale and diversity of data cause existing methods to perform
worse on test sets than on training sets, while also learning
dataset-specific biases that hinder their ability to generalize
effectively to real-world applications [3, 40].
On the other hand, malicious detection datasets in the
image-text domain are typically large-scale and diverse, often containing tens of thousands of samples [7, 17, 26, 33],
due to the relatively low cost of data annotation. Moreover,
synthetic samples can be easily incorporated into image-text
datasets [17] by appending generated text to existing images, thereby increasing diversity through the creation of
new instances. Given the similar modality composition and

22728

