This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SyncDiff: Synchronized Motion Diffusion for Multi-Body
Human-Object Interaction Synthesis
Wenkun He1,2 , Yun Liu1,2,3 , Ruitao Liu1 , Li Yi†,1,2,3
1
Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
https://syncdiff.github.io/

Figure 1. SyncDiff is a unified framework synthesizing synchronized multi-body interaction motions with any number of hands, humans,
and rigid objects. In SyncDiff, we introduce two novel multi-body motion synchronization mechanisms, namely the alignment scores
for training and explicit synchronization strategy in inference. With these mechanisms, the synthesized results can effectively prevent
interpenetration, contact loss, or asynchronous human-object interactions in various scenarios, as shown in the above figure.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Synthesizing realistic human-object interaction motions is
a critical problem in VR/AR and human animation. Unlike
the commonly studied scenarios involving a single human
or hand interacting with one object, we address a more
generic multi-body setting with arbitrary numbers of humans, hands, and objects. The high correlations and mutual influences among bodies leads to two major challenges,
for which we propose solutions. First, to satisfy the high
demands for synchronization of different body motions, we
mathematically derive a new set of alignment scores during the training process, and use maximum likelihood sampling on a dynamic graphical model for explicit synchronization during inference. Second, the high-frequency interactions between objects are often overshadowed by the
large-scale low-frequency movements. To address this, we
introduce frequency decomposition and explicitly represent
high-frequency components in the frequency domain. Extensive experiments across five datasets with various multibody configurations demonstrate the superiority of SyncDiff
over existing state-of-the-art motion synthesis methods.

In daily life, humans frequently manipulate objects to complete tasks, often using both hands or collaborating with
others. For instance, an individual might use both hands
to set up a fallen chair, hold a brush in one hand to scrub a
bowl held in the other, or work with another person to lift
and position a heavy object. These are examples of multibody human-object interactions (HOI) [13, 41, 42], where
“body” can refer to objects, hands, or humans. Synthesizing such interactions has prominent applications in VR/AR,
human animation, and robot learning [91].
The primary challenge in multi-body HOI synthesis is
capturing the complex joint distribution of body motions
and ensuring that the individual body motions are not only
synchronized but also mutually aligned with meaningful interaction semantics. This challenge intensifies as the number of bodies increases with high-order motion relationships. Existing works only focus on some specific configurations with limited body numbers, such as a single
hand interacting with an object [91], a person engaging
with an object [42, 79], or two hands manipulating a single item [13, 70], where motion trajectories are often simple and without too many semantics. These works introduce
configuration-specific priors and are restricted to particular
setups, leading to a strong demand for a generic method

11731

