This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffIP: Representation Fingerprints for Robust IP Protection of Diffusion
Models
Zhuoling Li1 Haoxuan Qu1 Jason Kuen2 Jiuxiang Gu2
Qiuhong Ke3 Jun Liu1 * Hossein Rahmani1
1
Lancaster University 2 Adobe Research 3 Monash University
{z.li81, h.qu5}@lancaster.ac.uk, {kuen, jigu}@adobe.com,
Qiuhong.Ke@monash.edu, {j.liu81, h.rahmani}@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
Intellectual property (IP) protection for diffusion models
is a critical concern, given the significant resources and
time required for their development. To effectively safeguard the IP of diffusion models, a key step is enabling the
comparison of unique identifiers (fingerprints) between suspect and victim models. However, performing robust and
effective fingerprint comparisons among diffusion models
remains an under-explored challenge, particularly for diffusion models that have already been released. To address
this, in this work, we propose DiffIP, a novel framework for
robust and effective fingerprint comparison between suspect
and victim diffusion models. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our framework.

identification, especially in legal disputes, the general process typically involves owners of both the suspect and victim models presenting their respective models to an authoritative third party for arbitration [47, 61]. In this context, a
critical step is enabling the comparison of unique identifiers
(fingerprints) between the suspect and victim models to ascertain whether model theft or subsequent development has
occurred.

1. Introduction

Existing research on fingerprint comparison primarily fall into two categories: external-watermark-injection
methods and intrinsic-fingerprint-identification methods.
External-watermark-injection methods [19, 25, 46, 66] generally inject artificial fingerprints (i.e., watermarks) into
the victim model, allowing for later extraction and identity verification. However, the process of injecting artificial watermarks can incur extra training costs and impair model performance [52]. More importantly, such a
process is inapplicable to models that have already been
released as open-source to the community. In light of
these limitations, intrinsic-fingerprint-identification methods [16, 32, 50, 68, 71] have emerged as a promising alternative across various network types, including large language models and image classifiers. This line of methods
considers using the model’s inherent and native attributes
as its intrinsic fingerprint, making them free of external
watermark injection thus feasible for even already-released
models [71]. Specifically, rather than directly using model
weights [68, 74] as intrinsic fingerprints, a well-established
observation is that a model’s feature representation generally exhibits enhanced robustness compared to its weights
during fine-tuning [18, 33, 58, 75]. Building on this insight, many recent intrinsic-fingerprint-identification methods [16, 32, 40, 43, 71] have focused on using a model’s
feature representations as its intrinsic fingerprints.

Recently, diffusion models have emerged as powerful tools,
enabling the general public to easily generate high-quality
images, such as cartoon illustrations [27], architectural design sketches [7], and advertising posters [69]. However, the development of diffusion models is typically
resource- and time-intensive, leading advanced diffusion
models (e.g., FLUX [2] and DeepFloyd [3]) to be released
typically with specific licenses [1, 4] when open-sourced.
These licenses protect the intellectual property (IP) of opensource diffusion models and often restrict their use within
the community to non-commercial and non-production purposes. Unfortunately, violations of these licenses are common, with wrapped or fine-tuned versions of open-source
diffusion models being misused to generate images in various styles for commercial gain [6]. Given this, it is essential
for open-source diffusion model owners to identify whether
a suspect model is a derivative of their original (victim) diffusion model or is independently developed. During such
* Corresponding Author

17035

Given the advantages of representation-based intrinsicfingerprint-identification methods, in this work, we aim to
protect the IP of open-source diffusion models also from

