This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoMusic-driven Human Dance Motion Estimation with Skeleton Mamba
Quang Nguyen1 , Nhat Le2 , Baoru Huang7,∗ , Minh Nhat Vu3 , Chengcheng Tang4 ,
Van Nguyen1 , Ngan Le5 , Thieu Vo6 , Anh Nguyen7
1
5

FPT Software AI Center 2 The University of Western Australia 3 TU Wien 4 Meta

University of Arkansas 6 National University of Singapore 7 University of Liverpool ∗ Corresponding author
https://zquang2202.github.io/SkeletonMamba/

Figure 1. We present a new dataset and method for estimating human dance motion from the egocentric video and music.

Abstract
Estimating human dance motion is a challenging task
with various industrial applications. Recently, many efforts
have focused on predicting human dance motion using either egocentric video or music as input. However, the task
of jointly estimating human motion from both egocentric
video and music remains largely unexplored. In this paper,
we aim to develop a new method that predicts human dance
motion from both egocentric video and music. In practice,
the egocentric view often obscures much of the body, making accurate full-pose estimation challenging. Additionally,
incorporating music requires the generated head and body
movements to align well with both visual and musical inputs. We ﬁrst introduce EgoAIST++, a new large-scale
dataset that combines both egocentric views and music with
more than 36 hours of dancing motion. Drawing on the
success of diffusion models and Mamba on modeling sequences, we develop an EgoMusic Motion Network with a
core Skeleton Mamba that explicitly captures the skeleton
structure of the human body. We illustrate that our approach is theoretically supportive. Intensive experiments
show that our method clearly outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches and generalizes effectively to real-world data.

1. Introduction
Dance is a fundamental form of human expression, creativity, and is deeply embedded in cultural and social contexts [21, 36]. Estimating full-body dance motion is a crucial task with many industrial applications, such as dance
education [13, 20], virtual metaverses [33, 35], or ﬁlm animation [6, 82]. While several works have focused on human dance pose estimation, they mostly tackle the problem
using the input from third-person video [4, 25, 62, 63, 96]
or motion tracking device [54, 55]. In practice, third-person
video methods suffer from occlusions, viewpoint variations,
and depth ambiguity, while motion-tracking devices require
costly hardware, making them less practical for real-world
AR/VR or metaverse applications. These constraints highlight the need for an alternative approach, such as ﬁrstperson (egocentric) view dance motion estimation.
Recently, egocentric input has been utilized to estimate
human motions in everyday activities such as walking and
running [30, 57, 78, 79]. A key challenge in egocentric
pose estimation is that much of the body often falls outside the camera’s view, creating ambiguities in full-body
capture. This issue is even more pronounced in dance motion, where movements are more complex and dynamic.
To overcome this, many works incorporate motion tracking

12023

