This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Long-Horizon Vision-Language-Action System:
Reasoning, Acting and Memory
Daixun Li1,∗

Yusi Zhang1,∗ Mingxiang Cao1,∗ Donglai Liu1,∗ Weiying Xie1,†
Lunkai Lin2 Zhiqiang Xie2 Yunsong Li1
1
Xidian University 2 AgileX Robotics
https://xdu-imagelab.github.io/MindExplore/
MindExplore System
Memory Mechanism

Dataset

SandThink-21k

COA-BLEU 1

Acting

Reasoning

SandGo-1k

Reasoning Layer Validation

Tianlin Hui1

COA-ROUGE_L

W-ACC

Multi-Modal: RGB Depth LiDAR

Chain of Thought

Reasoning Layer
Specialized
Chain
of
Thought

Acting Layer
Reasoning Layer
Memory Mechanism

OpenVLA

COA-ACC

Multi-terrain
Multi-task
W-BLEU 1

S-BLEU 1

Routing Gating
90.42%

RDT

W-ROUGE_L

Cold Start & Iterative DPO

Acting Layer

Long-Horizon Tasks
Boost by 31.33%
30.00%
6.70%

MLLM

MindExplore

Zero-Shot Tasks

Arm Expert

Base Expert

D

D RGB LiDAR

RGB LiDAR

Multimodal
Multimodal
Diffusion
Policy Diffusion Policy

<Goal Explanation>
<Goal Decomposition>
<Sub-Goal 1>
<Sub-Goal 2>
<Step 1> … <Step n>

S-ACC

S-ROUGE_L
COA: Cruising and Obstacle Avoidance S: Sampling W: Writing
Gemini-2.0-Flash
InternVL2.5-8B
ChatGPT-4o-latest
Qwen2.5-VL-7B
MindExplore-RM
DeepSeek-VL2

Long-Horizon Tasks

Cross-Expert Tasks
Slope

Branch

Instruction Following Tasks
Write

Emergency

Choose

Awareness

Rough
0-Shot
Pit

Perceive seen & unseen object Complete multiple meta-actions

Adapt to the dynamic sand scene

Complete long-horizon tasks as instructed

Figure 1. Overview of MindExplore System: A hierarchical embodied intelligence system including reasoning, acting, and memory,
offering state-of-the-art generalizability in highly dynamic scenes. Unlike conventional planar embodied intelligence models that consolidate all capabilities within a single layer, MindExplore introduces a novel expert-level hierarchical embodied system architecture.

Abstract

icy Experts strategy is built inspired by signals and multimodal inputs for adaptively selecting skill experts and generating closed-loop action sequences. Also, it integrates
a lightweight Multimodal Diffusion Policy (MMDP) to enhance spatial perception by fusing multi-visual modality
features. Besides, the pioneering memory mechanism establishes feedback between the reasoning and acting layers,
facilitating adaptive execution of long-horizon tasks and
real-time replanning. Notably, we create SandGo-1k and
SandThink-21k, the first expert-level multimodal embodied
dataset and CoT dataset tailored for sandy environments.
At a high execution frequency of 30 FPS, MindExplore is
3.01 × more successful than existing methods in unstructured and dynamic environments.

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) is crucial for autonomous
decision-making in embodied systems. While current methods have advanced single-skill abilities, their short-horizon
capability limits applicability in real-world scenarios. To
address this challenge, we innovatively propose MindExplore, a general hierarchical VLA system with cross-skill for
long-horizon tasks in highly dynamic sand. The key insight
is to iteratively align the knowledge domain of task planning and action execution. Thus, this task-oriented action
enables outstanding generalization across a wide range of
real-world scenarios. In the reasoning layer, task-specific
chains of thought (CoT) are designed for planning longhorizon task sequences and providing meta-action signals.
In the acting layer, a simple but powerful Mixture of Pol∗ Equal contribution.

† Corresponding authors.

6839

