This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Safeguarding Vision-Language Models: Mitigating Vulnerabilities to Gaussian
Noise in Perturbation-based Attacks
Jiawei Wang1,*
1

Yushen Zuo2,* Yuanjun Chai3 Zhendong Liu4
Yichun Feng6,† Kin-Man Lam2,†

Yicheng Fu5

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
3
University of Washington, 4 Nanjing University, 5 Stanford University,
6
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
wangjiawei@mail.ustc.edu.cn
zuoyushen12@gmail.com
yjchai@uw.edu
dz20330019@smail.nju.edu.cn
easonfu@stanford.edu
fengyichun22@mails.ucas.ac.cn
kin.man.lam@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

guage Models (LLMs) by integrating both visual and textual
information, allowing them to interpret and respond based
on multimodal inputs. This advancement enables VLMs to
tackle a wider range of tasks, from understanding images to
generating rich, contextually aware responses that leverage
both language and visual cues. While LLMs have incorporated various training techniques, such as Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [5, 15], to ensure
alignment with ethical and legal standards, VLMs remain
more susceptible to certain risks. Fine-tuning VLMs for
visual instruction-following can disrupt the alignment carefully established in LLMs [51]. Additionally, the integration of visual modalities not only introduces extra risk factors, such as a heightened vulnerability to jailbreak attacks
[27, 35], but also poses greater challenges for model robustness. Compared to LLMs, VLMs must account for a
broader spectrum of visual scenarios, rendering them more
sensitive to even minor noise perturbations.

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) extend the capabilities
of Large Language Models (LLMs) by incorporating visual information, yet they remain vulnerable to jailbreak
attacks, especially when processing noisy or corrupted images. Although existing VLMs adopt security measures during training to mitigate such attacks, vulnerabilities associated with noise-augmented visual inputs are overlooked. In
this work, we identify that missing noise-augmented training causes critical security gaps: many VLMs are susceptible to even simple perturbations such as Gaussian noise.
To address this challenge, we propose Robust-VLGuard, a
multimodal safety dataset with aligned / misaligned imagetext pairs, combined with noise-augmented fine-tuning that
reduces attack success rates while preserving functionality of VLM. For stronger optimization-based visual perturbation attacks, we propose DiffPure-VLM, leveraging
diffusion models to convert adversarial perturbations into
Gaussian-like noise, which can be defended by VLMs with
noise-augmented safety fine-tuning. Experimental results
demonstrate that the distribution-shifting property of diffusion model aligns well with our fine-tuned VLMs, significantly mitigating adversarial perturbations across varying intensities. The dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/JarvisUSTC/DiffPureRobustVLM

Perturbation-based adversarial attacks have long targeted
image classification neural networks [18, 42]. With the
emergence of VLMs, many studies have adapted traditional optimization-based perturbation attack methods to
perform jailbreak attacks on these models [13, 27, 35]. Concurrently, substantial research has focused on defending
against perturbation-based attacks. For instance, DiffPure
[33] utilizes the denoising capabilities of Diffusion Models
as an image preprocessing method to neutralize perturbation noise in adversarial images, though it does not fully
counteract perturbation attacks, particularly in VLMs [35].
Zong et al. [51] introduced VLGuard, a vision-language
dataset containing both safe and unsafe queries and images,
designed to fine-tune VLMs for enhanced protection against
jailbreak attacks. However, VLGuard’s effectiveness has
only been evaluated against the FigStep attack and it does

1. Introduction
Recently, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [3, 8, 29, 50]
have significantly extended the capabilities of Large Lan*
†

Equal contribution. Work done when Yushen Zuo was intern at PolyU.
Corresponding author

2773

