This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SketchSplat: 3D Edge Reconstruction via Differentiable
Multi-view Sketch Splatting
Haiyang Ying, Matthias Zwicker
University of Maryland, College Park
https://oceanying.github.io/SketchSplat

Abstract
Edges are one of the most basic parametric primitives
to describe structural information in 3D. In this paper, we
study parametric 3D edge reconstruction from calibrated
multi-view images. Previous methods usually reconstruct
a 3D edge point set from multi-view 2D edge images, and
then fit 3D edges to the point set. However, noise in the
point set may cause gaps among fitted edges, and the recovered edges may not align with input multi-view images since
the edge fitting depends only on the reconstructed 3D point
set. To mitigate these problems, we propose SketchSplat,
a method to reconstruct accurate, complete, and compact
3D edges via differentiable multi-view sketch splatting. We
represent 3D edges as sketches, which are parametric lines
and curves defined by attributes including control points,
scales, and opacity. During reconstruction, we iteratively
sample Gaussian points from a set of sketches and rasterize the Gaussians onto 2D edge images. Then the gradient of the image loss can be back-propagated to optimize
the sketch attributes. Our method bridges 2D edge images
and 3D edges in a differentiable manner, which ensures that
3D edges align well with 2D images and leads to accurate
and complete results. We also propose a series of adaptive topological operations to reduce redundant edges and
apply them along with the sketch optimization, yielding a
more compact reconstruction. Finally, we contribute an accurate 2D edge detector that improves the performance of
both ours and existing methods. Experiments show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy, completeness, and compactness on a benchmark CAD dataset.

(a) EMAP

(b) EdgeGS

(c) Ours

2D Edge Images

2D Edge Images

2D Edge Images

Render & Back-propagate
UDF
Extract

3D Gaussians

3D Gaussians

Extract

Sample

Edge Points

Edge Points

Fit

Fit

Back-Prop

3D Sketches/Edges

Adaptive
Topology Control
Differentiable

3D Edges

3D Edges

Non-differentiable

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We propose SketchSplat, a multi-view 3D edge reconstruction method based on differentiable sketch splatting. Previous
methods [7, 19] first recover edge points and then fit them to 3D
edges, which is sensitive to noise and often leads to incomplete
results. Instead, we sample Gaussian points from 3D sketches
and rasterize them to compute a rendering loss, enabling direct
edge parameter optimization under image supervision. Additionally, we design adaptive topology control methods to refine edge
structures during training and contribute an improved 2D edge detection method for more accurate reconstruction.

cornerstone of computer vision and graphics, 3D edge reconstruction underpins a wide range of applications, including CAD modeling [10, 20, 56], SLAM [13, 24, 41, 50], and
autonomous driving [8, 35, 36]. Despite its significance,
achieving high-quality 3D edge reconstructions remains a
challenging task due to the inherent difficulty of ensuring

Edges serve as one of the most fundamental elements of visual perception, playing a crucial role in understanding the
geometry and structure of the 3D world. Unlike point-based
representations, continuous edges offer a more compact and
perceptually aligned way to describe 3D structures. As a

25649

