This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAVias: Mitigate any Visual Bias
Ioannis Sarridis1,2
Christos Koutlis1
Symeon Papadopoulos1
Christos Diou2
1
Information Technologies Institute, CERTH, Greece
2
Department of Informatics and Telematics, Harokopio University of Athens, Greece
{gsarridis, ckoutlis, papadop}@iti.gr

Bird

image dataset
tagging

extracted tags
beak, bird, black, calm,
couple, duck, float, gray,
lake, pond, reed, swim,
water, water bird

LLM

{isarridis, cdiou}@hua.gr

potential biases
beak, bird, black, calm,
couple, duck, float, gray,
lake, pond, reed, swim,
water, water bird

features not to learn
VL encoding

Dog

Model
tagging

brown, car, chihuahua,
dog, driveway, grass,
house exterior, leash,
pavement, stand, yard

LLM

brown, car, chihuahua,
dog, driveway, grass,
house exterior, leash,
pavement, stand, yard

VL encoding

Figure 1. MAVias identifies instance-level potential visual biases through foundational models that extract tags representing visual features
and assess relevance to the target class. Then, MAVias encodes these features within the vision-language space and integrates them into a
bias-aware framework to train a model that is invariant to such visual biases.

Abstract

datasets [6, 22, 26], enabling models to learn complex patterns and visual features with impressive accuracy. However, alongside this progress, concerns have emerged about
biases embedded in these models [11, 30, 33, 40, 43, 47] –
often stemming from unintended correlations present in the
training data [13, 23, 28, 31]. The correlated attributes that
are irrelevant act as “shortcuts” and can significantly impact the model’s reliability and generalization [12, 37, 38].
It is important to note that in the context of this paper, we
define as visual bias any characteristic that does not contribute to defining the target class, which we refer to as “irrelevant”. To address this, several methodologies have been
developed. Broadly, these fall into two categories: Bias
label-Aware (BA) and label-Unaware (BU) methods. BA
methods leverage the annotations of attributes introducing
the biases to address them [2, 20, 44, 48]. BU methods
focus on extracting bias pseudo-labels in cases of extreme
biases where a bias-proxy model (or bias-capturing classifier) can be trained using the task’s target labels that closely
align with the bias labels [16, 29, 32, 41].

Mitigating biases in computer vision models is an essential step towards trustworthy artificial intelligence systems.
Existing bias mitigation methods are limited to predefined
biases, preventing their use in visual datasets where multiple, possibly unknown biases exist. To address this limitation, we introduce MAVias, an open-set bias mitigation approach that leverages foundation models to discover
spurious associations between visual attributes and target
classes. MAVias first captures a wide variety of visual features in natural language via a foundation image tagging
model, and then leverages a large language model to select
visual features that define the target class, resulting in a
set of language-coded potential visual biases. It then translates these biases into vision-language embeddings and introduces an in-processing bias mitigation approach to prevent the model from encoding information related to them.
Experiments on diverse datasets, including CelebA, Waterbirds, ImageNet, and UrbanCars, show that MAVias effectively detects and mitigates a wide range of biases in visual
recognition tasks, outperforming current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction

While effective in certain contexts, both BA and BU
methods have limited applicability when there are multiple,
complex, and possibly unknown biases. Common challenging scenarios include:

Computer Vision (CV) progress has been largely driven
by Deep Learning (DL) advances [9, 15] and large-scale

• Unknown biases: In large general-purpose CV datasets,
such as ImageNet, biases are difficult to identify and

1271

