This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TACO: Taming Diffusion for in-the-wild Video Amodal Completion
Ruijie Lu1,2 ⋆ , Yixin Chen2† , Yu Liu2,3 , Jiaxiang Tang1 ,
Junfeng Ni2,3 , Diwen Wan1 , Gang Zeng1† , Siyuan Huang2†
⋆
1

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI 3 Tsinghua University

Amodal Object

Input Video

Amodal Object

Input Video

Amodal Object

Input Video

2

Work done as an intern at BIGAI † Corresponding Authors

Figure 1. We propose TACO for video amodal completion. Our model is capable of synthesizing consistent amodal contents in diverse
in-the-wild occluded scenarios, including robotic manipulation, scene understanding, autonomous driving, and Internet videos.

Abstract
Humans can infer complete shapes and appearances of objects from limited visual cues, relying on extensive prior
knowledge of the physical world. However, completing partially observable objects while ensuring consistency across
video frames remains challenging for existing models, especially for unstructured, in-the-wild videos. This paper tackles Video Amodal Completion (VAC), aiming to generate
the complete object consistently throughout the video given
a visual prompt specifying the object of interest. Leveraging
the rich, consistent manifolds learned by pre-trained video
diffusion models, we propose a conditional diffusion model,

TACO, that repurposes these manifolds for VAC. To enable
its effective and robust generalization to challenging in-thewild scenarios, we curate a large-scale synthetic dataset
with multiple difficulty levels by systematically imposing occlusions onto un-occluded videos. Building on this, we devise a progressive fine-tuning paradigm that starts with simpler recovery tasks and gradually advances to more complex ones. We demonstrate TACO’s versatility on a wide
range of in-the-wild videos from Internet, as well as on diverse, unseen datasets commonly used in autonomous driving, robotic manipulation, and scene understanding. Moreover, we show that TACO can be effectively applied to various downstream tasks like object reconstruction and pose

13638

