This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LongAnimation: Long Animation Generation with Dynamic Global-Local
Memory
Nan Chen1 , Mengqi Huang1 , Yihao Meng2 , Zhendong Mao1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{chen nan,huangmq}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, ymengas@connect.ust.hk, {zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Animation colorization is a crucial part of real animation
industry production. Long animation colorization has high
labor costs. Therefore, automated long animation colorization based on the video generation model has significant
research value. Existing studies are limited to short-term
colorization. These studies adopt a local paradigm, fusing overlapping features to achieve smooth transitions between local segments. However, the local paradigm neglects global information, failing to maintain long-term
color consistency. In this study, we argue that ideal longterm color consistency can be achieved through a dynamic
global-local paradigm, i.e., dynamically extracting global
color consistent features relevant to the current generation. Specifically, we propose LongAnimation, a novel
framework, which mainly includes a SketchDiT, a Dynamic
Global-Local Memory (DGLM), and a Color Consistency
Reward. The SketchDiT captures hybrid reference features
to support the DGLM module. The DGLM module employs
a long video understanding model to dynamically compress
global historical features and adaptively fuse them with
the current generation features. To refine the color consistency, we introduce a Color Consistency Reward. During inference, we propose a color consistency fusion to
smooth the video segment transition. Extensive experiments
on both short-term (14 frames) and long-term (average 500
frames) animations show the effectiveness of LongAnimation in maintaining short-term and long-term color consistency for open-domain animation colorization task. The
code can be found at https://cn-makers.github.
io/long_animation_web/.

Figure 1. Comparison with existing paradigm. (a) Existing studies achieve local color consistency by fusing the overlaps of adjacent video segments, suffering low long-term color consistency.
(b) Our dynamic global-local paradigm dynamically extracts color
features of global historical segments as global memory and the
color features of the latest generated segment as local memory,
achieving high long-term color consistency. All segments are generated from one same reference image.

1. Introduction

crucial part of real animation industry production. The real
animation industry first draws and colors one key frame (not
just the first frame, but also the frame in the sequence).
Then, sketch sequences around key frame, especially long
sequences up to 10 ∼ 30 seconds (300 to 1000 frames),
are colored based on the key frame. Coloring such long sequences is extremely labor-intensive, which makes the research of automated long animation coloring highly significant. The primary goal of long animation coloring is main-

Animation is one of the most entertaining and aesthetic
forms in the video industry. Animation colorization is a
† Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

10032

