This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HIS-GPT: Towards 3D Human-In-Scene Multimodal Understanding
Jiahe Zhao1,2 , Ruibing Hou1 *, Zejie Tian3 , Hong Chang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2
1
2

State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China

3

Communication University of China

zhaojiahe22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {houruibing, changhong, sgshan}@ict.ac.cn
2021211023003@mails.cuc.edu.cn

Activity

Prediction

Interaction

Reasoning

Question:
What is he doing?
Answer:
Walk towards the cabinet.

Question:
What might he do next?
Answer:
Operate the microwave.

Question:
How is he interacting with the laptop?
Answer:
He picks up the laptop.

Question:
Can he move on without encountering obstacles?
Answer:
No, there is a chair blocking his moving path.

Planning

Question:
As an embodied assistant, what can you
do to help him?
Answer:
Since he is holding the laptop, and the
chair is blocking his way, I can help by
moving the chair to the side of the bed,
out of the person’s way.

Position
Question:
What is his position?
Answer:
At the corner of the sofa.

Navigation

Question:
How can he get to the refrigerator?
Answer:
Keep his moving direction, turn left at the
end of the sofa, and walk straight.

(a)

Scene
What is his position?

Scene LLM
I cannot see the person
Human
What is his position?

Human LLM
I cannot see his surroundings
Scene Human
What is his position?

HIS-GPT
At the corner of the sofa

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of HIS-QA task, which understands human behaviors in scene context. HIS-QA tasks span from basic perception
tasks, such as recognizing human activity, interaction, and position in scene, to higher order functions like prediction, reasoning, planning,
and navigation, facilitating embodied intelligence in real world. (b) Illustration of HIS-GPT. Unlike previous models that focus solely on
either scene or human understanding, HIS-GPT could jointly perceive scene and human modalities to tackle the challenges of HIS-QA.

Abstract

teractions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that HISGPT sets a new state-of-the-art on HIS-QA tasks. We
hope this work inspires future research on human behavior analysis in 3D scenes, advancing embodied AI
and world models. Codes and data will be available at
https://github.com/ZJHTerry18/HumanInScene.

We propose a new task to benchmark human-in-scene understanding for embodied agents: Human-In-Scene Question Answering (HIS-QA). Given a human motion within a
3D scene, HIS-QA requires the agent to comprehend human states and behaviors, reason about its surrounding
environment, and answer human-related questions within
the scene. To support this new task, we present HISBench, a multimodal benchmark that systematically evaluates HIS understanding across a broad spectrum, from
basic perception to commonsense reasoning and planning. Our evaluation of various vision-language models
on HIS-Bench reveals significant limitations in their ability to handle HIS-QA tasks. To this end, we propose
HIS-GPT, the first foundation model for HIS understanding. HIS-GPT integrates 3D scene context and human motion dynamics into large language models while incorporating specialized mechanisms to capture human-scene in-

1. Introduction
In recent years, intelligent systems for 3D vision-language
understanding have witnessed remarkable progress [12, 25,
48, 49, 51, 56], largely driven by the advancements in Large
Language Models (LLMs) [15–17, 21, 58]. Specifically, 3D
scene LLMs [24, 30, 32, 55] excel in tasks such as captioning and grounding within 3D layouts, whereas 3D human
LLMs [34, 39, 43, 65] exhibit strong capabilities in openended interpretations of human poses and motions. By em*Corresponding author.

4317

