This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DialNav: Multi-turn Dialog Navigation with a Remote Guide
Leekyeung Han1 Hyunji Min1 Gyeom Hwangbo2
Jonghyun Choi3 Paul Hongsuck Seo1
1
Korea University 2 University of Seoul 3 Seoul National University
{happilee12, daream2, phseo}@korea.ac.kr, gyeomhwangbo@uos.ac.kr, jonghyunchoi@snu.ac.kr

Initial Instruction !:

The goal room contains a carpet
Initial Node #

Dialog " between Navigator and Guide:

!

Navigator

!

Trajectory !

Navigator

!

Navigator

I'm in a bedroom with blue walls, a single bed, and two
pictures on the wall. Where should I go?
There are 2 bedrooms with blue walls in this house.
Could you be more specific?
The bed is single sized. One of the pictures has a drawing
with a red circle and a yellow triangle.
You’re in the bedroom on the second floor. Get out of the
room, and head to the lounge area with black dining table.
I see a long black dining table with 10 chairs. There’s also a
beige carpet on the floor. Is this the goal room?
No. Go pass the dining table, turn right to get into the room
with circular wooden table. That’s your goal room.

Goal Region ℛ

??
!Guide
!Guide
!Guide

!

!

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed DialNav task. Navigator is tasked with reaching the goal region R (yellow circle in the map) from the
initial node b based on an ambiguous initial instruction I, which provides only a hint about R (e.g., ‘The goal room contains a carpet’).
During navigation, Navigator can ask questions to obtain additional guidance (orange text boxes). Guide has knowledge of the environment
but lacks information of Navigator’s location. For successful navigation, Guide must estimate Navigator’s location through dialog D and
provide directions from the estimated position to the goal region (blue text boxes). Note that each QA pair in D is mapped to a node (red and
purple nodes mapped to dialog turns by dotted arrows) in the navigation trajectory T .

Abstract

1. Introduction
An embodied AI agent with a physical body perceives and
interacts with the world, responding to human instructions
or environmental stimuli. Since an embodied agent physically engages with its surroundings, misinterpreting human
commands or hallucinating unintended actions can cause inconvenience or even physical harm. To mitigate these risks,
the agent must seek clarification when faced with ambiguous
tasks. A natural approach is dialog-based interaction, allowing the agent to refine its understanding before acting. This
enhances both safety and effectiveness in task execution.

We introduce DialNav, a novel collaborative embodied dialog task, where a navigation agent (Navigator) and a remote guide (Guide) engage in multi-turn dialog to reach a
goal location. Unlike prior work, DialNav aims for holistic
evaluation and requires the Guide to infer the Navigator’s
location, making communication essential for task success.
To support this task, we collect and release Remote Assistance in Navigation (RAIN) dataset, human-human dialog
paired with navigation trajectories in photorealistic environments. We design a comprehensive benchmark to evaluate
both navigation and dialog, and conduct extensive experiments analyzing the impact of different Navigator and Guide
models. We highlight key challenges and publicly release
the dataset, code, and evaluation framework to foster future research in embodied dialog. Our code and dataset are
available at: https://happilee12.github.io/DialNav.

Despite the importance of communicative ability in embodied AI, its inherent challenges hinders progress. First,
collecting dialog-based data is costly, as it requires two individuals to engage in real-time interaction while performing
the task. Secondly, a dialog-based task necessitates not only
equipping the agent with the ability to ask questions but
also constructing a counterpart model capable of providing

8514

