This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Free2 Guide: Training-Free Text-to-Video Alignment using Image LVLM
Jaemin Kim,
Bryan Sangwoo Kim,
Jong Chul Ye
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
{kjm981995, bryanswkim, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
Free2 Guide

Baseline

"A person is strumming guitar"

"A dog and a horse"
2

Baseline

Free2 Guide

Baseline

Free Guide

Baseline

"A happy fuzzy panda playing guitar nearby a campfire, snow
mountain in the background"

Free2 Guide

"The bund Shanghai, vibrant color"

Figure 1. Representative video results using Free2 Guide, a novel framework that enables training-Free, gradient-Free video Guidance
leveraging a Large Vision-Language Model. Each image shows the first frame of a video.

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved impressive results in generative tasks for text-to-video (T2V) synthesis. However,
achieving accurate text alignment in T2V generation remains challenging due to the complex temporal dependencies across frames. Existing reinforcement learning (RL)based approaches to enhance text alignment often require
differentiable reward functions trained for videos, hindering
their scalability and applicability. In this paper, we propose Free2 Guide, a novel gradient-free and training-free
framework for aligning generated videos with text prompts.
Specifically, leveraging principles from path integral control,
Free2 Guide approximates guidance for diffusion models using non-differentiable reward functions, thereby enabling the
integration of powerful black-box Large Vision-Language
Models (LVLMs) as reward models. To enable image-trained
LVLMs to assess text-to-video alignment, we leverage stitching between video frames and use system prompts to capture
sequential attributions. Our framework supports the flexi-

ble ensembling of multiple reward models to synergistically
enhance alignment without significant computational overhead. Experimental results confirm that Free2 Guide using
image-trained LVLMs significantly improves text-to-video
alignment, thereby enhancing the overall video quality. Our
results and code are available at our project page 1 .

1. Introduction

17920

Diffusion models [21, 33, 34, 36] have emerged as powerful and versatile tools for generative modeling, achieving
state-of-the-art results in tasks that require fine-grained control over content generation, such as text-to-image (T2I) [33]
and text-to-video (T2V) generation [7, 15]. However, achieving perfect alignment with text conditions remains a significant challenge [12]. This issue becomes even more challenging in the video domain, where maintaining text-relevant
content across frames requires handling complex temporal
1 https://free2guide.github.io/

