This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StrandHead: Text to Hair-Disentangled 3D Head Avatars
Using Human-Centric Priors
Xiaokun Sun, Zeyu Cai, Ying Tai, Jian Yang, Zhenyu Zhang*
Nanjing University ∗ Corresponding Author
xiaokun sun@smail.nju.edu.cn, caizeyu010612@gmail.com,

on:

{yingtai, csjyang}@nju.edu.cn, zhangjesse@foxmail.com
“A handsome
American man with
slicked-back sandy
blonde hair.”
“Brad Pitt with
medium-length,
tousled blonde hair.”
“Chris Hemsworth
with side-swept
sandy blonde hair.”

(b) Realistic Hair-Decoupled 3D Head Avatars

“Marilyn Monroe
with iconic short
curly platinum
blonde hair.”

…

(a) Input Prompts

(d) Hairstyle Transfer

(c) Strand-Based 3D Hair

(e) Hairstyle Editing

(f) Physics-Based Simulation

Figure 1. Given (a) input prompts, StrandHead generates (b) realistic 3D head avatars featuring strand-level attributes and (c) 3D hair
strands by utilizing human-specific 2D generative priors and 3D hair strand geometric priors. By precisely capturing the internal geometry
of hair strands, our approach enables seamless and flexible (d) hairstyle transfer and (e) editing, as well as (f) physics-based simulation.

Abstract
While haircut indicates distinct personality, existing
avatar generation methods fail to model practical hair due
to the data limitation or entangled representation. We propose StrandHead, a novel text-driven method capable of
generating 3D hair strands and disentangled head avatars
with strand-level attributes. Instead of using large-scale
hair-text paired data for supervision, we demonstrate that
realistic hair strands can be generated from prompts by distilling 2D generative models pre-trained on human mesh
data. To this end, we propose a meshing approach guided
by strand geometry to guarantee the gradient flow from
the distillation objective to the neural strand representation. The optimization is then regularized by statistically
significant haircut features, leading to stable updating of
strands against unreasonable drifting. These employed
2D/3D human-centric priors contribute to text-aligned and
realistic 3D strand generation. Extensive experiments show
that StrandHead achieves the state-of-the-art performance

13393

on text to strand generation and disentangled 3D head
avatar modeling. The generated 3D hair can be applied
on avatars for strand-level editing, as well as implemented
in the graphics engine for physical simulation or other
applications. Project page: https://xiaokunsun.
github.io/StrandHead.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Creating 3D head avatars is crucial for many applications including digital telepresence, gaming, movies,
and AR/VR. Hairstyles reflecting personal characteristics
greatly impact the fidelity and realism of digital humans.
Traditional methods rely heavily on manual effort, making them time-consuming and labor-intensive. Recent advances [52, 75, 79, 88] achieve automatic 3D head generation with the research paradigm based on supervised learning. However, these methods require costly 3D training
data, which significantly limits their generalization capabilities and restricts potential applications.
With the rapid development of text-driven generation

