This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanSt3R: Multi-view Consistent Panoptic Segmentation
Lojze Žust

Yohann Cabon
Juliette Marrie
Leonid Antsfeld
Boris Chidlovskii
Jérôme Revaud
Gabriela Csurka
Naver Labs Europe
firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation in 3D is a fundamental problem
in scene understanding. Existing approaches typically rely
on costly test-time optimizations (often based on NeRF) to
consolidate 2D predictions of off-the-shelf panoptic segmentation methods into 3D. Instead, in this work, we propose a unified and integrated approach PanSt3R, which
eliminates the need for test-time optimization by jointly
predicting 3D geometry and multi-view-consistent panoptic segmentation in a single forward pass. Our approach
harnesses the 3D representations of MUSt3R, a recent scalable multi-view version of DUSt3R, and 2D representations of DINOv2, then performs joint multi-view panoptic
prediction via a mask transformer architecture. We additionally revisit the standard post-processing mask merging procedure and introduce a more principled approach
for multi-view segmentation. We also introduce a simple
method for generating novel-view predictions based on the
predictions of PanSt3R and vanilla 3DGS. Overall, the proposed PanSt3R is conceptually simple yet fast and scalable, and achieves state-of-the-art performance on several
benchmarks, while being orders of magnitude faster. More
information and examples available on our project page.

Figure 1. PanSt3R jointly predicts 3D geometry and panoptic segmentation of a scene in a single forward pass.

els [6, 56, 60, 65].
Several recent works [21, 27, 45, 51, 66] have extended
panoptic segmentation to 3D scenes represented as point
clouds, meshes or voxels. These methods typically take a
3D representation (e.g. a point cloud) as input and label it
using neural networks, such as PointNet [41, 42], designed
for direct operation on such data. However, acquiring dense
and accurate point clouds requires dedicated sensors and
recent models [26, 49, 55, 58, 61] struggle with noisy or
sparse point clouds derived from unposed images.
Instead, in this work, we propose to jointly perform 3D
reconstruction and panoptic segmentation given an unconstrained set of unposed images or video frames. In this
sense our method is closer to NeRF-based [2, 16, 25, 50,
57, 75] or 3DGS-based methods [62] that start from a collection of images. These approaches typically rely on posed
images and off-the-shelf 2D panoptic segmentation models [15], followed by lifting and fusing the 2D panoptic predictions to 3D via NeRFs [36] or 3DGS [22].
While this allows for aggregation of potentially inconsistent and noisy 2D panoptic labels from multiple images
into consistent 3D labels, these methods have several limitations: (1) they depend on accurate camera poses, (2) they
require costly test-time optimization to align 2D segmentations with 3D geometry, and (3) they inherently separate
the 2D segmentation and 3D reconstruction pipelines, potentially sacrificing efficiency and accuracy.
We argue that 3D reconstruction and 3D panoptic segmentation are two intrinsically connected tasks, both involving reasoning in terms of 3D geometry of the scene
and its instance decomposition. Therefore, we propose to

1. Introduction
Robust understanding of the semantics of 3D scenes is key
to many applications like virtual reality, robot navigation,
or autonomous driving. Such use cases require an accurate
decomposition of the 3D environment into separate object
instances of known classes. In 2D vision, this joint task
of semantic and instance segmentation, denoted as panoptic image segmentation [24], consists of instance segmentation of things classes (i.e. countable objects such as cars)
and semantic segmentation of stuff classes (i.e. uncountable
classes such as road or sky). Following [24], a large number of solutions have been proposed for 2D panoptic segmentation, based on CNNs [8, 30, 33, 37, 64], Transformers [14, 15, 29, 43, 67, 79], or more recently diffusion mod-

5856

