This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Integrating Visual Interpretation and Linguistic Reasoning
for Geometric Problem Solving
Zixian Guo1,2
1

Ming Liu1

Qilong Wang3

Harbin Institute of Technology
4

2

Zhilong Ji4

Jinfeng Bai4

Lei Zhang2

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Tomorrow Advancing Life

Abstract

5

3

Wangmeng Zuo1,5

Tianjin University

Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou

been made to extend the powerful reasoning capability to
visual and textual multi-modal scenarios [4, 7, 10, 42, 45].
Current development of vision-language models typically
employ a connector module, e.g. Linear layers [18], QFormer [15], Perceiver-Resampler [1], etc., to integrate visual features with text features of LLMs. They collect highquality image-text paired data and design sophisticated endto-end training processes to achieve joint visual and textual
comprehension and reasoning in a unified process [37, 38].
However, compared to LLMs, existing large visionlanguage models (LVLMs) can hardly achieve the same
level of reasoning proficiency[35, 44]. This gap in performance is particularly evident in visual-intensive tasks that
require precise extraction and interpretation of visual information to support complex reasoning processes [12]. We
find that a main barrier that hinders effective reasoning is
that existing LVLMs struggle with precisely extracting the
necessary information from images. The inaccurate understanding of the image brings a bottleneck to the subsequent
reasoning process, such as hallucinations in the reasoning.
For example, in Figure 1, the foundation model
Qwen2VL-7B [32] can not correctly answer the question
due to incorrectly associating the variable x with the angle
W . However, if we prompt the VL model to describe the
figure of the question, it can precisely summarize all the interior angles correctly. Then, we can get the correct answer
by using a reasoning LM to derive the solution. We show
more similar cases in the supplementary material. Even
when the images are frustratingly simple, LVLM can still
make obvious mistakes if it answers the question directly.
This implies that some parts of the current problems in VL
reasoning are not actually reasoning problems but insufficient visual understanding.
This observed discrepancy motivates our thinking of
whether an end-to-end visual-language reasoning model is
optimal or whether the problem can be more effectively addressed through a division of labor between vision specialists and linguistic reasoners. Current LLMs have reached
unprecedented capabilities in textual reasoning [8, 29],
while specialized vision models demonstrate remarkable

Current large vision-language models (LVLMs) typically
employ a connector module to link visual features with text
embeddings of large language models (LLMs) and use endto-end training to achieve multi-modal understanding in
a unified process. Well alignment needs high-quality pretraining data and a carefully designed training process.
Current LVLMs face challenges when addressing complex
vision-language reasoning tasks, with their reasoning capabilities notably lagging behind those of LLMs. This paper proposes a paradigm shift: instead of training end-toend vision-language reasoning models, we advocate for developing a decoupled reasoning framework based on existing visual interpretation specialists and text-based reasoning LLMs. Our approach leverages (1) a dedicated visionlanguage model to transform the visual content of images
into textual descriptions and (2) an LLM to perform reasoning according to the visual-derived text and the original question. This method presents a cost-efficient solution for multi-modal model development by optimizing
existing models to work collaboratively, avoiding end-toend development of vision-language models from scratch.
By transforming images into language model-compatible
text representations, it facilitates future low-cost and flexible upgrades to upcoming powerful LLMs. We introduce an outcome-rewarded joint-tuning strategy to optimize the cooperation between the visual interpretation and
linguistic reasoning model. Evaluation results on visionlanguage benchmarks demonstrate that the decoupled reasoning framework outperforms recent LVLMs. Our approach yields particularly significant performance gains on
visually intensive geometric mathematics problems. The
code is available: https://github.com/guozix/DVLR.

1. Introduction
Recent application of reinforcement techniques to the learning of large language models (LLMs) triggers amazing reasoning ability [21, 28] in the form of long natural language thought or slow-thinking [36]. Much efforts have

3988

