This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pi-GPS: Enhancing Geometry Problem Solving by Unleashing the Power of
Diagrammatic Information
Junbo Zhao1 * Ting Zhang1,3 * † Jiayu Sun1 Mi Tian2 Hua Huang1,3†
1
Beijing Normal University 2 TAL Education Group
3
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology and Educational Application (MOE)

Abstract

Problem Text

Parsed Text Formal Language

Diagram

The rectangle is inscribed
into the circle. Find the InscribedIn(Rectangle($),Circle($))
exact circumference of the Find(CircumferenceOf(Circle($)))
circle.

Geometry problem solving has garnered increasing attention due to its potential applications in intelligent education field. Inspired by the observation that text often introduces ambiguities that diagrams can clarify, this paper presents Pi-GPS, a novel framework that unleashes the
power of diagrammatic information to resolve textual ambiguities, an aspect largely overlooked in prior research.
Specifically, we design a micro module comprising a rectifier and verifier: the rectifier employs MLLMs to disambiguate text based on the diagrammatic context, while the
verifier ensures the rectified output adherence to geometric rules, mitigating model hallucinations. Additionally,
we explore the impact of LLMs in theorem predictor based
on the disambiguated formal language. Empirical results
demonstrate that Pi-GPS surpasses state-of-the-art models,
achieving a nearly 10% improvement on Geometry3K over
prior neural-symbolic approaches. We hope this work highlights the significance of resolving textual ambiguity in multimodal mathematical reasoning, a crucial factor limiting
performance. The code for Pi-GPS is publicly available at:
https://github.com/hellozting/Pi-GPS.

The two polygons are
similar. Find UT.

Similar(Polygon($1),Polygon($2))
Find(LengthOf(Line(U,T)))

Find the area of the
shaded region. Round to
the nearest tenth.

Find(AreaOf(Shaded(Shape($))))

Figure 1. Illustrating the ambiguity presented in text. Text alone
offers insufficient information to resolve the ambiguity, and disambiguation becomes straightforward when supported by a diagram.

hibited remarkable achievements, these efforts predominantly focus on language processing, neglecting the diagrammatic component of the problem. However, GPS transcends language-based reasoning, demanding a profound
understanding and manipulation of diagrammatic information, an enduring challenge in the field.
Existing approaches to GPS can be broadly categorized
into symbolic [4, 30] and neural-based methods [8, 13, 16–
18, 22, 31, 37, 38, 40, 42–45]. Symbolic methods, grounded
in formal logic and mathematical rigor, rely on explicit
theorem databases and symbolic manipulation to construct
logically sound reasoning paths. These methods excel in
providing interpretable steps and ensuring formal correctness. However, the predefined rules may struggle to accommodate diverse problem types. In contrast, neural-based
approaches leverage data-driven learning to generate solution paths from vast training datasets. These models offer flexibility and scalability, handling problems of varying complexity. However, their reliance on large, highquality annotated datasets and the lack of rigorous correctness guarantees pose significant limitations. Therefore,
many works [21, 25, 36, 46] attempt to combine the procedural power of symbolic models with the general power of
neural models. Such hybrid approaches in general involves
two key steps: parsing and reasoning. Parsing entails ex-

1. Introduction
Geometry Problem Solving (GPS) aims to derive solutions
from a textual problem description and its corresponding diagram. As a distinct and pivotal aspect of multimodal mathematical reasoning, GPS requires a nuanced understanding of visual shapes, intricate spatial relationships, symbolic abstraction, and logical inference across both textual
and diagrammatic inputs. This makes it a long-standing
challenge in mathematical reasoning and artificial intelligence [8, 14, 21, 28, 35]. While recent notable milestones [3, 33] such as the gold-medal-level solution to
geometry problems using AlphaGeometry2 [11] have ex* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1526

