This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language Driven Occupancy Prediction
Zhu Yu1,† Bowen Pang1,2,† Lizhe Liu2,B
Si-Yuan Cao3,1 Maochun Luo2 Mingxia Chen2
1

Runmin Zhang1 Qiang Li2
Sheng Yang2 Hui-Liang Shen1,B

Zhejiang University 2 Unmanned Vehicle Dept., CaiNiao Inc., Alibaba Group
3
Ningbo Global Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
Project Page:

https://github.com/pkqbajng/LOcc

Abstract
We introduce LOcc, an effective and generalizable framework for open-vocabulary occupancy (OVO) prediction.
Previous approaches typically supervise the networks
through coarse voxel-to-text correspondences via image
features as intermediates or noisy and sparse correspondences from voxel-based model-view projections. To alleviate the inaccurate supervision, we propose a semantic transitive labeling pipeline to generate dense and finegrained 3D language occupancy ground truth. Our pipeline
presents a feasible way to dig into the valuable semantic information of images, transferring text labels from images to LiDAR point clouds and ultimately to voxels, to establish precise voxel-to-text correspondences. By replacing the original prediction head of supervised occupancy
models with a geometry head for binary occupancy states
and a language head for language features, LOcc effectively uses the generated language ground truth to guide the
learning of 3D language volume. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our transitive semantic labeling
pipeline can produce more accurate pseudo-labeled ground
truth, diminishing labor-intensive human annotations. Additionally, we validate LOcc across various architectures,
where all models consistently outperform state-of-the-art
zero-shot occupancy prediction approaches on the Occ3DnuScenes dataset.

(a) Human-annotated ground
truth

(b) Image features as
intermediates

(c) Voxel-based model-view
projection

(d) Semantic transitive labeling
(ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of pseudo-Labeled 3D language occupancy
ground truth from different pipelines.

a fixed set of semantic categories, as the dense occupancy
ground truth is generated by merging multi-frame LiDAR
point clouds with semantic annotations. In this process, human annotators must label each point across thousands of
LiDAR frames with a semantic class, which remains highly
labor-intensive and costly. Instead, open-vocabulary occupancy (OVO) facilitates predicting the occupancy with
arbitrary sets of vocabularies using only unlabeled imageLiDAR data for training [35, 56].
Due to the lack of large-scale occupancy datasets with
language annotations, distilling knowledge from visionlanguage models [4, 18, 31, 35] into occupancy prediction
networks presents a viable solution. Some approaches [18,
35] use image features from the pretrained vision-language
models [18, 31] as intermediates [4, 35], subsequently
bridging the gap between 3D voxel and language features.
However, the feature values of objects with the same semantics may vary, as image features inherently encode both
semantic and appearance information, leading to inconsistencies in semantic representations across different inputs. Consequently, the pseudo-labeled ground truth derived from these features is inherently noisy in terms of

1. Introduction
Vision-based occupancy prediction aims to estimate both
the complete scene geometry and semantics using only image inputs, which serves as a critical foundation for various 3D perception tasks, such as autonomous driving [10],
embodied agent [15, 36], mapping and planning [34, 42].
Existing supervised occupancy prediction approaches [26,
27, 33, 34, 37, 39] are generally constrained to predicting
†: Equal contribution. B: Corresponding author.

7548

