This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WINS: Winograd Structured Pruning for Fast Winograd Convolution
Cheonjun Park1 , Hyun Jae Oh3 , Mincheol Park2 , Hyunchan Moon4 , Minsik Kim3 ,
Suhyun Kim5 , Myung Kuk Yoon6 , and Won Woo Ro3 *
1
Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, 2 Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology,
3
Yonsei University, 4 LG Electronics, 5 Kyung Hee University, 6 Ewha Womans University
{cheonjun.park, hyunjae.oh, mincheol.park, minsik.kim, wro}@yonsei.ac.kr,
{mhcqwe92, dr.suhyun.kim}@gmail.com, myungkuk.yoon@ewha.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent GPUs leverage Winograd convolution and structured pruning to significantly accelerate inference. First,
Winograd convolution is theoretically 2.25× faster than
standard convolution. Second, structured pruning reduces
inference time without additional overhead as the pruning
ratio increases. However, applying conventional structured
pruning alongside Winograd convolution is inefficient. Existing structured pruning methods, which do not account
for how GPUs process Winograd convolution, require large
pruning unit sizes, leading to significant information loss.
In this paper, we propose Winograd Structured Pruning
(WINS), the first approach to employ optimized structured
pruning for Winograd convolution. WINS is designed based
on an in-depth analysis of Winograd convolution’s computational characteristics on GPUs. Additionally, we introduce two variants, WINS-B and WINS-AB, which further enhance performance. Experimental results show that
WINS-AB achieves up to 2.8× practical speedup in baseline inference on GPUs while preserving the accuracy of
ResNet-18 on ImageNet.

Figure 1. Comparison of speedup among (a) structured pruning,
(b) Winograd weight pruning, and (c) WINS on ResNet-18.

1. Introduction

AI, and their importance is increasingly emphasized. In
particular, CNNs still achieve the highest performance in
accuracy-critical applications, and Winograd convolution is
used in the latest models [5, 54].
Despite the success of network pruning and Winograd convolution in moving towards on-device applications, combining both techniques is still limited. Finegrained pruning (e.g., weight pruning [15] and balanced
pruning [41, 63]) shows strong sparsity by zeroing extremely large weights for the compression of CNNs. However, Winograd convolution [39] manipulates the sparse
weights using linear transformations, which removes the
sparsity and generates dense matrices. On the other hand,
middle-grained pruning (e.g., tile pruning [36] and block
sparse [43]) can avoid such a manipulation owing to its bigger pruning unit size than the transformation unit size. Despite its compatibility, the holistic use of middle-grained
pruning and Winograd convolution poses a challenge in
model deployment, as it makes irregular, sparse transformed matrices that need special-purpose hardware for efficient processing [26, 64]. Coarse-grained pruning (e.g.,
filter pruning [19, 32]) makes regularly coalesced data in the
Winograd convolution. However, this technique is limited
to relieving a significant information loss due to its large
pruning unit size [49] (see Fig. 1-(a)).
One prior work [39] proposes Winograd weight pruning
to tackle the vanishing sparsity of fine-grained pruning in

CNNs are a powerful tool for computer vision tasks [29,
51]. However, their high computational demands have hindered their practical, on-device applications in mobile devices [45]. To overcome these challenges, industrial leaders, such as AMD and NVIDIA, have accepted network
pruning [42, 50] and Winograd convolution [30, 57] to
yield compact CNNs and process them rapidly on their
GPGPU features. Both optimization methods could achieve
a greater than a two-fold reduction in the processing time of
CNNs [1, 60, 61, 68]. Model compression techniques such
as pruning are essential for the advancement of on-device
* Corresponding author

22477

