This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V2XScenes: A Multiple Challenging Traffic Conditions Dataset for
Large-Range Vehicle-Infrastructure Collaborative Perception
Bowen Wang1
Yafei Wang1∗
Wei Gong1,2
Siheng Chen1,3
1
1
Genjia Liu
Minhao Xiong
Chin Long Ng1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

1

{98.wangbowen, wyfjlu, weigong2020, sihengc, LGJ1zed, xmh123, clong.ng}@sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Lingang Economic Development (Group) Co., Ltd.

3

Shanghai AI Laboratory

https://advrc-wangbw.github.io/V2XScenes/

Abstract
Whether autonomous driving can effectively handle
challenging scenarios such as bad weather and complex
traffic environments is still in doubt. One of the critical difficulties is that the single-view perception makes it hard to
obtain the complementary perceptual information around
the multi-condition scenes, such as meeting occlusion and
congestion. To investigate the advantages of collaborative perception in high-risky driving scenarios, we construct a multiple challenging conditions dataset for largerange vehicle-infrastructure cooperative perception, called
V2XScenes, which includes seven typical multi-modal layouts at successive road section. Particularly, each selected
scene is labeled with a specific condition description, and
we provide unique object tracking numbers across the entire road section and sequential frames to ensure consistency. Comprehensive cooperative perception benchmarks
of 3D object detection and tracking for large-range roadside scenes are summarized, and the quantitative results
based on the state-of-the-art demonstrate the effectiveness
of collaborative perception facing challenging scenes. The
data and benchmark codes of V2XScenes will be released.

single-vehicle perception by facilitating effective data exchange among multiple roadside units. Recently, a series
of V2X datasets have been released for the development of
cooperative perception, such as [47, 54, 57, 58, 62]. Among
them, DAIR-V2X [57] and V2X-seq[58] introduce the first
vehicle-infrastructure cooperative perception and trajectories prediction datasets based on the real-world data. V2XReal[47] proposes the first cooperative perception dataset
that can both support Vehicle-to-Infrastructure cooperation
or Vehicle-to-Vehicle cooperation. The existing solid works
truly make great advancements in V2X technologies.

1. Introduction

However, the advantages of cooperative perception in
challenging scenarios such as adverse weather remain difficult to validate due to the scarcity of real-world V2X
perception data. Although some works summarize the
challenging V2X driving maneuvers of traffic violations,
overtaking, and U-turns [62], the cooperative perception
range and sensor modalities are still remain development.
Due to the uncertainty of traffic dynamics and weather
condition in the real-world, it is a tough task to collect
the cooperative perception data under complicated scenarios. Some researchers use the simulators such as Carla
[23, 24, 40, 51, 53] and generative world models [10, 22, 42]
to construct challenging driving scenarios. Nevertheless,
the model trained with simulated data introduced a significant domain gap to real-world scenarios.
In this paper, we introduce a multi-condition and largerange V2X dataset, named V2XSences, which mainly focuses on complicated scenarios such as heavy rainy night,
congestion and occlusion. We collect the cooperative perception data under a large-range successive road section
with a range view of 600m. Particularly, to compare the
perception capabilities of different sensors in the challenging scenario, V2XSences consists of 5 sensor categories,
including 3 types of LiDAR (Mechanical LiDAR, SolidState LiDAR, Blind Repair LiDAR), 4D High-Resolution
Millimeter wave Radar and Camera. Unlike the previous

Single-vehicle perception systems often suffer from occlusion and sparse sensor observations, posing significant
safety risks, especially under challenging conditions such as
driving on rainy nights or in congested traffic with frequent
visual occlusions. [41]. To address the issues, vehicle-toeverything (V2X) for cooperative perception is a promising
solution [14, 26], which aims to mitigate the limitations of
* Corresponding author: Yafei Wang
This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Number 52372417 and Number 52072243.

28385

