This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Transferability of Targeted Adversarial Examples via Inverse Target
Gradient Competition and Spatial Distance Stretching
Zhankai Li1 , Weiping Wang1 , Jie Li1 , Shigeng Zhang1 , Yunan Hu1 , Song Guo2
1

2

Central South University
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

janlzk7@gmail.com, {wpwang, lijie55, sgzhang, hyn318}@csu.edu.cn, songguo@ust.hk

Abstract

However, the significance of adversarial attacks extends
beyond these applications, as they have inadvertently become a widely used defense mechanism in real-world scenarios. A prime example is Google’s login verification system, reCAPTCHA, which aims to distinguish real users
from bots to prevent abuse. Adversarial examples (AEs) are
one of the primary image verification methods employed,
as illustrated in Figure 1. This raises an important question: is it secure enough? Since we do not know the bot’s
model architecture or training domain, the transferability of
AEs becomes especially crucial. Most current research on
adversarial transferability focuses on non-targeted attacks
[14, 40], even extending to cross-architecture and crossdomain attacks [15, 37], achieving notable performance. In
contrast, targeted attacks face a significant increase in difficulty due to the substantial changes in decision boundaries,
and as a result, they still maintain a relatively low success
rate. However, for login verification, given that the output
category of non-targeted attacks is uncontrollable, and even
the original verification images without perturbation may
have “low-quality” issues (leading to misidentification by
bots), in such cases, targeted AEs are often safer and more
reliable than non-targeted AEs that may cause the deployed
bots to misjudge into the ground truth category.

In the field of AI security, deep neural networks (DNNs)
are highly sensitive to adversarial examples (AEs), which
can cause incorrect predictions with minimal input perturbations. Although AEs exhibit transferability across models, targeted attack success rates (TASRs) are low due to
differences in feature dimensions and decision boundaries.
To enhance targeted AE transferability, we propose a novel
approach using Inverse Target Gradient Competition (ITC)
and Spatial Distance Stretching (SDS) in the optimization process. Specifically, we employ a siamese-networklike framework to generate both non-targeted and targeted
AEs. The ITC mechanism applies non-targeted adversarial gradients each epoch to impede the optimization of targeted perturbations, thereby improving robustness. Additionally, a top-k SDS strategy guides AEs to penetrate target
class regions in the latent space while distancing from nontargeted regions, achieving optimal transferability. Compared to state-of-the-art competition-based attacks, our
method significantly improves transferable TASRs by 16.1%
and 21.4% on mainstream CNNs and ViTs, respectively, and
demonstrates superior defense-breaking capabilities. Our
code is available here.

Currently, effective targeted attack methods are primarily based on transformation [1, 18, 29, 34], achieving transferability through input augmentation. However, the relentless pursuit and stacking of a greater variety of transformations, although enhancing transferability to some extent, does not guarantee robust performance in white-box
attacks. Moreover, this stacking approach based on affine
and perspective transformations offers limited insight into
the complexity and vulnerability of DNNs. Recently,
competition-based attacks have been proposed [2, 30], offering a unique perspective. Their advantage lies in compelling AEs to consider the more complex and diverse feature representations within DNNs during their generation,
simulating various noise interferences and attack strategies,

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks involve adding small, often imperceptible perturbations to input data, which can lead otherwise
high-performing models to produce incorrect outputs. The
concept of adversarial attacks was first introduced by [23]
and further developed by [7], who demonstrated the vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNNs) to these perturbations. With the rapid advancement of DNNs in recent years,
the security risks revealed by adversarial attacks have become a critical issue. Adversarial attacks are now widely
used to assess model security, improve model robustness,
and drive research in defense technologies.

3716

