This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Joint Learning of Optical Flow and Intensity with Event Cameras
Shuang Guo1 , Friedhelm Hamann1,2 and Guillermo Gallego1,2,3 .
1
TU Berlin and Robotics Institute Germany,
2
Science of Intelligence Excellence Cluster, 3 Einstein Center for Digital Future.

Abstract
Event cameras rely on motion to obtain information about
scene appearance. This means that appearance and motion
are inherently linked: either both are present and recorded
in the event data, or neither is captured. Previous works
treat the recovery of these two visual quantities as separate
tasks, which does not fit with the above-mentioned nature of
event cameras and overlooks the inherent relations between
them. We propose an unsupervised learning framework that
jointly estimates optical flow (motion) and image intensity
(appearance) using a single network. From the data generation model, we newly derive the event-based photometric
error as a function of optical flow and image intensity. This
error is further combined with the contrast maximization
framework to form a comprehensive loss function that provides proper constraints for both flow and intensity estimation. Exhaustive experiments show our method’s state-ofthe-art performance: in optical flow estimation, it reduces
EPE by 20% and AE by 25% compared to unsupervised approaches, while delivering competitive intensity estimation
results, particularly in high dynamic range scenarios. Our
method also achieves shorter inference time than all other
optical flow methods and many of the image reconstruction
methods, while they output only one quantity. Project page:
https://github.com/tub-rip/E2FAI

(a) Input Events

(b) Estimated
Flow

(c) Estimated
Intensity

(d) Image
(reference)

Figure 1. Our method computes accurate optical flow and intensity images from event-camera data despite complex scenarios,
fast motion and high dynamic range. The above result is obtained
using data from interlaken 00 b sequence of DSEC [13].

In the past decade, a variety of computer vision algorithms have been developed to recover fundamental visual quantities from event streams [4, 9, 14, 50], such as
EV-FlowNet [52] for optical flow estimation, and E2VID
[31] for image intensity reconstruction. Despite achieving
good performance, most of these methods are designed to
estimate a single visual quantity: optical flow or image intensity. This philosophy does not fit well with the fact that,
under constant illumination, motion and appearance are inherently entangled in the input data, since events are produced by moving intensity patterns on the image plane (e.g.,
Fig. 1a). More accurate and robust estimation becomes possible when the synergies between both visual quantities are
properly leveraged.
To achieve this goal, we newly derive the event-based
photometric error (PhE) as a function of optical flow and
image intensity, and combine it with the state-of-the-art
contrast maximization (CMax) framework [7], yielding a
comprehensive loss function. Both PhE and CMax provide
constraints on scene appearance and motion. The former
focuses more on appearance (i.e., intensity) while the latter focuses more on motion (i.e., optical flow). Their complementary properties give rise to a well-behaved loss in
both aspects. In addition, our loss function also includes
a full consideration of the internal synergies between esti-

1. Introduction
Event cameras [18, 30] are novel bio-inspired vision sensors
that offer attractive properties compared to traditional cameras: high temporal resolution, very high dynamic range
(HDR), low power consumption and high pixel bandwidth,
resulting in reduced motion blur. Hence, event cameras
have a large potential for computer vision and robotics applications in challenging scenarios for traditional cameras,
such as high speed motion and HDR illumination. However,
novel methods are required to process the unconventional
output of these sensors (a stream of asynchronous per-pixel
brightness changes instead of conventional images) in order
to unlock their potential [9].

7980

