This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Discrete Tokens: Treating Them as Conditions for
Continuous Autoregressive Image Synthesis
Peng Zheng1,2 Junke Wang3 Yi Chang1 Yizhou Yu4 Rui Ma1,5, * Zuxuan Wu2,3, *
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute
3
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
4
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
5
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MOE, China

Abstract
Discrete

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have
spurred interests in encoding images as discrete tokens and
leveraging autoregressive (AR) frameworks for visual generation. However, the quantization process in AR-based visual generation models inherently introduces information
loss that degrades image fidelity. To mitigate this limitation, recent studies have explored to autoregressively predict continuous tokens. Unlike discrete tokens that reside
in a structured and bounded space, continuous representations exist in an unbounded, high-dimensional space, making density estimation more challenging and increasing the
risk of generating out-of-distribution artifacts. Based on
the above findings, this work introduces DisCon (DiscreteConditioned Continuous Autoregressive Model), a novel
framework that reinterprets discrete tokens as conditional
signals rather than generation targets. By modeling the
conditional probability of continuous representations conditioned on discrete tokens, DisCon circumvents the optimization challenges of continuous token modeling while
avoiding the information loss caused by quantization. DisCon achieves a gFID score of 1.38 on ImageNet 256×256
generation, outperforming state-of-the-art autoregressive
approaches by a clear margin. Project page: https:
//pengzheng0707.github.io/DisCon.

2

(Dog, Black)

5

(Cat, White)

3.4 0.6*(Dog, Black)+0.4*(Cat, White)
Continuous

Generation FID (gFID)↓

Ours

6.1 0.2*(Dog, Black)+0.8*(Cat, White)
0

Dog

2.7 (Dog, 0.7*Black)

1

Cat

5.3 (Cat, 0.9*White)

2.4
ACDIT
2
HART

1.6

VAR
MAR

MaskBit

RAR

DisCon (ours)

1.2
0

0.5

1
1.5
Reconstruction FID (rFID)↓

2

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Visual Data Representations. Discrete AR models represent data as separate categories, simplifying learning but introducing quantization-induced information loss, leading to higher
rFID. In contrast, continuous AR models assume data lies in a
continuous space, achieving lower rFID. However, unlike discrete
tokens that reside in a structured and bounded space, continuous
representations exist in an unbounded, high-dimensional space, increasing the risk of generating out-of-distribution artifacts, which
limits improvements in gFID. Our approach models data as a finite
set of disjoint continuous representations, using discrete tokens to
determine the broader structure and continuous tokens to refine details, effectively reducing optimization difficulty while achieving
both low rFID and gFID.

Image generation has long been a central topic in artificial intelligence. More recently, the remarkable success
of large language models (LLMs) [1, 18, 21, 33, 36] has
reignited interest in autoregressive (AR)-based image generation [44], offering a promising path towards general multimodal LLMs [25, 29, 32, 35, 37, 40–42, 51]. These methods first quantized images into discrete tokens, and then
* Corresponding authors

apply autoregressive transformers to predict them in a sequential manner. However, the quantization step inevitably
discards some visual information, thereby constraining the
fidelity of the generated images.

17390

