This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ForestFormer3D: A Unified Framework for End-to-End Segmentation of Forest
LiDAR 3D Point Clouds
Binbin Xiang1 , Maciej Wielgosz1 , Stefano Puliti1 , Kamil Král2
Martin Krůček2 , Azim Missarov2 , Rasmus Astrup1
1
Norwegian Institute of Bioeconomy Research (NIBIO)
2
Silva Tarouca Research Institute for Landscape and Ornamental Gardening
{binbin.xiang, maciej.wielgosz, stefano.puliti, rasmus.astrup}@nibio.no
{kral, krucek, missarov}@vukoz.cz

Abstract
The segmentation of forest LiDAR 3D point clouds, including both individual tree and semantic segmentation, is fundamental for advancing forest management and ecological research. However, current approaches often struggle with the complexity and variability of natural forest
environments. We present ForestFormer3D, a new unified
and end-to-end framework designed for precise individual
tree and semantic segmentation. ForestFormer3D incorporates ISA-guided query point selection, a score-based block
merging strategy during inference, and a one-to-many association mechanism for effective training. By combining
these new components, our model achieves state-of-the-art
performance for individual tree segmentation on the newly
introduced FOR-instanceV2 dataset, which spans diverse
forest types and regions. Additionally, ForestFormer3D
generalizes well to unseen test sets (Wytham woods and
LAUTx), showcasing its robustness across different forest
conditions and sensor modalities. The FOR-instanceV2
dataset and the ForestFormer3D code are publicly available at https://bxiang233.github.io/FF3D/.

1. Introduction
Forests, covering approximately 31% of the Earth’s land
surface, are essential for biodiversity conservation, carbon
storage, provision of timber and a wide range of ecosystem services central to the quality of life. Forests are complex 3D structures and to fully understand and map the
forest ecosystems requires a detailed 3D representation of
the structure. Advancements in high-density LiDAR technology now enable large-scale capture of 3D point clouds
with unprecedented detail, paving the way for improved
and streamlined forest ecosystem data capture. However, to

24717

capitalize on the captured data, further advancement in semantic and instance segmentation of 3D forest point clouds
is still required. Significant progress has been made in
3D segmentation for indoor and urban environments, but
moving to forest scenes introduces a substantial increase
in complexity. The organic, intertwined structure of trees,
highly variable sizes and shapes, and intricate occlusion patterns demand specialized segmentation methods. In simpler
forest structures, like boreal forests, LiDAR-derived point
clouds have been shown to enable tasks such as forest semantic segmentation, tree instance segmentation, and tree
biophysical parameter estimation [62]. However, in more
complex broadleaved, temperate, or tropical forests, increased structural complexity and species richness demand
specialized and novel segmentation methods beyond current
approaches [57], which can address the following key unresolved challenges:
• Structural complexity. Dense canopies, characterized
by closely spaced trees with plastic and overlapping tree
crowns, complicate the separation of individual trees (see
Fig. 1(a)).
• Multi-scale representation. Forests contain both large
canopy trees and small understory trees, requiring models capable of segmenting across multiple scales (see
Fig. 1(b)).
• Variability in point distribution. Differences in acquisition sensors, forest types, and environmental conditions lead to variations in point density and distribution,
necessitating robust generalization across diverse forest
scenes and sensor configurations (see differences among
Fig. 1(a)-(c)).
Focusing on improving the state-of-the-art for more
complex forests, this paper provides two primary contributions:
• FOR-instanceV2 dataset: We introduce an expanded
dataset based on FOR-instance [41], with a primary fo-

