This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoboTron-Sim: Improving Real-World Driving via Simulated Hard-Case
Baihui Xiao1† Chengjian Feng1†
Feng Yan1 Yujie Zhong1

Zhijian Huang1,2
Lin Ma1‡

1

Meituan 2 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
https://stars79689.github.io/RoboTron-Sim

Abstract
Collecting real-world data for rare high-risk scenarios,
long-tailed driving events, and complex interactions remains challenging, leading to poor performance of existing autonomous driving systems in these critical situations.
In this paper, we propose RoboTron-Sim that improves
real-world driving in critical situations by utilizing simulated hard cases. First, we develop a simulated dataset
called Hard-case Augmented Synthetic Scenarios (HASS),
which covers 13 high-risk edge-case categories, as well
as balanced environmental conditions such as day/night
and sunny/rainy. Second, we introduce Scenario-aware
Prompt Engineering (SPE) and an Image-to-Ego Encoder
(I2E Encoder) to enable multimodal large language models to effectively learn real-world challenging driving skills
from HASS, via adapting to environmental deviations and
hardware differences between real-world and simulated
scenarios. Extensive experiments on nuScenes show that
RoboTron-Sim improves driving performance in challenging scenarios by ∼50%, achieving state-of-the-art results
in real-world open-loop planning. Qualitative results further demonstrate the effectiveness of RoboTron-Sim in better managing rare high-risk driving scenarios.

Figure 1. RoboTron-Sim achieves stronger improvements in
real-world driving capabilities by leveraging simulated hard-case
data. We perform representative methods to evaluate the improvements from simulated data. Results show traditional method
VAD achieves minor gains while LLaVA-OneVision struggles to
improve performance in challenging scenarios. RoboTron-Sim
achieves over 50% improvement in hard-to-drive scenarios.

1. Introduction

tional models [1, 3, 44] and extensive datasets [9, 26, 32]
to catalyze innovation. This data-driven approach not only
enhances scalability [18, 21] but also promises continuous
improvement as incremental data integration [41, 44]. Thus,
end-to-end AD is positioned to redefine the future of autonomous mobility by offering a more adaptive solution to
complex driving scenarios.
In the era of data-driven innovation, the availability of
high-quality datasets [4, 37] plays a pivotal role in technological advancement. Current mainstream AD systems
like UniAD [14] and VAD [22], which employ end-to-end
architectures, remain constrained by supervised learning
paradigms requiring fine-grained annotations such as 3D
bounding boxes for agents and semantic segmentation of
lane markings. The exorbitant cost of annotation has become a critical bottleneck in scaling these end-to-end methods, while the inherent long-tail distribution [20] challenge
in AD tasks exacerbates the data dilemma – most collected
data consists of trivial scenarios like straight-road driving [27], with safety-critical cases being extremely scarce.
This distribution shift significantly limits the practical effectiveness of data-driven approaches, particularly in complex
edge cases and risk-sensitive scenarios where data collec-

The landscape of autonomous driving (AD) has seen great
breakthroughs in recent years, driven primarily by the development of end-to-end AD systems [5, 7, 14, 18, 36,
40, 42, 45, 48]. These systems represent a paradigm shift
from traditional module-based approaches, which separate
perception [15, 28, 31], prediction [8, 11, 13], and planning [12, 33, 34] into distinct components. Instead, endto-end AD synthesizes these functionalities into a unified,
integrated framework, utilizing the robustness of founda† Equal contribution. ‡ Corresponding author.

27380

