This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Distribution Bridging: Unsupervised Adaptation
for Large-scale Pre-trained Models via Adaptive Auxiliary Data
Weinan He1 Yixin Zhang1,2 Zilei Wang1 *
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
1

hwn2018@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyx12, zlwang}@ustc.edu.cn

Unsupervised

Unsupervised

High Initial Perf.

Poor Initial Perf.

UFT

Abstract

UDA

Large-scale pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
like CLIP have demonstrated promising zero-shot transfer
capabilities to downstream tasks. However, their performance deteriorates when facing significant domain shifts.
In this paper, we focus on cost-effective adaptation of largescale pre-trained VLMs to unlabeled target domains. In
this context, two prevalent paradigms show inherent limitations: Unsupervised Fine-Tuning (UFT) struggles with
poor initial model performance, while Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) may suffer from adverse effects of
inappropriate auxiliary source domain. To alleviate these
limitations, we propose to adaptively construct more suitable auxiliary data from large-scale image-text pairs to facilitate unsupervised adaptation without any human annotations. Specifically, we introduce Progressive Distribution
Bridging (PDB), which decomposes the challenging adaptation task into multiple simple steps through the construction of auxiliary data. To obtain such data, we design an
efficient and controllable retrieval algorithm incorporating
cascaded semantic filters and style controller to regulate the
semantic category and domain style of retrieved data, respectively. Experimental results across 11 different domains
from three standard UDA benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our auxiliary data. Notably, on Office-Home
and VisDA, our method outperforms state-of-the-art UDA
methods that rely on labeled source domains. The proposed
method offers a more universal and cost-effective solution
for adapting VLMs to unlabeled downstream tasks.

Ours

Large-scale
Datasets

 Semantic Filters
Retrieval
 Style Controller

Progressive Distribution Bridging
Pre-training

Source Domain in UDA

Target Domain

Retrieved Data

Figure 1. Analysis of UFT, UDA, and our method from a data distribution perspective. Colored circles show different data distributions. (Top) UFT uses only unlabeled target data. With poor initial
performance, the adaptation becomes difficult. (Middle) UDA utilizes auxiliary human-annotated source domains. For pre-trained
VLMs, employing predefined source domains with large domain
gap might be taking an unnecessary detour. (Bottom) We retrieve
auxiliary data from LAION-400M [65] in an annotation-free manner and adaptively construct it with progressively changing distributions towards the target data distribution.

bution discrepancies between training and downstream task
datasets [23, 26, 43, 44, 59, 82]. Recently, large-scale pretrained models [2, 3, 37, 53] have demonstrated decent robustness against distribution shifts. Particularly, VisionLanguage Models (VLMs) [11, 18, 36, 63, 70] pre-trained
on extensive image-text pairs [7, 63, 65, 66, 90], exhibit
promising capabilities in zero-shot transfer to downstream
tasks [63, 101]. Despite these advances, these models still
struggle when downstream data distributions differ substantially from pre-training [91]. Considering the annotation
costs, there is still an unresolved challenge: how to costeffectively adapt large-scale pre-trained VLMs to unlabeled
downstream datasets?

1. Introduction
Modern deep neural networks have shown outstanding results in solving many computer vision problems [5, 13,
14, 24, 25, 49, 78]. However, the performance of these
models tends to degrade significantly when facing distri-

Current solutions to this challenge mainly fall into two

* Corresponding Author

3280

