This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PersonalVideo: High ID-Fidelity Video Customization without
Dynamic and Semantic Degradation
Hengjia Li1 , Haonan Qiu2 , Shiwei Zhang3,∗ , Xiang Wang3,4 , Yujie Wei3 ,
Zekun Li3 , Yingya Zhang3 , Boxi Wu1,† , Deng Cai1
1

Zhejiang University

2

3
Nanyang Technological University
Alibaba Tongyi
lhjzju@zju.edu.cn, zhangjin.zsw@alibaba-inc.com

4

HUST

Project page: https://personalvideo.github.io/

Reference

“A <V> woman in a sparkly, magical dress, casting spells with her hands as glowing lights swirl around her. Her face is visible
with a mischievous grin, surrounded by floating mystical symbols.”

Reference

“A <V> musician man sitting on a stool, strumming an acoustic guitar with a serene expression. He wears a casual button-down
shirt and jeans, lost in the melody.”

Reference

”A <V> woman dressed as a warrior princess, holding a glowing sword as she stands in a field of wildflowers. Her face is visible,
showing determination as she prepares to protect her kingdom.”

Reference

“A <V> man in a black suit, paired with a white shirt and a dark tie, is walking along a busy city street. He is carrying a steaming
cup of coffee in one hand. The street is lined with tall buildings and bustling with people.”

Figure 1. Results of PersonalVideo. Given the reference images of a specific identity, PersonalVideo can generate high ID-fidelity videos
with promising motion dynamics and prompt following.

Abstract
The current text-to-video (T2V) generation has made significant progress in synthesizing realistic general videos, but it
is still under-explored in identity-specific human video generation with customized ID images. The key challenge lies
in maintaining high ID fidelity consistently while preserving
the original motion dynamic and semantic following after
the identity injection. Current video identity customization
methods mainly rely on reconstructing given identity images

on text-to-image models, which have a divergent distribution with the T2V model. This process introduces a tuninginference gap, leading to dynamic and semantic degradation. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel framework,
dubbed PersonalVideo, that applies a mixture of reward supervision on synthesized videos instead of the simple reconstruction objective on images. Specifically, we first incorporate identity consistency reward to effectively inject the
reference’s identity without the tuning-inference gap. Then
we propose a novel semantic consistency reward to align the
semantic distribution of the generated videos with the original T2V model, which preserves its dynamic and semantic

* Project Leader, † Corresponding Author

19406

