This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstructSeg: Unifying Instructed Visual Segmentation
with Multi-modal Large Language Models
Cong Wei1,2 , Yujie Zhong2† , Haoxian Tan2 , Yingsen Zeng2 , Yong Liu1 , Hongfa Wang1,3 , and Yujiu Yang1
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 Meituan Inc. 3 Tencent
weic22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jaszhong@hotmail.com, yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Instructed Visual Segmentation Tasks
RES

A baseball catcher with an
open mitt

A cat standing on the wash basin
with its head up

ReasonSeg

Something that ensures the
person to land safely

The person who appears to have
already won in the battle

A computer monitor reading
05:04

A grey and white cat that is
laying on the seat of the scooter

At a car show, visitors can get close to the
displayed vehicles to admire their design
and features. What part of the car in this
picture is open, allowing viewers to see
the engine compartment?

R-VOS

ReasonVOS

A duck is held by a person with her both hands

A hand giving a yellow ball to a dog

Which black bird(s) are in the green cage?

Which person is in the leading position?

Figure 1. We define Instructed Visual Segmentation (IVS) as the union of four text-guided segmentation tasks across image and video
domains: referring expression segmentation (RES), reasoning segmentation (ReasonSeg), referring video object segmentation (R-VOS) and
reasoning video object segmentation (ReasonVOS). InstructSeg can handle all the IVS tasks in one model with superior performance.

Abstract
Boosted by Multi-modal Large Language Models
(MLLMs), text-guided universal segmentation models for the
image and video domains have made rapid progress recently.
However, these methods are often developed separately for
specific domains, overlooking the similarities in task settings
and solutions across these two areas. In this paper, we define
the union of referring segmentation and reasoning segmentation at both the image and video levels as Instructed Visual
Segmentation (IVS). Correspondingly, we propose Instruct-

Seg, an end-to-end segmentation pipeline equipped with
MLLMs for IVS. Specifically, we employ an object-aware
video perceiver to extract temporal and object information
from reference frames, facilitating comprehensive video understanding. Additionally, we introduce vision-guided multigranularity text fusion to better integrate global and detailed
text information with fine-grained visual guidance. By leveraging multi-task and end-to-end training, InstructSeg demonstrates superior performance across diverse image and video
segmentation tasks, surpassing both segmentation specialists
and MLLM-based methods with a single model. Our code is
available at https://github.com/congvvc/InstructSeg.

† Corresponding authors.

20193

