This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PersonaCraft: Personalized and Controllable Full-Body Multi-Human Scene
Generation Using Occlusion-Aware 3D-Conditioned Diffusion
Gwanghyun Kim1∗ , Suh Yoon Jeon1∗ , Seunggyu Lee1 , Se Young Chun1,2†
1
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 INMC & IPAI
Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{gwang.kim, euniejeon, leeseunggyu, sychun}@snu.ac.kr

Figure 1. PersonaCraft generates realistic, personalized images of multiple individuals with complex occlusions, preserving facial identity
and body shape using occlusion-aware 3D pose and shape conditioned diffusion. PersonaCraft outperforms baselines in body shape
personalization (blue arrows indicate failures) and naturalness (yellow arrows highlight artifacts, with zoomed-in views in yellow boxes).

Abstract
We present PersonaCraft, a framework for controllable
and occlusion-robust full-body personalized image synthesis
of multiple individuals in complex scenes. Current methods
struggle with occlusion-heavy scenarios and complete body
personalization, as 2D pose conditioning lacks 3D geometry,
often leading to ambiguous occlusions and anatomical distortions, and many approaches focus solely on facial identity.
In contrast, our PersonaCraft integrates diffusion models
with 3D human modeling, employing SMPLx-ControlNet,
to utilize 3D geometry like depth and normal maps for robust 3D-aware pose conditioning and enhanced anatomical
coherence. To handle ﬁne-grained occlusions, we propose
Occlusion Boundary Enhancer Network that exploits depth

edge signals with occlusion-focused training, and OcclusionAware Classiﬁer-Free Guidance strategy that selectively reinforces conditioning in occluded regions without affecting
unoccluded areas. PersonaCraft can seamlessly be combined with Face Identity ControlNet, achieving full-body
multi-human personalization and thus marking a signiﬁcant advancement beyond prior approaches that concentrate
only on facial identity. Our dual-pathway body shape representation with SMPLx-based shape parameters and textual reﬁnement, enables precise full-body personalization
and ﬂexible user-deﬁned body shape adjustments. Extensive
quantitative experiments and user studies demonstrate that
PersonaCraft signiﬁcantly outperforms existing methods in
generating high-quality, multi-person images with accurate
personalization and robust occlusion handling.

* Authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.

12034

