This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AV-Link: Temporally-Aligned Diffusion Features for Cross-Modal
Audio-Video Generation
Moayed Haji-Ali1,2,∗
Alper Canberk2

Willi Menapace2
Kwot Sin Lee2
1

Aliaksandr Siarohin2
Ivan Skorokhodov2
1
Vicente Ordonez
Sergey Tulyakov2
2

Rice University

Snap Inc

Project Webpage: https://snap-research.github.io/AVLink
VIDEO-TO-AUDIO

AUDIO-TO-VIDEO

Audio
Generator

Video
Generator

AV-Link
Audio
Generator

Fusion Block
Video Feature
Extractor
(CLIP, ImageBind, ...)

Audio Feature
Extractor
(CLAP, BEATs, ...)

Video
Generator

Figure 1. Compared to current Video-to-Audio and Audio-to-Video methods, AV-Link provides a uniﬁed framework for these two tasks.
Rather than relying on feature extractors pretrained for other tasks (e.g. CLIP [68], CLAP [21]), we directly leverage the activations from
pretrained frozen Flow Matching models using a Fusion Block to achieve precise time alignment between modalities. Our approach offers
competitive semantic alignment and improved temporal alignment in a self-contained framework for both modalities.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We propose AV-Link, a uniﬁed framework for Videoto-Audio (A2V) and Audio-to-Video (A2V) generation that
leverages the activations of frozen video and audio diffusion models for temporally-aligned cross-modal conditioning. The key to our framework is a Fusion Block that facilitates bidirectional information exchange between video
and audio diffusion models through temporally-aligned self
attention operations. Unlike prior work that uses dedicated
models for A2V and V2A tasks and relies on pretrained feature extractors, AV-Link achieves both tasks in a single selfcontained framework, directly leveraging features obtained
by the complementary modality (i.e. video features to generate audio, or audio features to generate video). Extensive
evaluations demonstrate that AV-Link achieves substantial
improvements in audio-video synchronization, outperforming more expensive baselines such as MovieGen V2A model.
* Work mainly done during an internship at Snap Inc.

Generative models are becoming proﬁcient at synthesizing high-quality video [1, 7, 38, 58, 62, 75, 84] and audio [23, 27, 53, 54, 85]. Given the intrinsic correlation between audio and video, there has been a growing interest in cross-modal generation including Videoto-Audio (V2A) and Audio-to-Video (A2V). The goal of
V2A models is to add sound that is both semantically
and temporally aligned to video content [57, 67, 92, 103].
Conversely, A2V models [45, 99, 102] seek to generate
video that plausibly represent the sounds of a given audio. Since text has been established as a robust conditioning modality to guide the semantics of generated audio and video [32, 98], achieving accurate audio–video temporal alignment remains as the most critical and challenging aspect in cross-modal generation. Current V2A models [57, 67, 92, 103] typically depend on pre-trained visual
feature extractors such as CLIP [68], MetaCLIP [93], ImageBind [25], and CAVP [57] to condition audio generation

19373

