This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoteSplat: Hough Voting Gaussian Splatting for 3D Scene Understanding
Minchao Jiang1∗ , Shunyu Jia1∗ , Jiaming Gu1,2 , Xiaoyuan Lu3 , Guangming Zhu1 ,
Anqi Dong4 , Liang Zhang1†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
2
Algorithm R&D Center, Qing Yi (Shanghai)
3
Shanghai Pudong Cryptography Research Institute
4
Division of Decision and Control Systems and Department of Mathematics,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
{jamchaos, syjia 2001}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, jiaming gu xidian@outlook.com,
{gmzhu, liangzhang}@xidian.edu.cn, xylu@bnc.org.cn, anqid@kth.se

Prompt:
“Green chair”

Hierarchical
Segmentation

(a)Rendered View

(b)Voting

(c)Clustering

(d)3D scene
understanding

Figure 1. VoteSplat integrates 3DGS and Hough Voting for 3D scene understanding: (a) 3DGS retains its original novel view synthesis
capability, (b) each Gaussian primitive encodes an offset vector which votes the point cloud to the instance center, (c) 3D vote clustering
enables instance segmentation, and (d) open-vocabulary 3D instance localization and click-based 3D object localization are demonstrated.

Abstract

tion, VoteSplat maps 2D image semantics to 3D point clouds
via voting points, reducing training costs associated with
high-dimensional CLIP features while preserving semantic unambiguity. Extensive experiments demonstrate VoteSplat’s effectiveness in open-vocabulary 3D instance localization, 3D point cloud understanding, click-based 3D object localization, hierarchical segmentation, and ablation
studies. Our code is available at VoteSplat.

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become horsepower in
high-quality, real-time rendering for novel view synthesis of
3D scenes. However, existing methods focus primarily on
geometric and appearance modeling, lacking deeper scene
understanding while also incurring high training costs that
complicate the originally streamlined differentiable rendering pipeline. To this end, we propose VoteSplat, a novel
3D scene understanding framework that integrates Hough
voting with 3DGS. Specifically, Segment Anything Model
(SAM) is utilized for instance segmentation, extracting objects, and generating 2D vote maps. We then embed spatial
offset vectors into Gaussian primitives. These offsets construct 3D spatial votes by associating them with 2D image
votes, while depth distortion constraints refine localization
along the depth axis. For open-vocabulary object localiza-

1. Introduction
Localization and instance-level semantic understanding of
3D scenes are critical objectives in the computer vision
community, especially with the rise of embodied intelligence. Traditional point cloud-based methods for 3D scene
understanding have been widely explored, including classification [21], segmentation [22], and detection [23]. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [10] has gained popularity for its ability to achieve real-time, photorealistic

* Contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.

6456

