This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neuroverse3D: Developing In-Context Learning Universal Model for
Neuroimaging in 3D
Jiesi Hu1,2 , Hanyang Peng†2 , Yanwu Yang3,4 , Xutao Guo1,2 , Yang Shang1 ,
Pengcheng Shi1 , Chenfei Ye†1 , Ting Ma†1, 2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology at Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
3

University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

4

2

Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

German Center for Mental Health, Germany

22b352011@stu.hit.edu.cn, philoso phy0922@163.com
chenfei.ye@foxmail.com, tma@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
In-context learning (ICL), a type of universal model,
demonstrates exceptional generalization across a wide
range of tasks without retraining by leveraging task-specific
guidance from context, making it particularly effective for
the intricate demands of neuroimaging. However, current
ICL models, limited to 2D inputs and thus exhibiting suboptimal performance, struggle to extend to 3D inputs due
to the high memory demands of ICL. In this regard, we introduce Neuroverse3D, an ICL model capable of performing multiple neuroimaging tasks in 3D (e.g., segmentation,
denoising, inpainting). Neuroverse3D overcomes the large
memory consumption associated with 3D inputs through
adaptive parallel-sequential context processing and a Ushaped fusion strategy, allowing it to handle an unlimited
number of context images. Additionally, we propose an optimized loss function to balance multi-task training and enhance focus on anatomical boundaries. Our study incorporates 43,674 3D multi-modal scans from 19 neuroimaging datasets and evaluates Neuroverse3D on 14 diverse
tasks using held-out test sets. The results demonstrate that
Neuroverse3D significantly outperforms existing ICL models and closely matches task-specific models, enabling flexible adaptation to medical center variations without retraining. The code and model weights are publicly available at
https://github.com/jiesihu/Neuroverse3D.

domain datasets have gained attention for their ability to
handle diverse tasks (e.g., segmentation, denoising, inpainting) and modalities (e.g., MRI-T1w, MRI-T2w, CT),
demonstrating adaptability to domain shifts and even unseen tasks [12, 40, 45, 60]. In-context learning (ICL) has
emerged as a promising paradigm [7, 10, 54], enabling
models to adapt to domains without retraining by using
image-label pairs as task-specific guidance. These informative contexts make ICL models particularly effective for
segmenting tissues with intricate morphology and unifying
diverse image generation tasks.
While ICL models show clinical potential in neuroimaging [12, 14, 57], they are limited by dimensionality. Existing models process 3D volumes as 2D slices, which results
in the loss of inter-slice correlations and volumetric context.
This lack of global spatial awareness hinders performance
on neuroimaging tasks, such as hippocampus segmentation
which requires 3D anatomical understanding [13, 20].

1. Introduction

To address this limitations, it is crucial to develop an ICL
model that captures 3D global information. However, creating a universal ICL model with 3D input presents significant challenges, as 3D images can be over 100 times larger
than their 2D slices, leading to substantial memory requirements. This results in three critical issues: (1) Context
size is significantly limited, hindering performance as larger
contexts size demonstrably improve outputs [7, 12, 14, 55].
(2) Training models with more parameters becomes infeasible, restricting their capacity and potential performance. (3)
Processing high-resolution 3D inputs becomes difficult.

Computational neuroimage analysis has significantly advanced our understanding of the brain and non-invasive
diagnostics, crucial for quantitative analysis and precision
medicine. Recently, universal models trained on multi-

To develop 3D universal models in neuroimaging, we introduce Neuroverse3D, an in-context learning model that
takes 3D neuroimaging as input. To our knowledge, it is
the first 3D ICL universal model for neuroimaging. To mitigate the significant memory demands, we propose Adaptive Parallel-Sequential Processing (APSP) and a U-shape
fusion strategy to partition the entire context into multi-

† Corresponding author: Hanyang Peng, Chenfei Ye, Ting Ma.

21721

