This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DSO: Aligning 3D Generators with Simulation Feedback for Physical Soundness
Ruining Li

Chuanxia Zheng Christian Rupprecht Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

{ruining, cxzheng, chrisr, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk
ruiningli.com/dso

Image-to-3D (TRELLIS)

Image-to-3D with DSO (ours)

Input images

Real 3D prints

Figure 1. Top-left: A state-of-the-art image-to-3D model like TRELLIS often fails to reconstruct 3D objects that can stand under gravity
even when prompted with images of stable objects (e.g., bottom-left). Top-right: Our method, DSO, improves the image-to-3D model via
Direct Simulation Optimization, significantly increasing the likelihood that generated 3D objects can stand, in physical simulation and in
real-life, when 3D printed (bottom-right). The method incurs no additional cost at test time, and can thus generate such objects in seconds.

Abstract

ments demonstrate that the fine-tuned feed-forward generator, using either the DPO or DRO objective, is significantly
faster and more likely to produce stable objects than testtime optimization. Notably, the DSO framework functions
even without any ground-truth 3D objects for training, allowing the 3D generator to self-improve by automatically
collecting simulation feedback on its own outputs.

Most 3D object generators prioritize aesthetic quality, often neglecting the physical constraints necessary for practical applications. One such constraint is that a 3D object should be self-supporting, i.e., remain balanced under
gravity. Previous approaches to generating stable 3D objects relied on differentiable physics simulators to optimize
geometry at test time, which is slow, unstable, and prone
to local optima. Inspired by the literature on aligning generative models with external feedback, we propose Direct
Simulation Optimization (DSO). This framework leverages
feedback from a (non-differentiable) simulator to increase
the likelihood that the 3D generator directly outputs stable
3D objects. We construct a dataset of 3D objects labeled
with stability scores obtained from the physics simulator.
This dataset enables fine-tuning of the 3D generator using
the stability score as an alignment metric, via direct preference optimization (DPO) or direct reward optimization
(DRO)—a novel objective we introduce to align diffusion
models without requiring pairwise preferences. Our experi-

1. Introduction
Given a single image of an object that is stable under gravity, we consider the problem of reconstructing it in 3D. Recent image-to-3D reconstructors [24, 40, 44, 45, 55, 67, 76,
85–87, 89, 95, 101, 112, 113] have focused on improving
the quality of objects’ 3D geometry and appearance, but not
necessarily their physical soundness. As shown in Fig. 2,
when prompted with an image of a stable object, stateof-the-art generators like TRELLIS [101] and Hunyuan3D
2.0 [87] often fail to produce a stable object in 3D. The failure rate is 15% even for objects seen during training and

6772

