This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Confound from All Sides, Distill with Resilience: Multi-Objective
Adversarial Paths to Zero-Shot Robustness
Junhao Dong1,2 , Jiao Liu1 , Xinghua Qu3 , and Yew-Soon Ong1,2*
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 CFAR, IHPC, A*STAR, 3 Bytedance
{junhao003, jiao.liu, asysong}@ntu.edu.sg, xinghua.qu1@bytedance.com

Abstract

their multimodal nature and increased architectural complexity, VLMs are particularly susceptible to adversarial attacks. Such vulnerabilities raise serious concerns about the
reliability of VLMs in security-critical scenarios [10, 20].
To counter adversarial threats, recent works focused
on improving VLM robustness via adversarial fine-tuning
[21, 34, 43] with CLIP [37]. Despite its effectiveness, according to scaling laws, (robust) performance is inherently
tied to model size [17, 18, 29], making large VLMs more resilient than their lightweight ones. This underlying dependence on scale presents a challenge for deploying VLMs.
Adversarial distillation [15, 22] emerges as a promising alternative to address this, yet rare efforts have been dedicated
to VLMs. Similar to adversarial fine-tuning, adversarial distillation relies on untargeted adversaries. However, these
adversaries only push inputs away from their original distribution, limiting exploration of the teacher’s decision space
and missing diverse failure modes. The restricted perturbation space hinders robustness generalization, particularly in
out-of-distribution (zero-shot) tasks.
To support this claim, we analyze robustness transfer
using untargeted and targeted adversaries, evaluating their
impact on in-distribution and out-of-distribution robustness
(Figure 1a and 1b). Specifically, untargeted adversaries
follow a gradient ascent path away from the original class
(distribution) ci to maximize the classification error, while
targeted adversaries take a gradient descent trajectory toward a specific class ct ̸= ci 1 . Our key observation is that
untargeted adversaries primarily enhance in-distribution robustness, as they expose the worst-case decision boundaries
of the training distribution. In contrast, targeted adversaries
improve out-of-distribution robustness by spanning multiple class boundaries, promoting generalization beyond the
training set. This trade-off arises as untargeted adversaries
focus on the most vulnerable points in the training distribution, potentially leading to over-fitting in distillation, while
targeted adversaries explore a more diverse decision space,
aiding robustness transfer across distributions. Our Multi-

Adversarially robust knowledge distillation transfers the robustness of a large-scale teacher model to a lightweight
student while preserving natural performance. However,
foundation Vision-Language Models (VLMs) also demand
the transfer of zero-shot inference capabilities. We find
that standard robust distillation using untargeted adversarial examples fails to transfer out-of-distribution (zero-shot)
robustness, as these adversaries primarily push inputs away
from their original distribution, exploring a limited portion
of the teacher’s decision space and missing more diverse
failure modes. A natural solution is to generate multiple
targeted adversaries that traverse diverse paths across decision boundaries. Thus, these adversaries probe a broader
region of the teacher’s decision surface. However, naive
targeted adversary optimization often converges to local optima within a single category’s decision region, limiting the
diversity. To address this, we propose a Multi-Objective Optimization (MOO)-based adversarial distillation framework
that transfers robustness from large VLMs to lightweight
ones by exploiting adversaries with two main objectives:
misclassification and category-level adversarial diversity.
Theoretically, we show that optimizing for diversity mitigates adversarial collapse into local optima, ensuring adversaries span multiple decision regions and capture the
teacher’s generalizable robust features. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method over stateof-the-art adversarial learning across diverse scenarios.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable success across diverse domains [8, 30, 42]. However, extensive research has revealed their inherent susceptibility to adversarial perturbations [41]—subtle input modifications that are imperceptible to the human eye yet can
lead to predictions with high confidence [32, 50]. Due to

1 The formal definition will be provided in the following section.

* Corresponding author.

624

