This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

USP: Unified Self-Supervised Pretraining for Image Generation and
Understanding
Xiangxiang Chu Renda Li Yong Wang
AMAP, Alibaba Group
{chuxiangxiang.cxx, lirenda.lrd, wangyong.lz}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Recent studies have highlighted the interplay between diffusion models and representation learning. Intermediate
representations from diffusion models can be leveraged for
downstream visual tasks, while self-supervised vision models can enhance the convergence and generation quality of
diffusion models. However, transferring pretrained weights
from vision models to diffusion models is challenging due
to input mismatches and the use of latent spaces. To address these challenges, we propose Unified Self-supervised
Pretraining (USP), a framework that initializes diffusion
models via masked latent modeling in a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) latent space. USP achieves comparable
performance in understanding tasks while significantly accelerating convergence and enhancing generation quality
in diffusion models. Our code is available on https:
//github.com/AMAP-ML/USP.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, the pretraining-finetuning paradigm
has achieved remarkable success in image recognition.
Strong representations are first obtained by pretraining neural networks on large-scale datasets [9, 17, 19, 27, 36,
38, 39, 43, 56, 76]. These pretrained models are then
fine-tuned for downstream tasks such as object detection
[37, 68, 69, 79] and segmentation [58, 89, 90, 99], achieving
state-of-the-art performance. Meanwhile, self-supervised
learning has also seen rapid development, with methods
such as [3, 12, 38, 39] catching up to and even surpassing
their supervised counterparts [17, 18, 27, 36, 56, 80].
In parallel, image generation has also experienced significant progress, though following a different trajectory.
Diffusion models [24, 73, 75] have emerged as a dominant force, outperforming Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [32] and opening a new era in generative modeling.
Previous studies [1, 6, 7, 25, 85, 86, 88] have shown that
generative models can learn competitive recognition repre-

sentations, indicating a strong relationship between image
understanding and generation.
Pioneer works, such as iGPT [11], have explored autoregressive pretraining in the pixel space. However, this approach faces substantial challenges when scaling to large
datasets and models. Furthermore, it is inherently incompatible with diffusion models. To address these limitations,
a recent study, REPA [97], proposes aligning the representations of diffusion models with those from off-the-shelf pretrained recognition models. By aligning intermediate-layer
representations, diffusion models can more efficiently acquire discriminative features, leading to faster convergence
and improved performance within the same computational
budget. However, this method relies on powerful pretrained
backbones, such as DINOv2 [65], which require substantial
data and computational resources (over 22,000 A100 GPU
hours). Additionally, the extra teacher backbone not only
increases GPU memory consumption but also reduces the
training speed of diffusion models.
Several fundamental questions remain unresolved: Is
pretraining feasible and necessary for diffusion-based image generation? Can we establish a unified pretraining
framework that simultaneously improves image generation
and state-of-the-art perception tasks—in other words, a single pretraining paradigm beneficial to both image generation and recognition? Can the widely-adopted pretrainingfinetuning paradigm also succeed in generative models?
This paper aims to address these questions by proposing a
simple yet effective approach.
A major challenge in this endeavor is the input mismatch between perception and generation models, as recently noted in literature [97]. Specifically, perception
backbones typically process clean images, whereas diffusion models inherently handle images perturbed by scheduled noise. This discrepancy is further complicated by modern diffusion models [29, 66, 71] operating iteratively in a
latent space mediated by VAEs.
To bridge this gap, we propose a two-step strategy. Our
approach is grounded in a simple observation and a straightforward intuition: representation learning is central to var-

18475

