This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BASIC: Boosting Visual Alignment with Intrinsic Refined Embeddings in
Multimodal Large Language Models
Jianting Tang1,2
1

Yubo Wang1,2

Haoyu Cao1,2

Linli Xu1,2 *

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
{jiantingtang,wyb123,caohaoyu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, linlixu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

a

stone house with

a

clock tower </s>

Layer l

Mainstream Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
achieve visual understanding by using a vision projector to
bridge well-pretrained vision encoders and large language
models (LLMs). The inherent gap between visual and textual modalities makes the embeddings from the vision projector critical for visual comprehension. However, current alignment approaches treat visual embeddings as contextual cues and merely apply auto-regressive supervision
to textual outputs, neglecting the necessity of introducing
equivalent direct visual supervision, which hinders the potential finer alignment of visual embeddings. In this paper,
based on our analysis of the refinement process of visual
embeddings in the LLM’s shallow layers, we propose BASIC, a method that utilizes refined visual embeddings within
the LLM as supervision to directly guide the projector in
generating initial visual embeddings. Specifically, the guidance is conducted from two perspectives: (i) optimizing embedding directions by reducing angles between initial and
supervisory embeddings in semantic space; (ii) improving
semantic matching by minimizing disparities between the
logit distributions of both visual embeddings. Without additional supervisory models or artificial annotations, BASIC
significantly improves the performance of MLLMs across a
wide range of benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness
of our introduced direct visual supervision.

Layer k+1

LLM

Layer k
Layer 1

Direct Visual Supervision

Vision Projector

<s>

a

stone house with

a

clock tower </s>

Supervisory Visual Embedding

Vision Encoder

Refined Visual Embedding
Initial Visual Embedding

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed BASIC framework. Conventional MLLM training treats visual embeddings derived from the
vision projector as contextual cues, only applying auto-regressive
supervision to text tokens. Beyond that, BASIC leverages the refined visual embeddings from the LLM’s shallow layers to provide
direct visual supervision to the initial visual embeddings.

1. Introduction

68] and large language models (LLMs) [9, 13, 18, 61]. To
fully leverage both models, it is crucial to effectively align
the visual and textual modalities through the vision projector [32, 33, 43].
Current leading MLLMs, such as LLaVA [35], InternVL [12] and Qwen2-VL [57], employ a multistage
training paradigm to achieve modality alignment. Generally, the early stages establish basic multimodal understanding using large-scale image-caption pairs, aligning the vision projector’s output with the LLM’s input embedding
space. The subsequent stages refine this alignment by tuning on high-quality visual instruction-response data, developing the model’s capacity for specific visual tasks. However, due to the continuity of visual embeddings and the
discreteness of text tokens, the current training approaches
treat visual embeddings purely as contextual cues and apply auto-regressive supervision to text tokens, which implies lack of equivalent direct supervision for visual embeddings. The asymmetric supervision adapted from the training paradigm targeted for LLMs leads to two key problems.
First, it fails to fully utilize the rich information present in
visual data [60]. Second, it limits the model’s ability to
achieve fine-grained alignment between visual and linguistic representations [45].

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [12, 35, 57,
58, 63] have demonstrated impressive performance on tasks
requiring strong visual perception and logical reasoning,
marking a solid step towards general artificial intelligence
(AGI). To efficiently construct high-performance MLLMs,
a simple vision projector [10, 35, 36] is typically used to
bridge well-pretrained powerful vision encoders [30, 41, 48,
* Corresponding author.

20582

