This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Motion Graphs
Haiyang Liu1,2 * Zhan Xu2 Fa-Ting Hong2 Hsin-Ping Huang2 Yi Zhou2
1
The University of Tokyo 2 Adobe Research



  





  



  



   

Yang Zhou2



Figure 1. Video Motion Graphs is a system to generate human motion videos from a reference video and conditional signals such as
music, action tags and sparse keyframes. The video is generated by ﬁrst retrieving matched video clips from reference video and then
generating interpolation frames between clips to smooth the transition boundaries.

Abstract

for multi-modal conditioned human motion video generation. Project page can be found here.

We present Video Motion Graphs, a system designed to
generate realistic human motion videos. Using a reference video and conditional signals such as music or motion tags, the system synthesizes new videos by ﬁrst retrieving video clips with gestures matching the conditions and
then generating interpolation frames to seamlessly connect
clip boundaries. The core of our approach is HMInterp,
a robust Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) model that enables seamless interpolation of discontinuous frames, even
for complex motion scenarios like dancing. HMInterp i)
employs a dual-branch interpolation approach, combining
a Motion Diffusion Model for human skeleton motion interpolation with a diffusion-based video frame interpolation
model for ﬁnal frame generation. ii) adopts condition progressive training to effectively leverage identity strong and
weak conditions, such as images and pose. These designs
ensure both high video texture quality and accurate motion
trajectory. Results show that our Video Motion Graphs outperforms existing generative- and retrieval-based methods
* Work done during Haiyang, Fa-Ting, and Hsin-Ping’s internship at
Adobe Research from 24/06 to 24/09.

13730

1. Introduction
Human motion videos play a vital role across numerous
industries, including entertainment, virtual reality, and interactive media. However, capturing high-quality, realistic
motion videos can be labour-intensive and costly. Recent
advancements in video generation offer solutions in generating human motion videos based on inputs like skeletal
animation, action labels, and speech audios, making production more efﬁcient and customizable.
Human motion video generation has two primary
approaches: generative- and retrieval-based methods.
Generative-based models [7, 16, 21, 48] synthesize all
frame pixels from conditional inputs, offering ﬂexibility
in generating diverse motions. However, they often produce artifacts for complex contents, such as human distorted
limbs, ﬁngers, etc [1, 55]. Retrieval-based models utilize
key frames from given reference videos, and generate interpolation frames to ensure smooth transitions [30, 61].
While they require reference material, they typically deliver

