This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ASGS: Single-Domain Generalizable Open-Set Object Detection via
Adaptive Subgraph Searching
Yuxuan Yuan1∗ , Luyao Tang1,2,∗ , Yixin Chen1,2 , Chaoqi Chen3,† , Yue Huang1,2 and Xinghao Ding1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University 3 Shenzhen University
{lytang, yuanyuxuan0908}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, cqchen1994@gmail.com, yhuang2010@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

Person

Albeit existing Single-Domain Generalized Object Detection (Single-DGOD) methods enable models to generalize to unseen domains, most assume that the training and
testing data share the same label space. In real-world
scenarios, unseen domains often introduce previously unknown objects, a challenge that has been largely overlooked. In this paper, we tackle the practical problem
of Single-domain Generalizable Open-Set Object Detection
(SG-OSOD), which addresses both unseen domains and unknown classes. We identify two key challenges: (1) detecting unknown classes with only known-class data, and (2)
learning robust features to mitigate domain shift. To address these challenges, we propose the framework termed
ASGS, which leverages adaptive subgraph structures to enhance the understanding of unknown scenes and classes.
ASGS consists of Subgraph-wise Unknown-class Learning
(SUL) and Class-wise Embedding Compaction (CEC). SUL
employs non-parametric methods to detect unknown samples and performs Adaptive Subgraph Searching (ASS) for
high-order structural feature extraction, enabling domainrobust unknown class learning. Moreover, the CEC module enhances class discrimination robustness through contrastive learning, which results in more compact class clusters in unknown scenarios. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed ASGS.

Person

Person

Motorcycle

Motorcycle

(a) Signle-Domain Generalized Object Detection

Person Unknown

Motorcycle

(b) Single-domain Generalizable Open-Set Object Detection

Person

Classification
Head

B

Prediction

DETR

Person

Query Embeddings
(d)

ASGS
U

Classes Emb.
Classes Proto.

Background (B)
Unknown (U)

Person
Motorcycle

(c)

Prediction

Person
Classification
Head

B

Unknown

(e)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Top: Illustration of (a) the Single-DGOD setting, and (b)
the proposed SG-OSOD setting. Bottom: Comparison of ASGS
with Single-DGOD detector. (c) ASGS’s scheme. (d) Detection
examples from a vanilla Single-DGOD detector, where “horse” as
an unknown class is misclassified as background, and (e) detection
examples from ASGS, which successfully detects “horse” as an
unknown class due to its integrated unknown-class awareness.

Object detection is a foundational task in computer vision,
with widespread applications in areas such as autonomous
driving and robotics. However, in practical applications,
deep neural networks are often vulnerable to distribution
shifts [6]. For instance, in the field of autonomous driving, the performance of object detection systems can be
∗ Equal Contribution; † Corresponding Author.

significantly degraded due to varying weather and lighting
conditions. This challenge has spurred research into unsupervised domain adaptation object detection (DAOD) [2–
6, 27, 30, 38, 55], which aims to transfer an object detector
from a labeled source domain to a novel one with a shared
class space. However, DAOD requires simultaneous access
to source and target domain data, which is often infeasible
in real-world scenarios.
To overcome these limitations, domain generalizable ob-

20911

