This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ARGUS: Hallucination and Omission Evaluation in Video-LLMs
Ruchit Rawal

Reza Shirkavand

Heng Huang

Gowthami Somepalliω

Tom Goldsteinω

University of Maryland, College Park
Abstract
Video large language models have not yet been widely deployed, largely due to their tendency to hallucinate. Typical benchmarks for Video-LLMs rely simply on multiple
choice questions. Unfortunately, VideoLLMs hallucinate
far more aggressively on freeform text generation tasks like
video captioning than they do on multiple choice verification tasks. To address this weakness, we propose ARGUS,
a VideoLLM benchmark that measures freeform video captioning performance. By comparing VideoLLM outputs to
human ground truth captions, ARGUS quantifies dual metrics. First, we measure the rate of hallucinations in the form
of incorrect statements about video content or temporal relationships. Second, we measure the rate at which the model
omits important descriptive details. Together, these metrics
form a comprehensive view of video captioning.

Undesirable

LLaVa-NV (7B)
LLaVa-NV-DPO (7B)

InternVL2 (4B)

InternVL2 (2B)

GPT-4o-Mini

GPT-4o

Gemini-2.0-Flash

Gemini-1.5-Flash
Gemini-2.0-Pro

Desirable

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Relationship between Hallucination and Omission. The hallucination and omission cost metrics are correlated;
however, most models exhibit more omissions than hallucinations. Marker size indicates the average caption length per model.
Gemini-2.0-Flash achieves the best performance.

Video Large Language Models (VideoLLMs) [11, 43, 52]
have made significant strides in recent years, and improvements in their capabilities have been reflected in rising
scores on benchmarks for both short video [5, 44] and long
video [18, 39, 41, 42, 48, 57]. Despite these strides, VideoLLMs are not yet ready for widespread deployment. The
main challenge is their tendency to hallucinate, with the frequency and severity of these hallucinations increasing along
with the size and complexity of the input video.
Recent studies [3, 28] indicate that while language
models are often effective as verifiers (providing yes/no or
multiple choice answers), they are less reliable as freeform
generators. This disparity highlights a crucial limitation: a
VideoLLM’s ability to verify the presence of an object or
the occurrence of an event does not necessarily extend to
open-ended tasks like dense video captioning. The latter
is particularly important for models assisting users with
perceptual disabilities. Hence, there is a pressing need
for a dedicated benchmark that evaluates VideoLLMs on
their freeform generative capabilities rather than solely on

question-answering.
In this work, we develop ARGUS1 , a novel benchmark
that evaluates the rate of hallucination in free-form video
captions from VideoLLMs. Unfortunately, measuring hallucination alone is problematic — a model can avoid falsehoods simply by generating the empty string, and so it is
meaningless to measure freeform accuracy without a dual
metric of completeness. Hallucinations and omissions represent two sides of the same fundamental challenge — ensuring both the accuracy and completeness of video understanding. To the best of our knowledge, no benchmarks currently exist that systematically evaluate hallucinations and
omissions in a freeform setting for VideoLLMs.
Specifically, to address this gap, the ARGUS framework
compares the sentences from the VideoLLM generated caption to the human sentences, and an entailment analysis is
used to quantify the rate hallucinations in the form of (i)
1 Named after Argus, the hundred-eyed giant of Greek mythology
renowned for his vigilance and ability to monitor every detail.

ω Equal contribution. Correspondence: ruchitr@umd.edu

20280

