This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

: Towards Generic 3D Single Object Tracking in the Wild

GSOT3D
1,2

Yifan Jiao
1

Yunhao Li1,2 Junhua Ding3 Qing Yang3 Song Fu3 Heng Fan3† Libo Zhang1†∗

Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 University of North Texas

{jiaoyifan23, liyunhao23}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {junhua.ding, qing.yang, song.fu, heng.fan}@unt.edu, libo@iscas.ac.cn

Figure 1. Demonstration of a few sequence samples from our GSOT3D. Each sequence is offered with multiple modalities, including point
cloud, RGB image, and depth, supporting different 3D SOT tasks. Best viewed in color and by zooming in for all figures in the paper.

Abstract

a progressive spatial-temporal network and outperforms all
current solutions by a large margin. By releasing GSOT3D,
we expect to advance further 3D tracking in future research
and applications. Our benchmark and model as well as
the evaluation toolkit and results are publicly available at
https://github.com/ailovejinx/GSOT3D.

In this paper, we present a novel benchmark, GSOT3D, that
aims at facilitating development of generic 3D single object
tracking (SOT) in the wild. Specifically, GSOT3D offers 620
sequences with 123K frames, and covers a wide selection of
54 object categories. Each sequence is offered with multiple
modalities, including the point cloud (PC), RGB image, and
depth. This allows GSOT3D to support various 3D tracking
tasks, such as single-modal 3D SOT on PC and multi-modal
3D SOT on RGB-PC or RGB-D, and thus greatly broadens
research directions for 3D object tracking. To provide highquality per-frame 3D annotations, all sequences are labeled
manually with multiple rounds of meticulous inspection and
refinement. To our best knowledge, GSOT3D is the largest
benchmark dedicated to various generic 3D object tracking
tasks. To understand how existing 3D trackers perform and
to provide comparisons for future research on GSOT3D, we
assess eight representative point cloud-based tracking models. Our evaluation results exhibit that these models heavily
degrade on GSOT3D, and more efforts are required for robust and generic 3D object tracking. Besides, to encourage
future research, we present a simple yet effective generic 3D
tracker, named PROT3D, that localizes the target object via

1. Introduction
As one of the most crucial problems in 3D computer vision,
3D single object tracking (SOT) aims to localize the desired
target with a sequence of 3D bounding boxes, given its state
(usually a 3D bounding box) in the first frame. Due to its important applications in many scenarios, including intelligent
vehicles, general mobile robotics, navigation, etc, 3D object
tracking has received extensive attention in the past decade
with many approaches proposed (e.g., [1, 2, 8, 24, 34]).
Current research mainly focuses on the point cloud (PC)based 3D tracking. Relying on popular autonomous driving
datasets (e.g., KITTI [7] and NuScenes [3]), numerous deep
3D trackers have been proposed and demonstrated state-ofthe-art results (e.g., [21, 29, 31, 32]). Despite such progress,
further development of generic 3D SOT is heavily restricted
by currently adopted benchmarks due to several reasons: (1)
limited object classes. To achieve general tracking capacity,
a 3D tracker is expected to learn with sequences from a large
set of categories during training. However, existing datasets
for 3D SOT (e.g., [3, 7]), specially designed for autonomous
driving, comprise very few available categories (e.g., 8 in [7]

Yifan Jiao and Yunhao Li make equal contributions.
† Equal Advising and Co-last Authors.
∗ Corresponding author: Libo Zhang (libo@iscas.ac.cn).

5469

