This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Generalizable Portrait Style Transfer
Xinbo Wang1†
Wenju Xu2†
Qing Zhang1,3 *
Wei-Shi Zheng1,3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China 2 AMAZON
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
wangxb29@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

xuwenju123@gmail.com

zhangq93@mail.sysu.edu.cn

wszheng@ieee.org

Figure 1. Domain generalizable portrait style transfer. By training on the CelebAMask-HQ dataset with only 30K portrait photos, our
method allows for high-quality semantic-aware style transfer between any two portraits from a wide variety of domains including photo,
cartoon, sketch, animation, etc.

that integrates a ControlNet recording high- frequency information and the style guidance to generate the final result. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
our method. Our code and trained model are available at
https://github.com/wangxb29/DGPST.

Abstract
This paper presents a portrait style transfer method that
generalizes well to various different domains while enabling
high- quality semantic- aligned stylization on regions including hair, eyes, eyelashes, skins, lips, and background. To
this end, we propose to establish dense semantic correspondence between the given input and reference portraits based
on a pre- trained model and a semantic adapter, with which
we obtain a warped reference semantically aligned with the
input. To ensure effective yet controllable style transfer,
we devise an AdaIN- Wavelet transform to balance content
preservation and stylization by blending low- frequency information of the warped reference with high- frequency information of the input in the latent space. A style adapter is
also designed to provide style guidance from the warped
reference. With the stylized latent from AdaIN- Wavelet
transform, we employ a dual- conditional diffusion model

1. Introduction

† Equal contribution.

Portrait style transfer has gained popularity as an advanced
image editing technique, providing an automated way to apply the visual style of a reference portrait to an input portrait. This task is particularly challenging as it requires precise local tone adjustments across different facial regions,
such as the skin, lips, eyes, hair, and background, to faithfully replicate the reference style while preserving the portrait identity and facial structure details. As illustrated in
Figure 1, this technique is expected to enable a wide range
of transformations, such as converting a human portrait into
various artistic styles, modernizing old photographs, and
adding color to sketch images, allowing casual photographers to effortlessly transform their photos into stunning

* Corresponding author.

15802

