This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C2 MIL: Synchronizing Semantic and Topological Causalities in Multiple
Instance Learning for Robust and Interpretable Survival Analysis
Min Cen1 *, Zhenfeng Zhuang2 *, Yuzhe Zhang1 , Min Zeng1 ,
Baptiste Magnier3 , Lequan Yu4 , Hong Zhang1†, and Liansheng Wang2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
3
EuroMov Digital Health in Motion, Univ Montpellier, IMT Mines Ales, Ales, France
4
The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong SAR, China
{cenmin0127, zyz2020, zengm}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhuangzhenfeng@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
baptiste.magnier@mines-ales.fr, lqyu@hku.hk, zhangh@ustc.edu.cn, lswang@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph-based Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is widely
used in survival analysis with Hematoxylin and Eosin
(H&E)-stained whole slide images (WSIs) due to its ability to capture topological information. However, variations
in staining and scanning can introduce semantic bias, while
topological subgraphs that are not relevant to the causal relationships can create noise, resulting in biased slide-level
representations. These issues can hinder both the interpretability and generalization of the analysis. To tackle this,
we introduce a dual structural causal model as the theoretical foundation and propose a novel and interpretable
dual causal graph-based MIL model, C2 MIL. C2 MIL incorporates a novel cross-scale adaptive feature disentangling module for semantic causal intervention and a new
Bernoulli differentiable causal subgraph sampling method
for topological causal discovery. A joint optimization strategy combining disentangling supervision and contrastive
learning enables simultaneous refinement of both semantic and topological causalities. Experiments demonstrate
that C2 MIL consistently improves generalization and interpretability over existing methods and can serve as a causal
enhancement for diverse MIL baselines. The code is available at https://github.com/mimic0127/C2MIL.

1. Introduction
Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E)-stained whole slide images
(WSIs) are the gold standard for pathological diagnosis,
providing rich histological details essential for diagnostic
* Equal contribution. Min Cen contributed to this work during a visit at
Xiamen University.
† Corresponding author.

（b）

（a）

(c)

f

h

g

l
Y

G

X

Z

T

（d）

f
X

h

S
G

C

l

g

Y
Z

Figure 1. (a) Four WSIs showing staining, sectioning, and scanning variations. (b) Attention heatmaps from existing methods,
revealing sensitivity to irrelevant regions (black outlines: tumor
ground truth). (c) Standard graph-based MIL pipeline. (d) C2 MIL
pipeline with semantic causal intervention for confounder adjustment and topological causal discovery for non-causal structure removal. Letters in (c) and (d) correspond to Section 3.1.

and prognostic assessment. WSI-based survival analysis
plays a vital role in predicting patient outcomes, guiding
personalized treatment, and improving clinical decisionmaking [25, 44]. However, the sheer size and complexity
of WSIs pose significant challenges for computational modeling. Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) has emerged as a
powerful weakly supervised paradigm, reducing the need
for labor-intensive manual slide review [19, 40]. MIL has
demonstrated outstanding performance in various tasks in
pathology, including subtype classification [12], gene mutation prediction [31], and survival analysis [26]. Recently,
graph-based MIL methods (Figure 1 (c)) have gained traction for their ability to capture pathological features and

24392

