This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReTracker: Exploring Image Matching for Robust Online Any Point Tracking
Dongli Tan1,2∗ Xingyi He1,2∗ Sida Peng1 Yiqing Gong1 Xing Zhu2
Jiaming Sun1,3 Ruizhen Hu4 Yujun Shen2 Hujun Bao1 Xiaowei Zhou1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Ant Research 3 4DV.ai 4 Shenzhen University
†

Equal contribution

Corresponding author

Ours

Cotracker V3

BoosTapir

∗

Begin Tracking

Long-Term Occlusion

Appear Again, Re-Tracking

Time

Figure 1. Comparison Between Existing Online Trackers and the Proposed ReTracker. Retracking target points in a video sequence
after long-term occlusions is challenging due to significant scene changes, where current state-of-the-art online trackers often struggle. In
contrast, the proposed ReTracker pipeline achieves robust and accurate continuous tracking of target points upon reappearance, effectively
handling large viewpoint and appearance variations.

Abstract
This paper aims to establish correspondences for a set of 2D
query points across a video sequence in an online manner.
Recent methods leverage future frames to achieve smooth
point tracking at the current frame, but they still struggle
to find points with significant viewpoint changes after longterm occlusions and inherently cannot achieve online tracking. To overcome these challenges, we develop a novel online tracking framework, named ReTracker, that integrates
two advances in image matching with tracking-specific designs. First, a decoder network with a global receptive field
is incorporated with a temporal attention module to robustly
track points undergoing large location changes. Second, the
decoder network is adapted to pretrain on large-scale twoview matching data, which offers significantly greater diversity and volume than tracking data, to learn general matching priors. This pretraining strategy effectively enhances our
tracker’s ability to handle viewpoint and appearance varia-

4306

tions after long-term occlusions. Experiments demonstrate
that our method outperforms recent online trackers across
multiple benchmarks and achieves competitive or superior
performance compared to offline methods. Furthermore, we
collect an ego-centric, occlusion-heavy dataset to illustrate
the retracking capabilities of our approach. Project page:
re-tracker.github.io.

1. Introduction
Point tracking is a fundamental problem in computer vision,
which aims to find pixel correspondences of a set of 2D
query points in a sequence of video frames. The sequentially
tracked 2D point locations along the frames can be used in
various downstream tasks, such as SLAM [4, 31, 32], object
tracking [29, 38], video generation [21], robotic manipulation [16, 20, 51], etc. In this paper, we address the problem of online tracking, which aims to predict tracking results
for each newly captured frame instantly, without relying on

