This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guiding Diffusion-Based Articulated Object Generation by Partial Point Cloud
Alignment and Physical Plausibility Constraints
Jens U. Kreber and Joerg Stueckler
University of Augsburg
Augsburg, Germany
{jens.kreber,joerg.stueckler}@uni-a.de

Abstract
Articulated objects are an important type of interactable
objects in everyday environments. In this paper, we propose PhysNAP, a novel diffusion model-based approach for
generating articulated objects that aligns them with partial point clouds and improves their physical plausibility.
The model represents part shapes by signed distance functions (SDFs). We guide the reverse diffusion process using
a point cloud alignment loss computed using the predicted
SDFs. Additionally, we impose non-penetration and mobility constraints based on the part SDFs for guiding the
model to generate more physically plausible objects. We
also make our diffusion approach category-aware to further improve point cloud alignment if category information
is available. We evaluate the generative ability and constraint consistency of samples generated with PhysNAP using the PartNet-Mobility dataset. We also compare it with
an unguided baseline diffusion model and demonstrate that
PhysNAP can improve constraint consistency and provides
a tradeoff with generative ability.

Figure 1. Method overview of PhysNAP: We propose to guide a
pretrained diffusion model (NAP [10]) for articulated object generation with point cloud alignment and physical plausibility losses.
The latter measure part penetration in the initial state (penetration)
and in varying articulation states (mobility). All generated properties can potentially be adjusted to follow the losses, including
node and edge existence, shape and articulation joint properties.
We also augment NAP to condition on the object category.

1. Introduction
Many man-made objects in everyday environments such as
drawers, appliances, or laptops are articulated. Generating
and reconstructing digital twins of such articulated objects
is an important problem in virtual reality applications and
robotics.
In this paper, we propose PhysNAP, a novel diffusion
model-based approach that generates articulated objects
that align with partial point cloud views by loss-guided sampling. We include guidance loss terms which improve physical plausibility of the generated objects by reducing part
penetrations in the initial state (zero articulation) and in
varying articulation states. Additionally, we condition the
diffusion model on object categories which also improves
point cloud alignment, since with category information the

model is more likely to generate well-matching objects. An
overview of our method is shown in Figure 1. Our approach
extends NAP [10], an unconditional and unguided diffusion
model which generates articulation graphs, part shapes, and
joint parameters. We propose novel approaches to calculate
point distance and shape penetration based on the predicted
graph representation and signed distance function (SDF)
part shapes. The losses are differentiable by all generated
properties, which allows for multiple ways of minimizing
them, such as adjusting the relative location of objects or
altering their shape or articulation properties. To the best
of our knowledge, PhysNAP is the first category-aware diffusion model which can generate articulated objects with

3206

