This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IGD: Instructional Graphic Design with Multimodal Layer Generation
Yadong Qu1 ,* Shancheng Fang2†, Yuxin Wang2 ,
Xiaorui Wang2 , Zhineng Chen3 , Hongtao Xie1 , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 YuanShi Technology
3
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
qqqyd@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {fangsc, wangyx58, htxie, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, harrywxr@outlook.com

Abstract

Text

Input

Image

Group of friends celebrating a birthday.
They are laughing and enjoying each other's
company. Background features bold, retrostyle text saying “CARD PREVIEW” with a
vibrant color scheme of orange, blue, and
yellow. There is also black text that says
“HAPPY BIRTHDAY”.

Graphic design visually conveys information and data by
creating and combining text, images and graphics. Twostage methods that rely primarily on layout generation
lack creativity and intelligence, making graphic design still
labor-intensive. Existing diffusion-based methods generate
non-editable graphic design files at image level with poor
legibility in visual text rendering, which prevents them from
achieving satisfactory and practical automated graphic design. In this paper, we propose Instructional Graphic Designer (IGD) to swiftly generate multimodal layers with editable flexibility with only natural language instructions.
IGD adopts a new paradigm that leverages parametric rendering and image asset generation. First, we develop a design platform and establish a standardized format for multiscenario design files, thus laying the foundation for scaling
up data. Second, IGD utilizes the multimodal understanding and reasoning capabilities of MLLM to accomplish attribute prediction, sequencing and layout of layers. It also
employs a diffusion model to generate image content for assets. By enabling end-to-end training, IGD architecturally
supports scalability and extensibility in complex graphic
design tasks. The superior experimental results demonstrate that IGD offers a new solution for graphic design.

Graphic

Diffusion
Model
Image level
non editable

Input

Layout
Generation
Layer level
editable

Input

Please generate a poster with the words of “CARD”, “PREVIEW”, “HAPPY BIRTHDAY”.

Instructional Graphic Designer
Layer 1

type: text
bbox: 10, 0, 1140, 327
content: CARD
color: 240, 215, 97

Layer 3

...

Layer 2

type: image
bbox: 190, 379, 886, 557
transform: (0.96, -0.26,
0.26, 0.96, 0, 0)

Layer N

Attribute Level
editable

...

Figure 1. Method comparison. Diffusion models struggle with
legible text and lack editing flexibility. Layout generation requires
pre-designed elements, limiting creativity. IGD generates layered
content and layouts solely from instructions.

1. Introduction
With the rapid advancements of deep learning technology
and computational power, scaling laws have driven revolutionary success in recent years. In natural language processing tasks, large language models (LLMs) [3, 6, 12, 39] have
demonstrated remarkable capabilities, while diffusion models [9, 20, 33, 34, 40] have also achieved impressive results
in text-to-image generation, making previously challenging
tasks achievable. This success owes much to scaling laws.
* Work done during the internship at YuanShi Technology.
† Corresponding author.

Graphic design, as a fundamental task in conveying visual
and textual information, traditionally requires substantial
expertise and human effort to create aesthetically pleasing
works. However, there is no sufficiently intelligent and effective methods in this multimodal scenario to create layer
editable graphic design files based on instructions.
Previous methods attempted to achieve it in a straightfor-

18218

