This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GEMeX: A Large-Scale, Groundable, and Explainable Medical VQA
Benchmark for Chest X-ray Diagnosis
Bo Liu1 , Ke Zou2,3 , Li-Ming Zhan4 , Zexin Lu1 , Xiaoyu Dong1 , Yidi Chen5 , Chengqiang Xie1 ,
Jiannong Cao1 , Xiao-Ming Wu1 ,* Huazhu Fu6∗
1
3

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong S.A.R., China, 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore

Sichuan University, China, 4 Ningbo University of Technology, China, 5 West China Hospital of Sichuan University, China
6

Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

Abstract

Dataset

Medical Visual Question Answering (Med-VQA) combines
computer vision and natural language processing to automatically answer clinical inquiries about medical images.
However, current Med-VQA datasets exhibit two significant limitations: (1) they often lack visual and textual explanations for answers, hindering comprehension for patients and junior doctors; (2) they typically offer a narrow
range of question formats, inadequately reflecting the diverse requirements in practical scenarios. These limitations pose significant challenges to the development of a reliable and user-friendly Med-VQA system. To address these
challenges, we introduce a large-scale, Groundable, and
Explainable Medical VQA benchmark for chest X-ray diagnosis (GEMeX), featuring several innovative components:
(1) a multi-modal explainability mechanism that offers detailed visual and textual explanations for each questionanswer pair, thereby enhancing answer comprehensibility; (2) four question types—open-ended, closed-ended,
single-choice, and multiple-choice—to better reflect practical needs. With 151,025 images and 1,605,575 questions,
GEMeX is the currently largest chest X-ray VQA dataset.
Evaluation of 12 representative large vision language models (LVLMs) on GEMeX reveals suboptimal performance,
underscoring the dataset’s complexity. Meanwhile, we propose a strong model by fine-tuning an existing LVLM on the
GEMeX training set. The substantial performance improvement showcases the dataset’s effectiveness. The benchmark
is available at www.med-vqa.com/GEMeX.

1. Introduction
Large vision language models (LVLMs) have recently made
huge advancements in artificial intelligence [1, 2, 13, 34, 38,
*

Corresponding author.

VQA Type

Example

Closed-ended

Closed-ended VQA:
Q: Is any devices present within the right atrium?
A: No.

Open-ended

Open-ended VQA:
Q: What are all the diseases identifiable within the right
hilar structures?
A: A small right pleural effusion.

Closed-ended

Multi-choice VQA:

Open-ended

C: ["A: Bilateral lungs", "B: Right costophrenic angle",
"C: Bilateral lower lung", "D: Cardiac region"]

MIMIC-CXR-VQA

Q: Which regions on the X-ray show signs of abnormalities?

A: ["A", "B", "C", "D"]

Ours

Single-choice

Reason: Abnormalities are seen in the bilateral lungs
(hyperinflation), right costophrenic angle (blunting),
bilateral lower lung (atelectasis), and cardiac silhouette
(enlargement).

Multi-choice

Bounding Box: [[28, 40, 167, 190], [28, 124 , 85, 184],
[28, 126, 165, 189], [57, 114, 147, 180]]

Figure 1. Our GEMeX stands out from existing medical VQA
datasets by providing diverse question types and comprehensive
multimodal explanations: textual reasoning and visual grounding.

39, 53, 56], demonstrating remarkable capabilities in understanding visual content while generating coherent natural
language responses. These advancements have driven innovations across various domains [15, 47], with healthcare
emerging as an important application. Within this domain,
medical visual question answering (Med-VQA) stands out
as a crucial task that automatically provides reliable and
user-friendly answers [29] to questions about medical images [24], facilitating healthcare professionals in diagnosis,
medical education, and clinical decision-making.
To ensure the reliability and user-friendliness of MedVQA systems, it is crucial to incorporate answer explanations along with a diverse set of question formats. Although
significant progress has been made by existing Med-VQA
systems [16, 18, 24, 30, 51], none have yet integrated explanations for the answers, especially in terms of the visual aspect. As emphasized by [27], explanations are as
essential as the answers themselves in general VQA systems. This holds even stronger in medical VQA, where

21310

