This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PerLDiff: Controllable Street View Synthesis Using Perspective-Layout
Diffusion Model
Jinhua Zhang1 * Hualian Sheng2 * Sijia Cai2 Bing Deng2 Qiao Liang2
Wen Li 1 Ying Fu3 Jieping Ye2 Shuhang Gu1†
1

2

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Independent Researcher

3

Beijing Institute of Technology

{jinhua.zjh, shuhanggu}@gmail.com
Codes and models: https://github.com/LabShuHangGU/PerLDiff

Abstract
Controllable generation is considered a potentially vital approach to address the challenge of annotating 3D data, and
the precision of such controllable generation becomes particularly imperative in the context of data production for
autonomous driving. Existing methods focus on the integration of diverse generative information into controlling inputs, utilizing frameworks such as GLIGEN or ControlNet,
to produce commendable outcomes in controllable generation. However, such approaches intrinsically restrict generation performance to the learning capacities of predefined network architectures. In this paper, we explore the
innovative integration of controlling information and introduce PerLDiff (Perspective-Layout Diffusion Models), a
novel method for effective street view image generation that
fully leverages perspective 3D geometric information. Our
PerLDiff employs 3D geometric priors to guide the generation of street view images with precise object-level control
within the network learning process, resulting in a more robust and controllable output. Moreover, it demonstrates superior controllability compared to alternative layout control methods. Empirical results justify that our PerLDiff
markedly enhances the precision of controllable generation
on the NuScenes and KITTI datasets.

1. Introduction
The advancement of secure autonomous driving systems is
fundamentally dependent on the accurate perception of the
vehicle’s environment. Recently, perception utilizing Bird’s
Eye View (BEV) has seen rapid progress, markedly pushing forward areas such as 3D object detection [13, 15] and
BEV segmentation [37]. Nonetheless, these systems necessitate extensive datasets with high-quality 3D annotations,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

(a) Object Controllability (rotate + 90°)

MagicDrive

MagicDrive
BEVControl*

PerLDiff (Ours)

PerLDiff (Ours)

(b) Scene Controllability

MagicDrive

MagicDrive

BEVControl*

PerLDiff (Ours)

Figure 1. PerLDiff enhances controllability over BEVControl*
and MagicDrive using geometric priors. Top: Demonstrates object
controllability by adjusting the 3D annotation yaw by 90 degrees.
Bottom: Shows scene controllability through the alignment of the
street map with the generated image. Regions highlighted by rectangles indicate areas where the generated images fail to achieve
control and alignment with ground truth conditions.

the acquisition of which typically involves two consecutive
steps: data scene collection and subsequent labeling. Each
of these steps incurs significant expenses and presents considerable challenges in terms of data acquisition.
To mitigate issue of data scarcity, the adoption of generative technologies [5, 9, 29] has proven practical for reversing the order of data annotation. The paradigm of this
approach is to use the collected annotation as controlling
information to generate the corresponding lifelike images
depicting urban street scenes. By implementing this strategy, it is possible to dramatically lower the costs associ-

26306

