This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViSpeak: Visual Instruction Feedback in Streaming Videos
Shenghao Fu1,3,4,† , Qize Yang3,† , Yuan-Ming Li1,4 , Yi-Xing Peng1,3,4 , Kun-Yu Lin1,4 ,
Xihan Wei3 , Jian-Fang Hu1,4∗ , Xiaohua Xie1,4,5,6 *, Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,4,6
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China;
2

4

3

Peng Cheng Laboratory, China;

Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group;

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China;
5

Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China;
6

Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), China

fushh7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, qize.yqz@alibaba-inc.com, xiexiaoh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn
ViSpeak: https://github.com/HumanMLLM/ViSpeak
ViSpeak-Bench: https://github.com/HumanMLLM/ViSpeak-Bench

Abstract
Recent advances in Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) are
primarily focused on offline video understanding. Instead,
streaming video understanding poses great challenges to recent models due to its time-sensitive, omni-modal and interactive characteristics. In this work, we aim to extend the
streaming video understanding from a new perspective and
propose a novel task named Visual Instruction Feedback
in which models should be aware of visual contents and
learn to extract instructions from them. For example, when
users wave their hands to agents, agents should recognize
the gesture and start conversations with welcome information. Thus, following instructions in visual modality greatly
enhances user-agent interactions. To facilitate research, we
define seven key subtasks highly relevant to visual modality
and collect the ViSpeak-Instruct dataset for training and
the ViSpeak-Bench for evaluation. Further, we propose the
ViSpeak model, which is a SOTA streaming video understanding LMM with GPT-4o-level performance on various
streaming video understanding benchmarks. After finetuning on our ViSpeak-Instruct dataset, ViSpeak is equipped
with basic visual instruction feedback ability, serving as a
solid baseline for future research.

standing. In the offline setting, the entire video is provided
and the complete context can be modeled. However, in
streaming video understanding, models can not access the
entire video. Video content continuously arrives, and the
model must make decisions based on the information available so far while continuously processing incoming future
data, which poses great challenges to recent LMMs.

1. Introduction

Three key differences exist between streaming and offline video understanding: First, the question answers in
streaming video understanding are time-sensitive. The answers for the same question “What is happening now?” vary
at different timestamps and the model should output the answer at a proper time. Second, streaming videos are always accompanied by streaming audios, making problems
as omni-modal ones. Third but most importantly, streaming video understanding is distinguished by its interaction
characteristic. The interaction characteristic encompasses
three folds: 1) non-awakening interaction where users
can interact with agents at any time, 2) interruption where
users can stop the answer or change the topic at any time,
and 3) proactive output where agents can also express their
mind at a proper time. Despite its significance, the interaction characteristic has been largely overlooked by the community. MMDuet [51] and Dispider [41] conducted preliminary explorations on proactive output to point out a specific
event when it occurs based on user prompt. However, the
prompts do not always exist, especially for an unintentional
event or during communications. VITA [16] uses dual models to decide when to respond to instructions in audio but it
can not respond to visual contents.

Recent Large Video Language Models [4, 17, 23, 35, 68,
69] excel at fine-grained spatial perception, long-term temporal reasoning, and comprehensive spatiotemporal under* : Corresponding authors are Xiaohua Xie and Jian-Fang Hu. † : Equal

Contribution. Work was done when Shenghao Fu and Yi-Xing Peng were
interns at Alibaba.

21778

In this work, we dive deeper into the interaction characteristic of streaming video understanding and introduce a
new task named Visual Instruction Feedback to explore

