This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniPhys: Unified Planner and Controller with Diffusion for Flexible
Physics-Based Character Control
Yan Wu1

Korrawe Karunratanakul1
Zhengyi Luo2
1
ETH Zurich, 2 Carnegie Mellon University

Siyu Tang1

{yan.wu, korrawe.karunratanakul, siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch, zluo2@andrew.cmu.edu
https://wuyan01.github.io/uniphys-project/

Figure 1. UniPhys is a diffusion-based unified planner and controller for physics-based character control, handling diverse tasks with a
single model. We showcase its effectiveness in (a) text-driven control with dynamic language instructions, (b) precise velocity control, (c)
sparse goal reaching, and (d) adapting to dynamic environments with moving object avoidance.

Abstract
Generating natural and physically plausible character
motion remains challenging, particularly for long-horizon
control with diverse guidance signals. While prior work combines high-level diffusion-based motion planners with lowlevel physics controllers, these systems suffer from domain
gaps that degrade motion quality and require task-specific
fine-tuning. To tackle this problem, we introduce UniPhys,
a diffusion-based behavior cloning framework that unifies
motion planning and control into a single model. UniPhys
enables flexible, expressive character motion conditioned on
multi-modal inputs such as text, trajectories, and goals. To
address accumulated prediction errors over long sequences,
UniPhys is trained with the Diffusion Forcing paradigm,
learning to denoise noisy motion histories and handle discrepancies introduced by the physics simulator. This design
allows UniPhys to robustly generate physically plausible,
long-horizon motions. Through guided sampling, UniPhys
generalizes to a wide range of control signals, including
unseen ones, without requiring task-specific fine-tuning. Ex-

periments show that UniPhys outperforms prior methods in
motion naturalness, generalization, and robustness across
diverse control tasks.

1. Introduction
Generating natural and physically plausible character motion
is essential for graphics, games, animations, and robotics
applications. Prior research has shown that physics-based
character control can be formulated as tracking the reference motion clips from motion capture datasets with Goalconditioned Reinforcement Learning (RL) in a physics simulator [7, 29, 33, 44, 69]. The tracking policy can be distilled
with supervised learning into a more versatile controller
that can accept multi-modal signals such as text prompt,
keyframes, target joint location, etc [17, 53, 57]. However,
robust multi-task policies for bipedal character control remain challenging, and existing methods are still limited in
the naturalness of the generated motion [53]. They struggle
to generalize across diverse control signals [17] and support
only a limited range of motion behaviors [57]. Moreover,

13214

