This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OD-RASE: Ontology-Driven Risk Assessment and Safety Enhancement for
Autonomous Driving
† Kota Shimomura1,2 ,

Koki Inoue2 ,

† Masaki Nambata1,2 ,

Atsuya Ishikawa3 , Ryota Mimura3 ,
‡ Takayuki Kawabuchi3

Takayoshi Yamashita1 ,
† Equal Contribution,

‡ Corresponding Author

Chubu University1 ,

Elith Inc.2 , Honda R&D Co., Ltd.3
https://kotashimomura.github.io/odrase/

Abstract
Although autonomous driving systems demonstrate high perception performance, they still face limitations when handling rare situations or complex road structures. Such road
infrastructures are designed for human drivers, safety improvements are typically introduced only after accidents occur. This reactive approach poses a significant challenge
for autonomous systems, which require proactive risk mitigation. To address this issue, we propose OD-RASE, a
framework for enhancing the safety of autonomous driving systems by detecting road structures that cause traffic
accidents and connecting these findings to infrastructure
development. First, we formalize an ontology based on
specialized domain knowledge of road traffic systems. In
parallel, we generate infrastructure improvement proposals
using a large-scale visual language model (LVLM) and use
ontology-driven data filtering to enhance their reliability.
This process automatically annotates improvement proposals on pre-accident road images, leading to the construction
of a new dataset. Furthermore, we introduce the Baseline
approach (OD-RASE model), which leverages LVLM and
a diffusion model to produce both infrastructure improvement proposals and generated images of the improved road
environment. Our experiments demonstrate that ontologydriven data filtering enables highly accurate prediction of
accident-causing road structures and the corresponding improvement plans. We believe that this work contributes to
the overall safety of traffic environments and marks an important step toward the broader adoption of autonomous
driving systems.

Figure 1. Comparison of various methods for infrastructure improvement design. (a) is based on expert knowledge, while (b)
represents our proposed approach. Our method not only outputs
infrastructure improvement plans for road structures that cause traffic accidents but also generates visual representations of roads after
improvement.

1. Introduction

approaches such as BEVPerception methods [34, 50, 56]
that efficiently extract 3D features from 2D images, as well
as query-based multitask learning methods [19, 46]. These
efforts are supported by evaluation platforms that reproduce
existing road structures to simulate arbitrary driving scenarios [52, 58] and by benchmark datasets [6, 10, 15, 32, 53]. In
addition, data-centric research [26] has focused on generating arbitrary scenes [44, 45, 51] using diffusion models [17]
or novel view synthesis [23, 31] to address real-world corner
cases. Furthermore, several datasets have been proposed
to enhance safe autonomous driving by generating natural language reasoning explanations and evaluating systems
ability to understand contextual information [7, 24, 25, 49].
Other methods explicitly learn regions from which vehicles
or pedestrians might unexpectedly emerge during driving
[39, 55, 57].
These studies substantially contribute to the safety of
autonomous driving systems. Nevertheless, the design of
road infrastructure has a critical impact on safety, includ-

State-of-the-art autonomous driving systems achieve highly
accurate situational awareness by capturing information beyond what human drivers can process in real time, using

26167

