This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Discrepancy-aware Detector for Image Forgery Identification
Ziye Wang
Minghang Yu
Chunyan Xu*
Zhen Cui
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{wzynjust,mhyu,cyx }@njust.edu.cn, zhen.cui@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)

With the rapid advancement of image generation techniques, robust forgery detection has become increasingly
imperative to ensure the trustworthiness of digital media.
Recent research indicates that the learned semantic concepts of pre-trained models are critical for identifying fake
images. However, the misalignment between the forgery
and semantic concept spaces hinders the model’s forgery
detection performance. To address this problem, we propose a novel Semantic Discrepancy-aware Detector (SDD)
that leverages reconstruction learning to align the two
spaces at a fine-grained visual level. By exploiting the
conceptual knowledge embedded in the pre-trained visionlanguage model, we specifically design a semantic token
sampling module to mitigate the space shifts caused by features irrelevant to both forgery traces and semantic concepts. A concept-level forgery discrepancy learning module, based on reconstruction, enhances the interaction between semantic concepts and forgery traces, effectively capturing discrepancies under the concepts’ guidance. Finally,
the low-level forgery feature enhancement integrates the
learned concept-level forgery discrepancies to minimize redundant forgery information. Experiments conducted on
two standard image forgery datasets demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed SDD, which achieves superior results
compared to existing methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/wzy1111111/SSD.

(b)

Figure 1. The phenomenon of misalignment between semantic
concept space and forgery space. Since cos ω can reflect the similarity of image descriptions, we model the feature space in polar
coordinates. As the semantic concept space in [32] is frozen, fake
samples sharing similar concepts with real ones can be easily misclassified. With forgery-adaptive space like [26], the model can
correctly distinguish between them based on re-learned forgery
features. Nevertheless, due to the semantic concept bias introduced by coarse text prompts, the target samples may be projected
into an inaccurate semantic concept dimension, causing them to
drift away from the real source samples along the fake dimension.

images in a joint embedding space of texts and images can
effectively capture discrepancies between fake and real images. In contrast, methods [6, 13, 44, 50] overlooking the
interplay between forgery traces and semantic concepts perform poorly when confronted with unseen generative models.
To investigate the visual semantic concepts of pretrained models, we conduct a statistical analysis of the output features from CNNSpot [50] and CLIP-ViT [32] (See
Appendix A for more details). Under different categories,
CNNSpot exhibits a synchronized difference between real
and fake features in its training space. However, when tran-

1. Introduction
With the thriving of generative AI technologies, like Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [14] and diffusion
models [2], the images generated by these models can easily create confusion by passing off the spurious as genuine.
Therefore, it is crucial to develop a universal method for
detecting fake images to mitigate the widespread dissemination of disinformation.
Pioneering research [26, 32] has shown that projecting
* Corresponding author

18388

