This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowR: Flowing from Sparse to Dense 3D Reconstructions
Tobias Fischer1,2
Lorenzo Porzi2

Samuel Rota Bulò2
Yung-Hsu Yang1
Nikhil Keetha2,3
Norman Müller2
Katja Schwarz2
Jonathon Luiten2
1
2
Marc Pollefeys
Peter Kontschieder
1
2
ETH Zürich
Meta Reality Labs Zürich 3 CMU
https://tobiasfshr.github.io/pub/flowr

Abstract

)# (!# |()

3D Gaussian splatting enables high-quality novel view synthesis (NVS) at real-time frame rates. However, its quality
drops sharply as we depart from the training views. Thus,
dense captures are needed to match the high-quality expectations of applications like Virtual Reality (VR). However,
such dense captures are very laborious and expensive to
obtain. Existing works have explored using 2D generative
models to alleviate this requirement by distillation or generating additional training views. These models typically rely
on a noise-to-data generative process conditioned only on a
handful of reference input views, leading to hallucinations,
inconsistent generation results, and subsequent reconstruction artifacts. Instead, we propose a multi-view, flow matching model that learns a flow to directly connect novel view
renderings from possibly sparse reconstructions to renderings that we expect from dense reconstructions. This enables augmenting scene captures with consistent, generated views to improve reconstruction quality. Our model
is trained on a novel dataset of 3.6M image pairs and can
process up to 45 views at 540 → 960 resolution (91K tokens)
on one H100 GPU in a single forward pass. Our pipeline
consistently improves NVS in sparse- and dense-view scenarios, leading to higher-quality reconstructions than prior
works across multiple, widely-used NVS benchmarks.

!! ~ $! (!)

Standard Flow Matching

!" ~ $" (!|()

)# (!# |()

!! ~ $! (!|()

FlowR
FlowR !

!" ~ $" (!|()

Figure 1. Flowing from sparse to dense 3D reconstructions.
Contrary to previous diffusion and flow matching models that map
a standard multivariate Gaussian distribution p0 (z) to an, often
conditional, target distribution p1 (z | y), we consider source distributions of the form p0 (z | y). We use novel view renderings
of sparse reconstructions as source distribution samples, which we
map to the target distribution p1 (z | y) that represents reconstructions obtained under optimal, dense conditions (i.e. ground truth).

1. Introduction

tremely large number of captured images per scene. Obtaining these images is laborious and not always possible.
Thus, one of the core challenges in 3D reconstruction and
novel view synthesis is how to build an algorithm that can
achieve equally good results with far fewer images, while
also being able to take advantage of a large set of images
when they are available.
In this paper, we tackle this problem with our FlowR
method. FlowR consists of two parts: (a) a robust initial reconstruction pipeline based on 3DGS [25] but designed for
both sparse- and dense-view settings; and (b) a data densification procedure, which uses flow matching [33] to generate high-quality extra views that can be used to improve
reconstruction.
Several previous approaches [12, 19, 34, 45, 59, 61, 67]
have used generative models to generate novel views to improve reconstruction. These works rely on diffusion [21] or
flow matching [31] models that map samples between a data
and a noise distribution. As such, these works use a noiseto-data generative process, usually conditioned on initial input images or renderings (Fig. 1, top). We hypothesize that
a generative process that directly maps samples from a con-

3D reconstruction is the process of estimating the 3D
scene geometry and appearance from a set of 2D images.
Given a large and dense enough set of images, modern
3D reconstruction methods such as neural radiance fields
(NeRF) [37] and 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) [25] produce 3D representations that can be rendered into novel
views that are almost indistinguishable from reality. This is
the task of novel view synthesis (NVS), and it enables various applications such as immersive VR experiences inside
captured real-world scenes. However, for these methods to
achieve such a high level of photorealism, they need an ex-

27702

