This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffRefine: Diffusion-based Proposal Specific Point Cloud Densification
for Cross-Domain Object Detection
Sangyun Shin1
1

Yuhang He2

Xinyu Hou1

Samuel Hodgson1

Andrew Markham1

Niki Trigoni1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
2
Microsoft Research
® Project Page: https://yunshin.github.io/DiffRefine/

Abstract
The robustness of 3D object detection in large-scale outdoor point clouds degrades significantly when deployed in
an unseen environment due to domain shifts. To minimize
the domain gap, existing works on domain adaptive detection focuses on several factors, including point density, object shape and sizes, to reduce the false negative detections.
However, the adaptation results indicate that there are still
remaining challenges. We argue that this is due to the challenge in recognizing comparably less distinctive region on
object surface due to sparsity, occlusion, etc. In this work,
we aim to reinforce those features by generating points on
object surface to make them straightforwardly recognizable.
We draw our motivation from a common observation that
detection proposals already contain the accurate bounding
boxes, but with relatively low objectness score predictions,
which lead to false negatives. Given these box proposals,
we densify sparse object points with a diffusion approach.
As a result, our model DiffRefine can act as a simple additional module before second-stage refinement, where most
existing detection models for two-stage detection can use.
Experimental results on domain adaptive detection show
competitive performance, especially on vanishing points due
to distance on various detection architectures.

Figure 1. DiffRefine performs proposal specific generation to boost
the detection performance.

density on object surface due to the distance from the sensor,
leaving object surface featureless (see Fig. 1). The problem
becomes even worse when the domain changes, as sparse
points on distant objects can be easily confused when the
surrounding structure, such as roads or buildings, look different. Existing domain adaptive detection works addressing
this issue can be broadly divided into two categories: 1)
data augmentation-based techniques and 2) prototype-based
techniques.
Augmentation based techniques [9, 19, 32] aim to make
the detection model insensitive to variation in sparsity caused
by different sensors across domains. More specifically, during the training, they strategically sample the object points
while providing the consistent targets for bounding box regression and confidence scores. During this process, the
detection model learns to be insensitive towards the density

1. Introduction
Point cloud based object detection is a popular research topic
in computer vision due to the wide range of applications.
Despite recent progress, it still faces challenges caused by
domain gaps, due to factors such as variations in object sizes
and sparsity caused by different sensors. Although different
types of sensor specification can lead to different point cloud
densities, such as 32 or 64-beam LiDAR, a key challenge
that most sensors for point cloud share is diminishing point

4888

