This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CaliMatch: Adaptive Calibration for Improving Safe Semi-supervised Learning
Jinsoo Bae
Korea University
Seoul, Republic of Korea

Seoung Bum Kim*
Korea University
Seoul, Republic of Korea

Abstract

Hyungrok Do
NYU Grossman School of Medicine
New York, NY, USA

thereby decreasing the effectiveness of SSL approaches. To
address this issue, several deep learning-based SSL methods, known as safe semi-supervised learning, have been
proposed [1, 4, 9, 14, 24, 32]. Most safe SSL methods use
out-of-distribution (OOD) detection techniques to identify
whether the labels of unlabeled data belong to the set of
labels in the labeled training dataset. That is, they categorize the unlabeled data into “seen” and “unseen” classes and
use labeled data and unlabeled seen class data to improve
the classifier or unlabeled unseen class data to improve the
OOD detection performance.

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) uses unlabeled data to improve the performance of machine learning models when
labeled data is scarce. However, its real-world applications
often face the label distribution mismatch problem, in which
the unlabeled dataset includes instances whose groundtruth labels are absent from the labeled training dataset.
Recent studies, referred to as safe SSL, have addressed this
issue by using both classification and out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection. However, the existing methods may suffer from overconfidence in deep neural networks, leading
to increased SSL errors because of high confidence in incorrect pseudo-labels or OOD detection. To address this,
we propose a novel method, CaliMatch, which calibrates
both the classifier and the OOD detector to foster safe SSL.
CaliMatch presents adaptive label smoothing and temperature scaling, which eliminates the need to manually tune
the smoothing degree for effective calibration. We give a
theoretical justification for why improving the calibration
of both the classifier and the OOD detector is crucial in
safe SSL. Extensive evaluations on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
SVHN, TinyImageNet, and ImageNet demonstrate that CaliMatch outperforms the existing methods in safe SSL tasks.

Most safe SSL studies for image classification rely on
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, recent studies have reported that deep CNNs show poor calibration performances despite their effectiveness measured
in classification accuracies [7, 16, 17, 22, 28]. Specifically,
deep CNNs are overconfident in their decisions and struggle
to accurately assess the likelihood of error based on their
confidence levels. In this study, we investigate the overconfidence issue of deep CNNs in the context of safe SSL.
The overconfidence in safe SSL can cause the classification
model to learn from incorrect pseudo-labels with unreasonably high confidence in their decisions, thereby amplifying
the model’s error. Moreover, because of the overconfidence
issue, OOD detection in safe SSL may erroneously label a
considerable portion of unseen class data in the unlabeled
dataset as a seen class, consequently undermining the effectiveness of safe SSL.

1. Introduction

We propose a new safe SSL method, CaliMatch, to mitigate overconfidence-related issues in SSL by improving
the calibration performance. CaliMatch effectively rejects
unseen-class data and accurately identifies pseudo-labeled
samples from the unlabeled dataset using a well-calibrated
classifier and an OOD detector, thereby improving the efficacy of SSL. To achieve this, CaliMatch uses adaptive label smoothing and logit scaling to calibrate both the multiclass classifier and the OOD detector. Unlike conventional
smoothing-based calibration methods, which require manual adjustment of the smoothing degree for effective calibration, CaliMatch dynamically adjusts the degree of label
smoothing based on the accuracy distribution of the vali-

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a useful approach to improving machine learning model performance, particularly
when labeled data is limited, but plenty of unlabeled data
are available [5, 10, 24, 30, 31]. However, most existing
SSL methods are based on the assumption that the labeled
and unlabeled data have the same set of class labels. In reality, there could be unlabeled instances whose labels do not
belong to any classes in the labeled dataset, called unseenclass data. Such unseen-class data can adversely affect the
decision boundary of the classifier trained using labeled
data and unlabeled seen-class data through SSL methods,
* Seoung Bum Kim is the corresponding author: sbkim@korea.ac.kr.

2867

