This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UMDATrack: Unified Multi-Domain Adaptive Tracking
Under Adverse Weather Conditions
Siyuan Yao1,2 , Rui Zhu2 , Ziqi Wang2 , Wenqi Ren1,4,5 , Yanyang Yan3 , Xiaochun Cao1∗
1 Sun Yat-sen University 2 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 MoE Key Laboratory of Information Technology
5 Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
yaosiyuan04@gmail.com, ruizhu@bupt.edu.cn, zq_wang@bupt.edu.cn,
yanyanyang@ict.ac.cn, rwq.renwenqi@gmail.com, caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Dark

Foggy

Rainy

…

Visual object tracking has gained promising progress in past
decades. Most of the existing approaches focus on learning
target representation in well-conditioned daytime data, while
for the unconstrained real-world scenarios with adverse
weather conditions, e.g. nighttime or foggy environment, the
tremendous domain shift leads to significant performance
degradation. In this paper, we propose UMDATrack, which
is capable of maintaining high-quality target state prediction
under various adverse weather conditions within a unified
domain adaptation framework. Specifically, we first use a
controllable scenario generator to synthesize a small amount
of unlabeled videos (less than 2% frames in source daytime
datasets) in multiple weather conditions under the guidance
of different text prompts. Afterwards, we design a simple yet
effective domain-customized adapter (DCA), allowing the target objects’ representation to rapidly adapt to various weather
conditions without redundant model updating. Furthermore,
to enhance the localization consistency between source and
target domains, we propose a target-aware confidence alignment module (TCA) following optimal transport theorem.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that UMDATrack can
surpass existing advanced visual trackers and lead new stateof-the-art performance by a significant margin. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Z-Z188/UMDATrack.

Tracker

Tracker

Tracker

Multiple
Domain Adaptation

Single
Domain Adaptation

Image
Enhancer

Feature
Extractor

Feature
Extractor

Feature
Extractor

Adapter

Feature
Extractor

Scenario
Generator
Target frame Source frame Target frame
(a) Track-by(b) Single Domain
Enhancement
Adaptative Tracking

Source frame
Target frame
(c) Multi-Domain
Adaptative Tracking
(Ours)

Figure 1. Three representative tracking pipelines under adverse
weather conditions. (a) “Track-by-Enhancement” pipeline [48].
(b) Single domain adaptation pipeline [49]. (c) The proposed
unified multi-domain adaptive tracking (UMDATrack) pipeline.
UMDATrack utilizes controllable scenarios generator to synthesize
unlabeled video frames and employ a flexible domain-customized
adapter to transfer the knowledge to multi-domain.

constructs template-search pairs to learn a position-sensitive
matching network for target localization. Owing to the
promising advances of recent deep learning architectures,
VOT has achieved remarkable success in terms of accuracy
and efficiency.
Recent advanced object trackers typically utilize wellconditioned daytime datasets, e.g. LaSOT [10] or TrackingNet [29] as supervision for model training, however, the
performance of these SOTA trackers is unsatisfactory in
real-world scenarios with adverse weather conditions (e.g.
nighttime or foggy environment) due to the tremendous domain gap. To address this issue, some efforts have explored
to introduce synthesized datasets [40, 52] or domain adaptive
discriminator [49, 55] to enhance the cross-domain transferability. Despite the significant advances, they potentially
suffer from two drawbacks. First, most of the existing ap-

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking (VOT) is a fundamental visual task of
computer vision over the past decades, aiming to estimate
the state of arbitrary target objects in video sequences given
the initial annotation. Existing mainstream methods formulate object tracking as a target matching problem, which
∗ Corresponding Author.

6466

