This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Occlusion-robust Stylization for Drawing-based 3D Animation
Sunjae Yoon

Gwanhyeong Koo
Younghwan Lee
Ji Woo Hong
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST

Chang D. Yoo

{sunjae.yoon,kookie,youngh2,jiwoohong93,cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Target
motion
(3D)

Non-occlusion
Occlusion

“High quality”

0.45

OSF (Ours)

0.45

DSU [68]

Fidelity

DSU [68]
W3D [30]

0.3
0.30

OSF (Ours)

3D animation aims to generate a 3D animated video from
an input image and a target 3D motion sequence. Recent
advances in image-to-3D models enable the creation of animations directly from user-hand drawings. Distinguished
from conventional 3D animation, drawing-based 3D animation is crucial to preserve artist’s unique style properties, such as rough contours and distinct stroke patterns.
However, recent methods still exhibit quality deterioration
in style properties, especially under occlusions caused by
overlapping body parts, leading to contour flickering and
stroke blurring. This occurs due to a ‘stylization pose gap’
between training and inference in stylization networks designed to preserve drawing styles in drawing-based 3D animation systems. The stylization pose gap denotes that input
target poses used to train the stylization network are always
in occlusion-free poses, while target poses encountered in
an inference include diverse occlusions under dynamic motions. To this end, we propose Occlusion-robust Stylization
Framework (OSF) for drawing-based 3D animation. We
found that while employing object’s edge can be effective
input prior for guiding stylization, it becomes notably inaccurate when occlusions occur at inference. Thus, our
proposed OSF provides occlusion-robust edge guidance for
stylization network using optical flow, ensuring a consistent stylization even under occlusions. Furthermore, OSF
operates in a single run instead of the previous two-stage
method, achieving 2.4× faster inference and 2.1× less memory. Project is available at: github.io/Drawingbased-3D-Animation-page.

W3D [30]

Drawing

Joint plots of LPIPS ↓ and CLIP ↑
(1-LPIPS) ↑

Abstract

“Low quality”

0.15
0.15
0.8
0.80

(a) Qualitative analysis about occlusion

0.85
0.85

0.9
Consistency

0.95 (CLIP) ↑
0.95

(b) Quality on samples according to occlusion

Figure 1. Quality deterioration in occlusion areas: (a) current
systems exhibit stylistic inaccuracies in strokes and contours within
overlapping body parts, and (b) animations with occlusion reduced
consistency (CLIP [42]) and fidelity (LPIPS [67]) compared to ones
without occlusion across diverse drawings in Amateur Drawings
[46]. The CLIP measures consecutive frame similarity, and LPIPS
measures perceptual differences between input and output.

1. Introduction

to as drawing-based 3D animation. As shown in Figure 1
(a), drawing-based 3D animation systems take a reference
hand-drawn image and a target 3D motion as inputs, and
generate 3D animated drawings aligned with the target motion. In these systems, it is crucial to preserve artists’ unique
styles, such as contours and stroke patterns in output frames.
However, synthesizing 3D structures inevitably causes undesirable distortions1 on them. Thus, drawing-based 3D
animation systems employ a stylization process using a neural network (referred to as a stylization network) fine-tuned
on the input drawing to restore the distortions.
Recent advancements [30, 51, 68] of drawing-based
3D animation systems have demonstrated notable precision
in preserving a drawing’s identity within 3D animations.
Nonetheless, these systems still suffer from quality deterioration in terms of drawing properties (i.e. contour and
stroke) when dealing with occlusions in target poses. To
be specific, in target poses where the object’s body parts
overlap, the outputs exhibit flickering contours and blurred
internal stroke patterns. Figure 1 (a) presents examples of

Denoising diffusion models [10, 12, 47, 48] have reshaped
the landscape of generative AI, leading to remarkable advancements [14, 23, 24, 41, 53, 64] in image, speech, and
video generation. Image-to-3D diffusion models [28–30]
have showcased the potential for creating 3D animations
[32, 40, 68] from a single image. In this work, we focus here
on 3D animation techniques for user-drawn images, referred

12263

1 The contour lines depicting the subject’s shape become excessively
thick, or the strokes conveying the artist’s unique style become blurred.

