This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniEgoMotion: A Unified Model for Egocentric Motion Reconstruction,
Forecasting, and Generation
Chaitanya Patel1
Kazuki Kozuka2
1

Stanford University

2

Hiroki Nakamura2
Juan Carlos Niebles1

Panasonic Holdings Corporation

3

Yuta Kyuragi1,3
Ehsan Adeli1

Panasonic R&D Company of America

https://chaitanya100100.github.io/UniEgoMotion/

Egocentric Motion Generation

UniEgoMotion

UniEgoMotion

Egocentric Motion Forecasting

Ego Image I1

Ego Video I1:n

Trajectory T1:n

UniEgoMotion

Egocentric Motion Reconstruction

Ego Video I1:N

Trajectory
Input
Output

Trajectory T1:N

Figure 1. UniEgoMotion is a unified, scene-aware motion model designed for egocentric settings: (1) It generates plausible future motion
from a single egocentric image – for example, predicting how you might take your shot on goal. (2) It forecasts upcoming motion using
past egocentric video and ego-device trajectory, showing how you could complete your run-up to score. (3) It reconstructs accurate 3D
motion from past egocentric observations, showing how you squatted down to reach the lower cabinet.

Abstract
Egocentric human motion generation and forecasting with
scene-context is crucial for enhancing AR/VR experiences,
improving human-robot interaction, advancing assistive
technologies, and enabling adaptive healthcare solutions
by accurately predicting and simulating movement from a
first-person perspective. However, existing methods primarily focus on third-person motion synthesis with structured 3D scene contexts, limiting their effectiveness in realworld egocentric settings where limited field of view, frequent occlusions, and dynamic cameras hinder scene perception. To bridge this gap, we introduce Egocentric Motion Generation and Egocentric Motion Forecasting, two
novel tasks that utilize first-person images for scene-aware
motion synthesis without relying on explicit 3D scene. We
propose UniEgoMotion, a unified conditional motion diffusion model with a novel head-centric motion representation tailored for egocentric devices. UniEgoMotion’s simple yet effective design supports egocentric motion reconstruction, forecasting, and generation from first-person vi-

sual inputs in a unified framework. Unlike previous works
that overlook scene semantics, our model effectively extracts image-based scene context to infer plausible 3D motion. To facilitate training, we introduce EE4D-Motion,
a large-scale dataset derived from EgoExo4D, augmented
with pseudo-ground-truth 3D motion annotations. UniEgoMotion achieves state-of-the-art performance in egocentric motion reconstruction and is the first to generate motion from a single egocentric image. Extensive evaluations
demonstrate the effectiveness of our unified framework, setting a new benchmark for egocentric motion modeling and
unlocking new possibilities for egocentric applications.

1. Introduction

10318

Egocentric human motion reconstruction, forecasting, and
generation are fundamental for AR/VR, assistive technologies, and healthcare applications. The egocentric camera
provides a personalized first-person perspective, enabling
interactive and adaptive experiences. Imagine you are learning to play soccer while wearing smart glasses. Egocen-

