This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scalable Dual Fingerprinting for
Hierarchical Attribution of Text-to-Image Models
Jianwei Fei1 , Yunshu Dai2 , Peipeng Yu3 , Zhe Kong2 , Jiantao Zhou1,∗ , Zhihua Xia3
1

State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, and also with the Department of
Computer and Information Science, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
3
College of Cyber Security, Jinan University

Abstract
The commercialization of generative artificial intelligence
(GenAI) has led to a multi-level ecosystem involving model
developers, service providers, and consumers. Thus, ensuring traceability is crucial, as service providers may
violate intellectual property rights (IPR), and consumers
may generate harmful content. However, existing methods
are limited to single-level attribution scenarios and cannot simultaneously trace across multiple levels. To this
end, we introduce a scalable dual fingerprinting method
for text-to-image (T2I) models to achieve traceability of
both service providers and consumers. Specifically, we
propose 2-head Fingerprint-Informed Low-Rank Adaptation (FI-LoRA), where each head is controlled by a binary fingerprint and capable of introducing the fingerprints
into generated images. In practice, one FI-LoRA head is
used by the developer to assign a unique fingerprint to
each service provider, while the other is made available
to service providers for embedding consumer-specific fingerprints during image generation. Experiments show that
our method applies to various image generation and editing
tasks of multiple T2I models, and can achieve over 99.9%
extraction accuracy for both fingerprints. Our method also
demonstrates good robustness against both image-level attacks and white-box model-level attacks. Code available at:
https://github.com/jumpycat/FI-LORA

1. Introduction
With the widespread commercialization of AI models, a
layered ecosystem has emerged. The developers (such as
research companies) sell or license their models to businesses (service providers). These businesses then integrate
the models into applications and subsequently provide con* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Capability comparison between our dual fingerprinting
method and existing model and image fingerprinting methods.

sumers with online services through these applications. For
instance, OpenAI licenses their GPT models to Microsoft,
which integrates them into Office products and benefits
users with AI-driven features [31]. Google DeepMind’s AlphaFold is used by isomorphic labs to accelerate drug discovery to help patients [9]. In this ecosystem, the progress
in GenAI is particularly outstanding, as diffusion-based image generation and editing models have rapidly become
products in various real-world applications, such as Imagen [41], DALL·E 2 [37], GLIDE [34], and Stable Diffusion [35]. For instance, Stability.AI [43] allows businesses
to build their applications on top of the Stable Diffusion
API and enables artists and designers to generate images.
Such an ecosystem in generative AI reduces the technical
barriers for businesses and enables them to offer consumers
low-cost, user-friendly tools.

15025

