This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sibai: A Few-Shot Meta-Classiﬁer for Poisoning Detection in Federated Learning
Melanie Götz, Torsten Krauß, Alexandra Dmitrienko
University of Würzburg
Sanderring 2, 97070 Würzburg, Germany
melanie.goetz@uni-wuerzburg.de, torsten.krauss@uni-wuerzburg.de,
alexandra.dmitrienko@uni-wuerzburg.de

Abstract

ﬂuence reduction (IR) [1, 3, 39, 50], robust aggregation
(RA) [36, 61], and the more common detection and ﬁltering
(DF) [5, 8, 17, 27, 43, 47, 48, 63], which excludes poisoned
models before aggregation. Although IR and RA can leverage information from all local models, their methods, such
as noising and clipping, often degrade benign performance
when applied broadly.
Challenges. Most DF-based defenses rely on predeﬁned
metrics to detect poisoning, but this approach faces two
key challenges. First, adaptive adversaries can tailor poisoned models to evade detection by appearing normal within
these metrics [27, 29]. Expanding the metric sets [27] partially addresses this, but still relies on rigid criteria which
are vulnerable to adaptation. Second, the natural diversity
of non-identically and independently distributed (non-i.i.d.)
datasets in real-world scenarios makes distinguishing poisoned models from those reﬂecting unusual data distributions
difﬁcult.
Meta-Classiﬁers. This paper introduces a dynamic metaclassiﬁer approach to FL poisoning defense, which avoids
rigid metrics and instead learns to differentiate malicious
directly from observing local models. Recent methods [9,
21, 22, 25, 58] show that meta-classiﬁers can effectively
detect poisoned models in an ofﬂine scenario. However,
applying this to FL poses challenges: training requires a
diverse set of so-called shadow models, including both benign and poisoned models, and existing methods depend on
time-consuming preprocessing.
Contributions. To tackle the aforementioned challenges,
this paper introduces the Siamese Backdoor Inspector
(Sibai), a novel meta-classiﬁer-based poisoning detection
method speciﬁcally tailored to function as a DF-based defense for FL. Sibai is based on the staple few-shot learning
technique of Siamese networks. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows:

Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative machine
learning across decentralized clients without sharing raw
data, which offers enhanced privacy and improved performance. However, FL is vulnerable to poisoning attacks,
compromising model integrity through both untargeted performance degradation and targeted backdoor attacks. Detecting backdoors in FL is challenging due to their stealthy
nature and variability in local datasets. Existing defenses
struggle against adaptive adversaries and distinguishing between poisoning and genuine dataset anomalies. This paper
introduces the Siamese Backdoor Inspector (Sibai), a novel
meta-classiﬁer-based poisoning defense for FL. Leveraging
the staple few-shot learning technique of Siamese networks,
Sibai effectively detects malicious contributions in various
scenarios, including settings with strong variations between
clients’ datasets and encounters with adaptive adversaries.
Sibai achieves high detection rates, prevents backdoors, minimizes performance impact, and outperforms eight recent
defenses regarding F1 score, poisoning prevention, and consistency across complex scenarios.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [59] enables collaborative deep
neural network (DNN) training across decentralized clients
by sharing model updates instead of raw data, preserving
privacy. While FL offers signiﬁcant beneﬁts, it is susceptible to poisoning attacks by untrustworthy or compromised
clients who manipulate training data, labels, hyperparameters, or model parameters. These attacks can be untargeted [15, 31, 55, 57], degrading global model performance,
or targeted [2–4, 11, 18, 19, 33, 40, 42, 45, 52, 54, 56], introducing backdoors that misclassify inputs with speciﬁc
triggers while maintaining normal performance otherwise.
Backdoors are particularly dangerous due to their stealth and
severe risks in security-critical applications like autonomous
vehicles [32, 41, 62]. FL poisoning defenses include in-

• Sibai is the ﬁrst application of a meta-classiﬁer in DFbased poisoning defenses for FL. Unlike conventional
approaches that are reliant on predeﬁned ﬁxed metrics for
detection, Sibai dynamically learns the criteria to distin-

3787

