This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Implicit Features with Flow-Infused Transformations
for Realistic Virtual Try-On
Delong Zhang1,3,∗,†
Qiwei Huang2,†
Yang Sun2
Yuanliu Liu2
Wei-Shi Zheng1,3,‡
Pengfei Xiong2,‡
Wei Zhang2
1
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China;
Shopee;
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China.
Target Person

Garment

Ours

StableVITON

D4-VTON

GP-VTON

Warped Garment

Figure 1. Warping-based method (e.g. GP-VTON) is prone to severe visual artifacts and distortions (see the green dashed box) affected by
the incorrect prediction of warp module. Learning-based methods (e.g. StableVTON and D4 -VTON) are difﬁcult to reconstruct complex
detailed textures (see the red dashed box). Our FIA-VTON designs a Flow Infused Attention module, utilizing the warping ﬂow as an
implicit guidance to reconstruct complex detailed textures while maintaining the consistency of the garment.

Abstract
Diffusion-based virtual try-on aims to synthesize a realistic image that seamlessly integrating the speciﬁc garment
into a target model. The primary challenge lies in effectively guiding the warping process of the latent diffusion
model. However, previous methods either lack direct guidance or explicitly warp the garment image, which highly
depends on the performance of the warping module. In this
paper, we propose FIA-VTON, which leverages the implicit
ﬂow feature as guidance by adopting a Flow Infused Attention module on virtual try-on. The dense warp ﬂow map is
projected as indirect guidance to enhance the feature map
warping in the generation process implicitly, which is less
sensitive to the warping estimation accuracy than an explicit warp of the garment image. To further enhance implicit warp guidance, we incorporate high-level spatial attention to complement the dense warp. Experimental results
on the VTON-HD and DressCode dataset signiﬁcantly out-

perform state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating that FIAVTON is effective and robust for virtual try-on.

1. Introduction
Virtual try-on technology generates images or videos of ﬁtting a garment image on a model image, which is widely
used in online shopping, special effects entertainment, AR,
and other scenarios. The goal of the try-on task is to create
a realistic image of the target model wearing the speciﬁed
garment, ensuring accurate ﬁtting, natural appearance, and
preservation of details. This paper focuses on leveraging the
powerful latent diffusion model (LDM)[29], which learns
to guide the generative process to render the garment onto a
person.
This diffusion-based try-on task is substantially challenging, as it needs to simultaneously achieve accurate gar-

∗ Work done during internship at Shopee Inc.
† Equal Contribution.
‡ Corresponding Author.

18736

