This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RetinexMCNet: A Memory Controller Dominated Network for Low-Light Video
Enhancement Based on Retinex

1

Meiao Wang1 , Xuejing Kang1 *, Yaxi Lu2 , Jie Xu1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 2 Tsinghua University
{meiaowang, kangxuejing}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-light video enhancement (LLVE) aims to restore videos
degraded by insufficient illumination. While existing methods have demonstrated their effectiveness, they often face
challenges with intra-frame noise, overexposure, and interframe inconsistency since they fail to exploit the temporal continuity across frames. Inspired by the progressive
video understanding mechanism of human, we propose a
novel end-to-end two-stage memory controller (MC) dominated network (RetinexMCNet). Specifically, we first define the overall optimization objective for Retinex-based
LLVE, and accordingly design our framework. In stage
one, aided by a dual-perspective Lightness-Texture Stability (LTS) loss, we perform per-frame enhancement without
the MC, which uses channel-aware Illumination Adjustment
Module (IAM) and illumination-guided Reflectance Denoising Module (RDM) based on Retinex theory to mitigate
intra-frame noise and overexposure. In stage two, we activate the MC to simulate human temporal memory and integrate it with high-quality single frames for global consistency. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments
on common low-light datasets demonstrate our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches. Code.

(a) Methods that focus on intra-frame enhancement.

(b) Methods that focus on inter-frame relations.

(c) Proposed method that focuses on intra- and inter-frame enhancement.

Figure 1. Comparisons of existing LLVE methods with ours.

enhancement scheme suffers from salient flickering artifacts
between frames due to isolated temporal information.
Recent LLVE methods focus on relating adjacent frames
or random frames to improve inter-frame relations. Specifically, some works [11, 14, 23, 27] expand the input of
LLIE to adjacent frames as Fig. 1a to strengthen connections between frames. Though achieving local consistency,
they still suffer from flickering artifacts due to unstable temporal information from neighboring frames. Recently, few
scholars focus on global consistency by constructing consistent frameworks as Fig. 1b. They [5, 36] exploit siamese
networks to relate random frames and optimize a pixel-level
consistency loss to tolerate minor inter-frame inconsistency.
However, since the pixel-level consistency loss processes
frames randomly, they lack temporal continuity modeling,
thus failing to achieve global consistency and leading to
overexposure. Essentially, relating adjacent frames (Fig.
1a) or random frames (Fig. 1b) is quite different from human’s temporal-dependent understanding process [39], i.e.,

1. Introduction
Low-light video enhancement (LLVE) is crucial for computer vision applications like nighttime autonomous driving and surveillance, because poor illumination severely degrades video quality. Existing works have proposed some
effective mechanisms to enhance low-light videos. As
the simplest scheme, low-light image enhancement (LLIE)
(also called intra-frame enhancement in our paper) can be
directly applied to single frames to improve illumination,
noise and textures, mainly adopting CNN [4, 32], Transformer [2, 33], GAN [15] or Diffusion [38]. While effective
for LLIE, when directly transferred to videos, this per-frame
* Corresponding author

9716

