This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt-driven Transferable Adversarial Attack on Person Re-Identification
with Attribute-aware Textual Inversion
Yuan Bian1,2 , Min Liu1,2 , Yunqi Yi1,2 , Xueping Wang3 , Shuai Jiang1,2 , Yaonan Wang1,2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hunan University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Robot Visual Perception and Control Technology
3
College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal University
{yuanbian, liu min, y0512321, wang xueping, svyj, yaonan}@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (re-id) models are vital in security surveillance systems, requiring transferable adversarial attacks to explore the vulnerabilities of them. Recently,
vision-language models (VLM) based attacks have shown
superior transferability by attacking generalized image and
textual features of VLM, but they lack comprehensive feature disruption due to the overemphasis on discriminative
semantics in integral representation. In this paper, we introduce the Attribute-aware Prompt Attack (AP-Attack), a
novel method that leverages VLM’s image-text alignment
capability to explicitly disrupt fine-grained semantic features of pedestrian images by destroying attribute-specific
textual embeddings. To obtain personalized textual descriptions for individual attributes, textual inversion networks are designed to map pedestrian images to pseudo
tokens that represent semantic embeddings, trained in the
contrastive learning manner with images and a predefined
prompt template that explicitly describes the pedestrian attributes. Inverted benign and adversarial fine-grained textual semantics facilitate attacker in effectively conducting
thorough disruptions, enhancing the transferability of adversarial examples. Extensive experiments show that APAttack achieves state-of-the-art transferability, significantly
outperforming previous methods by 22.9% on mean Drop
Rate in cross-model&dataset attack scenarios. The codes
are at https:// github.com/ yuanbianGit/ AP-Attack.

A photo of a person wearing yellow shirt on top,
Inverse denim shorts underneath, short dark hairstyle,
gray sneaker shoes, carrying black backpack.
Benign
Image

jean shorts

Attack

blue
pants

white
trousers

…

sweatpants

blue
denim

…

white
tee

orange
vest

black
coat

red
dress

＋

yellow
top

S1shirt on top,
A photo of a person wearing yellow
S2shorts underneath, shortS3dark hairstyle,
Inverse denim
gray S4
sneaker shoes, carrying black S5
backpack.
Adversarial
Example

Pull

Push

Figure 1. The core idea of our Attribute-aware Prompt Attack. We
leverage the image-text alignment capability of vision-language
model to invert pedestrian image into pseudo-word tokens S∗
that represent attribute-specific semantics, guided by a predefined
prompt template explicitly describing person attributes. With inverted semantics, our method enables fine-grained attack by pushing adversarial semantics away from benign ones and pulling them
toward the least similar semantics, achieving thorough disruption
across all attribute semantic spaces.

1. Introduction

ral networks, i.e., the addition of imperceptible perturbations on benign images can destroy model performance
[15, 33]. The intriguing transferability of adversarial examples (AEs) across different models [43] further exposes
real-world surveillance systems to safety threats. To obtain
reliable re-id models, it is paramount to test the robustness
of re-id models by generating highly transferable AEs.
Cross-model and cross-dataset transferability are crucial
for adversarial attacks on black-box re-id models due to the
uncertainty architecture of the target model and the signif-

Person re-identification models are widely employed in
security-critical surveillance systems, aiming to retrieve the
target person [60, 66]. Despite the significant progress
made by deep learning-based re-id methods [1, 5, 17, 27,
28, 47], they also inherit the vulnerability of deep neuCorresponding author: Min Liu (liu min@hnu.edu.cn)

22599

