This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Overcoming Dual Drift for Continual Long-Tailed Visual Question Answering
Feifei Zhang1 *, Zhihao Wang1 , Xi Zhang2 , Changsheng Xu3,4,5
1
Tianjin University of Technology 2 Alibaba Group
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
feifeizhang@email.tjut.edu.cn, zhihaowang@stud.tjut.edu.cn
zx443053@alibaba-inc.com, csxu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Accuracy (%)

Sample Proportion

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a widely explored
multimodal task aimed at answering questions based on
images. Recently, a few studies have started to investigate
continual learning in VQA to cope with evolving multimodal data streams. However, these studies fall short of
tackling another critical issue in real-world VQA applications: the long-tailed distribution of data. In this paper, we
introduce Continual Long-Tailed Visual Question Answering (CLT-VQA) and identify two critical challenges: innertask prototype drift, where classifier prototypes become
biased toward majority classes due to imbalanced data, and
inter-task feature drift, where learned features shift over
time, causing forgetting of previously learned knowledge.
To address these challenges, we propose a unified dualbalance approach that integrates a Balanced Classifier Prototype (BCP) learning module and a Multi-modal Feature
Alignment (MFA) module. The BCP optimizes classifier
prototypes to achieve balanced class representation, while
the MFA aligns features consistently across tasks, preventing catastrophic forgetting. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that our method outperforms existing models,
validating the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

Answer Distribution
85% Training Samples

0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04

70

80

60

70

50

60

Accuracy (%)

0.2

Abstract

40
30
20
10

0

ite red nge ilver rple tan nde gold oon
r
a
s pu
wh
blo
or
ma

(a)

Offline training
Continual learning

50
40
30
20
10

0

e red ge ver ple tan de old on
n g
ro
an sil pur
blo
or
ma

it
wh

(b)

0

Head

Tail

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Long-tailed answer distribution over question type
‘color’ on VQA v2 dataset [16]. (b) Answer prediction results
from baseline [11]. (c) Comparison of VQA accuracy between
offline training and continual learning-based training.

stantly emerging. Therefore, an ideal VQA model should
be able to generate answers for an ever-changing stream of
new questions and images, essential for applications like AI
assistants, robotics, and monitoring systems.
Continual Learning (CL), also known as incremental or
lifelong learning, seeks to emulate human cognitive process
of sequentially acquiring and integrating knowledge [50].
By learning over time, deep models in CL are expected to
acquire new knowledge without succumbing to catastrophic
forgetting of previously learned information. While significant advancements have been made, the primary focus
has been on uni-modal tasks, including image classification [15, 38, 45], object detection [41, 49, 61], and domain
adaptation [42, 46]. Recently, the volume of multi-modal
data has expanded dramatically. To cope with such constantly emerging data, a few recent works are beginning
to explore multi-modal continual learning. For instance,
VQACL [56] approaches CL with a dual-level task framework. The outer level adapts to dynamic shifts in question
types, while the inner level incorporates visually driven
subtasks based on image object categories. TRIPLET [33]
introduces three CL scenarios: one focusing on changes in
visual content, another on shifts in question patterns, and
a third that combines both, thereby equipping the model to
adapt to a range of task variations.
Although the above multi-modal CL methods [33, 56]
can effectively manage streaming data, they assume a bal-

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a common multimodal task that lies at the intersection of computer vision and natural language processing, aiming to answer
questions based on visual image content. While existing
approaches [4, 12, 23] have achieved great success by
leveraging attention mechanisms and multi-modal fusion
techniques, they typically rely on static data streams, i.e.,
training once on fully annotated datasets to achieve optimal
performance, without taking into account the subsequent
learning processes. However, in the real world, data is con* Corresponding author.

4413

