This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoBridge: A Hierarchical Architecture Bridging Cognition and Execution for
General Robotic Manipulation
Kaidong Zhang1 Rongtao Xu2,5 Pengzhen Ren3 Junfan Lin3
Hefeng Wu1 Liang Lin1,3,4† Xiaodan Liang1,2,3†
1

Sun Yat-sen University

2

MBZUAI

3

Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
Operating robots in open-ended scenarios with diverse
tasks is a crucial research and application direction in
robotics. While recent progress in natural language processing and large multimodal models has enhanced robots’
ability to understand complex instructions, robot manipulation still faces the procedural skill dilemma and the declarative skill dilemma in open environments. Existing methods often compromise cognitive and executive capabilities.
To address these challenges, in this paper, we propose RoBridge, a hierarchical intelligent architecture for general
robotic manipulation. It consists of a high-level cognitive
planner (HCP) based on a large-scale pre-trained visionlanguage model (VLM), an invariant operable representation (IOR) serving as a symbolic bridge, and a guided embodied agent (GEA). RoBridge maintains the declarative
skill of VLM and unleashes the procedural skill of reinforcement learning, effectively bridging the gap between cognition and execution. RoBridge demonstrates significant performance improvements over existing baselines, achieving a
75% success rate on new tasks and an 83% average success
rate in sim-to-real generalization using only five real-world
data samples per task. This work represents a significant
step towards integrating cognitive reasoning with physical
execution in robotic systems, offering a new paradigm for
general robotic manipulation.

1. Introduction
Operating robots in open-ended scenarios with diverse tasks
is a significant research and application direction in the field
of robotics. In such scenarios, robots are required to understand natural language instructions and accurately execute
complex tasks while adapting to dynamic environmental
changes and uncertainties [15, 23]. In recent years, the rapid
development of natural language processing and large multimodal models [3, 37, 47] has led to substantial progress in
† Corresponding authors

4

X-Era.AI Inc.

5

Spatialtemporal AI

robots’ ability to understand and execute complex instructions. However, robot manipulation still faces two major
challenges when dealing with complex instructions in open
environments: the procedural skill dilemma and the declarative skill dilemma.
• Procedural Skill Dilemma. To acquire the ability to
manipulate objects according to instructions, embodied
models[5, 6, 33, 36] like RDT [33] and π0 [5] typically
employ data-driven trajectory fitting methods. However,
these methods frequently suffer catastrophic performance
degradation when confronted with environmental variations, including fluctuating illumination conditions, camera pose deviations, and contextual changes [42]. Reinforcement learning, though robust, has a trial-and-error
nature and low learning efficiency, making it less applicable in real-world environments.
• Declarative Skill Dilemma. Recent endeavors to integrate vision-language models (VLM) into robotic systems
[9, 24, 25, 32, 40] like ReKep [25] and OmniManip [40]
use large multimodal models to generate operational instructions for open-domain tasks. While these models excel in understanding, they lack embodied experience and
require constraining outputs to executable actions. This
approach forces the language model to handle spatialtemporal reasoning without physical intuition, often resulting in implausible task planning. For instance, in the
task “place block A atop block B”, an insufficient spatial
understanding (e.g., shape, height) often leads this kind
of method to produce fatally flawed action sequences.
Unfortunately, in facing these dilemmas, most existing
methods [7, 28] choose to restrict the capabilities of large
multimodal models, forcing them to generate low-level execution commands to drive data-driven downstream control
strategies to complete tasks. This enables a certain degree
of task execution in open scenarios but essentially represents a compromise in cognitive and executive capabilities. Conversely, suppose we could leverage the strengths
of large language/multimodal models in declarative tasks
and the advantages of reinforcement learning in procedural
tasks without mutual constraints. In that case, robots might

14590

