This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ExCap3D: Expressive 3D Scene Understanding via Object Captioning
with Varying Detail
Chandan Yeshwanth

Dávid Rozenberszki

Angela Dai

Technical University of Munich
https://cy94.github.io/excap3d/

Figure 1. ExCap3D produces descriptions at multiple level of details for objects in an input 3D scan. For each detected object, we generate
both object- and part-level of detail captions. The generated captions are consistent across the two levels and contain rich details.

Abstract
Generating text descriptions of objects in 3D indoor
scenes is an important building block of embodied understanding. Existing methods describe objects at a single
level of detail and do not capture fine-grained details of the
parts of objects. In order to produce varying levels of detail
capturing both coarse object-level information and detailed
part-level descriptions, we propose the task of expressive
3D captioning. Given an input 3D scene, the task is to describe objects at multiple levels of detail: a high-level object
description, and a low-level description of the properties of
its parts. To produce such captions, we present ExCap3D,
an expressive 3D captioning model which takes as input a
3D scan, and for each detected object in the scan, generates
a fine-grained collective description of the parts of the object, along with an object-level description conditioned on
the part-level description. We design ExCap3D to encourage consistency between the multiple levels of descriptions.
To enable this task, we generated the ExCap3D Dataset by
leveraging a visual-language model (VLM) for multi-view
captioning. The ExCap3D Dataset contains captions on
the ScanNet++ dataset with varying levels of detail, comprising 190k text descriptions of 34k 3D objects in 947 indoor scenes. Our experiments show that the object- and

part-level details generated by ExCap3D are more expressive than those produced by state-of-the-art methods, with
a CIDEr score improvement of 17% and 124% for objectand part-level details respectively. Our code, dataset and
models will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction

21699

3D indoor scene understanding is central to applications
such as augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and
robotics. While detecting 3D objects and their semantics is
important for these applications, natural language descriptions of objects enable more wide-ranging possibilities –
they can encode more complex information efficiently and,
importantly, enable more natural interactions between embodied agents as well as humans and the scene. To produce a representation that facilities a diverse array of applications, such language descriptions must also encompass
varying levels of detail: object-level descriptions for coarse
identification in the scene, and part-level details for precise
manipulation and fine-grained understanding. For instance,
a robotic assistant would only need a coarse, high-level description of the objects in a room (e.g., ‘a recliner chair’)
in order to navigate effectively in it, but it would need finegrained descriptions of the objects (e.g., ‘recliner chair with
a high padded back, wooden armrests, a soft cushion and an

