This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenFlow3D: Generative Scene Flow Estimation and Prediction
on Point Cloud Sequences
Hanlin Li1 Wenming Weng1 Yueyi Zhang2∗ Zhiwei Xiong1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 MiroMind

1

{hanlinli, wmweng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn yueyi.zhang@miromind.ai

Abstract
Scene flow provides the fundamental information of the
scene dynamics. Existing scene flow estimation methods
typically rely on the correlation between only a consecutive
point cloud pair, which makes them limited to the instantaneous state of the scene and face challenges in real-world
scenarios with factors like occlusion, noise, and diverse motion of background and foreground. In this paper, we study
the joint sequential scene flow estimation and future scene
flow prediction on point cloud sequences. The expanded
sequential input introduces long-term and high-order motion information. We propose GenFlow3D, a recurrent neural network model which integrates diffusion in the decoder
to better incorporate the two tasks and enhance the ability to extract general motion patterns. A transformer-based
denoising network is adopted to help capture useful information. Depending on the input point clouds, discriminative condition signals are generated to guide the diffusion decoder to switch among different modes specific for
scene flow estimation and prediction in a multi-scale manner. GenFlow3D is evaluated on the real-world datasets
nuScenes and Argoverse 2, and demonstrates superior performance compared with the existing methods. Our code is
available at https://github.com/ustc-hlli/GenFlow3D.

1. Introduction
Understanding the motion of the objects in the scene is a
fundamental and crucial problem for autonomous driving
and robotics. Scene flow, the 3D displacement field between consecutive point clouds or images [39], provides a
low-level representation of the scene dynamics. It benefits various applications such as object tracking [48], visual
SLAM [35] and motion segmentation [1].
With the advance of deep learning in 3D vision, recent
scene flow estimation methods [3, 6–8, 13, 16, 17, 31, 41,
43, 46] primarily leverage neural networks on point cloud
∗ Corresponding author

zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

data directly. Typically, these methods take only a pair of
consecutive point clouds as input and are highly dependent
on the geometric correlation between them. However, the
point cloud pair only describes the instantaneous state of the
scene and lacks contextual motion information. This leads
to high estimation error in real-world scenes with challenging cases that hinder the extraction of accurate correlation,
such as occlusion, noise, and diverse motion patterns of the
background and foreground objects.
Unlike most existing works, in this paper, we consider
the scene flow on a point cloud sequence. First, we study
a problem with less attention named sequential scene flow
estimation [9], which is an expanded form of the standard
scene flow estimation. Concretely, given a point cloud sequence {Pi }N
i=1 , sequential scene flow estimation requires
N −1
to estimate a scene flow sequence {SFi }i=1
, where SFi
is the scene flow from Pi to Pi+1 . In contrast to point
cloud pairs, point cloud sequences provide high-order motion states like acceleration and inherently capture longterm trajectories of the objects in the scene. These spatiotemporal priors help to regularize every single scene flow
estimation result and reduce the outliers and erroneous patterns. In addition, we combine sequential scene flow estimation with future scene flow prediction, a task aiming to
−1
generate the scene flow {SFN +i }M
i=0 to the future frames
M
{PN +i }i=1 starting from the last historical point cloud PN ,
to boost each other. The scene flow can then be used for
point cloud prediction [5, 19]. Future scene flow prediction
encourages the model to learn the motion information rather
than the simple geometry similarity by removing the target
point cloud. Conversely, the explicit estimation of the previous scene flow works as a strong guidance to promote the
prediction of future scene flow.
There are some pioneering works on sequential scene
flow estimation and scene-flow-based point cloud prediction [5, 9, 19]. He et al [9]. build SPCM-Net by extending
the PointPWC-Net architecture to process multi-step information. It can solve sequential scene flow estimation or
scene-flow-based point cloud prediction with different decoder designs. Lu et al. [19] propose MoNet which has

27488

