This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SplatTalk: 3D VQA with Gaussian Splatting
Anh Thai1,2*

Songyou Peng2
1

Leonidas Guibas2
2

Georgia Institute of Technology
*

Multi-view RGB
Images

Kyle Genova2

Thomas Funkhouser2

Google DeepMind

Work done as a student researcher at Google DeepMind.

Visual-Language
Feature Maps

3D-Language
Gaussian Field

Pretrained
Multimodal
image encoder
Projector
from 2D VLM

⋮

Feed-forward
3D-Language
Gaussian
Splatting
Model

Text prompt: “What is
next to the bed?”

Large Langue
Model

Self-supervised 3D-Language Gaussian Splatting Training

Text
response:
“The desk”

Downstream Task: 3D VQA

Figure 1. SplatTalk. We propose a self-supervised 3D-Language Gaussian Splatting model trained from multi-view RGB images. First,
images are encoded using a pretrained 2D Vision-Language Model (VLM) and projected into visual-language feature maps via a multimodal
projector. These feature maps are then learned within a feed-forward 3D-Language Gaussian Splatting model, producing a 3D-Language
Gaussian Field that encodes spatial and semantic information in 3D space. During inference, the 3D Gaussian features are directly queried
by a Large Language Model (LLM) to perform 3D question-answering (3D VQA) tasks.

1. Introduction

Abstract

The rise of Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), following
the success of Large Language Models (LLMs), has become
increasingly significant in a world where visual understanding is crucial. While 2D LMMs have seen rapid improvements, enabling models to analyze images and answer complex questions [21, 28, 37, 40], progress in 3D LMMs has
been slower. This gap is largely due to the scarcity of 3D
data compared to 2D datasets. Further, the availability of
language-annotated 3D data is even more limited, as annotating 3D scenes since it is significantly more complex and
expensive than labeling 2D images. These challenges have
hindered the development of language-guided 3D reasoning, making 3D LMMs an important yet underexplored area
in multimodal research. In this work, we focus on 3D Visual Question Answering (3D VQA) as it provides a strong
benchmark for evaluating a model’s ability to understand
and reason about 3D scenes.
Recently, significant progress has been made in 3D multimodal learning, particularly for indoor scenes [15, 17, 27,
48]. Several approaches rely on posed images and 3D inputs,
like meshes [41], point clouds [9, 17, 34] and voxels [13],
to associate 3D geometry with language features. As such,

Language-guided 3D scene understanding is important for
advancing applications in robotics, AR/VR, and humancomputer interaction, enabling models to comprehend and
interact with 3D environments through natural language.
While 2D vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved
remarkable success in 2D VQA tasks, progress in the 3D
domain has been significantly slower due to the complexity
of 3D data and the high cost of manual annotations. In
this work, we introduce SplatTalk, a novel method that uses
a generalizable 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) framework
to produce 3D tokens suitable for direct input into a pretrained LLM, enabling effective zero-shot 3D visual question
answering (3D VQA) for scenes with only posed images.
During experiments on multiple benchmarks, our approach
outperforms both 3D models trained specifically for the task
and previous 2D-LMM-based models utilizing only images
(our setting), while achieving competitive performance with
state-of-the-art 3D LMMs that additionally utilize 3D inputs.
Project website: https:// splat-talk.github.io/

4712

