This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Selective Contrastive Learning for Weakly Supervised Affordance Grounding
WonJun Moon† Hyun Seok Seong† Jae-Pil Heo∗
Sungkyunkwan University
{wjun0830, gustjrdl95, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Weakly-supervised Affordance Grounding Action class ‘Hold’

Abstract

Knowledge
transfer

Facilitating an entity’s interaction with objects requires accurately identifying parts that afford specific actions. Weakly
supervised affordance grounding (WSAG) seeks to imitate
human learning from third-person demonstrations, where
humans intuitively grasp functional parts without needing
pixel-level annotations. To achieve this, grounding is typically learned using a shared classifier across images from
different perspectives, along with distillation strategies incorporating part discovery process. However, since affordancerelevant parts are not always easily distinguishable, models
primarily rely on classification, often focusing on common
class-specific patterns that are unrelated to affordance. To
address this limitation, we move beyond isolated part-level
learning by introducing selective prototypical and pixel contrastive objectives that adaptively learn affordance-relevant
cues at both the part and object levels, depending on the
granularity of the available information. Initially, we find the
action-associated objects in both egocentric (object-focused)
and exocentric (third-person example) images by leveraging
CLIP. Then, by cross-referencing the discovered objects of
complementary views, we excavate the precise part-level affordance clues in each perspective. By consistently learning
to distinguish affordance-relevant regions from affordanceirrelevant background context, our approach effectively shifts
activation from irrelevant areas toward meaningful affordance cues. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Exocentric Image

Egocentric Image

Part Discovery

Part

Part

Non-part

LOCATE [23]

Affordable Part
If

Part Discovery

No,

Reliable?

Leverage
ObjectLevel Clue

No

Yes

No

Obj.

Part

Reliable?
Yes

Pred.

Object Non-object

Part

Non-part

Obj.

Object Non-object

Used clues for Affordance Learning

Ours

Figure 1. (Up) Goal of WSAG is to identify action-affordable parts
within the egocentric image, given exocentric images as contextual
hints. (Down) To perform affordance learning, we first discover
the part-relevant clues from both egocentric and exocentric images.
When these parts are deemed reliable in representing affordancerelevant regions, the model learns to distinguish these parts from
the other parts. If not, we instead utilize object-level clues to distinguish objects from the background. Compared to our baseline (LOCATE [23]), which only exploits reliable parts of exocentric images,
our approach extends affordance learning to learn from both egocentric and exocentric views and also both from affordance-relevant
and affordance-irrelevant clues. By leveraging all these types of
clues within the mini-batch at once, the model learns to distinguish
affordance-relevant parts from representations of other affordance
classes and backgrounds.

1. Introduction
Humans learn to interact with objects by observing others
and recognizing relevant object parts in interactions [2, 23].
Similarly, weakly supervised affordance grounding focuses
on identifying which parts of an object afford particular interactions within the environment in which humans typically

learn [17, 23, 28, 34, 37, 38, 47]. Specifically, a target egocentric image (object-focused) is provided with an action
class name and a few exocentric images (human-object interaction examples given in third-person view) to localize the
affordable parts within egocentric image [28, 34, 38]. Then,
the model is trained to localize action-affordable parts when
an egocentric image is provided along with an action class.

† Equal contribution
∗ Corresponding author

5210

