This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BATCLIP: Bimodal Online Test-Time Adaptation for CLIP
Sarthak Kumar Maharana1 , Baoming Zhang1 , Leonid Karlinsky2 , Rogerio Feris2 , Yunhui Guo1
1
The University of Texas at Dallas 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{sarthak.maharana, yunhui.guo}@utdallas.edu

Abstract

achieve. For example, models deployed for safety-critical
applications like autonomous driving [1], could face rapid
distributional shifts of blurriness, pixel changes, snowy
nights, or other weather conditions [38]. In particular,
our findings on the zero-shot performance of CLIP with
a ResNet-101 [17] vision backbone reveals that the accuracy on the test set of CIFAR100 [21] with Gaussian noise
of severity level 5, plummets to 10.79% from 49% on the
clean set. Similar trends are observed with ViT-B/16, -B/32,
and -L/14 [11] as backbones. The performance degradation caused by image corruption can have significant consequences in real-world scenarios, particularly in safetycritical applications like self-driving cars.

Although open-vocabulary classification models like Contrastive Language Image Pretraining (CLIP) have demonstrated strong zero-shot learning capabilities, their robustness to common image corruptions remains poorly understood. Through extensive experiments, we show that
zero-shot CLIP lacks robustness to common image corruptions during test-time, necessitating the adaptation of CLIP
to unlabeled corrupted images using test-time adaptation
(TTA). However, we found that existing TTA methods have
severe limitations in adapting CLIP due to their unimodal
nature. To address these limitations, we propose BATCLIP,
a bimodal online TTA method designed to improve CLIP’s
robustness to common image corruptions. The key insight of our approach is not only to adapt the visual encoders for improving image features but also to strengthen
the alignment between image and text features by promoting a stronger association between the image class prototype, computed using pseudo-labels, and the corresponding text feature. We evaluate our approach on benchmark
image corruption datasets and achieve state-of-the-art results in online TTA for CLIP. Furthermore, we evaluate
our proposed TTA approach on various domain generalization datasets to demonstrate its generalization capabilities. Our code is available at https://github.com/
sarthaxxxxx/BATCLIP.

One effective approach to improving model performance
under distribution shift is test-time adaptation (TTA) [9, 48],
where a pre-trained model is directly adapted to unlabeled
test batches, without access to the source dataset. Moreover,
given the abundance of unlabeled data available in the wild,
there is a growing need for online adaptation to streaming data, with a single forward pass, ensuring privacy, realtime performance [29], and preventing catastrophic forgetting [13] of source knowledge. Several online TTA methods
proposed in the literature have been effective in mitigating
domain shifts [4, 32, 37, 39, 43, 48]. In this paper, we use
the terms distributions and domains interchangeably.
While there have been few works on using CLIP for online TTA [10, 20, 41], they come with certain limitations.
For example, test-time prompt tuning (TPT) [41] tunes the
text prompts on the text encoder alone and generates multiple random augmented views, for each test image. The
text prompts, initialized to pre-trained values, are optimized
by minimizing the marginal entropy of the confident model
predictions. The prompts are reset after adaptation to each
image. However, such a method is expensive and slow due
to performing multiple forward passes through the vision
encoder of CLIP, for each image. Also, it relies on handcrafted prompts for initialization, making it impractical at
test-time. Another recent approach, Vision-Text-Space Ensemble (VTE) [10], uses an ensemble of different prompts
as input to CLIP’s text encoder while keeping both the encoders frozen. Since the vision encoder is frozen, it strug-

1. Introduction
The emergence of large pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP [34], has led to their widespread
adoption in various visual recognition tasks, including segmentation [23, 27], detection [2, 26], classification [55, 56],
and image generation [35, 36, 47]. Thanks to supervision
from massive corpora of paired language and image data,
VLMs like CLIP demonstrate strong zero-shot capabilities
for these downstream tasks.
Despite CLIP’s successes in such important applications,
its robustness when faced with corrupted images remains
largely underexplored. Our motivation stems from the fact
that the vision perception system of humans exhibits a
level of robustness that real-world vision systems are yet to

1569

