This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoRFSplat: Direct Scene-Level Text-to-3D Gaussian Splatting Generation with
Flexible Pose and Multi-View Joint Modeling
Hyojun Go1 *

Byeongjun Park1,2 *
Hyungjin Chung1†
1

EverEx

2

Hyelin Nam1
Byung-Hoon Kim1,3
2†
Changick Kim
3

KAIST

Yonsei University

"A black grand piano in a concert hall."

"A brick building with a large window and a tree in front of it."

" A classroom with rows of chairs facing a black lectern on wheel."

" A well-organized clothing store with various garments hanging on racks."

Figure 1. Generated 3D Gaussian Splattings and rendered views from diverse texts by VideoRFSplat. VideoRFSplat directly generates
realistic 3D scenes from text without SDS [35, 58] refinement, outperforming prior methods [20, 35] that rely on SDS refinements.

Abstract
We propose VideoRFSplat, a direct text-to-3D model leveraging a video generation model to generate realistic 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) for unbounded real-world scenes. To
generate diverse camera poses and unbounded spatial extent of real-world scenes, while ensuring generalization to
arbitrary text prompts, previous methods fine-tune 2D generative models to jointly model camera poses and multi-view
images. However, these methods suffer from instability when
extending 2D generative models to joint modeling due to the
modality gap, which necessitates additional models to stabilize training and inference. In this work, we propose an architecture and a sampling strategy to jointly model multi-view
images and camera poses when fine-tuning a video genera-

tion model. Our core idea is a dual-stream architecture that
attaches a dedicated pose generation model alongside a pretrained video generation model via communication blocks,
generating multi-view images and camera poses through
separate streams. This design reduces interference between
the pose and image modalities. Additionally, we propose an
asynchronous sampling strategy that denoises camera poses
faster than multi-view images, allowing rapidly denoised
poses to condition multi-view generation, reducing mutual
ambiguity and enhancing cross-modal consistency. Trained
on multiple large-scale real-world datasets (RealEstate10K,
MVImgNet, DL3DV-10K, ACID), VideoRFSplat outperforms
existing text-to-3D direct generation methods that heavily depend on post-hoc refinement via score distillation sampling,
achieving superior results without such refinement. Project
page: https://gohyojun15.github.io/VideoRFSplat/

* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

26706

