This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VISO: Accelerating In-orbit Object Detection with Language-Guided Mask
Learning and Sparse Inference
Meiqi Wang
Tsinghua University

Han Qiu
Tsinghua University

wang-mq22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

qiuhan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In-orbit object detection is essential for Earth observation missions on satellites equipped with GPUs. A promising approach is to use pre-trained vision-language modeling (VLM) to enhance its open-vocabulary capability. However, adopting it on satellites poses two challenges: (1)
satellite imagery differs substantially from natural images,
and (2) satellites’ embedded GPUs are insufficient for complex models’ inference. We reveal their lack of a crucial
prior: in-orbit detection involves identifying a set of known
objects within a cluttered yet monotonous background. Motivated by this observation, we propose VISO, a Visionlanguage Instructed Satellite Object detection model that
focuses on object-specific features while suppressing irrelevant regions through language-guided mask learning. After pre-training on a large-scale satellite dataset with 3.4M
region-text pairs, VISO enhances object-text alignment and
object-centric features to improve detection accuracy. Also,
VISO suppresses irrelevant regions, enabling highly sparse
inference to accelerate speed on satellites. Extensive experiments show that VISO without sparsity outperforms stateof-the-art (SOTA) VLMs in zero-shot detection by increasing 34.1% AP and reducing 27× FLOPs, and surpasses
specialist models in supervised object detection and object
referring by improving 2.3% AP. When sparsifying VISO
to a comparable AP, FLOPs can be greatly reduced by up
to 8.5×. Real-world tests reveal that VISO achieves a
2.8–4.8× FPS speed-up on satellites’ embedded GPUs1 .

Figure 1. Earth observation images and natural images are different. Earth observation images typically contain very small objects. On the right is the size ratio of objects to images. We choose
5 categories in DOTA: plane (pl), storage tank (st), roundabout
(rb), small vehicle (sv), baseball diamond (bd), and 5 categories in
COCO: person (pr), cat (ct), car (cr), bed (bd), bottle (btl).

1. Introduction

open-vocabulary detection (OVD) [7], allowing for detecting novel objects with the guidance of natural language.
However, most existing VLMs [22, 25, 48] are designed
for natural images and suffer from high computational overhead due to complex backbones (e.g., Swin [27] used in
GLIP [22]). Although YOLO-World [7] provides a practical solution for time-critical applications, directly applying
it to satellite data remains challenging due to the disparities between terrestrial natural images and satellite images,
as shown in Figure 1. Satellite images are typically captured from a bird’s eye view with a long distance from the
ground. They often contain a few tiny objects (e.g., ships)
relevant to referring detection tasks in orbit (e.g., detect the
ship on the lower left), surrounded by vast irrelevant objects
and backgrounds (e.g., buildings, roads, etc.), which makes
detection difficult [24, 44]. We consider these priors and address two important goals. (1) Accurate detection requires
distinguishing object-centric visual features from irrelevant
features while incorporating useful contextual information.
(2) Fast inference can be achieved by omitting large irrelevant regions, consisting of non-essential backgrounds and
objects, to reduce redundant computation.
In this paper, we achieve the above two goals by proposing VISO, a Vision-language Instructed Satellite Object detection model. Our key insight is that rich semantic textual

Recently, embedded GPUs are deployed in space [15], enabling in-orbit object detection to support latency-sensitive
Earth observation tasks such as disaster monitoring [34] and
wildfire detection [35]. In-orbit detection requires detecting
flexible in-orbit tasks and responding to unforeseen emergencies beyond predefined closed-set categories. We observe that vision-language models (VLMs) [22] facilitate
1 Our code: https://github.com/joannahuadu/VISO.

23300

