This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Trust but Verify: Programmatic VLM Evaluation in the Wild
Viraj Prabhu1 * Senthil Purushwalkam2† An Yan1
1

Salesforce AI Research

Abstract

2

Caiming Xiong1

Ran Xu1

OpenAI

significant research [14, 17, 25, 47] and regulatory [7] interest, particularly as using such models as the “foundation” of
various high-stakes applications becomes imminent [8].
This has led to a flurry of research on reliably benchmarking VLM performance [29], by measuring not just
the helpfulness but also the truthfulness of their responses.
Existing benchmarks fall into two categories – discriminative [16, 24, 31], which evaluate the model’s responses to
close-ended, existence-based queries (“Is there a man in this
image?”), and generative [14, 25, 26, 38, 39], which evaluate responses to free-form, open-ended questions (“Describe
this image.”). While discriminative benchmarks ease evaluation, they do not realistically simulate in-the-wild usage. On
the other hand, generative benchmarks, while realistic, are
extremely challenging to reliably evaluate, as they require
verifying both that the model response fully answers the
question (i.e. is helpful) and does not make any false claims
(i.e. is truthful).
Evaluating such free-form responses typically relies on
external models (usually, a proprietary LLM) to score
responses given some image context (usually groundtruth annotations), under the now de-facto “LLM-as-judge”
paradigm. However, we find that in several such benchmarks, the context provided is completely insufficient to
judge if the response contains hallucinations. Consider
Fig. 1: a VLM may respond to the query “How many puppies are in the image?” (correct answer = “four”), with
“There are four labradoodle puppies”. Evaluating the truthfulness of this statement requires verifying multiple claims
about the puppies (<count == four> and <breed ==
labradoodle>); however, an LLM judge provided only
with a brief image caption as context (“four puppies placed
on a light blue rug”) will be unable to do so, and will in-fact
penalize the model for providing extra (correct) information!
Further, the absence of a clear scoring rubric coupled with
the sensitivity of LLMs to minor prompt differences often
leads to inconsistent and arbitrary scores in such cases. In
Fig. 2, we provide real examples from existing benchmarks
that illustrate this problem.
We propose Programmatic VLM Evaluation (PROVE),
a new evaluation paradigm that performs reliable and interpretable programmatic evaluation of free-form VLM re-

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) frequently hallucinate responses to visual queries, undermining their reliability for
critical applications. However, quantifying the effect of such
hallucinations in free-form responses to open-ended queries
requires visually verifying each claim within the response,
which is highly challenging. We propose Programmatic
VLM Evaluation (PROVE), a new benchmarking paradigm
for evaluating VLM responses to open-ended queries. To
construct PROVE, we provide a large language model with
a high-fidelity scene-graph representation constructed from
a detailed image caption, and prompt it to generate i) diverse and challenging question-answer (QA) pairs that test
a range of image understanding capabilities, and ii) programs that can be executed over the scene graph object to
verify each QA pair. We thus construct a benchmark of
10.6k challenging but grounded visual QA pairs.
Next, we propose a scene graph-based evaluation framework to programmatically measure both the helpfulness
and truthfulness of free-form VLM responses to questions
from our benchmark that does not rely on subjective LLM
judgments. We extensively benchmark a range of VLMs
on PROVE, and uncover a concerning tradeoff where models that provide more helpful responses often hallucinate
more, whereas truthful models tend to be less informative. PROVE serves as a foundation for developing nextgeneration VLMs that balance helpfulness with truthfulness.
Project page: prove-explorer.netlify.app

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) have emerged as an effective solution for generating responses to queries about visual
content. However, despite impressive progress (and much
like their LLM-counterparts), VLMs are still known to hallucinate – to generate plausible but incorrect answers that
are either inconsistent or unverifiable against the provided
visual context. This crucial shortcoming has the potential to
erode trust in such systems and has already begun to attract
* Correspondence to viraj.prabhu@salesforce.com.
† Work done at Salesforce.

3258

