This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Visual Prompt Learning for Continual Video Instance Segmentation
Jiahua Dong1 *, Hui Yin2 *, Wenqi Liang3 , Hanbin Zhao4 , Henghui Ding5 , Nicu Sebe3 ,
Salman Khan1,6 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,7
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 2 Hunan University 3 University of Trento
4
Zhejiang University 5 Fudan University 6 Australian National University 7 Linköping University
{dongjiahua1995, yinhui2000a, liangwenqi0123, henghui.ding}@gmail.com, zhaohanbin@zju.edu.cn
niculae.sebe@unitn.it, {salman.khan, fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Video instance segmentation (VIS) has gained significant
attention for its capability in tracking and segmenting object instances across video frames. However, most of the
existing VIS approaches unrealistically assume that the categories of object instances remain fixed over time. Moreover, they experience catastrophic forgetting of old classes
when required to continuously learn object instances belonging to new categories. To resolve these challenges, we develop a novel Hierarchical Visual Prompt Learning (HVPL)
model that overcomes catastrophic forgetting of previous
categories from both frame-level and video-level perspectives. Specifically, to mitigate forgetting at the frame level,
we devise a task-specific frame prompt and an orthogonal
gradient correction (OGC) module. The OGC module helps
the frame prompt encode task-specific global instance information for new classes in each individual frame by projecting its gradients onto the orthogonal feature space of old
classes. Furthermore, to address forgetting at the video level,
we design a task-specific video prompt and a video context
decoder. This decoder first embeds structural inter-class
relationships across frames into the frame prompt features,
and then propagates task-specific global video contexts from
the frame prompt features to the video prompt. Through
rigorous comparisons, our HVPL model proves to be more
effective than baseline approaches. The code is available at
https://github.com/JiahuaDong/HVPL.

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS) [35, 36, 42, 45, 83] is
a sophisticated vision task that requires simultaneously detecting, segmenting, and tracking individual object instances
* Equal contributions. The corresponding authors are Dr. Jiahua Dong
and Prof. Henghui Ding. This work was supported in part by the National
Nature Science Foundation of China under Grant 62133005 and 62472104.

Task t − 1
(New Class: Person)

Task t
(New Class: Plane)

Predictions: Person

Predictions: Person & Plane

Figure 1. Demonstration of continual video instance segmentation
(CVIS) for learning object instances belonging to new classes consecutively. At the t-th task, CVIS seeks to learn new categories (e.g.,
plane) while alleviating forgetting on old ones (e.g., person).

across consecutive frames. Unlike traditional object detection [57] or segmentation [62], which predicts within individual frames, VIS seeks to detect and segment each unique
object instance across an entire video sequence, maintaining consistent tracking over time [73, 79]. This requires
distinguishing individual objects as they move, change appearance, or undergo occlusions, making VIS a particularly
challenging research field [40, 87]. In recent years, VIS has
become essential in various applications such as autonomous
driving [52], robotics [26], and augmented reality [53].
Generally, most existing VIS methods [9, 30, 33, 48] are
designed for static application scenarios, where the categories of object instances are predefined and remain constant over time. However, real-world scenarios are typically
dynamic, with object instances of new classes arriving consecutively in an online manner. To tackle this limitation,
traditional VIS models [22, 39, 44] often require retaining
all video data of old categories to retrain the entire model.
Nevertheless, as the number of old categories grows contin-

11829

