This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PseudoMapTrainer: Learning Online Mapping without HD Maps
Christian Löwens1,3
1

Bosch Research

2

Thorben Funke1

Automated Driving, Bosch

Jingchao Xie1,4
3

Alexandru Paul Condurache2,3

University of Lübeck

4

Technical University of Munich

{christian.loewens, thorben.funke}@bosch.com

Abstract

Pseudo Map Labels

Crowdsourced Data

Online mapping models show remarkable results in predicting vectorized maps from multi-view camera images only.
However, all existing approaches still rely on ground-truth
high-definition maps during training, which are expensive
to obtain and often not geographically diverse enough for
reliable generalization. In this work, we propose PseudoMapTrainer, a novel approach to online mapping that
uses pseudo-labels generated from unlabeled sensor data.
We derive those pseudo-labels by reconstructing the road
surface from multi-camera imagery using Gaussian splatting and semantics of a pre-trained 2D segmentation network. In addition, we introduce a mask-aware assignment algorithm and loss function to handle partially masked
pseudo-labels, allowing for the first time the training of online mapping models without any ground-truth maps. Furthermore, our pseudo-labels can be effectively used to pretrain an online model in a semi-supervised manner to leverage large-scale unlabeled crowdsourced data. The code is
available at github.com/boschresearch/PseudoMapTrainer.

Gaussian Splatting
& Vectorization

Map

+

RGB

Sem.

LiDAR

Ours
Survey Data

Scalability
BEV
Rendering

Ground-truth HD Map

RGB

Labeling
Pipeline

Accurate
Positioning

Traditional map
construction

Costs

LiDAR

Costs

Scalability
Human
Annotators

Figure 1. Motivation for pseudo-labels. Compared to conventional HD mapping, our method produces maps without human
annotations via Gaussian splatting of surrounding camera and segmentation images, greatly reducing costs and enhancing scalability. We then use those labels to train an online mapping model.
[ · ] denotes optional components. Survey vehicle from [34].

Given that it is much easier to collect large amounts of
unlabeled crowdsourced data from vehicles already on the
road, the question arises whether this data can also be leveraged to train online mapping models. Therefore, in this
work, we propose PseudoMapTrainer, a novel approach that
eliminates the need for ground-truth HD maps even during
training. Specifically, we generate pseudo-labels based on
road surface reconstruction using Gaussian splatting [14].
We model the road surface as a mesh of Gaussian surfels [10] and optimize it with temporal multi-view camera
images. Since surfels can encode not only geometric and
color properties but also semantics, we can directly render
semantic bird’s-eye view (BEV) maps and subsequently derive vectorized pseudo map labels (see Fig. 2).
As our pseudo-labels are derived from observations collected from a single or few vehicle passes, they are inherently incomplete. Thus, a key challenge when training with
pseudo-labels is handling occlusions and missing data. To
address this, we introduce a mask-aware assignment strat-

1. Introduction
High-definition (HD) maps play a crucial role in autonomous driving, offering precise representations of road
geometries, traffic signs, and other essential infrastructure
[1, 25]. Traditionally, these maps are constructed from survey vehicles equipped with high-precision sensors and curated by human annotators. While accurate, this process
is expensive and faces challenges in maintaining up-to-date
information due to the dynamic nature of real-world environments [1]. To mitigate these limitations, the research
community has increasingly focused on online mapping
methods, which learn to generate maps in real time using
only data from vehicle-mounted sensors [16, 17, 19, 26]. A
substantial challenge in this domain is the reliance on extensive ground-truth map labels for supervised learning, which
are labor-intensive to produce (see Fig. 1) and often not geographically diverse enough for reliable generalization [21].

5263

