This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DOLLAR: Few-Step Video Generation via Distillation and Latent Reward
Optimization
Zihan Ding,* Chi Jin
Princeton University
{zihand, chij}@princeton.edu

Difan Liu, Haitian Zheng, Krishna Kumar Singh, Qiang Zhang, Yan Kang, Zhe Lin, Yuchen Liu
Adobe Research
{diliu, hazheng, krishsin, qiangz, yankang, zlin, yuliu}@adobe.com

Videos to play [Click]

Figure 1. By incorporating variational score distillation, consistency distillation and latent reward fine-tuning, our DOLLAR method with 4-inference
steps increases sample diversity and fidelity over DMD [75], generates higher quality videos than LCM [36, 62], and achieves ×15.6 acceleration
compared with teacher. You can [click] rightmost column samples to play videos (20 extracted frames) in Adobe Acrobat. More in Appendix 11.

Abstract
Diffusion probabilistic models have shown significant progress
in video generation; however, their computational efficiency is
limited by the large number of sampling steps required. Reducing sampling steps often compromises video quality or generation diversity. In this work, we introduce a distillation method
that combines variational score distillation and consistency distillation to achieve few-step video generation, maintaining both
high quality and diversity. We also propose a latent reward
model fine-tuning approach to further enhance video generation performance according to any specified reward metric.
This approach reduces memory usage and does not require the
reward to be differentiable. Our method demonstrates stateof-the-art performance in few-step generation for 10-second
videos (128 frames at 12 FPS). The distilled student model
* Work done during internship at Adobe Research.

achieves a score of 82.57 on VBench, surpassing the teacher
model as well as baseline models Gen-3 [10], T2V-Turbo [29],
and Kling [27]. One-step distillation accelerates the teacher
model’s diffusion sampling by up to 278.6 times, enabling near
real-time generation. Human evaluations further validate the
superior performance of our 4-step student models compared
to teacher model using 50-step DDIM sampling. Project page:
https://quantumiracle.github.io/dollar/

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models [17, 53, 55, 56] have recently
revolutionized generative modeling in continuous domains.
With remarkable expressive power and flexibility across diverse
data formats and modalities, diffusion models have significant
breakthroughs in tasks such as text-to-image and text-to-video
(T2V) generation. However, despite substantial improvements

17961

