This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FullDiT: Video Generative Foundation Models with Multimodal Control
via Full Attention
Xuan Ju12 * Weicai Ye1B Quande Liu1 Qiulin Wang1 Xintao Wang1
Pengfei Wan1 Di Zhang1 Kun Gai1 Qiang Xu2B
1
2
Kling Team, Kuaishou Technology
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://fulldit.github.io

Camera

Identities

A woman carrying a bouquet of vibrant flowers walks along the beach
Identities

Depth

A young woman wearing a white t-shirt is sitting indoors.
Camera

Identities

Depth

A man and a woman are standing together in a forested area
Figure 1. FullDiT is a multi-task video generative foundation model that unifies conditional learning with full self-attention. With
self-attention’s long-context learning ability, FullDiT can flexibly take different combinations of input to generate high-quality videos.

Abstract
Current video generative foundation models primarily
focus on text-to-video tasks, providing limited control for
fine-grained video content creation. Although adapterbased approaches (e.g., ControlNet) enable additional controls with minimal fine-tuning, they encounter challenges
when integrating multiple conditions, including: branch
conflicts between independently trained adapters, parameter redundancy leading to increased computational cost,
and suboptimal performance compared to full fine-tuning.
To address these challenges, we introduce FullDiT, a unified foundation model for video generation that seamlessly
integrates multiple conditions via unified full-attention
mechanisms. By fusing multi-task conditions into a unified
sequence representation and leveraging the long-context
learning ability of full self-attention to capture condition dy-

namics, FullDiT reduces parameter overhead, avoids conditions conflict, and shows scalability and emergent ability.
We further introduce FullBench for multi-task video generation evaluation. Experiments demonstrate that FullDiT
achieves state-of-the-art results, highlighting the efficacy of
full-attention in complex multi-task video generation.

1. Introduction

∗ Work done during internship at Kling Team, Kuaishou Technology.

The pre-training of video generative foundation models
has predominantly adhered to a paradigm focused solely
on text-to-video generation, benefiting from its simplicity
and broad applicability. However, relying solely on textual prompts offers insufficient granularity, failing to provide precise and direct manipulation over critical video attributes. Real-world creative industries—such as filmmaking, animation, and digital content creation—frequently require fine-grained control across multiple aspects of generated videos, such as camera movements, character identities, and scene layout. To meet these multifaceted demands,

B Corresponding Author.

15737

