This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayerAnimate: Layer-level Control for Animation
Yuxue Yang1,2
Lue Fan2
Zuzeng Lin3
Feng Wang4
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,5†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
NLPR & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science
3
4
5
Tianjin University
CreateAI
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{yangyuxue2023, lue.fan, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
linzuzeng@tju.edu.cn
feng.wff@gmail.com
Abstract

Motion Score

Traditional animation production decomposes visual elements into discrete layers to enable independent processing
for sketching, refining, coloring, and in-betweening. Existing anime generation video methods typically treat animation as a distinct data domain different from real-world
videos, lacking fine-grained control at the layer level. To
bridge this gap, we introduce LayerAnimate, a novel video
diffusion framework with layer-aware architecture that empowers the manipulation of layers through layer-level controls. The development of a layer-aware framework faces
a significant data scarcity challenge due to the commercial sensitivity of professional animation assets. To address
the limitation, we propose a data curation pipeline featuring Automated Element Segmentation and Motion-based
Hierarchical Merging. Through quantitative and qualitative comparisons, and user study, we demonstrate that LayerAnimate outperforms current methods in terms of animation quality, control precision, and usability, making it an
effective tool for both professional animators and amateur
enthusiasts. This framework opens up new possibilities for
layer-level animation applications and creative flexibility.
Our code is available at https://layeranimate.
github.io.

0.60

Sketch

Trajectory

Input
Motion Score

Generated Frames
0.00

Sketch

Trajectory

Input

Generated Frames

Figure 1. LayerAnimate enables controllable video generation under multiple layer-level controls.

1. Introduction

videos, generating videos under frame-level controls. They
overlook a fundamental concept to animation, layer, which
allows independent controls on decomposed elements as
depicted in Fig. 1. The principle of layer decomposition
forms a foundational methodology across animation history, manifesting as stacked translucent celluloid overlays
in classical hand-drawn production and evolving into digital layer hierarchies within modern software. The hierarchical paradigm helps animators conduct nondestructive editing through layer isolation, enabling precise control over
individual elements.
Considering the scarcity of layer data due to its commercial value, it is challenging to develop a video generation model supporting layer-level controls. We design
a layer curation pipeline comprising Automated Element
Segmentation and Motion-based Hierarchical Merging to
overcome the challenge. We iteratively leverage SAM [18]
and SAM2 [27] for element segmentation, then merge oversegmented elements into layers based on their motion states
with hierarchical clustering.
With the curated layer data, we propose LayerAnimate,
a framework that facilitates flexible composition of heterogeneous layer-level control signals and fine-grained manipulation of animation layers. Initially, the frame-level reference image is decomposed into layer-level regions using
layer masks from our curation pipeline, establishing explicit

Animation is a globally beloved art form, yet its production remains a complex process involving sketch drafting, refining, coloring, and in-betweening. With the development of video generation models, automation technologies are increasingly being integrated into the animation production process. Recent animation generation models [15, 24, 32, 35] have adapted real-world generation models [1, 37] to achieve impressive results in interpolation and
sketch coloring. However, previous works typically treat
animation as a distinct data domain compared to real-world
† Corresponding author

10865

