This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WorldScore: A Unified Evaluation Benchmark for World Generation
Haoyi Duan∗

Hong-Xing Yu∗

Sirui Chen

Li Fei-Fei

Jiajun Wu

Stanford University

Abstract
We introduce the WorldScore benchmark, the first unified benchmark for world generation. We decompose world
generation into a sequence of next-scene generation tasks
with explicit camera trajectory-based layout specifications,
enabling unified evaluation of diverse approaches from 3D
and 4D scene generation to video generation models. The
WorldScore benchmark encompasses a curated dataset of
3,000 test examples that span diverse worlds: static and
dynamic, indoor and outdoor, photorealistic and stylized.
The WorldScore metric evaluates generated worlds through
three key aspects: controllability, quality, and dynamics.
Through extensive evaluation of 20 representative models,
including both open-source and closed-source ones, we
reveal key insights and challenges for each category of
models. Our dataset, evaluation code, and leaderboard
can be found at https://haoyi-duan.github.io/
WorldScore/.

Model B

Task:
Generate a world
starting from here

VBench:
WorldScore (ours):

* Equal contribution.

Model A (80.28) ≈ Model B (83.06)
Model A (70.70) > Model B (46.28)

Figure 1. While existing video benchmarks like VBench [26]
rate Models A and B similarly based on single-scene video quality, our WorldScore benchmark differentiates their world generation capabilities by identifying that Model B fails to generate a new scene or follow the instructed camera movement. In
https://haoyi-duan.github.io/WorldScore/, we
show the videos to explain our WorldScore metrics.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in visual generation have sparked growing interest in world generation—the creation of large-scale,
diverse worlds with various scenes, which finds wide applications in entertainment, education, simulation, and embodied
AI. The rapid progress in video generation [1, 6, 10, 88],
3D scene generation [11, 16, 90, 91], and 4D scene generation [3, 85, 89] has shown generating high-quality individual
scenes, demonstrating the potential of these models as world
generation systems. However, as the concept of world generation expands, users demand to generate more comprehensive worlds that seamlessly integrate multiple varied scenes
with detailed spatial layout controls rather than disconnected
individual environments.
Achieving this vision requires a unified evaluation benchmark that systematically assesses different types of world
generation models across large-scale, diverse worlds, which
is currently absent. Existing benchmarks mainly focus on
video generation [15, 45, 46, 48, 92] and evaluate only indi-

Model A

Next scene:
Next scene:
“Window …
“Flowers …
Camera pans left” Camera moves left”

vidual scene generation. For example, VBench [26] primarily evaluates text-to-video (T2V) tasks using curated prompts
without explicit spatial layout control, restricting their evaluations to single scenes (Figure 1). Moreover, despite the
promising potential of 3D and 4D scene generation methods
for world generation, current benchmarks lack essential components such as camera specifications and reference images,
making them incompatible with many state-of-the-art 3D/4D
scene generation methods that require an image or a camera
trajectory as inputs [11, 16, 39, 90, 91].
We introduce WorldScore, a unified benchmark for world
generation. Our key design is to decompose world generation
into a sequence of next-scene generation tasks, where each
step is characterized by a triplet of (current scene,
next scene, layout). For unified evaluation across
different methods, we provide both an image and a text
prompt for a current scene, as well as both camera
matrices and a textual description for a layout specifi-

27713

