This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class Token as Proxy: Optimal Transport-assisted Proxy Learning for Weakly
Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Jian Wang1,2
1

XJTLU

2

Tianhong Dai3 Bingfeng Zhang4
Eng Gee Lim1 * Jimin Xiao1 *

University of Liverpool

3

Applied Computing

4

Siyue Yu1

China University of Petroleum

(a) CAM and feature distribution of method
with token gap (e.g., MCTformer+)

Abstract
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) utilizes
Class Activation Maps (CAMs) to extract spatial cues from
image-level labels. However, CAMs highlight only the
most discriminative foreground regions, leading to incomplete results. Recent Vision Transformer-based methods
leverage class-patch attention to enhance CAMs, yet they
still suffer from partial activation due to the token gap:
classification-focused class tokens prioritize discriminative
features, while patch tokens capture both discriminative
and non-discriminative characteristics. This mismatch prevents class tokens from activating all relevant features,
especially when discriminative and non-discriminative regions exhibit significant differences. To address this issue, we propose Optimal Transport-assisted Proxy Learning (OTPL), a novel framework that bridges the token gap
by learning adaptive proxies. OTPL introduces two key
strategies: (1) optimal transport-assisted proxy learning,
which combines class tokens with their most relevant patch
tokens to produce comprehensive CAMs, and (2) optimal
transport-enhanced contrastive learning, aligning proxies
with confident patch tokens for bounded proxy exploration.
Our framework overcomes the limitation of class tokens in
activating patch tokens, providing more complete and accurate CAM results. Experiments on WSSS benchmarks (PASCAL VOC and MS COCO) demonstrate that our method
significantly improves the CAM quality and achieves stateof-the-art performances.

Token Gap
Class token

/

Patch token

Proxy Learning Mitigates Token Gap

(b) CAM and feature distribution of our method
Activated foreground feature: CAM value ≥ 0.5
Unactivated foreground feature: CAM value < 0.5

Figure 1. (a) CAM and feature distribution of method with token
gap. The class token is positioned at the edge of feature space,
activating only nearby features. (b) Our proxy learning framework
mitigates the token gap. The learned proxy is located in the center
of feature space and activates more foreground features.

1. Introduction

pseudo-labels, which are subsequently used to train a segmentation model [6]. However, CAMs often focus primarily on the most distinctive foreground areas [35, 52], leading to incomplete object coverage. This limitation leads to
insufficient supervision during the training of the segmentation model [6], ultimately affecting the final performance.
To mitigate this limitation, class-patch attention in Vision Transformer (ViT) [13] is introduced to generate more
robust CAMs [16, 45, 46]. This approach leverages the
cosine similarity between class tokens and patch tokens
in ViT to enhance CAM generation. For example, TSCAM [16] utilizes this class-patch attention instead of traditional CAMs to create pseudo-labels. However, the original ViT structure only contains a single class token, which
limits the ability of TS-CAM to make dense class-specific
predictions. To address this issue, the MCTformer series [45, 46] incorporates multiple class tokens into ViT,

Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) with
image-level labels alleviates the need for labor-intensive
pixel-level annotations, thereby becoming increasingly popular. In WSSS, Class Activation Maps (CAMs) [55] are
widely employed to identify and localize foreground objects. These CAMs are leveraged as the basis to generate
* Corresponding authors.

21645

