This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVGBench: a Comprehensive Benchmark for Multi-view Generation Models
Xianghui Xie1,2,3
1

2

University of Tübingen

Jan Eric Lenssen3
3

Tübingen AI Center

Gerard Pons-Moll1,2,3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatic Campus

https://virtualhumans.mpi-inf.mpg.de/MVGBench/

Evaluation metrics

Metric dimensions

3D geometric consistency
Chamfer

Depth

3D texture consistency
cSSIM

cPSNR

cLPIPS

Image quality
oFID

IQ-vlm

Semantic consistency
Style

Object class

Color

Performance aspects

Best setup performance

Generalization to real data

Robustness

Figure 1. We present MVGBench, a comprehensive evaluation suite for multi-view image generation models (MVGs). We propose ten
metrics to evaluate the 3D consistency in geometry and texture, image quality, and semantics of generated multi-view images. This suite
allows us to fairly compare existing MVGs in three aspects: best setup performance, generalization, and robustness to input perturbations.
We use our benchmark to systematically analyze different models and identify critical design choices, leading to a new model that achieves
the best 3D consistency and robustness, with otherwise on-par performance. All values are normalized, and outermost is better.

Abstract

choices contribute to the progress of MVGs.
MVGBench evaluates three different aspects: best setup
performance, generalization to real data and robustness.
Instead of comparing against ground truth, we introduce a
novel 3D self-consistency metric which compares 3D reconstructions from disjoint generated multi-views. We systematically compare 12 existing MVGs on 4 different curated
real and synthetic datasets. With our analysis, we identify
important limitations of existing methods specially in terms
of robustness and generalization, and we ﬁnd the most critical design choices. Using the discovered best practices,
we propose ViFiGen, a method that outperforms all evaluated MVGs on 3D consistency. Our benchmark suite and
pretrained models are publicly released.

We propose MVGBench, a comprehensive benchmark for
multi-view image generation models (MVGs) that evaluates 3D consistency in geometry and texture, image quality,
and semantics (using vision language models). Recently,
MVGs have been the main driving force in 3D object creation. However, existing metrics compare generated images
against ground truth target views, which is not suitable for
generative tasks where multiple solutions exist while differing from ground truth. Furthermore, different MVGs are
trained on different view angles, synthetic data and speciﬁc
lightings – robustness to these factors and generalization to
real data are rarely evaluated thoroughly. Without a rigorous evaluation protocol, it is also unclear what design

8207

