This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PRVQL: Progressive Knowledge-guided Refinement for Robust Egocentric
Visual Query Localization
Bing Fan1

Yunhe Feng1

Yapeng Tian2 James Chenhao Liang3 Yuewei Lin4
Yan Huang1 Heng Fan1
1
University of North Texas 2 University of Texas at Dallas
3
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory 4 Brookhaven National Laboratory

Abstract
Output

Existing
Approaches

Egocentric visual query localization (EgoVQL) focuses on
localizing the target of interest in space and time from firstperson videos, given a visual query. Despite recent progressive, existing methods often struggle to handle severe object
appearance changes and cluttering background in the video
due to lacking sufficient target cues, leading to degradation.
Addressing this, we introduce PRVQL, a novel Progressive
knowledge-guided Refinement framework for EgoVQL. The
core is to continuously exploit target-relevant knowledge directly from videos and utilize it as guidance to refine both
query and video features for improving target localization.
Our PRVQL contains multiple processing stages. The target
knowledge from one stage, comprising appearance and spatial knowledge extracted via two specially designed knowledge learning modules, are utilized as guidance to refine the
query and videos features for the next stage, which are used
to generate more accurate knowledge for further feature refinement. With such a progressive process, target knowledge
in PRVQL can be gradually improved, which, in turn, leads
to better refined query and video features for localization in
the final stage. Compared to previous methods, our PRVQL,
besides the given object cues, enjoys additional crucial target information from a video as guidance to refine features,
and hence enhances EgoVQL in complicated scenes. In our
experiments on challenging Ego4D, PRVQL achieves stateof-the-art result and largely surpasses other methods, showing its efficacy. Our code, model and results will be released
at https://github.com/fb-reps/PRVQL.

(a) Existing EgoVQL methods
Visual Query

PRVQL
(multi-stage)
appearance
knowledge

Egocentric Video

Input
spatial
knowledge

stage-wise

Output
target knowledge
(b) The proposed PRVQL via progressive
knowledge-guided refinement

Figure 1. Comparison between current EgoVQL approaches in (a)
and proposed PRVQL with progressive knowledge-guided refinement in (b). Best viewed in color and by zooming in for all figures.

visual query, spatially and temporally, by returning the most
recent spatio-temporal tube. Owing to its important roles in
numerous downstream object-centric applications including
augmented and virtual reality, robotics, human-machine interaction, and so on, EgoVQL has drawn extensive attention
from researchers in recent years.
Current approaches (e.g., [9, 14, 28, 29]) simply leverage
the provided visual query as the sole cue to locate the target
in the video (see Fig. 1 (a)). However, since the given visual
query is cropped outside the search video, there often exists
a significant gap between the query and the target of interest, due to rapid appearance variations in first-person videos
caused by many factors, such as object pose change, motion
blur, occlusion, and so forth. As a result, relying only on the
given object query, as in existing methods, is insufficient to
describe and distinguish the target from background in complicated scenarios with heavy appearance changes, resulting
in performance degeneration. In addition, to achieve precise

1. Introduction
The egocentric visual query localization (EgoVQL) task [9]
aims at answering the question “Where was the object X last
seen in the video?”, with “X” being a visual query specified
by a single image crop outside the search video. In specific,
given a first-person video, its goal is to search and locate the

5156

