This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Normal and Abnormal Pathology Knowledge-Augmented Vision-Language
Model for Anomaly Detection in Pathology Images
Jinsol Song1 Jiamu Wang1 Anh Tien Nguyen1 Keunho Byeon1
Sangjeong Ahn1 Sung Hak Lee2 Jin Tae Kwak1
1
Korea University 2 The Catholic University of Korea
Jinsol Song:

truetg@korea.ac.kr

Jin Tae Kwak:

Abstract

jkwak@korea.ac.kr

Anomaly detection in computational pathology aims to
identify rare and scarce anomalies where disease-related
data are often limited or missing. Existing anomaly detection methods, primarily designed for industrial settings,
face limitations in pathology due to computational constraints, diverse tissue structures, and lack of interpretability. To address these challenges, we propose Ano-NAViLa,
a Normal and Abnormal pathology knowledge-augmented
Vision-Language model for Anomaly detection in pathology images. Ano-NAViLa is built on a pre-trained visionlanguage model with a lightweight trainable MLP. By incorporating both normal and abnormal pathology knowledge,
Ano-NAViLa enhances accuracy and robustness to variability in pathology images and provides interpretability
through image-text associations. Evaluated on two lymph
node datasets from different organs, Ano-NAViLa achieves
the state-of-the-art performance in anomaly detection and
localization, outperforming competing models.

There are several limitations when applying existing
methods to pathology images: 1) Computational bottleneck: State-of-the-art AD models often rely on large backbone networks [8, 13, 45], requiring substantial memory
storage [7, 32], or adopt generative models [21, 42] with
long inference times, making them impractical for realworld applications. Gigapixel-sized whole slide images
(WSIs) [19] impose even greater computational and storage
demands; 2) Tissue Diversity: Anomalies, e.g., scratches,
damages, and missing components, in other domains, are
often well-defined, whereas, in pathology images, anomalies are more complex and diverse, involving intricate alterations in cellular and tissue structures. Even normal tissues
exhibit high structural heterogeneity [50], making it more
challenging to differentiate between normal variations and
true anomalies; 3) Generalization ability: The quality of
pathology images considerably varies due to multiple factors, including differences in institutions, imaging equipment, and staining protocols. These variations contribute
to domain shifts, limiting the generalizability of existing
AD methods across different domains; 4) Interpretability:
Most existing AD methods operate as black-boxes, providing minimal insight into their final decisions. This lack of
interpretability restricts their adoption in real-world clinical
settings, where transparency is crucial to support trustworthy and clinically relevant decision-making.
To address these challenges, we propose Ano-NAViLa,
a Normal and Abnormal pathology knowledge-augmented
Vision-Language model for Anomaly detection in pathology images. Ano-NAViLa is built by integrating a visionlanguage model (VLM) for feature extraction and semantic
mapping with multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) for anomaly
clustering and detection. The model is designed to utilize
two types of pathology knowledge to enhance its AD capabilities: 1) Data-driven knowledge: Ano-NAViLa adopts
a pathology VLM, pre-trained on large pathology imagetext pair datasets, to obtain rich image and text representations, which are subsequently used to extract distinctive features between normal and abnormal tissues; 2) Ex-

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) has been a long-standing research
area dedicated to addressing the practical challenge of detecting anomalies, which are inherently scarce and difficult
to collect compared to normal data. While AD can be considered as a binary classification task, it differs from standard classification as it exclusively learns from normal data
to identify deviations indicative of anomalies. Most existing
research has focused on developing visual AD models for
applications such as quality inspection and defect detection
in industrial settings [4, 31, 34]. In computational pathology, specific disease conditions are often rare but hold critical clinical implications [9, 50], posing a significant challenge. Therefore, AD holds great potential to improve clinical practice by enabling the identification of rare disease
patterns with limited labeled data.

22066

