This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynamicID: Zero-Shot Multi-ID Image Personalization with Flexible Facial
Editability
Xirui Hu1∗

Jiahao Wang1∗ Hao Chen2 Weizhan Zhang1† Benqi Wang2
Yikun Li1 Haishun Nan2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, MOEKLINNS Lab,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
Film AI Lab, Western Movie Group
Action

Accessory

Background

Style

Attribute

chef

running

Christmas hat

snow

Neonpunk

blue hair

different seed

(a)

Clothing

happy

angry

happy

disgusted happy

front

front

down

front

side

front

happy happy

sad

happy

surprised happy

front

front

up

front

side

front

same seed

afraid

(b)

Figure 1. Given only a single reference image for each identity, (a) our method demonstrates the capability to generate diverse and
personalized multi-ID images based on text prompts. Furthermore, (b) it excels in performing independent and flexible facial editing,
especially concerning expressions and orientations, while preserving high fidelity to the original character.

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image generation have driven interest in generating personalized human images that depict
specific identities from reference images. Although existing
methods achieve high-fidelity identity preservation, they are
generally limited to single-ID scenarios and offer insufficient facial editability. We present DynamicID, a tuningfree framework that inherently facilitates both single-ID
and multi-ID personalized generation with high fidelity and
flexible facial editability. Our key innovations include: 1)
Semantic-Activated Attention (SAA), which employs query-

level activation gating to minimize disruption to the base
model when injecting ID features and achieve multi-ID
personalization without requiring multi-ID samples during
training. 2) Identity-Motion Reconfigurator (IMR), which
applies feature-space manipulation to effectively disentangle and reconfigure facial motion and identity features, supporting flexible facial editing. 3) a task-decoupled training paradigm that reduces data dependency, together with
VariFace-10k, a curated dataset of 10k unique individuals,
each represented by 35 distinct facial images. Experimental results demonstrate that DynamicID outperforms stateof-the-art methods in identity fidelity, facial editability, and

∗ Equal contributors. † Corresponding Author

10549

