This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Distribution Matching for Diffusion Distillation
Towards Efficient Image and Video Synthesis
Yanzuo Lu1,2 , Yuxi Ren2 , Xin Xia2 , Shanchuan Lin2 , Xing Wang2 ,
Xuefeng Xiao2∗ , Andy J. Ma1,3,4† , Xiaohua Xie1,3,4,5 , Jian-Huang Lai1,3,4,5
1

Sun Yat-Sen University 2 ByteDance Seed Vision
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
5
Pazhou Lab (HuangPu), Guangzhou, China
oliveryanzuolu@gmail.com,xiaoxuefeng.ailab@bytedance.com,majh8@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Distribution Matching Distillation (DMD) is a promising
score distillation technique that compresses pre-trained
teacher diffusion models into efficient one-step or multi-step
student generators. Nevertheless, its reliance on the reverse
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence minimization potentially
induces mode collapse (or mode-seeking) in certain applications. To circumvent this inherent drawback, we propose Adversarial Distribution Matching (ADM), a novel
framework that leverages diffusion-based discriminators to
align the latent predictions between real and fake score
estimators for score distillation in an adversarial manner.
In the context of extremely challenging one-step distillation, we further improve the pre-trained generator by adversarial distillation with hybrid discriminators in both latent and pixel spaces. Different from the mean squared error used in DMD2 pre-training, our method incorporates
the distributional loss on ODE pairs collected from the
teacher model, and thus providing a better initialization for
score distillation fine-tuning in the next stage. By combining the adversarial distillation pre-training with ADM finetuning into a unified pipeline termed DMDX, our proposed
method achieves superior one-step performance on SDXL
compared to DMD2 while consuming less GPU time. Additional experiments that apply multi-step ADM distillation
on SD3-Medium, SD3.5-Large, and CogVideoX set a new
benchmark towards efficient image and video synthesis.

(a) A white polar bear cub wearing
sunglasses sits in a meadow with
flowers.

(c) beautiful nighttime landscape
photography of the Rocky Mountains
with a crystal blue lake, milky way
galaxy sky, serene, dramatic lighting.

(d) A planisphere lavalamp glows
inside a glass jar buried in sand with
swirling mist around it.

Figure 1. In these images, some are generated by the baseline
SDXL via 50NFE, the others with our DMDX in 1NFE. Can
you tell which is the accelerated one? Answers in the footnote‡ .

a more efficient generator (a.k.a student model) that approximates the output distribution of the pretrained teacher.
This field has observed multiple pathways developing in
parallel with progressive distillation [23, 58], consistency
distillation [18, 34, 35, 43, 55, 66, 69, 70, 92], score
distillation [3, 16, 21, 38, 55, 59, 61, 84–87, 93], rectified flow [27, 28, 30, 71, 81] and adversarial distillation [23, 24, 43, 55, 60, 61, 85, 91]. They are currently
appearing as distinct yet non-exclusive research directions.
Distribution Matching Distillation (DMD) [85, 86] is a
promising score distillation [51] approach, which distills the
powerful text-to-image diffusion model SDXL-Base [56]
into a one-step generator with great fidelity. While DMD’s
primary contribution lies in introducing additional regularizers to constrain the distribution matching loss, its predecessor Diff-Instruct [37] pioneered the use of a fake score
estimator to approximate the student model’s output distribution. This contrasts with the distillation loss in Adversarial Diffusion Distillation (ADD) [61], which directly em-

1. Introduction
Recent methods for accelerating diffusion models [12, 17,
63, 65] have concentrated on reducing the sampling steps
through distillation. The distillation process generally trains
* Project Lead.

(b) mage, wizard, female, demoness,
forest, D&D, fantasy, intricate,
elegant, highly detailed, digital
painting, artstation, […]

† Our DMDX (left to right): bottom, top, bottom, top.

† Corresponding Author.

16818

