This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Principles of Visual Tokens for Efficient Video Understanding
Xinyue Hao1
1

Gen Li1

University of Edinburgh

2

Shreyank N Gowda2 Robert B. Fisher1
Anurag Arnab4 Laura Sevilla-Lara1

University of Nottingham

3

Jonathan Huang3

Scaled Foundations

4

Google DeepMind

Figure 1. Left: Given an input video (top row), the proposed LITE method is able to select a subset (non-white patches) of discriminative
tokens for any given computational budget. Right: LITE is lightweight and efficient, achieving the optimal Pareto-front over state-of-the-art
methods in the trade-off between computational cost (GFLOPs) and accuracy. The plot shows the results on Something-Something-V2.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Video understanding has made huge strides in recent years,
relying largely on the power of transformers. As this architecture is notoriously expensive and video data is highly
redundant, research into improving efficiency has become
particularly relevant. Some creative solutions include token selection and merging. While most methods succeed in
reducing the cost of the model and maintaining accuracy,
an interesting pattern arises: most methods do not outperform the baseline of randomly discarding tokens. In this paper we take a closer look at this phenomenon and observe
5 principles of the nature of visual tokens. For example,
we observe that the value of tokens follows a clear Paretodistribution where most tokens have remarkably low value,
and just a few carry most of the perceptual information. We
build on these and further insights to propose a lightweight
video model, LITE, that can select a small number of tokens effectively, outperforming state-of-the-art and existing baselines across datasets (Kinetics-400 and SomethingSomething-V2) in the challenging trade-off of computation
(GFLOPs) vs accuracy. Experiments also show that LITE
generalizes across datasets and even other tasks without
the need for retraining. The code is released at https:
//github.com/maggieHao/Efficient-LITE.

21254

Video understanding has made remarkable progress in the
last few years, getting close to solving many standard
benchmarks and tasks [6, 7, 20]. This progress has largely
hinged on the use of the transformer architecture [41],
which is both extremely powerful as well as extremely computationally expensive. Transformers originated in the language field, where few tokens are needed to represent a concept, such as an action, as tokens roughly correspond to single words. This is not the case in the visual adaptation of
transformers [1], where the number of tokens to represent
an action is orders of magnitude larger, leading to an exponentially larger computational cost. This cost has a wide
range of negative consequences: it limits the deployability
of models, as they require expensive equipment to run, it
burdens video understanding research, making turnaround
slower, it is financially expensive and it has a big environmental footprint [17]. In particular, although the inference
cost is small compared to training, over the lifetime of a
model, the overall cost of inference is larger than the cost
of training, as it is done many more times [32]. At the same
time, video is notoriously redundant in space (where background regions might be a large part of the scene) and time
(with many frames being similar, even if they are downsampled). These two factors together pose a great opportu-

