This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborative Instance Object Navigation:
Leveraging Uncertainty-Awareness to Minimize Human-Agent Dialogues
Francesco Taioli1,2 , Edoardo Zorzi2 , Gianni Franchi3 , Alberto Castellini2 , Alessandro Farinelli2 ,
Marco Cristani2,5 , Yiming Wang4
1

Polytechnic of Turin, 2 University of Verona, 3 U2IS, ENSTA Paris, 4 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, 5 University of Reykjavik

francesco.taioli@polito.it, {name.surname}@univr.it, gianni.franchi@ensta-paris.fr, ywang@fbk.eu

https://intelligolabs.github.io/CoIN
Agent-user Interaction with UncerTainty Awareness
Self-Questioner
Describe the picture in the image
Is the person
shirtless?

This cannot be
the target, it is
too colored

Is the picture
colored?
No, the picture
is not colored
LLM

4

5

No need to ask,
I think this is
the target!

VLM

VLM

Thinking of

Start position

Find the picture

3
Does the picture
depict a coastal
scenario?
Yes, it is a portrait of a person
on a light green wall,
representing a coastal scenario

LLM

- Is wearing trousers but appears to be shirtless

- A surfboard is visible, ...hinting at a coastal setting
- Is the person shirtless?

- Is the wall light-blue?

- Does the image depict
... a coastal scenario? 




VLM

LLM

“There is a black-and-white picture, on a light-blue
wall, depicting a person near a large window”
- Is the person wearing some clothes?

- Does the picture depict
a coastal scenario?


...

Yes, you’re right

2

1

VLM

LLM

Normalized-Entropy
uncertainty estimation
per attribute
“There is a black-and-white picture depicting a
person, who is wearing trousers but is shirtless. The
background is a coastal scene with a surfboard”

LLM

Interaction Trigger

“No need to ask, I think this is the target!

LLM

Figure 1. CoIN task illustration. A human provides a request (“Find the picture”) in natural language. The agent has to locate the object
in a completely unknown environment without any target image as input, interacting with the user only when needed via template-free,
open-ended natural-language dialogues. Our method, Agent-user Interaction with UncerTainty Awareness (AIUTA), minimizes user
interactions by equipping the agent with two modules: a Self-Questioner and an Interaction Trigger. The Self-Questioner leverages a
LLM and VLM in a self-dialogue to describe the agent’s observation and then extract additional relevant details, with a novel entropy-based
technique to reduce hallucinations and inaccuracies, producing a refined detection description. The Interaction Trigger uses this refined
description to decide whether to pose a question to the user (①,③,④), continue the navigation (②) or halt the exploration (⑤).

Abstract
Language-driven instance object navigation assumes that a
human initiates the task by providing a detailed description
of the target to the embodied agent. While this description is
crucial for distinguishing the target from other visually similar instances, providing it prior to navigation can be demanding for humans. We thus introduce Collaborative Instance
object Navigation (CoIN), a new task setting where the agent
actively resolves uncertainties about the target instance during navigation in natural, template-free and open-ended dialogues with the human, minimizing user input. We propose
a novel training-free method, Agent-user Interaction with
UncerTainty Awareness (AIUTA), which operates independently from the navigation policy, and focuses on the humanagent interaction reasoning using Vision-Language Models

(VLMs) and Large Language Models (LLMs). First, upon object detection, a Self-Questioner model initiates internal selfdialogues within the agent to obtain a complete and accurate
observation with a novel uncertainty estimation technique.
Then, an Interaction Trigger module determines whether to
ask a question to the human, continue, or halt navigation.
For evaluation, we introduce CoIN-Bench, with a curated
dataset designed for challenging multi-instance scenarios.
CoIN-Bench supports both online evaluation with humans
and reproducible experiments with simulated user-agent interactions. On CoIN-Bench, we show that AIUTA serves as
a competitive baseline, whereas existing language-driven instance navigation methods struggle in multi-instance scenes.

18781

