This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long Context Tuning for Video Generation
Yuwei Guo1,2

Ceyuan Yang2,† Ziyan Yang2 Zhibei Ma2 Zhijie Lin2
Zhenheng Yang3 Dahua Lin1 Lu Jiang2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 ByteDance Seed 3 ByteDance

Abstract
Recent advances in video generation can produce realistic, minute-long single-shot videos with scalable diffusion transformers. However, real-world narrative videos
require multi-shot scenes with visual and dynamic consistency across shots. In this work, we introduce Long Context
Tuning (LCT), a training paradigm that expands the context window of pre-trained single-shot video diffusion models to learn scene-level consistency directly from data. Our
method expands full attention mechanisms from individual
shots to encompass all shots within a scene, incorporating
interleaved 3D position embedding and an asynchronous
noise strategy, enabling both joint and auto-regressive shot
generation without additional parameters. Models with
bidirectional attention after LCT can further be fine-tuned
with context-causal attention, facilitating auto-regressive
generation with efficient KV-cache. Experiments demonstrate single-shot models after LCT can produce coherent
multi-shot scenes and exhibit emerging capabilities, including compositional generation and interactive shot extension, paving the way for more practical visual content creation. See our Project Page for more details.

1. Introduction
Video generation has experienced significant advancements
in recent years. By leveraging web-scale data and scalable
model architecture such as diffusion transformer (DiT) [40],
state-of-the-art models (e.g., SoRA [7], Kling [32], Seaweed [44]) are now capable of synthesizing realistic singleshot videos lasting up to a minute. However, real-world
narrative videos, such as movies and television shows, are
composed of multiple single-shot segments. This implies a
substantial gap between the current capabilities of singleshot video generation and the authentic demands of video
content production.
To bridge this gap, video generation research may need
to evolve from single-shot synthesis to scene-level genera† Corresponding Author.

tion. In this higher-level paradigm, a scene is defined as a
series of single-shot videos capturing coherent events unfolding over time [9, 42, 43]. For instance, the classic scene
in Titanic where Jack and Rose meet on the deck consists
of four principal shots (Fig. 2): (1) close-shot of Jack looking back, (2) mid-shot of Rose speaking, (3) wide-shot of
Rose approaching Jack, and (4) close-up shot of Jack embracing Rose from behind. Generating such a scene requires consistency in visual appearance and temporal dynamics to ensure a coherent narration flow. Specifically, visual coherence indicates the consistent rendering of shared
visual components, e.g., person identity, background, lighting, and color tone. Similarly, temporal coherence necessitates the uniformity in dynamic elements such as character actions (e.g., maintaining consistent walking pace)
and camera movements (e.g., smooth versus shaky camera)
across shots. Addressing these challenges demands novel
approaches for scene-level video generation.
Many solutions have been proposed to address scenelevel video generation, most of which fall into two categories: (1) appearance-conditioned generation [27, 29, 35],
and (2) keyframe generation [26, 72, 73, 75] followed
by image-to-video (I2V) animation [5, 61]. In the first
paradigm, key visual elements (e.g., character identity and
background) serve as conditional inputs to enforce crossshot consistency. However, this approach struggles to maintain abstract elements like lighting and color tone due to
its reliance on predefined conditions and specially curated
datasets. The keyframe-based strategy generates a coherent set of keyframes to ensure visual consistency, which
then serve as initial frames for an I2V model to synthesize each shot independently. Yet, the independent shot synthesis fails to guarantee temporal consistency across shots.
Moreover, sparse keyframes limit the effectiveness of conditioning. For instance, if a character enters the scene between keyframes, the keyframe-based method misses this
character as part of the conditioning, thereby rendering a
consistent representation of the character is infeasiable.
In this work, we propose Long Context Tuning (LCT)
for scene-level video generation. LCT builds upon a pretrained single-shot video generation model, adapting it to

17281

