This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Skeleton Motion Words for Unsupervised Skeleton-Based Temporal Action
Segmentation
Uzay Gökay1 Federico Spurio1,3 Dominik R. Bach1,2 Juergen Gall1,3
1
University of Bonn, Germany 2 University College London, UK
3
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, Germany
{u.goekay, d.bach}@uni-bonn.de

{fspurio, gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art methods for skeleton-based temporal action segmentation are predominantly supervised and
require annotated data, which is expensive to collect. In
contrast, existing unsupervised temporal action segmentation methods have focused primarily on video data, while
skeleton sequences remain underexplored, despite their relevance to real-world applications, robustness, and privacypreserving nature. In this paper, we propose a novel approach for unsupervised skeleton-based temporal action
segmentation. Our method utilizes a sequence-to-sequence
temporal autoencoder that keeps the information of the different joints disentangled in the embedding space. Latent
skeleton sequences are then divided into non-overlapping
patches and quantized to obtain distinctive skeleton motion words, driving the discovery of semantically meaningful action clusters. We thoroughly evaluate the proposed
approach on three widely used skeleton-based datasets,
namely HuGaDB, LARa, and BABEL. The results demonstrate that our model outperforms the current state-of-theart unsupervised temporal action segmentation methods.
Code is available at github.com/bachlab/SMQ.

Figure 1. Our unsupervised skeleton-based temporal action
segmentation framework, Skeleton Motion Quantization (SMQ),
takes a set of untrimmed skeleton sequences as input (top) and
discovers actions consistent across all sequences (bottom). This is
achieved by jointly segmenting and clustering all sequences. The
letters A, B, C, and D correspond to the identified actions.

1. Introduction

This highly constrained setting limits their applicability to
real-world scenarios, where multiple actions are performed
within a single sequence.
In the context of RGB videos, unsupervised approaches
for temporal action segmentation have been proposed [26,
27, 29, 36, 50, 56, 61]. These methods discover actions
in a set of long untrimmed video sequences by identifying
actions across sequences and multiple actions within each
sequence. While these approaches achieved promising results on video data, they have not been evaluated on skeleton sequences. Our investigations reveal that such methods
either struggle to recognize re-occurring actions due to postprocessing with Viterbi decoding or produce overly small
segments, as visualized in qualitative results.
In this paper, we thus propose a novel approach for
unsupervised skeleton-based temporal action segmentation,
which is illustrated in Fig. 1. Our model uses a dilated
temporal convolution based sequence-to-sequence autoencoder, which preserves the skeleton structure by ensuring
that the information of the different joints remains disen-

Advancements in motion capture technology and pose estimation have enabled the precise recording of human motion, represented as time series of joint positions, orientations, or other representations of skeleton sequences.
Recently, there has been an increased interest in temporally segmenting long skeleton sequences into action segments [14, 19, 21, 32, 53–55, 60]. These approaches, however, are predominantly supervised, requiring extensive labeled data for training. In contrast, prior unsupervised
skeleton-based approaches [16, 30, 34, 35, 45, 52, 67] focus
mainly on action recognition, assuming that the sequences
are very short and contain only a single action per sequence.

12101

