This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian Splatting with Discretized SDF for Relightable Assets
Zuo-Liang Zhu1 Jian Yang1† Beibei Wang2†
1
Nankai University 2 Nanjing University

Tbell

Horse

Helmet

Car

Qilin

Figure 1. We present a relightable Gaussian splatting framework that introduces a discretized SDF to promote decomposition quality. We
show five relighting results (left) and their normal estimation (right), including ‘Tbell’ and ‘Horse’ from NeRO [17], ‘Helmet’ and ‘Car’
from Ref-NeRF [26], and ‘Qilin’ from NeILF++ [37], where ‘Qilin’ is a real scene. Our method demonstrates a robust decomposition of
geometry and material for various objects, leading to photo-realistic object relighting.

Abstract
3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) has shown its detailed expressive ability and highly efficient rendering speed in the
novel view synthesis (NVS) task. The application to inverse
rendering still faces several challenges, as the discrete nature of Gaussian primitives makes it difficult to apply geometry constraints. Recent works introduce the signed distance field (SDF) as an extra continuous representation to
regularize the geometry defined by Gaussian primitives. It
improves the decomposition quality, at the cost of increasing memory usage and complicating training. Unlike these
works, we introduce a discretized SDF to represent the continuous SDF in a discrete manner by encoding it within
each Gaussian using a sampled value. This approach allows us to link the SDF with the Gaussian opacity through
an SDF-to-opacity transformation, enabling rendering the
SDF via splatting and avoiding the computational cost of
ray marching. The key challenge is to regularize the discrete samples to be consistent with the underlying SDF, as
the discrete representation can hardly apply the gradientbased constraints (e.g., Eikonal loss). For this, we project
† Corresponding author.
1 PCA Lab, VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2 School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University,
Suzhou, China.

Gaussians onto the zero-level set of SDF and enforce alignment with the surface from splatting, namely a projectionbased consistency loss. Thanks to the discretized SDF, our
method achieves higher relighting quality, while requiring
no extra memory beyond GS and avoiding complex manually designed optimization. The experiments reveal that
our method outperforms existing Gaussian-based inverse
rendering methods. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/NK-CS-ZZL/DiscretizedSDF.

1. Introduction
While creating relightable 3D assets from multi-view images is valuable for many downstream tasks (e.g., augmented reality, virtual reality), it is challenging due to the
ambiguity from decomposing geometry, material, and light.
A key point for decomposing these factors is the regularization of geometry, as high-quality geometry is the prerequisite to estimate reasonable material and light. The
signed distance field (SDF) has been introduced into neural radiance field (NeRF) [21] as an effective geometric
prior, as NeuS [28]. Due to SDF constraints, several methods [14, 25, 42–44] have shown a robust decomposition
of geometry and material. Unfortunately, these methods
require long training and rendering time, due to the ex-

25155

