This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Kaleidoscopic Background Attack: Disrupting Pose Estimation
with Multi-Fold Radial Symmetry Textures
Xinlong Ding∗1 , Hongwei Yu∗1 , Jiawei Li∗1 , Feifan Li1 , Yu Shang2
Bochao Zou1 , Huimin Ma1 , Jiansheng Chen†1
1

University of Science and Technology Beijing, China

2

Tsinghua University, China

https://wakuwu.github.io/KBA

(a) Natural Background

Abstract

capture

Camera pose estimation is a fundamental computer vision
task that is essential for applications like visual localization and multi-view stereo reconstruction. In the objectcentric scenarios with sparse inputs, the accuracy of pose
estimation can be significantly influenced by background
textures that occupy major portions of the images across different viewpoints. In light of this, we introduce the Kaleidoscopic Background Attack (KBA), which uses identical segments to form discs with multi-fold radial symmetry. These
discs maintain high similarity across different viewpoints,
enabling effective attacks on pose estimation models even
with natural texture segments. Additionally, a projected orientation consistency loss is proposed to optimize the kaleidoscopic segments, leading to a significant enhancement in
the attack effectiveness. Experimental results show that optimized adversarial kaleidoscopic backgrounds can effectively attack various camera pose estimation models.

(b) Kaleidoscopic Background
construct

Figure 1. Impact of natural and kaleidoscopic backgrounds on
camera pose estimation in object-centric scenes. (a) With a natural
tabletop background, the DUSt3R model accurately estimates the
camera pose and reconstructs the banana. (b) With a kaleidoscopic
background, the model predicts erroneous but similar poses across
viewpoints, leading to reconstruction failure.

1. Introduction

background information that occupies a large portion of
the image to accurately estimate camera poses from sparse
views. This reliance makes it possible for specific texture
patterns to interfere with the model’s output. However, the
robustness of pose estimation models under such situations
has not been fully discussed previously. In light of this, we
aim to explore the vulnerability of such models by leveraging background textures through adversarial attacks.
Since the pioneering study by Szegedy et al. [34], the
adversarial robustness of deep neural networks (DNNs) has
been extensively studied over the years [6, 11, 13, 15, 22,
25, 28, 32, 35, 36, 45–47]. Classic patch-based attacks [5,
7, 12, 18, 21, 39], a common form of adversarial attack,
often optimize perturbations directly on a standalone patch
image, limiting their adaptability in physical environments.
Recent studies try to address these limitations by leveraging
repeated texture patterns [17, 42] and learnable patch shapes
and locations [8, 40], significantly enhancing their success
rates in the physical world. This leads us to consider what
kinds of texture priors can enhance adversarial attacks for
camera pose estimation tasks in the physical world.
We observe that numerous radial symmetric patterns ex-

Camera pose estimation involves determining the positions
and orientations of cameras based on multi-view images.
The accuracy of these estimates is critical for various downstream tasks, including visual localization [14, 20], multiview stereo reconstruction [10, 44], and novel view synthesis [23, 27]. Sparse-view object-centric scenes, where objects are centered on a flat surface and imaged by cameras
oriented towards them, are among the most common scenarios in practical applications. Classic methods like Structure
from Motion (SfM) [1, 9, 31, 41] can not adapt to such scenarios since they require dense viewpoints. Consequently,
many learning-based approaches [19, 24, 26, 30, 33, 37, 38,
48, 49] have been proposed to bridge this gap, achieving
satisfying performance with sparse views.
However, these learning-based methods often rely on
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author (jschen@ustb.edu.cn).

28483

