This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TARS: Traffic-Aware Radar Scene Flow Estimation
Jialong Wu1,3
1

Marco Braun3

University of Wuppertal

2

Dominic Spata3

Osnabrück University

Abstract

3

Matthias Rottmann1,2

Aptiv Services Deutschland GmbH

(a) Scene 1, frame 1

(c) Scene 2, frame 1

More sparse

Scene flow provides crucial motion information for autonomous driving. Recent LiDAR scene flow models utilize
the rigid-motion assumption at the instance level, assuming objects are rigid bodies. However, these instance-level
methods are not suitable for sparse radar point clouds. In
this work, we present a novel Traffic-Aware Radar SceneFlow (TARS) estimation method, which utilizes motion
rigidity at the traffic level. To address the challenges in
radar scene flow, we perform object detection and scene
flow jointly and boost the latter. We incorporate the feature
map from the object detector, trained with detection losses,
to make radar scene flow aware of the environment and road
users. From this, we construct a Traffic Vector Field (TVF)
in the feature space to achieve holistic traffic-level scene understanding in our scene flow branch. When estimating the
scene flow, we consider both point-level motion cues from
point neighbors and traffic-level consistency of rigid motion within the space. TARS outperforms the state of the
art on a proprietary dataset and the View-of-Delft dataset,
improving the benchmarks by 23% and 15%, respectively.

Not capturing
surface shape
(b) Scene 1, frame 2

(d) Scene 2, frame 2

Deformation exhibited
Lack of strong
correspondence

Lower resolution

Figure 1. Challenges in radar scene flow. LiDAR points are shown
in color, with corresponding radar points overlaid as larger gray
points. (a-b) and (c-d) are two pairs of consecutive frames.

1. Introduction

for each object pair [8] or derive the instance-wise transformation using optimization-based methods [13, 20].
However, these instance-level methods are not suitable
for radar scene flow due to the inherent sparsity of radar data
(cf. Fig. 1). Radar is more robust under different weather
conditions and is typically an order of magnitude less expensive than LiDAR [30]. Nevertheless, radar point clouds
are considerably sparser than LiDAR ones and fail to capture object shapes. These challenges lead to a lack of reliable correspondences for matching instance pairs. Objects
in radar point clouds may even exhibit deformations between frames due to the sparsity. Inferring rigid motion at
the instance level may misinterpret such abnormal deformations as motion. Moreover, even nearby objects may have
only a few reflection points (Fig. 1d), making optimizationbased methods [20, 21] ineffective.
In this work, we focus on reconciling the contradiction
between the rigid-motion assumption and the sparsity of
radar point clouds. Although rigid motion of objects under
radar is difficult to capture at the instance level, we believe
this motion rigidity still exists within the space occupied by
objects. Therefore, we aim for a higher-level scene understanding, beyond the instance level, focusing on the traffic
level to capture rigid motion hidden in the traffic context.
When estimating the scene flow, we not only consider the

Scene flow estimates displacement vectors that describe
point motion between two point cloud frames, which facilitates subsequent decision making in autonomous driving.
Early point cloud scene flow methods [22, 32] typically
extract point-level or point-patch features and then estimate
the flow by aggregating neighboring information from two
frames. Considering only point-level information can result
in points from the same object moving in different directions with varying magnitudes [21]. Recent LiDAR scene
flow methods focus on the rigid-motion assumption [12]:
objects move rigidly without deformation and a scene can
be viewed as multiple rigidly moving objects and stationary
parts. These LiDAR-based methods often begin with foreground segmentation, followed by clustering and matching
to obtain instance pairs of the same object in two frames
[14]. Then they predict the rigid motion at the instance level

26075

