This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMOne: Representing Multiple Modalities in One Scene
Zhifeng Gu
Bing Wang†
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
zhifeng.gu@connect.polyu.hk, bingwang@polyu.edu.hk

…

MMOne
…

RGB

Thermal

Language

Figure 1. MMOne Overview. MMOne is a general framework designed to represent multiple modalities in one scene. By disentangling
multimodal information based on the inherent differences among modalities, we achieve enhanced performance across all modalities.

Abstract

environment [46]. Scene representation is a fundamental
cognitive tool for humans to comprehend the world and is
crucial for spatial cognition [9, 17]. Integrating information
from different modalities into a multimodal scene representation enables better comprehension of the physical world,
especially in complex environments [7, 52].
Scene representation has evolved from explicit representations [13] to implicit representations [42], owing
to their flexibility in geometry and appearance modeling
through continuous parameterization. Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [27, 44] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
[19] have demonstrated significant potential in various realworld applications, such as autonomous driving [50, 54]
and robotic manipulation [41], due to their capabilities for
high-fidelity scene reconstruction and real-time rendering.
Beyond RGB, modalities such as language [20, 23, 34,
40, 53] and thermal [15, 25] have been incorporated into
scene representation. Current works typically employ additional feature vectors to model modality-specific properties
and render these modalities similarly to RGB. Follow-up
studies incorporate modality-specific designs, such as learning distinctive features [30, 48], to improve the modality
representation ability. However, these approaches are limited to specific modalities and do not address the fundamental differences among different modalities. More critically,
they use the same set of Gaussians to represent all modalities, which contradicts the varying levels of granularity of
different modalities. These factors motivate us to consider
a core problem: how to address the essential differences
among modalities when representing multiple modalities simultaneously? This is inherently challenging as different
modalities exhibit distinct properties and granularities.

Humans perceive the world through multimodal cues
to understand and interact with the environment. Learning a scene representation for multiple modalities enhances
comprehension of the physical world. However, modality conflicts, arising from inherent distinctions among different modalities, present two critical challenges: property disparity and granularity disparity. To address these
challenges, we propose a general framework, MMOne, to
represent multiple modalities in one scene, which can be
readily extended to additional modalities. Specifically, a
modality modeling module with a novel modality indicator
is proposed to capture the unique properties of each modality. Additionally, we design a multimodal decomposition
mechanism to separate multi-modal Gaussians into singlemodal Gaussians based on modality differences. We address the essential distinctions among modalities by disentangling multimodal information into shared and modalityspecific components, resulting in a more compact and efficient multimodal scene representation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method consistently enhances
the representation capability for each modality and is scalable to additional modalities. The code is available at
https://github.com/Neal2020GitHub/MMOne.

1. Introduction
The 3D physical world inherently comprises multiple
modalities, such as vision, thermal, and language. Humans
perceive these modalities to understand and interact with the
† : Corresponding author.

1088

