This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Analyzing Fine-tuning Representation Shift for Multimodal LLMs Steering
Pegah Khayatan⋆1
1

Mustafa Shukor⋆1

Jayneel Parekh⋆1

ISIR, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France

Abstract

Arnaud Dapogny1
2

Matthieu Cord1,2

Valeo.ai, Paris, France

tational cost of training these models, recent research has
proposed more efficient approaches, such as creating diverse,
high-quality instruction-tuning datasets [39] or keeping the
LLM frozen and fine-tuning small amounts of parameters,
like the connector [41, 57, 58, 67]. These approaches take
advantage of the ability of frozen LLMs to generalize to
multimodal data [56]. Despite the different efficient tuning
methods, training these models still incurs significant costs.
While substantial progress has been made in developing
high-performing MLLMs, relatively few studies aim to understand them [4, 47, 55, 56, 59, 61, 73]. Existing work
typically conducts post-hoc analyses of MLLMs in isolation, overlooking the internal changes due to fine-tuning.
Research by [56] addresses this gap to some extent by examining the internal multimodal alignment as it evolves during
training.
In this work, we apply concept-level analysis to provide a
readable understanding of MLLM behavior and, in particular,
semantic dynamics that may occur due to fine-tuning, or due
to covariate shift when considering different datasets.
In the first case, we find that fine-tuning on a specific
task potentially reshapes learned latent concepts, with some
adjusting subtly to align with the task, and others emerging
or disappearing altogether (see Fig. 1). Notably, we find
that most fine-tuned concepts can be reconstructed from the
original model by translating its original concepts in the
direction of specific concept shift vectors, reducing the need
for additional training and its associated costs. Furthermore,
we explore the implications of the proposed analysis for
MLLMs steering, demonstrating how model outputs can be
modified inexpensively without additional training. Our key
findings are summarized as follows:
• We apply latent concept-level analysis to provide readable
understanding on MLLMs’ behavior ; in particular, we
show that fine-tuning can introduce significant alteration
in the original concepts.
• We show that we can control the MLLM’s behavior w.r.t.
certain concepts by simply manipulating shift vectors.
• Lastly, our findings also have direct applications for steering MLLM outputs, which find use for model debiasing
as well as safety control.

Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) have reached remarkable levels
of proficiency in understanding multimodal inputs. However,
understanding and interpreting the behavior of such complex
models is a challenging task, not to mention the dynamic
shifts that may occur during fine-tuning, or due to covariate
shift between datasets. In this work, we apply concept-level
analysis towards MLLM understanding. More specifically,
we propose to map hidden states to interpretable visual
and textual concepts. This enables us to more efficiently
compare certain semantic dynamics, such as the shift from an
original and fine-tuned model, revealing concept alteration
and potential biases that may occur during fine-tuning. We
also demonstrate the use of shift vectors to capture these
concepts changes. These shift vectors allow us to recover
fine-tuned concepts by applying simple, computationally
inexpensive additive concept shifts in the original model.
Finally, our findings also have direct applications for MLLM
steering, which can be used for model debiasing as well as
enforcing safety in MLLM output. All in all, we propose
a novel, training-free, ready-to-use framework for MLLM
behavior interpretability and control. Our implementation
is publicly available. 1

1. Introduction
With the rapid progress in Large Language Models (LLMs)
[7, 10, 28, 44, 65], Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) [3, 12, 34,
39, 61] have recently demonstrated remarkable capabilities
in addressing complex multimodal tasks such as image captioning and visual question-answering.
MLLMs are typically composed of a visual encoder, an
LLM, and a connector. Following initial unimodal pretraining—and, in many cases, multimodal pretraining on large
datasets—these models can be further specialized by training on multimodal datasets [1, 33]. Given the high compu⋆ First authors
1 Project page and code: https://pegah- kh.github.io/
projects/lmm-finetuning-analysis-and-steering/

2206

