This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking Multimodal CoT Reward Model Stepwise by Visual Program
Minghe Gao1,2 ,* Xuqi Liu1 ,* Zhongqi Yue3,4 ,* Yang Wu5 , Shuang Chen1
Juncheng Li1†, Siliang Tang1 , Fei Wu1 , Tat-Seng Chua2 , Yueting Zhuang1
1
3

Zhejiang University

2

Chalmers University of Technology

4

National University of Singapore

Nanyang Technological University

5

Ant Group

{minghegao,xuchee,3220105511,junchengli,siliang,wufei,yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn
zhongqi@chalmers.se, wy306396@antgroup.com, chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg

Query：
What is the color of birds in sky?

Abstract

1There are many birds in the picture.

Recent advancements in reward signal usage for Large
Language Models (LLMs) are remarkable. However, significant challenges exist when transitioning reward signal
to the multimodal domain, including labor-intensive annotations, over-reliance on one-step rewards, and inadequate
evaluation. To address these issues, we propose SVIP,
a novel approach to train a step-level multi-dimensional
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reward model automatically. It
generates code for solving visual tasks and transforms the
analysis of code blocks into the evaluation of CoT step as
training samples. Then, we train SVIP-Reward model
using a multi-head attention mechanism called TriAtt-CoT.
The advantages of SVIP-Reward are evident throughout
the entire process of MLLM. We also introduce a benchmark
for CoT reward model training and testing. Experimental
results demonstrate that SVIP-Reward improves MLLM
performance across training and inference-time scaling,
yielding better results on benchmarks while reducing hallucinations and enhancing reasoning ability.

MLLM

2A bird is on the top-left of the image.
3And several white doves on a pine.
4So the answer is white.

One-step Single-d
imension
al

Existing Reward Model:

According to the given picture and answer,
the bird in the sky is white, so the answer is correct.

SVIP-Reward:

Relevance

Logic

Multi-ste Multi-dim
p
ensional
Attribute

Step1:
Step2:
Step3:
Step4:
Although the answer is correct, after analysis, the second step of
is irrelevant to the problem, and there is an attribute error in the
third step, so the answer is logically unreliable.

Figure 1. Existing reward models lack step-level multidimensional
evaluation, while SVIP offers it in three dimensions per step.

the Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) domain
could similarly enhance their performance.
However, compared to established practices in LLMs,
implementing reward signals in MLLMs has challenges:
1) Labor-intensive and non-scalable annotation: Manually generating CoT, along with human evaluations or
template-based assessment [37] for reward signals are unfeasible due to their high labor intensity and lack of scalability, particularly more costly in the multimodal domain.
2) Over reliance on one-step reward: Models like R1 [6]
mainly target tasks (e.g., mathematical or coding problems) with a single, unique outcome, using the final result as the sole output reward signal. This narrowly defined approach neglects supervision for intermediate steps.
3) Single-dimensional and inadequate evaluation: Current CoT evaluation scores from reward models are onedimensional [19, 38, 44]. Such frameworks risk overfitting
to correctness or preference and neglecting other critical dimensions in tasks that require more than mere accuracy.

1. Introduction
Recent research indicates that rather than allocating extra computational resources to pre-training, it is more effective to utilize reward signals to enhance LLM reasoning performance during test/inference-time scaling or posttraining phases [22, 31, 34, 36, 39]. For instance, OpenAI’s
o1 [27] introduces inference-time scaling that selects the
most promising candidate during inference based on the reward model’s score. Deepseek-R1 [6] adopts a rule-based
reward system to facilitate reinforcement learning. Given
the critical role of the reward signals in improving reasoning capabilities, extending this advantageous mechanism to
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1718

