This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DATA: Domain-And-Time Alignment for High-Quality Feature Fusion in
Collaborative Perception
Chengchang Tian1* , Jianwei Ma1* , Yan Huang1† , Zhanye Chen1† , Honghao Wei2 , Hui Zhang1 , Wei Hong1
1
Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA
{chengchang tian, jianwei ma, yan huang, chenzhanye, huizhang, weihong}@seu.edu.cn
honghao.wei@wsu.edu

Abstract
Feature-level fusion shows promise in collaborative perception (CP) through balanced performance and communication bandwidth trade-off. However, its effectiveness critically relies on input feature quality. The acquisition of
high-quality features faces domain gaps from hardware diversity and deployment conditions, alongside temporal misalignment from transmission delays. These challenges degrade feature quality with cumulative effects throughout
the collaborative network. In this paper, we present the
Domain-And-Time Alignment (DATA) network, designed
to systematically align features while maximizing their semantic representations for fusion. Specifically, we propose a Consistency-preserving Domain Alignment Module
(CDAM) that reduces domain gaps through proximal-region
hierarchical downsampling and observability-constrained
discriminator. We further propose a Progressive Temporal Alignment Module (PTAM) to handle transmission delays via multi-scale motion modeling and two-stage compensation. Building upon the aligned features, an Instancefocused Feature Aggregation Module (IFAM) is developed
to enhance semantic representations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DATA achieves state-of-the-art performance on three typical datasets, maintaining robustness with severe communication delays and pose errors.
The code will be released at https://github.com/
ChengchangTian/DATA.

1. Introduction
Collaborative perception (CP) [2, 6, 19] has emerged as
a crucial solution to overcome the inherent limitations of
single-agent perception [27, 32], such as limited perception range and occluded areas. By enabling multiple agents
1∗ Equal contribution
2† Corresponding authors

Figure 1. (a) Domain gap. E.g., different structured and scattered
foreground patterns of different agents. (b) Temporal Misalignment.
E.g., communication latency in the collaboration process and the followed observation misalignment between agents.

to share their own perceptual information, CP facilitates a
more comprehensive understanding of surroundings.
For CP, intermediate fusion [10, 17, 20, 21, 26, 31, 35],
which operates at the feature level for information sharing
and integration, has been extensively studied due to its balanced trade-off between perception performance and communication bandwidth. However, it is difficult to maintain
high-quality input features for fusion. In real-world deployments, obtaining high-quality features during the feature acquisition phase is fraught with significant challenges
[34]. Hardware heterogeneity [16, 18, 31, 38] (e.g., LiDARs
with varying numbers of laser beams and diverse modes for
acquiring point clouds) and differences in agent conditions
(e.g., sensor mounting heights and angles) result in distinct
data distributions among agents. This divergence in data
among agents creates a domain gap in CP, as illustrated in
Figure 1(a). Furthermore, temporal delays [14, 27, 28, 39]
are introduced during communication transmission between
agents, as illustrated in Figure 1(b), causing the features of

28643

