This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decouple to Reconstruct: High Quality UHD Restoration via Active Feature
Disentanglement and Reversible Fusion
Yidi Liu1 , DongLi1† , Yuxin Ma1 , Jie Huang1 ,Wenlong Zhang2† , Xueyang Fu1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
liuyidi2023@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dongli6@mail.ustc.edu.cn

†

Corresponding Author

Abstract
Ultra-high-definition (UHD) image restoration often
faces computational bottlenecks and information loss due
to its extremely high resolution. Existing studies based on
Variational Autoencoders (VAE) improve efficiency by transferring the image restoration process from pixel space to
latent space. However, degraded components are inherently
coupled with background elements in degraded images, both
information loss during compression and information gain
during compensation remain uncontrollable. These lead to
restored images often exhibiting image detail loss and incomplete degradation removal. To address this issue, we
propose a Controlled Differential Disentangled VAE, which
utilizes Hierarchical Contrastive Disentanglement Learning
and an Orthogonal Gated Projection Module to guide the
VAE to actively discard easily recoverable background information while encoding more difficult-to-recover degraded
information into the latent space. Additionally, we design
a Complex Invertible Multiscale Fusion Network to handle background features, ensuring their consistency, and
utilize a latent space restoration network to transform the degraded latent features, leading to more accurate restoration
results. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our
method effectively alleviates the information loss problem in
VAE models while ensuring computational efficiency, significantly improving the quality of UHD image restoration, and
achieves state-of-the-art results in six UHD restoration tasks
with only 1M parameters. Our code will be available here.

Figure 1. (a) Previous methods based on VAE suffered from irreversible background information loss due to global compression
of the input image. Although additional High Frequency Injection
(HFI) can partially mitigate the loss of high-frequency details, it
also leads to residual high-frequency degradation. (b) Our proposed CD²-VAE decouples background and degradation features
and achieves a balance between background consistency and low
residual degradation through a dual-path reconstruction structure.
(c) As the number of parameters in the VAE model increases, the
reconstruction capability improves, leading to better restoration
results. However, the excessive parameter count does not meet the
lightweight requirements for UHD image restoration.

1. Introduction

cessing, previous methods generally place the core restoration computation in the downsampled space of the original
image. UHDFour [15] and UHDformer [27] reduce the
spatial dimension of the original input through PixelUnshuffle [22] and convolution operations, while LMAR [34]
designs a learning-based resampling operator. Clearly, the
dimensionality reduction process leads to the loss of most
of the information in the original image. Therefore, these
methods often use a more lightweight network to process
the image at its original resolution, thereby compensating
for the information lost in the downsampling branch. DreamUHD [18] develops a VAE framework that outperforms

With the widespread adoption of 4K display devices, ultrahigh-definition (UHD) image restoration has become a key
challenge in the field of computer vision. Traditional pixellevel processing methods are limited by the high-resolution
characteristics of UHD images, resulting in significant computational bottlenecks [4, 17, 18, 27, 29, 36, 39, 41]
To alleviate the computational burden of UHD image pro-

11622

