This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Statistical Confidence Rescoring for Robust 3D Scene Graph Generation from
Multi-View Images
Qi Xun Yeo Yanyan Li Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{qixunyeo,yan.li,gimhee.lee}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
wall

Modern 3D semantic scene graph estimation methods
utilize ground truth 3D annotations to accurately predict
target objects, predicates, and relationships. In the absence
of given 3D ground truth representations, we explore leveraging only multi-view RGB images to tackle this task. To attain robust features for accurate scene graph estimation, we
must overcome the noisy reconstructed pseudo point-based
geometry from predicted depth maps and reduce the amount
of background noise present in multi-view image features.
The key is to enrich node and edge features with accurate semantic and spatial information and through neighboring relations. We obtain semantic masks to guide feature aggregation to filter background features and design
a novel method to incorporate neighboring node information to aid robustness of our scene graph estimates. Furthermore, we leverage on explicit statistical priors calculated from the training summary statistics to refine node
and edge predictions based on their one-hop neighborhood.
Our experiments show that our method outperforms current
methods purely using multi-view images as the initial input. Our project page is available at https://qixun1.
github.io/projects/SCRSSG.

aggregate
Model

other
wall
floor

Bounding Boxes

Background: >20%

wall
aggregate

Background: <1%

Model

chair
wall
floor

Segmentation Masks

Figure 1. Existing multi-view RGB methods aggregate features
using bounding boxes, introducing background noise that hinders
accuracy. We use pretrained segmentation masks reduce this interference and thus improving prediction accuracy.

1. Introduction

ships that extend beyond the visible image plane, allowing
a holistic understanding of complex environments.
Many approaches [1, 28, 29] rely on ground-truth 3D
LiDAR point clouds as input. However, LiDAR sensors
are resource-intensive and lack inherent semantic richness.
Recent works [31, 32] have shifted toward using semantically rich multi-view RGB images, which offer a balance
between computational efficiency and improved semantic
fidelity. Although point cloud-based methods remain valuable for capturing geometric information, our approach focuses on leveraging multi-view RGB images. By incorporating pretrained depth estimators, we generate pseudo
point-based geometry to estimate the 3D semantic scene
graph, reducing reliance on LiDAR while preserving spatial and structural details.
A key challenge in using only multi-view RGB images
is ensuring that node features remain free from distractors.
As shown in Fig. 1, prior approaches that rely on entity
detectors to extract 2D bounding box proposals or regions
of interest often fail to guarantee robustness since distrac-

The semantic scene graph (SSG) is a crucial intermediate
representation that enhances higher-level scene understanding. It plays a key role in tasks such as image captioning
[17, 34, 37], image retrieval [13, 22, 23, 38], image editing
[3, 5, 43], and medical applications [7, 12, 15, 20, 39] by
capturing both semantic and, more importantly, relational
information between objects and their surroundings. Initially developed for 2D images, SSG has since expanded to
the 3D domain [6, 9, 19]. 3D scene graphs provide a highlevel representation of an entire 3D scene using inputs such
as multi-view RGB images or LiDAR point clouds. Unlike their 2D counterparts, they incorporate spatial relation-

24999

