This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pretend Benign: A Stealthy Adversarial Attack by Exploiting Vulnerabilities
in Cooperative Perception
Hongwei Lin1 Dongyu Pan1 Qiming Xia1 Hai Wu1,2
Cheng Wang1 Siqi Shen1 Chenglu Wen1 *
1
Xiamen University 2 Pengcheng Laboratory
Abstract
Recently, learning-based multi-agent cooperative perception has garnered widespread attention. However, the inherent vulnerabilities of neural networks, combined with
the risks posed by cooperative communication as a wideopen backdoor, render these systems highly susceptible to
adversarial attacks. Existing attack methods lack stealth as
they perturb transmitted information indiscriminately, producing numerous false positives that are readily detected
by consensus-based defenses. This paper proposes Pretend
Benign (PB), a novel stealthy adversarial attack method
that exploits vulnerabilities in cooperative perception to enable the attacker to disguise as a benign cooperator. To
achieve this, we ﬁrst introduce the Attack Region Selection
(ARS) module, which divides the perception area into subregions based on conﬁdence levels to pinpoint optimal attack locations. Then, we propose Multi-target Adversarial
Perturbation Generation (MAPG), which maintains consensus, gain the victim’s trust, and thereby reverse the normal
cooperative role of perception. To mitigate the latency in
adversarial signal generation and communication, we further propose a real-time attack by predicting future information through historical feature ﬂow. Extensive experiments on the OPV2V and V2XSet datasets demonstrate that
PB effectively bypasses state-of-the-art defense methods,
underscoring its stealth and efﬁcacy.

1. Introduction
Cooperative perception integrates complementary viewpoints from multiple agents to achieve a more comprehensive environmental perception [11, 14, 16, 32, 33], effectively mitigating the limitations of single-agent perception [7, 12, 28, 29, 34] caused by occlusion and long-range
sensing constraints [6, 23]. However, as existing perception systems are predominantly based on learning-based
networks, they are inherently vulnerable to adversarial at* Corresponding author.

Fusion

(a)
Ego

Comprehensive
Perception
Correct

Reaching
Consensus

Defense

Benign Agent
Fusion

(b)
Ego

Bad
Perception
Distort
Reaching
Consensus

Defense
Attacker

Tamper

High-confidence correct

High-confidence incorrect

Consensus

Remove

Low-confidence correct

Low-confidence incorrect

Enhance

Supplement

Figure 1. (a) Cooperative perception mechanism in operation. (b)
Attacks exploiting vulnerabilities in cooperative perception mechanisms.

tacks [5, 24]. In particular, during inter-agent information
sharing, even minor adversarial perturbations will signiﬁcantly degrade perception performance, compromising system security and reliability [3, 4, 31]. Therefore, enhancing the adversarial robustness of cooperative perception systems is crucial.
Recent studies have explored adversarial attacks and defenses in cooperative perception, primarily focusing on 3D
object detection. Existing attack methods degrade detection accuracy by indiscriminately adding perturbations to
transmitted information. However, such methods generate
numerous false positives, signiﬁcantly compromising the
stealthiness of attacks [13, 25] (see Fig. 2). These limitations allow current defense strategies [17, 40] to effectively detect and counteract them. Therefore, further exploration of stealthier attack strategies is essential for enhancing the robustness of cooperative perception systems,
enabling them to withstand challenging scenarios.
To design a stealthy adversarial attack in cooperative
perception, a thorough analysis of cooperative perception
mechanisms and existing defenses is required. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), differences in position and viewpoint

19947

