This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DOGR: Towards Versatile Visual Document Grounding and Referring
Yinan Zhou1,2,3∗ , Yuxin Chen2∗† , Haokun Lin2,3,4 , Yichen Wu3,5 ,
Shuyu Yang1 , Zhongang Qi6‡ , Chen Ma3‡ , and Li Zhu1‡
1

4

Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 City University of Hongkong
Institute of Automation, CAS 5 Harvard University 6 vivo Mobile Communication Co.
∗

Equal Contribution

†

Project lead

‡

Corresponding authors

Figure 1. We propose DOGR, a multi-modal large language model that enables users to engage in versatile grounded document interactions.
The figure illustrates the reasoning results of DOGR for grounding, grounding-and-referring, and referring tasks in DOGR-Bench.

Abstract

instruction-tuning data to activate MLLMs’ grounding and
referring capabilities in dialogue and reasoning. Using
the DOGR-Engine, we construct DOGR-Bench, a benchmark covering seven grounding and referring tasks across
three document types (chart, poster, and PDF document),
offering a comprehensive evaluation of fine-grained document understanding. Leveraging the generated data, we
further develop DOGR, a strong baseline model that excels
in text localization and recognition, while precisely grounds
and refers to key textual information during conversation
and reasoning, thereby advancing document understanding to a finer granularity and enable flexible interaction
paradigms. Our code, data, and model are open-sourced
at https://github.com/zyinan99/DOGR.

With recent advances in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), grounding and referring capabilities have
gained increasing attention for achieving detailed understanding and flexible user interaction. However, these capabilities still remain underdeveloped in visual document
understanding due to the scarcity of fine-grained datasets
and comprehensive benchmarks. To fill this gap, we propose the DOcument Grounding and Referring data engine
(DOGR-Engine), which generates two types of high-quality
fine-grained document data: (1) multi-granular parsing
data to improve text localization and recognition, and (2)
Work is done during internship at Tencent.

3596

