This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Trial-Oriented Visual Rearrangement
Yuyi Liu1,2 , Xinhang Song1,2 ,* Tianliang Qi1,2 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

{yuyi.liu, xinhang.song, tianliang.qi}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

world scenarios, changes in objects exhibit considerable diversity, primarily categorized into three types, movement,
appearance and existence changes, which together constitute the inherent complexity of visual rearrangement, as
shown in Fig.1(a)
Recent works can be divided into end-to-end reinforcement learning methods and modular methods. Reinforcement learning methods [11, 35] try to leverage a lot of experience in training and memorize the environment states in
parametric mapping mechanism. However, due to the limitations of model parameters and training data, the end-toend RL methods struggle to handle such difficult task with
excessive complexity of state space. Alternatively, modular methods seek to partition the task into perception and
planning modules, which construct and compare the explicit scene graphs of two environment states to infer rearrangement goals. While achieving reasonable performance
on addressing movement changes, the modular methods
encounter challenges to handle appearance and existence
changes in a unified manner. The underlying reason lies in
the highly heterogeneous nature of the inference spaces for
movement, appearance, and existence changes. Integrating
these factors within a unified reasoning framework can result in explosive inference complexity, thereby reducing the
confidence in decision-making. If decoupled, each change
form would require a individual module, reducing overall
re-usability.
To address this issue, our motivation is to prune the joint
reasoning space and identify a smaller shared space for unified processing various object changes. Traditional pruning methods typically impose prior distributions on the reasoning space. Specifically, for embodied agents performing tasks in real-world physical environments, their prior
knowledge inherently includes various physical laws. Although a fully accurate world model adhering to all physical laws has yet to emerge, every action taken by an embodied agent inherently complies with these laws. Therefore,
we can leverage the continuous interactions with environment of the embodied agent to directly prune search spaces
that violate physical principles. Besides, as illustrated in

Towards visual room rearrangement for embodied agents,
this paper tackles the intricate challenge of restoring a disarrayed scene configuration to its intended goal state. The
task necessitates a range of sophisticated capabilities, including efficient spatial navigation, precise and accurate
object interaction, sensitive scene change detection, and
meticulous restoration techniques. The inherent complexity
of this endeavor stems from the diverse nature of potential
object changes, encompassing movements within the space,
alterations in appearance, and changes in existence—where
objects may be introduced or removed from the scene. Previous methods, either end-to-end reinforcement learning or
modular approaches, struggle with handling these changes
in a unified manner due to the heterogeneous nature of
the inference spaces. To address this, this paper proposes
a Trial-Oriented Visual Rearrangement (TOR) framework,
which leverages the principles of stronger embodiment to
prune the joint reasoning space and identify a smaller
shared space for processing various object changes. TOR
maintains a differential point cloud representation to capture environmental changes and uses two core mechanisms,
assessment and trial, to iteratively restore the scene to the
goal state. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of TOR in restoring both object movement and appearance changes and show its generalization to complex multiroom environments.

1. Introduction
Visual room rearrangement remains a core challenge for
embodied agents, whose goal is to recover a shuffled scene
configuration to the goal state. This task demands a wide
range of capabilities from the agent, including foundational
skills such as efficient navigation and accurate interaction
with objects. However, the principal challenge lies in scene
change detection and scene change restoration. In real* Corresponding authors

8022

