This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Mamba Decoder with Bidirectional Interaction in Multi-Task Dense
Prediction
Mang Cao1

Sanping Zhou1 * Yizhe Li1

Ye Deng2

Wenli Huang3

Le Wang1

1

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
3
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Ningbo University of Technology
3298592685@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, spzhou@xjtu.edu.cn

⭐ Fusion

Abstract

⭐

⭐

⭐

...

...

Sufficient cross-task interaction is crucial for success in
multi-task dense prediction. However, sufficient interaction often results in high computational complexity, forcing
existing methods to face the trade-off between interaction
completeness and computational efficiency. To address this
limitation, this work proposes a Bidirectional Interaction
Mamba (BIM), which incorporates novel scanning mechanisms to adapt the Mamba modeling approach for multitask dense prediction. On the one hand, we introduce a
novel Bidirectional Interaction Scan (BI-Scan) mechanism,
which constructs task-specific representations as bidirectional sequences during interaction. By integrating taskfirst and position-first scanning modes within a unified linear complexity architecture, BI-Scan efficiently preserves
critical cross-task information. On the other hand, we employ a Multi-Scale Scan (MS-Scan) mechanism to achieve
multi-granularity scene modeling. This design not only
meets the diverse granularity requirements of various tasks
but also enhances nuanced cross-task feature interactions.
Extensive experiments on two challenging benchmarks, i.e.,
NYUD-V2 and PASCAL-Context, show the superiority of
our BIM vs its state-of-the-art competitors. Codes are available online: https://github.com/mmm-cc/BIM_
for_MTL.

Interaction Information

⭐

⭐

/

Task-Share/Specific Feature

⭐

⭐

⭐

⭐

Scan

Information Integrity √
Intercation Complexity: O(n2)

Information Integrity ×
Intercation Complexity: O(n)

Information Integrity √
Intercation Complexity: O(n)

(a) Pair-Wise

(b) Bridge Representation

(c) Cross-Task Scan (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of different cross-task interaction strategies.
(a) Pair-Wise [8, 28, 31]: each task can access the complete information of other tasks, while the interaction complexity is O(n2 ).
(b) Bridge Representation [1, 16, 24, 39]: the interaction complexity is O(n), yet, each task is limited to accessing only a partial
subset of information from other tasks during interaction, which
inevitably results in the loss of valuable details. (c) Ours CrossTask Scan: It preserves the integrity of task information during
interaction, with an interaction complexity of O(n).

1. Introduction

tion, surface normal estimation, and saliency detection. Existing approaches made mainly efforts [5, 30] to refine taskgeneral representations, obtained from the encoder, into
task-specific representations. In these approaches, crosstask interaction has been proven to be significant in multitask dense prediction [26, 31, 35, 39], as it can enhance the
robustness and effectiveness of task representations.
Initially, multi-task dense prediction methods primarily
utilized Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with pairwise interactions, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). These networks [8, 28, 31] were carefully designed with specialized

Multi-task dense prediction is a critical visual task designed to simultaneously predict outputs for various pixellevel tasks, such as semantic segmentation, depth predic* Corresponding author.

18815

