This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ClaraVid: A Holistic Scene Reconstruction Benchmark From Aerial Perspective
With Delentropy-Based Complexity Profiling
Radu Beche
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca
Cluj-Napoca, Romania

Sergiu Nedevschi
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca
Cluj-Napoca, Romania

radu.beche@cs.utcluj.ro

sergiu.nedevschi@cs.utcluj.ro

b) High Resolution Complex Scenarios

a) Simultaneous multi viewpoint aquisition
C
B

high

mid

A

low

c) Multimodal Labels

Scene Level PCL

Dynamic Objects Mask

Semantic

Instance

Depth

Figure 1. Overview of ClaraVid: (a) Multi-viewpoint UAV acquisition: High-resolution aerial imagery is captured from multiple altitudes,
ensuring diverse perspectives. (b) High-fidelity, diverse environments: complex urban, suburban, and natural landscapes. (c) Multimodal
ground truth: Pixel-level and scene-level multimodal data for holistic scene reconstruction and semantic mapping.

Abstract
The development of aerial holistic scene understanding algorithms is hindered by the scarcity of comprehensive datasets that enable both semantic and geometric reconstruction. While synthetic datasets offer an alternative,
existing options exhibit task-specific limitations, unrealistic scene compositions, and rendering artifacts that compromise real-world applicability. We introduce ClaraVid,
a synthetic aerial dataset specifically designed to overcome these limitations. Comprising 16,917 high-resolution
images captured at 4032×3024 from multiple viewpoints
across diverse landscapes, ClaraVid provides dense depth
maps, panoptic segmentation, sparse point clouds, and dy-

namic object masks, while mitigating common rendering
artifacts. To further advance neural reconstruction, we introduce the Delentropic Scene Profile (DSP), a novel complexity metric derived from differential entropy analysis,
designed to quantitatively assess scene difficulty and inform reconstruction tasks. Utilizing DSP, we systematically
benchmark neural reconstruction methods, uncovering a
consistent, measurable correlation between scene complexity and reconstruction accuracy. Empirical results indicate
that higher delentropy strongly correlates with increased reconstruction errors, validating DSP as a reliable complexity
prior. The data and code are available on the project page:
rdbch.github.com/claravid.

26015

