This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SG-LDM: Semantic-Guided LiDAR Generation via Latent-Aligned Diffusion
Zhengkang Xiang

Zizhao Li Amir Khodabandeh
The University of Melbourne

Kourosh Khoshelham

https://github.com/YiGuYT/SG-LDM

Figure 1. Quantitative comparison of our model and LiDM [45] on semantic-to-lidar conditional generation. Both models are trained on
SemanticKITTI. Our approach achieves an improvement of 81% in FRID score on the SemanticKITTI validation set and demonstrates
robust generalization, yielding a 36% FRID improvement on the SynLiDAR dataset.

Abstract
Lidar point cloud synthesis based on generative models offers a promising solution to augment deep learning
pipelines, particularly when real-world data is scarce or
lacks diversity. By enabling flexible object manipulation,
this synthesis approach can significantly enrich training
datasets and enhance discriminative models. However, existing methods focus on unconditional lidar point cloud
generation, overlooking their potential for real-world applications. In this paper, we propose SG-LDM, a SemanticGuided Lidar Diffusion Model that employs latent alignment to enable robust semantic-to-lidar synthesis. By directly operating in the native lidar space and leveraging
explicit semantic conditioning, SG-LDM achieves state-ofthe-art performance in generating high-fidelity lidar point
clouds guided by semantic labels. Moreover, we propose
the first diffusion-based lidar translation framework based
on SG-LDM, which enables cross-domain translation as a
domain adaptation strategy to enhance downstream perception performance. Systematic experiments demonstrate that
SG-LDM significantly outperforms existing lidar diffusion

models and the proposed lidar translation framework further improves data augmentation performance in the downstream lidar segmentation task.

1. Introduction

24965

Lidar has clear advantages over RGB cameras in driving
scene perception, including geometric accuracy and robustness to poor visibility and weather conditions. However,
learning-based lidar perception systems require large-scale
annotated datasets [23, 24, 62–64, 74], and manually assigning semantic labels or bounding boxes to each point
(or cluster of points) is time-consuming and far more onerous than annotating 2D images. Additionally, existing realworld lidar datasets are naturally imbalanced, i.e., common classes like roads, buildings, and vehicles dominate the
point clouds, while important but rarer classes (e.g. pedestrians, cyclists, traffic signs) are underrepresented [3, 6].
This imbalance can bias learning algorithms, which tend to
be overly tuned to frequent classes and struggle with minority classes. Due to these, models trained exclusively on realworld datasets suffer from biases and generalization gaps.
To mitigate data scarcity and imbalance, leveraging syn-

