This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Heavy Labels Out! Dataset Distillation with Label Space Lightening
Ruonan Yu, Songhua Liu, Zigeng Chen, Jingwen Ye, Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
{ruonan,songhua.liu,zigeng99,}@u.nus.edu, {jingweny,xinchao}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

instance, it has been demonstrated that a network trained
with merely 1 synthetic image per class (IPC) can perform
well on CIFAR-10 [12]. However, with such a high compression ratio, it is challenging for the distilled sets to encapsulate the whole knowledge of the original dataset used
for training in a very limited space. Thus, classic methods
in this field like [32, 39–41] still have a significant performance gap between the original set and the synthetic one,
especially when handling large-scale datasets [35].

Dataset distillation or condensation aims to condense a
large-scale training dataset into a much smaller synthetic
one such that the training performance of distilled and original sets on neural networks are similar. Although the number of training samples can be reduced substantially, current state-of-the-art methods heavily rely on enormous soft
labels to achieve satisfactory performance. As a result,
the required storage can be comparable even to original
datasets, especially for large-scale ones. To solve this problem, instead of storing these heavy labels, we propose a
novel label-lightening framework termed HeLlO aiming at
effective image-to-label projectors, with which synthetic labels can be directly generated online from synthetic images.
Specifically, to construct such projectors, we leverage prior
knowledge in open-source foundation models, e.g., CLIP,
and introduce a LoRA-like fine-tuning strategy to mitigate
the gap between pre-trained and target distributions, so that
original models for soft-label generation can be distilled
into a group of low-rank matrices. Moreover, an effective
image optimization method is proposed to further mitigate
the potential error between the original and distilled label
generators. Extensive experiments show that our method
significantly reduces the storage cost to merely 0.001%
compared to full soft-label storage methods while achieving comparable performance to state-of-the-art dataset distillation methods on large-scale datasets. Our codes are
available at https://github.com/Lexie-YU/HeLlO.

To compensate for such dramatic information loss, recent state-of-the-art dataset distillation methods [25, 28, 34]
turn to data augmentation, to make the best use of the
limited synthetic data. Specifically, strategies such as
Mixup [37] and Cutmix [36] are applied in downstream network training, which effectively enhance the performance
of distilled datasets and scale dataset distillation up to larger
and more complex datasets like ImageNet [6].
Nevertheless, these recent works heavily rely on soft labels generated by a pre-trained teacher model on the original dataset. According to RDED [28], networks trained
with 10 IPC on ImageNet-1k achieve only 15.2% accuracy
with categorical hard labels, compared to 42.1% with soft
labels. Since each augmented sample corresponds to a distinct soft label, as shown in Fig. 1 (left), there are a number
of generated soft labels that far exceeds the basic synthetic
samples. Consequently, storage costs for these soft labels
are non-negligible, especially for large-scale datasets with
numerous categories. For example, on ImageNet-1K with 1
IPC, the required storage for distilled images is ∼ 15 MB,
whereas the storage for soft labels exceeds 572 MB—more
than 38 times greater. Furthermore, with 200 IPC, the storage required for soft labels reaches 110 GB, making it even
comparable to the original dataset size.

1. Introduction
Dataset distillation [32] is proposed to deal with the issues caused by large-scale datasets, e.g., high computational overhead for training and heavy burden for storage
and transmission. It aims to condense a large dataset into
a much smaller synthetic one, which preserves the original
training performance, so that it can serve as an effective and
efficient surrogate to train downstream neural networks. For

To address the issue of such heavy labels, we propose
a novel label-lightening framework termed Heavy Labels
Out, or HeLlO in short. Fig. 1 (right) illustrates the overall
framework of the proposed HeLlO. By creating an effective
and lightweight projector from the image to the label space,
it reduces the required storage significantly. Specifically,
we build the projector upon recent foundation models like
CLIP [21] that has been pre-trained on massive data and

* Corresponding author.

5017

