This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BlueNeg: A 35mm Negative Film Dataset for Restoring
Channel-Heterogeneous Deterioration
Hanyuan Liu1 Chengze Li2 Minshan Xie4 Zhenni Wang3
Jiawen Liang1 Chi-Sing Leung1, * Tien-Tsin Wong5
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Saint Francis University 3 Huawei Technologies Ltd
4
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence 5 Monash University
meethyliu@gmail.com, czli@sfu.edu.hk, msxie92@gmail.com, zhenni126@126.com,
jiawliang6-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, eeleungc@cityu.edu.hk, tt.wong@monash.edu

Color

R channel

G channel

B channel

Figure 1. Film negatives exhibit channel-heterogeneous deterioration, especially common on the blue channel. However, the artifact pattern
is not unique (see the above two examples), which poses a challenge in restoration. © Tien-Tsin Wong, 2025.

Abstract
While digitally acquired photographs have been dominating
since around 2000, there remains a huge amount of legacy
photographs being acquired by optical cameras and are
stored in the form of film negatives. In this paper, we address
the unique challenge of channel-heterogeneous deterioration in film negatives and introduce BlueNeg, the first highquality 35mm negative film dataset specifically designed
for restoration in this context. Our work aims to spotlight
this underexplored area of image restoration on channelheterogeneous deterioration. A key challenge in evaluating
restoration performance is the absence of ground truth, as
many negatives are already contaminated. To overcome this,
∗ Corresponding author.

13119

we utilize printed photographs from the same negatives as
proxies for quantitative assessment. These prints, while affected by spatially invariant color fading, are less affected
from channel-heterogeneous degradation. We propose a
reverse-printing process to estimate pseudo-ground truth
from the prints and introduce a dedicated evaluation protocol. Our empirical analysis shows that existing restoration
methods struggle with this dataset, highlighting the need
for specialized techniques. We hope that BlueNeg and our
evaluation framework will inspire further research in legacy
photograph restoration, contributing to the digital preservation of historical moments for archival use. Our dataset
is publicly available at https://huggingface.co/
datasets/ttgroup/blueneg-release.

