This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Registration beyond Points: General Affine Subspace
Alignment via Geodesic Distance on Grassmann Manifold
Jaeho Shin1 Hyeonjae Gil1 Junwoo Jang2 Maani Ghaffari3 Ayoung Kim1†
1
Seoul National University 2 Inha University 3 University of Michigan

Abstract

Source feature

Affine Grassmannian has been favored for expressing
proximity between lines and planes due to its theoretical
exactness in measuring distances among features. Despite
this advantage, the existing method can only measure the
proximity without yielding the distance as an explicit function of rigid body transformation. Thus, an optimizable distance function on the manifold has remained underdeveloped, stifling its application in registration problems. This
paper is the first to explicitly derive an optimizable cost
function between two Grassmannian features with respect
to rigid body transformation (R and t). Specifically, we
present a rigorous mathematical proof demonstrating that
the bases of high-dimensional linear subspaces can serve
as an explicit representation of the cost. Finally, we propose an optimizable cost function based on the transformed
bases that can be applied to the registration problem of
any affine subspace. Compared to vector parameter-based
approaches, our method is able to find a globally optimal solution by directly minimizing the geodesic distance
which is agnostic to representation ambiguity. The resulting cost function and its extension to the inlier-set maximizing Branch-and-Bound (BnB) solver have been demonstrated to improve the convergence of existing solutions or
outperform them in various computer vision tasks. The code
is available on https://github.com/joomeok/
GrassmannRegistration.

Target feature

Consistent Metrics

Inconsistent Metrics

ℝ𝑚

ℳ
Antipodal parameter

Parameter-based Registration

Suboptimal Alignment

Geodesic-based Registration

Optimal Alignment

Figure 1. Comparison of parameter and geodesic-based registration. Existing methods for solving line and plane registration minimize the squared sum of distances between vectors used
to parameterize features in Euclidean space (e.g., Plücker coordinates, plane parameters). However, the sign ambiguity of vector
representations induces metric inconsistencies and suboptimality.
In contrast, as geodesic distances represented by basis span is agnostic to such ambiguity, our cost function provides the optimal
registration result.

ture with noise resilience. However, many approaches either approximate feature distances using point-based approximation [6, 29, 30] or parameterize them naively in Euclidean space [11, 21]. These approaches can reintroduce
noise sensitivity or lead to inconsistent metrics due to potential sign ambiguities (e.g., a plane’s normal vector and its
negative representing the same plane), ultimately resulting
in suboptimal registration accuracy, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Alternatively, lines and planes can be represented as
affine subspaces (defined by a linear subspace and an offset)
with their formulation on the affine Grassmannian [24, 43].
This interpretation enables a principled definition of the
Grassmann distance, a natural metric for geometric proximity that quantifies differences in orientation and position
between subspaces. While this approach eliminates issues

1. Introduction
Registration is a fundamental problem in computer vision,
SLAM, and object pose estimation [28, 34]. While deep
feature-based methods have become increasingly popular,
geometric registration remains essential for its interpretability and efficiency. Among these, 3D point-based methods
[33, 35] are widely adopted but fail to capture structural relationships and are highly sensitive to sensor noise.
To overcome these limitations, higher-order geometric
features such as lines and planes [13, 16, 22] have emerged
as a robust alternative, as they naturally encode scene struc-

3767

