This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FramePainter: Endowing Interactive Image Editing with
Video Diffusion Priors
Yabo Zhang1
1

Xinpeng Zhou1 Yihan Zeng2 Hang Xu2 Hui Li1 Wangmeng Zuo1( )
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Figure 1. Examples of FramePainter. FramePainter allows users to manipulate images through intuitive visual instructions like drawing
sketches, clicking points, and dragging regions. Benefiting from powerful video diffusion priors, it not only enables intuitive and plausible
edits in common scenarios (e.g., adjust the reflection of the cup in red box), but also exhibits exceptional generalization in out-of-domain
cases, e.g., transform the clownfish into shark-like shape.

Abstract
Interactive image editing allows users to modify images
through visual interaction operations such as drawing,
clicking, and dragging. Existing methods construct such
supervision signals from videos, as they capture how objects change with various physical interactions. However,
these models are usually built upon text-to-image diffusion
models, so they either rely on slow optimization-based inference, or necessitate (i) massive training samples and (ii)
an additional reference encoder to learn real-world dynamics and visual consistency. In this paper, we reformulate
this task as an image-to-video generation problem, so that
inherit powerful video diffusion priors to reduce training
costs and ensure temporal consistency. Specifically, we introduce FramePainter as an efficient instantiation of this
formulation. Initialized with Stable Video Diffusion, it only
uses a lightweight sparse control encoder to inject editing
signals. Considering the limitations of temporal attention

in handling large motion between two frames, we further
propose matching attention to enlarge the receptive field
while encouraging dense correspondence between edited
and source image tokens. We highlight the effectiveness
and efficiency of FramePainter across various of editing
signals: it domainantly outperforms previous state-of-theart methods with far less training data, achieving highly
seamless and coherent editing of images, e.g., automatically
adjust the reflection of the cup. Moreover, FramePainter
also exhibits exceptional generalization in scenarios not
present in real-world videos, e.g., transform the clownfish
into shark-like shape. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/YBYBZhang/FramePainter.

1. Introduction

18121

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in generating exceptional and photorealistic images from natural
language descriptions [45, 47, 48, 50]. Compared to gen-

