This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FixTalk: Taming Identity Leakage for High-Quality
Talking Head Generation in Extreme Cases
Shuai Tan, Bill Gong, Bin Ji, Ye Pan*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{tanshuai0219, whitneypanye}@sjtu.edu.cn

Mouth
GT
Driven
Audio

Identity
Source

Pose
Ours
GT

Pose
Source
Expressive Expressions

Expression Source

Extreme
Poses

Figure 1. Example animations generated by FixTalk. Given an identity source, FixTalk supports decoupled control over lip sync, head
pose, and emotional expressions from their respective sources. As presented in Tab. 4, FixTalk achieves real-time generation. In particular,
FixTalk demonstrates superior performance with high-quality rendering in extreme poses and expressive expressions.

Abstract

generation. Firstly, we propose an Enhanced Motion Indicator (EMI) to effectively decouple identity information
from motion features, mitigating the impact of IL on generated talking heads. To address RA, we introduce an Enhanced Detail Indicator (EDI), which utilizes the leaked
identity information to supplement missing details, thus fixing the artifacts. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
FixTalk effectively mitigates IL and RA, achieving superior
performance compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Talking head generation is gaining significant importance
across various domains, with a growing demand for highquality rendering. However, existing methods often suffer
from identity leakage (IL) and rendering artifacts (RA), particularly in extreme cases. Through an in-depth analysis
of previous approaches, we identify two key insights: (1)
IL arises from identity information embedded within motion features, and (2) this identity information can be leveraged to address RA. Building on these findings, this paper
introduces FixTalk, a novel framework designed to simultaneously resolve both issues for high-quality talking head

1. Introduction
Talking head generation [4, 23, 70, 98], the task of producing realistic facial animations driven by audio or other in-

* Corresponding author.

24

