This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Purification Matters: Suppressing Outlier Propagation for
Training-Free Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Shuo Jin1,2

Siyue Yu1 * Bingfeng Zhang3 Mingjie Sun4 Yi Dong2 Jimin Xiao1
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University 2 University of Liverpool
3
China University of Petroleum (East China) 4 Soochow University
{shuo.jin, yi.dong}@liverpool.ac.uk, {siyue.yu02, jimin.xiao}@xjtlu.edu.cn
bingfeng.zhang@upc.edu.cn, mjsun@suda.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Training-free open-vocabulary semantic segmentation has
advanced with vision-language models like CLIP, which exhibit strong zero-shot abilities. However, CLIP’s attention
mechanism often wrongly emphasises specific image tokens,
namely outliers, which results in irrelevant over-activation.
Existing approaches struggle with these outliers that arise
in intermediate layers and propagate through the model,
ultimately degrading spatial perception. In this paper, we
propose a Self-adaptive Feature Purifier framework (SFP)
to suppress propagated outliers and enhance semantic representations for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation.
Specifically, based on an in-depth analysis of attention responses between image and class tokens, we design a selfadaptive outlier mitigator to detect and mitigate outliers
at each layer for propagated feature purification. In addition, we introduce a semantic-aware attention enhancer
to augment attention intensity in semantically relevant regions, which strengthens the purified feature to focus on
objects. Further, we introduce a hierarchical attention integrator to aggregate multi-layer attention maps to refine
spatially coherent feature representations for final segmentation. Our proposed SFP enables robust outlier suppression and object-centric feature representation, leading to
a more precise segmentation. Extensive experiments show
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance and
surpasses existing methods by an average of 4.6% mIoU on
eight segmentation benchmarks. The code is released at:
https://github.com/Kimsure/SFP.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 1. Visualization of attention and feature maps. (a) Attention
map of the selected target object token (marked as ω). (b) Attention
map of the selected background token (marked as ω). (c) Attention
map of the class token. (d) Diagonal weights of the attention map
of each image token. (e) Detected outliers. (f) - (h) output feature
map of CLIP [38], SCLIP [45], and our SFP.

1. Introduction

like traditional semantic segmentation, OVSS must handle an open set of classes, making it more challenging. Vision-language models (VLM), such as CLIP [38],
demonstrate remarkable zero-shot performance by leveraging large-scale image-text pairs [39]. Thus, existing
approaches can be categorized into two pipelines: finetuning CLIP or training-free CLIP. Although the fine-tuning
pipeline yields superior performance, it risks overfitting
and compromises generalization [30, 43]. In contrast, the
training-free pipeline preserves CLIP’s original generalization capability without additional training, which is more
convenient and efficient.
Recent training-free methods [12, 40] have demonstrated
that in the original CLIP’s pair-wise attention maps, there
exist the same highly correlated image tokens for all input
tokens, such as those marked with the white box in Fig. 1
(a) - (b). In such a situation, regardless of whether it is the
target image token (Fig. 1 (a)), the background image to-

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) [4, 58]
seeks to partition an image into distinct regions and assign pixel-level labels to arbitrary semantic categories. Un* Corresponding author: siyue.yu02@xjtlu.edu.cn

20291

