This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Watermarking Reinvented: Enhancing Robustness and Generation
Quality with Fourier Integrity
Sung Ju Lee

Nam Ik Cho

Dept. of ECE & INMC, Seoul National University, Korea
thomas11809@snu.ac.kr, nicho@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Semantic watermarking techniques for latent diffusion models (LDMs) are robust against regeneration attacks, but often suffer from detection performance degradation due to
the loss of frequency integrity. To tackle this problem, we
propose a novel embedding method called Hermitian Symmetric Fourier Watermarking (SFW), which maintains frequency integrity by enforcing Hermitian symmetry. Additionally, we introduce a center-aware embedding strategy that reduces the vulnerability of semantic watermarking due to cropping attacks by ensuring robust information retention. To validate our approach, we apply these
techniques to existing semantic watermarking schemes, enhancing their frequency-domain structures for better robustness and retrieval accuracy. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our methods achieve state-of-the-art verification and identification performance, surpassing previous approaches across various attack scenarios. Ablation
studies confirm the impact of SFW on detection capabilities,
the effectiveness of the center-aware embedding against
cropping, and how message capacity influences identification accuracy. Notably, our method achieves the highest detection accuracy while maintaining superior image fidelity,
as evidenced by FID and CLIP scores. Conclusively, our
proposed SFW is shown to be an effective framework for
balancing robustness and image fidelity, addressing the inherent trade-offs in semantic watermarking. Code available
at github.com/thomas11809/SFWMark.

Figure 1. Summary of watermarking performance across different
semantic watermarking methods, as detailed in Sec. 5.2. All methods follow the merged-in-generation scheme with no additional
processing time. Verification is evaluated using TPR@1%FPR
(True Positive Rate at 1% False Positive Rate), while identification is assessed by Identification Accuracy (Perfect Match Rate).
The proposed approaches achieve the best balance between detection robustness and image fidelity.

1. Introduction

in script-based image generation and editing technologies,
resulting in a surge of generative content. This has raised
new concerns, such as the copyright of AI-generated content and the tracking of images created with malicious intent. As a solution to these problems, the technique of
embedding invisible watermarks into content has been proposed.
Digital content watermarking has been extensively studied through both classical signal processing techniques [5,
6, 12, 13, 15, 28, 38, 43, 44, 49] and deep learning-based
approaches [1, 18, 19, 21, 26, 30, 42, 52, 57, 58]. Recently,
watermarking techniques that directly intervene in the generation process of diffusion models [3, 7, 10, 20, 22, 27, 31,
36, 51, 54] have been explored; however, these approaches
require additional setup or configuration, adding more complexity.
Several studies have explored embedding watermarks di-

With the advancement of diffusion generative models [17,
25, 33, 35, 39, 41], their generated images are being increasingly used across various fields, including creative works,
entertainment, and advertisement. In particular, the opensource release of large-scale language-image (LLI) models
like Stable Diffusion [37] has led to an exponential growth

18759

