This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to See Inside Opaque Liquid Containers using Speckle Vibrometry
Matan Kichler
Shai Bagon
Mark Sheinin
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
matankic@gmail.com, shai.bagon@weizmann.ac.il, mark.sheinin@weizmann.ac.il
https://matankic.github.io/see_inside_containers

Abstract
Computer vision seeks to infer a wide range of information
about objects and events. However, vision systems based
on conventional imaging are limited to extracting information only from the visible surfaces of scene objects. For
instance, a vision system can detect and identify a Coke
can in the scene, but it cannot determine whether the can
is full or empty. In this paper, we aim to expand the scope of
computer vision to include the novel task of inferring the
hidden liquid levels of opaque containers by sensing the
tiny vibrations on their surfaces. Our method provides a
first-of-a-kind way to inspect the fill level of multiple sealed
containers remotely, at once, without needing physical manipulation and manual weighing. First, we propose a novel
speckle-based vibration sensing system for simultaneously
capturing scene vibrations on a 2D grid of points. We use
our system to efficiently and remotely capture a dataset of
vibration responses for a variety of everyday liquid containers. Then, we develop a transformer-based approach for
analyzing the captured vibrations and classifying the container type and its hidden liquid level at the time of measurement. Our architecture is invariant to the vibration source,
yielding correct liquid level estimates for controlled and
ambient scene sound sources. Moreover, our model generalizes to unseen container instances within known classes
(e.g., training on five Coke cans of a six-pack, testing on a
sixth) and fluid levels. We demonstrate our method by recovering liquid levels from various everyday containers.

Figure 1. Learning to ‘see’ the fill level of opaque containers.
We develop a novel system to capture the surface vibrations of
multiple liquid containers at multiple surface points. We vibrate
the containers using a nearby speaker and train a novel Vibration Transformer to infer the container class and the hidden liquid
level, expressed as a percentage of total capacity, from the measured multi-point surface vibrations.

signed to replicate the human eye. However, using conventional cameras limits the scope of retrievable scene information. For instance, an image or video can be used to detect
and identify a scene object, but the object’s internal properties, like its content or material composition, are mostly indeterminable from its captured surface appearance. In this
paper, we focus on revealing one commonplace hidden object property: the fill level of opaque liquid containers.
Our work joins a rich body of previous vision research
focused on retrieving hidden object properties by leveraging unconventional imaging. Clever hyperspectral scene
probing and polarization cues were used to classify [27, 42–
44] and segment [28, 50] scene object materials. Material
properties were also probed by thermal imaging [10, 12, 33,
37, 41] and structured light methods [30]. While effective,
these methods can only probe object properties that are optically accessible at the object’s surface.

1. Introduction
Since its inception in the 1960s, computer vision has sought
to enable machines to infer a wide range of information
about scene objects and events. In industrial settings, this
capability enables the automation of various inspection and
monitoring tasks involving manufactured goods, mechanical parts, or stored items across a range of environments.
Today, much like in its early days, most computer vision
systems rely on sensing using conventional cameras de-

9466

