This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention to Trajectory: Trajectory-Aware Open-Vocabulary Tracking
Yunhao Li1,2 Yifan Jiao1,2 Dan Meng 4 Heng Fan3† Libo Zhang1†∗
1
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of North Texas 4 OPPO Research Institute

Abstract

(a) Association

❌ ID Switch
incorrect detection

Open-Vocabulary Multi-Object Tracking (OV-MOT) aims to
enable approaches to track objects without being limited to
a predefined set of categories. Current OV-MOT methods
typically rely primarily on instance-level detection and association, often overlooking trajectory information that is
unique and essential for object tracking tasks. Utilizing trajectory information can enhance association stability and
classification accuracy, especially in cases of occlusion and
category ambiguity, thereby improving adaptability to novel
classes. Thus motivated, in this paper we propose TRACT,
an open-vocabulary tracker that leverages trajectory information to improve both object association and classification
in OV-MOT. Specifically, we introduce a Trajectory Consistency Reinforcement (TCR) strategy, that benefits tracking performance by improving target identity and category
consistency. In addition, we present TraCLIP, a plug-andplay trajectory classification module. It integrates Trajectory Feature Aggregation (TFA) and Trajectory Semantic
Enrichment (TSE) strategies to fully leverage trajectory information from visual and language perspectives for enhancing the classification results. Extensive experiments
on OV-TAO show that our TRACT significantly improves
tracking performance, highlighting trajectory information
as a valuable asset for OV-MOT. We will release TRACT at
https://github.com/Nathan-Li123/TRACT.

without trajectory

✅ Recover Association by Trajectory
with trajectory

(b) Classification
Pelican

Recover Classification by Trajectory
Pelican

Duck ❌

Pelican ✅

Figure 1. Trajectory information can enhance both association and
classification by helping to recover associations disrupted by inaccurate or missed detections (as shown in (a)) and by correcting
incorrect classifications (as shown in (b)).

1. Introduction

few common categories, e.g., pedestrians and vehicles, and
later shifts toward tracking a broader range of categories.
Recently, as the demand for practical applications grows,
Open-Vocabulary MOT [12] is introduced to enable tracking across arbitrary categories, overcoming the limitations
imposed by pre-defined tracking categories in training data.
Despite great advancements, current OV-MOT methods
are often constrained by a critical limitation: an overwhelming focus on instance-level information, with limited attention to trajectory-level insights. Specifically, although recent methods have introduced innovative association strategies for open-vocabulary scenarios, they fail to incorporate
trajectory information, which is an important cue in videos
and widely utilized in classic MOT approaches. This oversight may prevent current OV-MOT approaches from fully
leveraging contextual continuity offered by trajectory that is
essential to effective tracking, and thus leads to degradation
in association and classification (see Fig. 1).
In this context, we rethink the role of trajectory in OVMOT and apply it for improvement. Currently, OV-MOT

Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is an important task in computer vision, focusing on the detection and tracking of objects within video sequences. It has many key applications,
such as autonomous driving, intelligent surveillance, and
robotics. Early MOT research primarily concentrates on a
Yunhao Li and Yifan Jiao make equal contributions.
† Equal Advising and Co-last Authors.
∗ Corresponding author: Libo Zhang (libo@iscas.ac.cn).
Acknowledgement Libo Zhang was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62476266). Heng Fan and his employer
were not supported by any financial support for this work.

14390

Please note that, in this paper trajectory information refers to all data related to the trajectory during the tracking process, including its position
and classification results from previous frames, among other details.

