This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Medical World Model
Yijun Yang1, ,* Zhao-Yang Wang2 , Qiuping Liu3 , Shuwen Sun3 , Kang Wang4 , Rama Chellappa2 ,
Zongwei Zhou2 , Alan Yuille2 , Lei Zhu1,5,†, Yu-Dong Zhang3 , Jieneng Chen2,†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 Johns Hopkins University
3
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University
4
University of California, San Francisco 5 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Project:

https://yijun-yang.github.io/MeWM

Github:

https://github.com/scott-yjyang/MeWM

Abstract

Survival
Analysis

Providing effective treatment and making informed clinical decisions are essential goals of modern medicine and
clinical care. We are interested in simulating disease dynamics for clinical decision-making, leveraging recent advances in large generative models. To this end, we introduce
the Medical World Model (MeWM), the first world model in
medicine that visually predicts future disease states based
on clinical decisions. MeWM comprises (i) vision-language
models to serve as policy models, and (ii) tumor generative
models as dynamics models. The policy model generates
action plans, such as clinical treatments, while the dynamics model simulates tumor progression or regression under
given treatment conditions. Building on this, we propose
the inverse dynamics model that applies survival analysis
to the simulated post-treatment tumor, enabling the evaluation of treatment efficacy and the selection of the optimal
clinical action plan. As a result, the proposed MeWM simulates disease dynamics by synthesizing post-treatment tumors, with state-of-the-art specificity in Turing tests evaluated by radiologists. Simultaneously, its inverse dynamics
model outperforms medical-specialized GPTs in optimizing
individualized treatment protocols across all metrics. Notably, MeWM improves clinical decision-making for interventional physicians, boosting F1-score in selecting the optimal TACE protocol by 13%, paving the way for future integration of medical world models as the second readers.

Perception

State(𝒔𝟎 )

Actor
Progression
Generative Model

State(𝒔𝟏 )

···

Imaging
Observation

Recovery-Conditioned
Policies

Action

Figure 1. Formulation of Medical World Model. It integrates
imaging observations with perception modules to form an initial
state, which is then processed by a progression generative model
to predict future states of disease under different treatment conditions. Recovery-conditioned policies guide treatment decisions,
creating a feedback loop for optimizing clinical interventions.

mine the best course of action for each patient. Artificial intelligence (AI) models are increasingly assuming a crucial
role in this process by analyzing the complex multimodal
data, revealing patterns that may be difficult to detect with
human observation alone, and suggesting tailored treatment
strategies based on predictive analytics.
Foundation models [7] such as large language models (LLMs) [33, 57] present a new frontier in medical
AI research and development. However, recent studies [26] show that LLMs, even those specifically tailored
for medicine [13, 54, 55], diagnose significantly worse than
clinicians and make less informed treatment decisions. This
is due to several challenges. First, the complexity of diseases themselves, such as tumors that evolve under the
influence of diverse biological and chemotherapy factors,
calls for models that can adapt and account for disease progression. Second, clinical decision-making necessitates not
only accurate predictions but also visually trackable insights
that physicians can trust.
Recent breakthroughs in world models (WMs) [3, 8, 39,
45, 62] provide a promising avenue for overcoming these
obstacles. By generating a predictive distribution of how

1. Introduction
Clinical decision-making is at the heart of patient care, driving outcomes and shaping the trajectory of healthcare interventions. Physicians constantly weigh the multimodal factors including medical images and patient history to deter* Work done while visiting at JHU.
† Corresponding authors.

8319

