This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interpretable Zero-Shot Learning with Locally-Aligned Vision-Language Model
Shiming Chen1 , Bowen Duan2 , Salman Khan1,3 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,4
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Australian National University 4 Linköping University
{shimingchen, bwduan9910}@gmail.com

{salman.khan, fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract

Despite its achievements, CLIP’s performance exhibits
notable sensitivity to the text prompts used during the inference stage and the domain-speciﬁc datasets. Accordingly,
many works focus on i) prompts learning [44, 55, 56] and
ii) adapter learning [18, 24, 31]. Prompt learning discovers the domain knowledge from the downstream data for
improving the generalization of CLIP. For example, Zhou
introduced prompt learning using the downstream data for
learning domain knowledge in the text prompt [55, 56]. Shu
[44] and Feng [17] explored additional insights from the
test sample itself to enhance the domain knowledge of the
prompt. Adapter learning follows ﬁne-tuning thoughts to
learn lightweight parameters via additional visual-semantic
interactions [24].

Large-scale vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP,
have achieved remarkable success in zero-shot learning
(ZSL) by leveraging large-scale visual-text pair datasets.
However, these methods often lack interpretability, as they
compute the similarity between an entire query image and
the embedded category words, making it difﬁcult to explain
their predictions. One approach to address this issue is
to develop interpretable models by integrating language,
where classiﬁers are built using discrete attributes, similar
to human perception. This introduces a new challenge: how
to effectively align local visual features with corresponding
attributes based on pre-trained VLMs. To tackle this, we
propose LaZSL, a locally-aligned vision-language model
for interpretable ZSL. LaZSL employs local visual-semantic
alignment via optimal transport to perform interaction between visual regions and their associated attributes, facilitating effective alignment and providing interpretable similarity without the need for additional training. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method offers several advantages, including enhanced interpretability, improved accuracy, and strong domain generalization. Codes available at: https://github.com/shiming- chen/
LaZSL.

However, these methods compute the similarity between
the whole query image and the embedded words for each
category prompt following the standard CLIP, resulting in
limited interpretability, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Because
they cannot recognize classes based on the corresponding
factors (e.g., attributes/semantics) of target classes. Meanwhile, they fail to capture ﬁne-grained information of vision, their generalization is limited. Accordingly, a few
works [12, 16, 30, 37, 42, 46] attempt to build interpretable
models by integrating language, where classiﬁers are constructed with the discrete attributes. Speciﬁcally, they adopt
large language models (LLMs) to generate multiple ﬁner
text descriptions with amounts of attribute for each category, and take these text as text prompts for computing similarity with image, as shown in Fig. 1(b). They can classify
classes according to the key attributes corresponding to the
target classes, and thus their classiﬁers have interpretability analogously to human perception, where humans recognize an object via the obvious factors (e.g., attributes).
Unfortunately, these interpretable similarities are between
the whole image and attributes, which cannot directly capture the relationships between ﬁne-grained visual information and their corresponding attributes, inevitably resulting
in wrong visual-semantic alignments and limiting the generalization of VLMs.

1. Introduction
Large-scale vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP
[40], have achieved signiﬁcant zero-shot learning (ZSL) by
training with large amount visual-text pairs, sparking a new
wave of research in ZSL [34, 51]. Speciﬁcally, CLIP performs a zero-shot classiﬁcation procedure by computing the
similarity between the whole query image and the embedded words for each category prompt (e.g., “a photo of a
class”), then choosing the highest similarity for classiﬁcation. Since its encoder includes rich information in the
world and does not require additional annotation knowledge, it is also used in segmentation [45], detection [23],
and retrieval [15] tasks.

Naturally, interpretable ZSL raises a new challenge: how

478

