This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Magic Insert: Style-Aware Drag-and-Drop
Nataniel Ruiz1
Yuanzhen Li1
Neal Wadhwa2
Yael Pritch2
Michael Rubinstein1
David E. Jacobs2
Shlomi Fruchter1
1
2
Google DeepMind
Google

Figure 1. Using Magic Insert is a state-of-the-art method to drag-and-drop a subject from an image with an arbitrary style onto another
target image with a vastly different style and achieve a style-aware and impressively realistic insertion of the subject into the target image.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present Magic Insert, a method to drag-and-drop subjects from a user-provided image into a target image of a
different style in a plausible manner while matching the
style of the target image. This work formalizes our version of the problem of style-aware drag-and-drop and proposes to tackle it by decomposing it into two sub-problems:
style-aware personalization and realistic object insertion
in stylized images. For style-aware personalization, we
cast our method as a weight-and-text-embedding finetuning method with inference-time module-targeted style injection. For subject insertion, we propose Bootstrapped Domain Adaption (BDA) to adapt a domain-specific photorealistic object insertion model to the domain of diverse artistic
styles. Overall, the method significantly outperforms traditional and state-of-the-art approaches that struggle with
quality, subject fidelity and harmonious stylization. Finally,
we present a new dataset, SubjectPlop, to facilitate evaluation and future progress in this area.

Large text-to-image models have recently made significant
progress in generating high-quality images. However, to
make these models truly useful, controllability is essential.
Users have diverse needs and want to interact with these
models in different ways depending on their specific use
case. Influential work has been done to enable controllability in these networks, robustly addressing foundational
applications and controls such as subject personalization,
style learning, layout controls, and semantic controls. Despite this progress, the full potential of these powerful large
models has not been fully realized. Some applications that
seemed clearly out of reach just a couple of years ago are
now possible with careful approaches.
We explore one such application: style-aware drag-anddrop, where aesthetics and quality are of utmost importance
and optimality in these directions has not yet been achieved.
We formalize this problem and introduce Magic Insert, our
method to tackle it. One might initially consider addressing
style-aware drag-and-drop by trying to inpaint using a stylized subject, for example by combining Dreambooth [35],

15971

