This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAB: Transformer Attention Bottlenecks enable User Intervention and
Debugging in Vision-Language Models
Pooyan Rahmanzadehgervi†

Hung Huy Nguyen†

Rosanne Liu♣

pooyan.rmz@gmail.com

hhn0008@auburn.edu

mimosavvy@gmail.com

Long Mai♢

Anh Totti Nguyen†

mai.t.long88@gmail.com
† Auburn University

anh.ng8@gmail.com

♣ Google DeepMind, ML Collective

♢ Adobe Research

(i) Zeroed MHSA attention maps
CLIP4IDC: the small gray matte cylinder
that is behind the small red matte object
changed its location ❌

(d) Corrected MHSA attention maps
CLIP4IDC: the window is missing ❌
(g) MHSA attention maps
CLIP4IDC: the small gray matte cylinder that is
behind the small red matte object changed its
location ❌

(b) MHSA attention maps
CLIP4IDC: the window is missing ❌

(j) Zeroed TAB attention maps
TAB4IDC: there is no change ✅
(e) Corrected TAB attention maps
TAB4IDC: the wheel is missing ✅
(f) No-Change images
GT: there is no change
(a) Change images
GT: the wheel is missing

(c) TAB attention maps
TAB4IDC: the window is missing ❌

(h) TAB attention maps
TAB4IDC: the tiny gray matte cylinder
that is behind the big red metal object is
gone ❌

Figure 1. In a change case in OpenImages-I, both CLIP4IDC and TAB4IDC generate a wrong caption (b–c). However, guiding VLMs to
look by highlighting
attention patches inside 2 in MHSA attention maps does not cause CLIP4IDC output to change (d). In contrast,
intervention on the TAB bottleneck causes TAB4IDC output to change to an expected caption (e). Similarly, zeroing out the TAB attention
map causes TAB4IDC to generate “there is no change” as expected (j). However, zeroing out MHSA attention values in CLIP4IDC results
in no changes to the caption (i), showing that the highlighted input patches (g) might not causally contribute to CLIP4IDC outputs.

Abstract

the first architecture to enable users to debug by editing
attention, which often produces expected outputs by VLMs.

Multi-head self-attention (MHSA) is a key component of
Transformers [70], a widely popular architecture in both
language and vision. Multiple heads intuitively enable different parallel processes over the same input. Yet, they also
obscure the attribution of each input patch to the output of
a model [9, 17]. We propose a novel 1-head Transformer
Attention Bottleneck (TAB) layer, inserted after the traditional MHSA architecture, to serve as an attention bottleneck for interpretability and intervention. Unlike standard
self-attention [70], TAB constrains the total attention over
all patches to ∈ [0, 1]. That is, when the total attention
is 0, no visual information is propagated further into the
network, and the vision-language model (VLM) would default to a generic, image-independent response (Fig. 1j). To
demonstrate the advantages of TAB, we train VLMs with
TAB to perform image-difference captioning. Over three
datasets, our models perform similarly to baseline VLMs
in captioning but the bottleneck is superior in localizing
changes and in identifying when no changes occur. TAB is

1. Introduction

22551

Failures of image-comparison models, e.g., in identifying a face or changes in parking lot across two CCTV
views, can lead to life-critical consequences such as denial of unemployment benefits [64] or false arrests by police [14, 28, 30, 61]. Even state-of-the-art (SotA) VLMs
(GPT-4, LLaVA, Gemini) also perform poorly at describing
image changes [69], leaving their decoded speech incomprehensible to users. A faithful visualization of what VLMs
look at while identifying differences across two images is
key to understanding their decoded outputs.
Vision Transformers (ViTs) [23] are the backbone architecture of modern image comparison and VLMs; however,
there is no reliable method for accurately identifying what
exact input patches they are attending to due to the following possible obstacles: (a) lack of registers [4, 22]; (b) many

