This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Engage for All: Making Ordinary Image Descriptions Appealing Again!
Yuyan Chen1 ,* Yifan Jiang2 , Li Zhou3 , Jinghan Cao4 , Yu Guan5 , Ming Yang6 , Qingpei Guo5,6†
1
Cornell University, 2 University of Southern California,
3
Morgan Stanley Service Canada, 4 San Francisco State University,
5
University of Warwick, 6 Ant Group
yolandachen0313@gmail.com, yifjia@isi.edu, lzhou1068@gmail.com,
jcao3@alumni.sfsu.edu, yu.guan@warwick.ac.uk, {m.yang, qingpei.gqp}@antgroup.com

Figure 1. (a) to (c) present Conventional descriptions (highlighted in red) and appealing descriptions (highlighted in blue) for three
ordinary images. (d) presents a sample from AppealBench with complete object descriptions. (e) presents four tasks applied to a sample
from AppealBench across single-object, multi-object, and global perspectives.

Abstract
In recent years, multi-modal large language models
(MLLMs) have been successfully adopted to generate humorous and engaging descriptions for internet memes.
While, it is challenging for the same approaches to apply to ordinary images which lack of inherent funny or
exaggerated contents. Thus, crafting appealing descriptions for ordinary image demands imaginative efforts to
discover or create intriguing connections between words
to image contents. To address this gap, we introduce Ap-

pealImage, a large-scale dataset consisting of ordinary images paired with appealing descriptions. AppealImage allows us to define four distinct tasks with quantitative metrics to enable objective evaluation. Subsequently, we propose CharmNet, an innovative framework designed to generate appealing descriptions for ordinary images. CharmNet combines instruction tuning with heuristic active learning, guided by a referee model. Experimental results
demonstrate that CharmNet outperforms the state-of-theart method by 11.4% in generating appealing descriptions.
Furthermore, CharmNet delivers impressive performance
across various creative applications, including visual storytelling and situational dialogue generation. These results

*
†

Work done during an internship at Ant Group.
Qingpei Guo is the corresponding author.

19342

