This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guiding Noisy Label Conditional Diffusion Models with
Score-based Discriminator Correction
Dat Nguyen Cong
FPT Software AI Center

Hieu Tran Bao
FPT IS AI R&D Center

Tung Hoang-Thanh
VNU University of Engineering and Technology

datnc13@fpt.com

hieutb2@fpt.com

htt210@gmail.com

Abstract
Diffusion models have gained prominence as state-of-theart techniques for synthesizing images and videos, particularly due to their ability to scale effectively with large
datasets. Recent studies have uncovered that these extensive datasets often contain mistakes from manual labeling
processes. However, the extent to which such errors compromise the generative capabilities and controllability of
diffusion models is not well studied. This paper introduces
Score-based Discriminator Correction (SBDC), a guidance
technique for aligning noisy pre-trained conditional diffusion models. The guidance is built on discriminator training using adversarial loss, drawing on prior noise detection techniques to assess the authenticity of each sample.
We further show that limiting the usage of our guidance to
the early phase of the generation process leads to better
performance. Our method is computationally efficient, only
marginally increases inference time, and does not require
retraining diffusion models. Experiments on different noise
settings demonstrate the superiority of our method over previous state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. The uncurated generated images of EDM (left) and
SBDC (right) on the CIFAR-10 dataset with 50% symmetric noise.
We highlight erroneous images their and corrections in red and
green squares, respectively.

1. Introduction

Noisy datasets can cause conditional generative models to generate lower-quality images that do not align with
the conditions (Fig. 1). This paper focuses on methods
for correcting the outputs of generative models trained
on noisy datasets. Existing approaches often require retraining generative models with modified loss functions
(and/or) on modified datasets. Works on noisy conditional
generation rely on transition matrix estimation techniques
[2, 28, 55, 60], which adjust the objective function to mitigate the effects of noisy labels [22, 34]. This approach involves multi-stage training processes, where errors and biases from one stage can propagate to the next. Alternatively,
noise detection methods [11, 63] identify and remove noisy
data from the training set and then retrain generative models
on the cleaned datasets. Retraining large-scale generative
models is extremely expensive and time-consuming, rendering the above methods impractical for large-scale models.
To address this challenge, we propose Score-based Discriminator Correction (SBDC), an inference-time method
that enhances the robustness of pre-trained conditional diffusion models against label noise. We train a small discriminator and use it to guide the generation of the pre-trained
conditional diffusion model (Fig. 1). Our method does not
require retraining pre-trained generative models and only
incurs a small computational overhead at inference time.

Diffusion models [21, 43] have emerged as state-of-theart techniques for generating highly realistic and controllable images and videos. Their success is largely attributed
to their ability to scale effectively with massive datasets
[4, 42, 50]. However, these large and often uncurated
datasets come with significant challenges, including mislabeled, ambiguous [6], and unsafe content [48]. As a result,
models trained on such data may produce low-quality, irrelevant, or even nonsensical outputs. These data quality
issues are prevalent across both labeled datasets like ImageNet [13] and multi-modal datasets such as LAION-5B
[42], negatively impacting the performance of generative
models. Manually addressing these issues is an extremely
costly and nearly infeasible task.

18531

