This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAViD: Modeling Dynamic Affordance of 3D Objects
Using Pre-trained Video Diffusion Models
Hyeonwoo Kim

Sangwon Baik

Hanbyul Joo

Seoul National University
https://snuvclab.github.io/david/

Figure 1. DAViD for Learning Dynamic Affordance. Given an input 3D object (left), our method, DAViD, learns Dynamic Affordance
to model the dynamic patterns that occur during HOI (right). To build it, we present a framework to synthesize diverse 4D HOI samples
(middle) by leveraging a pre-trained video diffusion model.

Abstract
Modeling how humans interact with objects is crucial for
AI to effectively assist or mimic human behaviors. Existing
studies for learning such ability primarily focus on static
human-object interaction (HOI) patterns, such as contact
and spatial relationships, while dynamic HOI patterns, capturing the movement of humans and objects over time, remain relatively underexplored. In this paper, we present a
novel framework for learning Dynamic Affordance across
various target object categories. To address the scarcity
of 4D HOI datasets, our method learns the 3D dynamic
affordance from synthetically generated 4D HOI samples.
Specifically, we propose a pipeline that first generates 2D
HOI videos from a given 3D target object using a pre-trained
video diffusion model, then lifts them into 3D to generate
4D HOI samples. Leveraging these synthesized 4D HOI
samples, we train DAViD, our generative 4D human-object
interaction model, which is composed of two key components: (1) a human motion diffusion model (MDM) with
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) module to fine-tune a pretrained MDM to learn the HOI motion concepts from limited
HOI motion samples, (2) a motion diffusion model for 4D
object poses conditioned by produced human interaction motions. Interestingly, DAViD can integrate newly learned HOI

motion concepts with pre-trained human motions to create
novel HOI motions, even for multiple HOI motion concepts,
demonstrating the advantage of our pipeline with LoRA in
integrating dynamic HOI concepts. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that DAViD outperforms baselines
in synthesizing HOI motion.

1. Introduction
Humans effortlessly understand how to effectively use
objects to achieve their goals within a given environment.
This knowledge, known as affordance originally introduced
by Gibson [22], encapsulates a comprehensive understanding of the inherent ways humans interact with objects.
Modeling these patterns is crucial for AI systems to assist or mimic human behavior, leading to extensive research in AI fields [1, 11–14, 17, 37, 40, 41, 54, 56, 58, 62–
66, 72, 73, 76, 79, 80, 86, 93, 98, 114, 122–124]. However, existing studies on affordance learning primarily focus
on static human-object interaction (HOI) patterns. For example, some approaches address affordances by inferring
contact (or interaction) region between humans and objects
in 2D images [2, 50], 3D humans [91, 111], and 3D objects [110, 111]. Others [27, 38] represent affordances as
spatial distributions aggregated from static 3D HOI samples.

10330

