This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MamTiff-CAD: Multi-Scale Latent Diffusion with Mamba+ for Complex
Parametric Sequence
Liyuan Deng1

Yunpeng Bai2 Yongkang Dai1 Xiaoshui Huang3 Hongping Gan1
Dongshuo Huang1 Hao Jiacheng4 Yilei Shi1 *
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 National University of Singapore
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Nanchang University

{dly,daiyongkang,ganhongping,huangdongshuo,yilei shi}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

bai yunpeng99@u.nus.edu

huangxiaoshui@sjtu.edu.cn

haojiacheng@email.ncu.edu.cn

Abstract
Parametric Computer-Aided Design (CAD) is crucial in
industrial applications, yet existing approaches often struggle to generate long sequence parametric commands due
to complex CAD models’ geometric and topological constraints. To address this challenge, we propose MamTiffCAD, a novel CAD parametric command sequences generation framework that leverages a Transformer-based diffusion model for multi-scale latent representations. Specifically, we design a novel autoencoder that integrates
Mamba+ and Transformer, to transfer parameterized CAD
sequences into latent representations. The Mamba+ block
incorporates a forget gate mechanism to effectively capture
long-range dependencies. The non-autoregressive Transformer decoder reconstructs the latent representations. A
diffusion model based on multi-scale Transformer is then
trained on these latent embeddings to learn the distribution of long sequence commands. In addition, we also construct a dataset that consists of long parametric sequences,
which is up to 256 commands for a single CAD model. Experiments demonstrate that MamTiff-CAD achieves stateof-the-art performance on both reconstruction and generation tasks, confirming its effectiveness for long sequence
(60-256) CAD model generation.

Figure 1. Gallery of Generated CAD Designs. Our generative
model infers parametric CAD command sequences, enabling the
creation of diverse and structurally valid CAD models. The resulting 3D shapes exhibit clean geometry, well-defined features, and
full editability, allowing users to modify designs seamlessly.

1. Introduction

for highly complex and long sequence CAD models in industrial design, existing generation methods are limited by
computational efficiency and sequence modeling capabilities, making it difficult to effectively handle industrial-grade
design processes that contain hundreds of commands.
The key challenges lie in overcoming the bottleneck of
long sequence modeling and enabling the automated generation of complex CAD models. Significant progress has
been made in deep learning-based parametric CAD modeling, with Transformer architectures being employed to
genarate parametric CAD models [42, 45, 46]. While these
approaches achieve strong performance in short-sequence
command generation, the inherent quadratic complexity of
the Transformer’s self-attention mechanism limits its scalability to longer sequences [37]. This constraint makes it
difficult to model intricate CAD structures, significantly restricting the applicability of existing methods for generating
complex CAD models.
To address these challenges, we propose MamTiff-

Computer-Aided Design (CAD) is a core tool in modern industrial product manufacturing, constructing complex 3D
models through parametric command sequences (such as
Sketch, Extrusion, and Boolean operations). It not only defines geometric shapes but also thoroughly records design
logic and engineering intentions. With the growing demand
* Corresponding author.

10517

