This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF Is a Valuable Assistant for 3D Gaussian Splatting
Shuangkang Fang1 , I-Chao Shen2 , Takeo Igarashi2 , Yufeng Wang1 ,* ZeSheng Wang1 ,
Yi Yang3 , Wenrui Ding1 , Shuchang Zhou3
1
Beihang University 2 The University of Tokyo 3 StepFun

Abstract
We introduce NeRF-GS, a novel framework that jointly optimizes Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS). This framework leverages the inherent
continuous spatial representation of NeRF to mitigate several limitations of 3DGS, including sensitivity to Gaussian initialization, limited spatial awareness, and weak
inter-Gaussian correlations, thereby enhancing its performance. In NeRF-GS, we revisit the design of 3DGS and
progressively align its spatial features with NeRF, enabling
both representations to be optimized within the same scene
through shared 3D spatial information. We further address
the formal distinctions between the two approaches by optimizing residual vectors for both implicit features and Gaussian positions to enhance the personalized capabilities of
3DGS. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show
that NeRF-GS surpasses existing methods and achieves
state-of-the-art performance. This outcome confirms that
NeRF and 3DGS are complementary rather than competing, offering new insights into hybrid approaches that combine 3DGS and NeRF for efficient 3D scene representation.

GT

PSNR: 28.7

3DGS

PSNR: 30.5

NeRF-GS

Figure 1. NeRF-GS establishes a bridge of communication between NeRF and 3DGS, leveraging information sharing, modeling
of distinct characteristics, and joint optimization to enable 3DGS
to achieve higher fidelity representation. In this case, NeRF-GS
outperforms the vanilla 3DGS by 1.8dB in PSNR.

1. Introduction

formance. Nonetheless, the reliance on Gaussian initialization and limited spatial perception can lead to instability in
3DGS training [12, 18, 20, 46]. Moreover, the weak correlation between discrete Gaussians results in a lack of smooth
spatial transitions [7, 8, 40], which negatively affects the
visual quality of the rendered outputs.
To address these deficiencies, existing studies have
sought to improve both NeRF and 3DGS. For example, some researches focus on accelerating rendering for
NeRF [6, 19, 22, 42, 53, 64], while others improve 3DGS
in terms of visual quality [9, 35, 40, 65]. However, most of
these studies treat NeRF and 3DGS as independent scene
representation paradigms, concentrating on their separate
enhancements. Several researchers have attempted to leverage the properties of NeRF to enhance 3DGS, such as initializing 3DGS with NeRF [18, 46], embedding NeRF attributes within 3DGS [36, 40, 46], or creating networks
to implicitly estimate 3DGS parameters [8, 35]. However,
these approaches primarily focus on individually enhancing variants of 3DGS, without systematically exploring the

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [41] and 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [27] have emerged as two prominent
methodologies in 3D scene reconstruction, photorealistic
rendering, and virtual reality applications [6, 13, 14, 16, 17,
19, 37, 41, 42, 51, 54, 58]. NeRF represents 3D scenes
through a continuous volumetric field, capturing intricate
details by an MLP-based encoding of color and density at
any position in space. However, it requires numerous forward passes through the MLP, limiting its applicability in
real-time scenarios. In contrast, 3DGS [27] represents a
scene through a set of discrete Gaussians to approximate
points in space, which capitalizes on point-based rendering for computational efficiency, providing real-time per* Corresponding author: Yufeng Wang

26230

