This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLaVA-KD: A Framework of Distilling Multimodal Large Language Models
Yuxuan Cai1 * Jiangning Zhang2,3 * Haoyang He2 Xinwei He4 Ao Tong1 Zhenye Gan3
Chengjie Wang3 Zhucun Xue2 Yong Liu2 Xiang Bai1†
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Zhejiang University
3
Tencent Youtu Lab 4 Huazhong Agricultural University
{cyx hust, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, 186368@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

understanding of visual and linguistic information. However, the success of MLLMs benefits from the scaling law,
which significantly increases the model size. The largescale model and high-cost inference limit the application of
MLLMs in resource-constrained scenarios.
Some works [6, 53] address this challenge by directly
adopting lightweight LLM backbones to build small-scale
MLLMs (s-MLLMs), while preserving the conventional
two-stage paradigm of large MLLMs (l-MLLMs) for model
training, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). This paradigm comprises
two stages: Pre-Training (PT) and Supervised Fine-Tuning
(SFT). The PT stage establishes cross-modal alignment
by projecting visual features to the text embedding space,
while the SFT stage enhances multimodal understanding
capabilities. Nevertheless, directly applying this paradigmoriginally designed for l-MLLMs to s-MLLMs often yields
suboptimal performance due to inherent capacity limitations [18], preventing s-MLLMs from effectively learning
the complex knowledge that l-MLLMs can capture. Recent efforts compensate for this issue by optimizing model
structure and improving the quality of training data: MoELLaVA [23] introduces the Mixture-of-Experts [17] (MoE)
to enhance the model’s ability for understanding complex
multimodal information while maintaining the computational cost, and Bunny [13] improves the training data quality by removing redundant data. Unlike these methods, we
propose investigating training paradigm optimization as a
novel pathway to enhance s-MLLMs performance, without
architectural modifications or data engineering.
Knowledge distillation (KD) transfers knowledge from
powerful teacher models to small student networks, significantly improves the performance of students with less
computation. Although KD has achieved remarkable success in traditional vision tasks, its application to MLLMs
remains underexplored. Given that MLLMs primarily rely
on language models to achieve robust cross-modal understanding, they present a challenge for distillation: how to
effectively transfer multimodal understanding capabilities
via language model distillation. However, existing LLM

The success of Large Language Models (LLMs) has inspired
the development of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) for unified understanding of vision and language.
However, the increasing model size and computational complexity of large-scale MLLMs (l-MLLMs) limit their use
in resource-constrained scenarios. Although small-scale
MLLMs (s-MLLMs) are designed to reduce computational
costs, they typically suffer from performance degradation.
To mitigate this limitation, we propose a novel LLaVAKD framework to transfer knowledge from l-MLLMs to sMLLMs. Specifically, we introduce Multimodal Distillation
(MDist) to transfer teacher model’s robust representations
across both visual and linguistic modalities, and Relation
Distillation (RDist) to transfer teacher model’s ability to
capture visual token relationships. Additionally, we propose
a three-stage training scheme to fully exploit the potential of
the proposed distillation strategy: 1) Distilled Pre-Training
to strengthen the alignment between visual-linguistic representations in s-MLLMs, 2) Supervised Fine-Tuning to
equip the s-MLLMs with multimodal understanding capacity, and 3) Distilled Fine-Tuning to refine s-MLLM’s knowledge. Our approach significantly improves s-MLLMs performance without altering the model architecture. Extensive experiments and ablation studies validate the effectiveness of each proposed component. Code will be available
at https://github.com/Fantasyele/LLaVA-KD.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the significant achievements of Large Language
Models (LLM) in the field of Natural Language Processing, an emerging and rapidly developing research area is focusing on the development of Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLM). These models [3, 24, 45] integrate visual encoder, feature projector, and LLM to achieve unified
* Equal Contribution. Work done during internship at Tencent YouTu
Lab. † Correspondence to Xiang Bai<xbai@hust.edu.cn>.

239

