This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vision-Language Models Can’t See the Obvious
Yasser Dahou*
Ngoc Dung Huynh* †
Wamiq Reyaz Para
Ankit Singh

Phuc H. Le-Khac
Sanath Narayan

Technology Innovation Institute, Abu Dhabi, UAE
†
Deakin University, Australia
https://salbench.github.io

Abstract
We present Saliency Benchmark (SalBench), a novel
benchmark designed to assess the capability of Large
Vision-Language Models (LVLM) in detecting visually
salient features that are readily apparent to humans, such as
a large circle amidst a grid of smaller ones. This benchmark
focuses on low-level features including color, intensity, and
orientation, which are fundamental to human visual processing. Our SalBench consists of images that highlight
rare, unusual, or unexpected elements within scenes, and
naturally draw human attention. It comprises three novel
tasks for evaluating the perceptual capabilities of LVLM:
Odd-One-Out Detection, Referring Odd-One-Out, and Visual Referring Odd-One-Out. We perform a comprehensive
evaluation of state-of-the-art LVLM using SalBench and our
ﬁndings reveal a surprising limitation: LVLM struggle to
identify seemingly obvious visual anomalies, with even the
advanced GPT-4o achieving only 47.6% accuracy on such
a simple task. SalBench will be an important step in measuring the capabilities of LVLM that align with the subtle
deﬁnition of human attention.

Figure 1. Our SalBench evaluates the perceptual capabilities
of vision-language models. It comprises natural and synthetic
images, which consist of a single salient target among multiple
distractors. In natural images, the target can vary from the rest in
orientation, color, focus, shape, size, location and pattern, while it
differs only in orientation, color or size in synthetic images. SalBench evaluates the odd-one-out understanding under three tasks:
Detection, Referring and Visual Referring. In detection task, the
odd features must be directly predicted. Moreover, the box coordinates of the target are provided as context in text (referring task)
or as a highlighted box in the image (visual referring task) for predicting the odd features of the target. Best viewed zoomed-in.

1. Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLM) have emerged as
a central focus in recent computer vision research [4, 12,
31, 32, 44, 60]. The primary advantage of these models
lies in their ability to reason about images using the Large
Language Model (LLM) knowledge about the world, and
solve tasks that surpass the capabilities of traditional vision
models. LVLMs enable a better reasoning about the visual
content using the prior world knowledge.
Current LVLM exhibit impressive performance on existing benchmarks [11, 17, 27, 34, 55, 57], which evaluate
* Joint ﬁrst authors
† This work was done when Ngoc Dung Huynh was intern at TII

Correspondence: yasser.djilali@tii.ae

on a range of capabilities, from general visual question answering [17] to tasks requiring college-level subject knowledge and critical reasoning, such as MMMU [57]. With the
main focus of these benchmarks being high-level complex
tasks, it raises a fundamental question: can LVLM perform
equally well on simple perceptual tasks, such as identifying a black dot on a white background? This aligns with
Moravec’s paradox [40], which suggests that high-level reasoning tasks are computationally simpler for artiﬁcial intelligence systems than low-level perceptual and sensorimotor skills. Consequently, we may ﬁnd that LVLM excel at
complex tasks present in existing benchmarks while strug-

24159

