This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Flow Matching
George Stoica12†
Vivek Ramanujan2→
Xiang Fan2→
Ali Farhadi2
Ranjay Krishna2
Judy Hoffman1
1
Georgia Tech 2 University of Washington
†
→
Correspondence to: gstoica!@gatech.edu
Equal Contribution

Figure 1. Training with Contrastive Flow Matching (!FM) improves natural image generation. (left is baseline, right is with !FM)
Here we show comparisons between images generated by diffusion models trained on ImageNet-1k (512 → 512). Each pair of images
is generated with the same class and initial noise to ensure similar image structure for comparability. We see that our !FM objective
encourages significantly more coherent images and improves the consistency of global structure.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Flow matching for generative modeling trains continuous
normalizing flows by regressing ideal probability flow fields
between a base (noise) distribution and the data distribution [25]. This approach enables straight-line generative
trajectories and has demonstrated competitive image synthesis quality. However, for conditional generation (e.g., classconditional image generation), vanilla flow matching models
often produce outputs that resemble an “average” of the
possible images for a given condition, rather than a distinct
mode of that condition. In essence, the model may collapse
multiple diverse outputs into a single trajectory, yielding
samples that lack the expected specificity and diversity for
each condition [29, 44]. By contrast, an unconditional flow
model—tasked with covering the entire data distribution
without any conditioning—implicitly learns more varied
flows for different modes of the data. Existing conditional
flow matching formulations do not enforce the flows to differ
across conditions, which can lead to this averaging effect
and suboptimal generation fidelity.

Unconditional flow matching trains diffusion models to transport samples from a source distribution to a target distribution by enforcing that the flows between sample pairs
are unique. However, in conditional settings (e.g., classconditioned models), this uniqueness is no longer guaranteedflows from different conditions may overlap, leading
to more ambiguous generations. We introduce Contrastive
Flow Matching, an extension to the flow matching objective that explicitly enforces uniqueness across all conditional flows, enhancing condition separation. Our approach
adds a contrastive objective that maximizes dissimilarities
between predicted flows from arbitrary sample pairs. We
validate Contrastive Flow Matching by conducting extensive experiments across varying model architectures on both
class-conditioned (ImageNet-1k) and text-to-image (CC3M)
benchmarks. Notably, we find that training models with Contrastive Flow Matching (1) improves training speed by a
factor of up to 9→, (2) requires up to 5→ fewer de-noising
steps and (3) lowers FID by up to 8.9 compared to training
the same models with flow matching. We release our code
at: https://github.com/gstoica!”/DeltaFM.git.

To address these limitations and improve generation quality, recent work has explored enhancements to structure the
generator’s representations and also proposed inference-time
guidance strategies. For example, one approach is to incorporate a REPresentation Alignment (REPA) objective to

1185

