This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large Learning Rates Simultaneously Achieve
Robustness to Spurious Correlations and Compressibility
Melih Barsbey

Lucas Prieto
Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London

Tolga Birdal

(b) Feature Attributions

Abstract
85
80
75
70

Test Accuracy
Compressibility
Core Feat. Util.
Class Sep.

Double MNIST

Input

75
70
65
60

Test Accuracy
Compressibility
Background Util. %

Learning Rate ( )

CIFAR-10

Low LR High LR

Test Accuracy

Learning Rate ( )

Low LR High LR

Test Accuracy

Input

90

Robustness and resource-efficiency are two highly desirable
properties for modern machine learning models. However,
achieving them jointly remains a challenge. In this paper, we identify high learning rates as a facilitator for simultaneously achieving robustness to spurious correlations
and network compressibility. We demonstrate that large
learning rates also produce desirable representation properties such as invariant feature utilization, class separation,
and activation sparsity. Our findings indicate that large
learning rates compare favorably to other hyperparameters and regularization methods, in consistently satisfying
these properties in tandem. In addition to demonstrating
the positive effect of large learning rates across diverse spurious correlation datasets, models, and optimizers, we also
present strong evidence that the previously documented success of large learning rates in standard classification tasks
is related to addressing hidden/rare spurious correlations
in the training dataset. Our investigation of the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon reveals the importance
of confident mispredictions of bias-conflicting samples under large learning rates.

Figure 1. (Top left) When trained on the Double MNIST spurious
correlation (SC) dataset with higher learning rates (LR), models
tend to be more robust against SCs (higher accuracy), more compressible, and have more favorable core/invariant feature utilization and class separation. (Top right) Given images containing
core and spurious features (bright vs. dim digit), high LR models are more likely to be attuned to the core feature vs. spurious feature, unlike low LR models. (Bottom) Our findings extend
to standard classification tasks since vulnerability to SCs, such as
background, strongly associate with accuracy drops. All ranges
normalized in y-axis to highlight relationship to LR.

1. Introduction
The requirement to function well in novel circumstances
and being resource-efficient are two central challenges for
modern machine learning (ML) systems, which are expected to perform critical functions with less resources and
on smaller hardware, in the face of limited access to computational resources, environmental concerns about energy
consumption, and tightening bottlenecks around computational hardware [9, 10, 21]. As ML-based technologies increasingly permeate every aspect of daily and industrial life
[25], it becomes urgent to determine the inductive biases
that help the models address both challenges together.
Although no learner can be expected to perform well under arbitrary changes in the environment [80], they are expected to do so under “reasonable” distribution shifts – a capability commonly exhibited by numerous animal species.

Such robustness to distributions that differ from the training
data in principled ways have been studied under the umbrella term out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization [79].
Although scaling models and datasets, as well as targeting specific aspects of this issue have shown some success
[6, 45], OOD generalization remains an open problem both
theoretically and in practice [12].
A critical obstacle for OOD generalization is the presence of spurious correlations1 (SCs) in training data, which
can intuitively be described as the relationships between the
1 Unless noted otherwise, throughout the paper any references to robustness or OOD generalization will be in the context of spurious correlations.

2055

