This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simulating Dual-Pixel Images From Ray Tracing For Depth Estimation
Fengchen He, Dayang Zhao, Hao Xu, Tingwei Quan, Shaoqun Zeng
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{linyark, dayangzhao, xuhao_2003, quantingwei, sqzeng}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Many studies utilize dual-pixel (DP) sensor phase information for various applications, such as depth estimation and deblurring. However, since DP image features
are entirely determined by the camera hardware, DP-depth
paired datasets are very scarce, especially when performing depth estimation on customized cameras. To overcome
this, studies simulate DP images using ideal optical models. However, these simulations often violate real optical
propagation laws, leading to poor generalization to real
DP data. To address this, we investigate the domain gap
between simulated and real DP data, and propose solutions
using the Simulating DP Images from Ray Tracing (Sdirt)
scheme. Sdirt generates realistic DP images via ray tracing and integrates them into the depth estimation training
pipeline. Experimental results show that models trained
with Sdirt-simulated images generalize better to real DP
data. The code and collected datasets will be available at
https://github.com/LinYark/Sdirt.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) Imaging process of a DP camera. The slight shifts
between the left and right DP images caused by phase differences
are illustrated with white dashed lines. (b) Example comparison
between real and CoC-simulated DP PSFs, showing a signiﬁcant
difference between them.

time calibrating real cameras to match DP PSFs, but suffer
from issues such as interpolation errors due to discrete calibration points and the neglect of lens and DP sensor parameters, limiting model transferability. Model-based simulators [2, 23, 26] employ ideal optical or aberration analysis
models to directly compute DP PSFs, bypassing calibration.
However, these models often perform poorly on real DP images because they ignore lens aberrations and sensor phase
splitting characteristics. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the ideal
thin-lens model’s simulated circle-of-confusion (CoC) DP
PSF exhibits a signiﬁcant domain gap with the real PSF, adversely affecting depth estimation.
To bridge the domain gap between real DP images and
DP images simulated by model-based simulators, we propose Sdirt. Sdirt consists of a ray-traced DP PSF simulator
and a pixel-wise DP image rendering module, which can
accurately generate DP images with aberration and phase
information. Speciﬁcally, given a ﬁxed focus lens and DP
sensor system with known parameters, we use ray trac-

The DP sensor [15, 29] is designed to split each pixel into
left and right sub-pixels, utilizing microlenses and subpixels to achieve phase splitting. This allows the capture of a pair of images in one shot, known as DP images, as shown in Fig. 1(a). DP images are not only used
for autofocus [7, 11, 31], but also improve performance
in tasks such as deblurring [4, 17, 41] and depth estimation [9, 13, 23]. In the ﬁeld of depth-from-dual-pixel
(DfDP) estimation, the scarcity of DP-depth paired datasets
stems from hardware limitations. To address this, many
studies [2, 16, 18, 23, 26, 37] have focused on simulating
DP images using RGBD datasets, which serve as more ﬂexible and accessible data sources.
The key to simulating DP images from RGBD datasets
lies in accurately modeling the DP point spread function (PSF). In recent years, numerous model-based and
calibration-based DP PSF simulators have been proposed.
Calibration-based simulators [16, 18, 37] require substantial

26106

