This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vision-Language Interactive Relation Mining for
Open-Vocabulary Scene Graph Generation
Yukuan Min1 , Muli Yang†2 , Jinhao Zhang1 , Yuxuan Wang1 , Aming Wu1 , Cheng Deng†1
1
Xidian University, China
2
A*STAR, Singapore
ykmin@stu.xidian.edu.cn, yangml@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, {zhangjinhao,wangyuxuan}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
amwu@xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
To promote the deployment of scenario understanding in
the real world, Open-Vocabulary Scene Graph Generation
(OV-SGG) has attracted much attention recently, aiming to
generalize beyond the limited number of relation categories
labeled during training and detect those unseen relations
during inference. Towards OV-SGG, one feasible solution
is to leverage the large-scale pre-trained vision-language
models (VLMs) containing plentiful category-level content
to capture accurate correspondences between images and
text. However, due to the lack of quadratic relation-aware
knowledge in VLMs, directly using the category-level correspondence in the base dataset could not sufficiently represent generalized relations involved in open world. Therefore, designing an effective open-vocabulary relation mining framework is challenging and meaningful. To this end,
we propose a novel Vision-Language Interactive Relation
Mining model (VL-IRM) for OV-SGG, which explores learning generalized relation-aware knowledge through multimodal interaction. Specifically, first, to enhance the generalization of the relation text to visual content, we present
a generative relation model to make the text modality explore possible open-ended relations based on visual content. Then, we employ visual modality to guide the relation
text for spatial and semantic extension. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior OV-SGG performance of
our method.

Figure 1. Illustration of the interactive visual-language model
for OV-SGG. (a) Previous methods directly use category-level
correspondence to adapt the vision-language models to openvocabulary relations. (b) In this work, we consider the lack of
quadratic relation-aware knowledge in VLMs, and construct an
Interactive Relation Mining model for OV-SGG.

1. Introduction

tiple objects. Though existing methods have been verified
to be effective, they usually follow a closed-set assumption, i.e., the training and testing data share the same predicate categories. However, the real scenario is open and full
of unknown relations, limiting the application of close-set
based methods. To this end, Open-Vocabulary Scene Graph
Generation (OV-SGG) is proposed, whose goal is to leverage pre-trained models to extend the predicate space and
improve the performance of identifying unknown relations.

To accelerate the understanding for visual content, Scene
Graph Generation (SGG) has attracted much attention recently, aiming to predict the predicate relation between mul-

To tackle the OV-SGG problem and enhance the practical utility of models, a common strategy is to exploit
the visual-text matching knowledge in the Vision-Language

† The corresponding authors.

Codes available at: https://github.com/myukzzz/VL-IRM

16755

