This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real3D: Towards Scaling Large Reconstruction Models with Real Images
Hanwen Jiang Qixing Huang Georgios Pavlakos
The University of Texas at Austin
Project & Code: https://hwjiang1510.github.io/Real3D/
Input

Reconstruction

Input

Reconstruction

Input

Reconstruction

Input

Reconstruction

Figure 1. Real3D reconstructions of in-the-wild instances. We show the input view and two novel views of our reconstruction, including a
novel side view and a novel back view. Real3D can reconstruct diverse shapes from in-the-wild images, including those in uncommon poses
and shape categories.

Abstract

pabilities [2, 60]. Recently, the same recipe has been applied
to build large reconstruction models (LRMs) [23], i.e., foundation models for single-view 3D reconstruction. LRMs
benefit from training on multi-view images from 3D/video
data, where the increased dataset size [9, 10, 98] is the key
of the improved model performance. However, the excessive
reliance on multi-view supervision creates two bottlenecks
for LRMs. First, expanding the scale of such data is hard –
either creating synthetic 3D assets [9] or intentional video
captures [98] is laborious. This leads to a limited scale
of training data of LRMs, compared with LLMs [2, 76]
and VLMs [36, 101], ceiling their scalability. Second, the
multi-view data is biased towards shapes that are easy to
model by artists or easy to capture in the round table setting [29, 62, 98], creating a domain gap with the real-life
shapes we want to reconstruct in most applications.

Training single-view Large Reconstruction Models (LRMs)
follows the fully supervised route, requiring multi-view supervision. However, the multi-view data typically comes
from synthetic 3D assets, which are hard to scale further and
are not representative of the distribution of real-world object
shapes. To address these limitations, we introduce Real3D,
the first LRM that uses single-view real images for training,
benefiting from their scalability and capturing the real-world
shape distribution. Real3D introduces a novel self-training
framework, including unsupervised losses at the pixel- and
semantic-level, enabling LRMs to learn from these singleview images without multi-view supervision. Simultaneously,
to deal with the noise of real data, Real3D also presents
an automatic data curation approach to gather high-quality
examples that have positive impact on training. Our experiments show that Real3D consistently outperforms prior work
in diverse evaluation settings that include real and synthetic
data, as well as both in-domain and out-of-domain shapes.

To address these limitations, we propose Real3D. Our
main objective is to expand the training data of LRMs to
single-view images. This is motivated by the potential of using single-view images to solve the two aforementioned problems. First, single-view images are readily available in existing large-scale datasets [12, 66, 74] or in-the-wild resources,
leading to a large-scale set of training examples. Second,
by leveraging a large number of collected real images for
training, we can capture the distribution of real objects more
faithfully (Figure 1), closing the training-inference gap and

1. Introduction
The scaling law is the secret sauce of large foundation models [33]. By scaling both model parameters and training data,
the foundation models demonstrate impressive emerging ca-

5821

