This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lark: Low-Rank updates after knowledge localization for Few-shot
Class-Incremental Learning
1

Jinxin Shi1 , Jiabao Zhao2 *, Yifan Yang3 , Xingjiao Wu1 , Jiawen Li1 , Liang He1*
East China Normal University 2 Donghua University 3 Transwarp Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd
jinxinshi@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, jbzhao@dhu.edu.cn, yifan.yang@transwarp.io
xjwu@pharm.ecnu.edu.cn, jwli@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, lhe@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
For Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL), direct
fine-tuning causes significant parameter shifts, resulting in
catastrophic forgetting and increased resource consumption. While, freezing the pre-trained backbone exacerbates
the inconsistency between the backbone and the evolving
classifier. To overcome these challenges, we introduce a
method called Low-Rank updates after knowledge localization (Lark). In the knowledge localization phase, the Fisher
Information Matrix is calculated to measure the sensitivity of parameters in different layers to previously acquired
knowledge. This phase ultimately identifies the parameters
within the model that are most suitable for learning new
knowledge. In the subsequent incremental editing phase, a
low-rank incremental update strategy is applied. This strategy ensures that the model parameter updates adhere to a
Rank-One matrix structure. By doing so, it minimizes alterations to the original parameters, thereby enabling the
model to integrate new knowledge while retaining as much
of the previous knowledge as possible. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the Lark method achieves
significant performance improvements on the CIFAR100,
mini-ImageNet, and CUB200 datasets, surpassing current
state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration. The left panel depicts the space
under regular training, whereas the right panel displays the space
following Rank-One matrix updates. Notably, the Rank-One matrix updates (!Wlow ) exhibit higher precision compared to those
produced by regular training (!Wreg ).

hensive knowledge representations. Moreover, there exists
the stability-plasticity dilemma [16, 36]. Specifically, when
the model learns new knowledge (plasticity), it may result
in forgetting previously acquired knowledge. Conversely,
overemphasizing the retention of old knowledge (stability)
can limit the model’s ability to learn new knowledge.
To address these challenges, existing FSCIL methods
have explored various directions, such as meta-learning [7,
38], replaying old samples [22, 29], and enhancing feature
representations [1, 37, 56]. However, the vast majority of
these works are based on small-scale models such as convolutional neural networks. When Transformer models (e.g.,
ViTs) are introduced into FSCIL scenarios, the aforementioned challenges become even more severe.
On one hand, in ViTs, classification predictions rely on
global attention interaction between the CLS token and all
patch tokens, which results in classifier-only optimization
methods disrupting the cognitive consistency between the
backbone and the classifier [53, 61]. On the other hand,
due to the massive number of parameters in ViT models
and the lack of the inherent inductive bias of convolutional
networks, directly fine-tuning with only a few incremental samples is more prone to overfitting and representation
drift [5]. These suggest that effective adaptation in few-shot

1. Introduction
Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) aims to enable models to continuously acquire new knowledge in dynamic environments. In this scenario, the model faces challenges related to empirical risk minimization [51], where
insufficient data hinder the model’s ability to learn compre* Corresponding author.

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Grant No.62207013, 62477011), the Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Commission with Grant (No.24511106802) supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(No.2232025D-35), and Suzhou Key Laboratory of Multimodal Data Fusion and Smart Healthcare (No.25SZZD14).

3607

