This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAPTUR E: Evaluating Spatial Reasoning in Vision Language Models
via Occluded Object Counting
Atin Pothiraj

Elias Stengel-Eskin
Jaemin Cho
UNC Chapel Hill

Mohit Bansal

{atin, esteng, jmincho, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

GPT-4o (Incorrect):
3 rows of cups visible in the
image. 5 cups visible per row.
2 additional columns of cups
hidden behind the black boxes.
This would result in 7 cups per
row. 3 times 7 = 21 cups.

Recognizing and reasoning about occluded (partially or
fully hidden) objects is vital to understanding visual scenes,
as occlusions frequently occur in real-world environments
and act as obstacles for spatial comprehension. To test
models’ ability to reason about multiple occluded objects,
we introduce a novel task, Counting Amodally for Patterns
Through Unseen REgions (CAPTUR E), which requires a
model to count objects arranged in a pattern by inferring
how the pattern continues behind an occluder (an object
which blocks parts of the scene). CAPTUR E requires both
recognizing visual patterns and reasoning, making it a useful testbed for evaluating vision-language models (VLMs)
on whether they understand occluded patterns and possess
spatial understanding skills. By requiring models to reason about occluded objects, CAPTUR E also tests VLMs’
ability to form world models that would allow them to fill
in missing information. CAPTUR E consists of two parts:
(1) CAPTUR Ereal , with manually filtered images of real objects in patterns and (2) CAPTUR Esynthetic , a controlled diagnostic with generated patterned images. We evaluate four
strong VLMs (GPT-4o, Intern-VL2, Molmo, and Qwen2VL) on CAPTUR E, finding that models struggle to count on
both occluded and unoccluded patterns. Crucially, we find
that models perform worse with occlusion, suggesting that
VLMs are also deficient in inferring unseen spatial relationships: even the strongest VLMs like GPT-4o fail to count
with occlusion. In contrast, we find that humans achieve
very little error on CAPTUR E. We also find that providing
auxiliary information of occluded object locations increases
performance, underscoring that the model error comes both
from an inability to handle occlusion as well as difficulty in
counting in images.1

Human (Correct):
Imagined

Instruction: Count the exact
number of cups in the image,
assuming the pattern continues
behind the black box.

4 columns x 4
rows = 16
cups!

Figure 1. CAPTUR E example with an output from GPT-4o.
While people can easily infer the missing number of cups and correctly reason over occluded patterns, models generally struggle to
reason over these occluded scenes.

maintain a coherent understanding of our environment even
when parts are hidden. The human visual system accomplishes this by integrating past experiences, context, and
sensory inputs to reconstruct incomplete scenes [19, 27, 30,
45]. Meanwhile, recent advancements in vision-language
models (VLMs) – especially in terms of visual and spatial
reasoning – raise the question of whether these systems can
perform similar inferential tasks. One way of measuring
such capabilities is through amodal completion – the task
of inferring the invisible parts of partially occluded objects;
here, vision-only models are typically evaluated via dense
prediction tasks like object segmentation and image inpainting [5]. However, this format is not well-suited for assessing VLMs, whose outputs consist of text tokens rather than
pixel-level predictions. This raises a critical question: How
can we quantify the ability of VLMs to form spatial world
modeling [17] in the presence of occlusion?
To address this, we introduce CAPTUR E, Counting
Amodally for Patterns Through Unseen REgions, a novel
benchmark that tests a VLM’s world modeling and spatial reasoning abilities through the task of amodal counting, where models are prompted to count occluded objects

1. Introduction
Inferring what lies behind different objects in occluded
scenes is crucial for human perception, as it allows us to
1 Code and data: https://github.com/atinpothiraj/CAPTURe

8001

