This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Curriculum:
Synthetic-to-Real Data Curriculum via Image-Guided Diffusion
Yijun Liang*, Shweta Bhardwaj*, Tianyi Zhou
University of Maryland, College Park
{yliang17,shweta12}@umd.edu, tianyi.david.zhou@gmail.com
Project: https://github.com/tianyi-lab/DisCL

Abstract

ization performance, their success highly relies on the quality and quantity of the training data. However, in enormous
practical scenarios, the data are collected from real environments so neither the quality nor the quantity can always be
guaranteed. For example, it is difficult to control the light
conditions, weather, motion blur, or the position of objects in
the scenes captured by trail/animal cameras, traffic cameras,
motion cameras, or robot cameras. Likewise, it is also difficult to keep different classes in the collected data balanced
so the model may perform much poorer on tail classes with
scarce data. On the other hand, the low-quality/quantity of
data also makes the model more prone to the gap between
the test and training distributions, thereby posing an out-ofdistribution challenge. In many cases, such “hard” training
data hinders effective learning, introduces biases or outliers,
and may even impact the learning of other data.
Data augmentation and synthesis have been studied
to address the challenges of hard real data. By applying
pre-defined transformations [1] to data in scarce classes or
modifying their backgrounds [3, 11], data augmentation
helps learn representations robust to these task-irrelevant
variations. While the augmented data may lack sufficient
diversity or non-trivial difference to the original data, the
recent text-to-image generative models such as GAN or
Stable Diffusion enable more sophisticated data synthesis
[9] of diverse higher-quality samples, while the text prompts
retain the task-related features. For instance, recent works
[15, 23, 39] have focused on training specialized diffusion
models specifically for sampling from underrepresented or
hard classes to increase diversity. However, these existing
methods are still challenged when scaling to real-world data,
such as in-the-wild or long-tail learning scenarios, where
the data distribution is highly imbalanced, diverse, and
unpredictable. Although text-to-image synthesis improves
the data quality and quantity, the synthetic data are solely
controlled by text prompts but lack sufficient visual similarity to the original image, which leads to a distribution gap
to the original data and hurts the generalization performance.
To maximize the merits of synthetic data for learning hard

Low-quality or scarce data has posed significant challenges
for training deep neural networks in practice. While classical data augmentation cannot produce very different new
data, diffusion models open up a new door to build selfevolving AI by generating high-quality and diverse synthetic
data through text-guided prompts. However, text-only guidance cannot control synthetic images’ proximity to the original images, resulting in out-of-distribution data detrimental
to model performance. To overcome the limitation, we study
image guidance to achieve a spectrum of interpolations between synthetic and real images. With stronger image guidance, the generated images are similar to the training data,
but are hard to learn. With weaker image guidance, the
synthetic images will be easier to learn but suffer from a
larger distribution gap to the original data. The generated
full spectrum of data enables us to build a novel “Diffusion
CurricuLum (DisCL)”. DisCL adjusts the image guidance
level of image synthesis for each training stage: It identifies
and focuses on hard samples for the model and assesses the
most effective guidance level of synthetic images to improve
hard data learning. We apply DisCL to two challenging
tasks: long-tail (LT) classification and learning from lowquality data. It focuses on lower-guidance images of high
quality to learn prototypical features as a warm-up for learning higher-guidance images that might be weak on diversity
or quality. DisCL achieves a gain of 2.7% and 2.1% in
OOD and ID macro-accuracy when applied to iWildCam
dataset. On ImageNet-LT, DisCL improves the base model’s
tail-class accuracy from 4.4% to 23.64% and leads to a
4.02% improvement in all-class accuracy.

1. Introduction
While existing machine learning approaches can train representation or discriminative models with promising general* These authors contributed equally to this work.

1697

