This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UrbanLLaVA: A Multi-modal Large Language Model for Urban Intelligence
Jie Feng† , Shengyuan Wang‡ , Tianhui Liu§ , Yanxin Xi¶ , Yong Li†
†
Department of Electronic Engineering, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
‡
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
§
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
¶
University of Helsinki, Finland
{fengjie, liyong07}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

General Multi-Modal Large Lanauge Models (LLaVA, ......)

Satellite
UrbanImage
research involves Street
a wide
Viewrange
Image of scenarios and

Satellite Image

tasks that require the understanding of multi-modal data.
Current methods often focus on specific data types and lack
a unified framework in urban field for processing them comprehensively. The recent success of multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) presents a promising opportunity to
overcome this limitation. In this paper, we introduce UrbanGeoSpatial Data
Datamodel designed to
LLaVA, a multi-modal largeTrajectory
language
process these four types of data simultaneously and achieve
strong performance across diverse urban tasks compared
with general MLLMs. In UrbanLLaVA, we first curate a diverse urban instruction dataset encompassing both singlemodal and cross-modal urban data, spanning from location
view to global view of urban environment. Additionally,
we propose a multi-stage training framework that decouples spatial reasoning enhancement from domain knowledge learning, thereby improving the compatibility and
downstream performance of UrbanLLaVA across diverse
urban tasks. Finally, we also extend existing benchmark
for urban research to assess the performance of MLLMs
across a wide range of urban tasks. Experimental results
from three cities demonstrate that UrbanLLaVA outperforms open-source and proprietary MLLMs in both singlemodal tasks and complex cross-modal tasks and shows robust generalization abilities across cities. Source codes
and data are openly accessible to the research community via https://github.com/tsinghua- fiblab/UrbanLLaVA.

Satellite Image

GeoSpatial Data

Trajectory

GeoChat

CityGPT

Street View

Trajectory Data

Street
View
Image
GeoSpatial Data

Urban Instruction Data
UrbanVLP

Mobility-LLM

Existing Works

UrbanLLaVA

Our Work

Figure 1. Existing works vs. our UrbanLLaVA in urban research.

gether, these data types capture the multi-faceted nature of
urban environments, representing a wide range of spatial
information and urban knowledge [35, 46, 57]. Integrating these multi-modal data into a cohesive framework is
essential for developing a systematic understanding of urban spaces and advancing complex modeling architectures
in urban research. However, the inherent heterogeneity of
these diverse urban data presents substantial challenges for
the integration. While numerous deep learning based methods have been proposed to fuse various cross-domain urban data [57], they are often designed for specific urban
tasks, limiting their ability to achieve a comprehensive understanding of urban environment and advanced reasoning
for real-world urban applications [46, 53].
Recently,
multi-modal large language models
(MLLMs) [49] have made notable advancements by
leveraging large language models (LLMs) [38] with
build-in common sense and reasoning abilities as a central component for unifying the processing data across
various modalities, such as images [31], speech [19], and

1. Introduction
Urban science [53, 57] and geographic science research[35]
highlight that urban data spans multiple modalities, including urban visual data [14], geo-text [45], structured geospatial data [1, 2], and spatiotemporal series data [20, 28]. To-

6209

