This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhysTwin: Physics-Informed Reconstruction and Simulation of
Deformable Objects from Videos
Hanxiao Jiang1,2

Hao-Yu Hsu2
1

Kaifeng Zhang1

Columbia University

2

Hsin-Ni Yu2

Shenlong Wang2

Yunzhu Li1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Teleoperation

Digital Twin
Overlay

Model-Based Robot Planning

Left Hand

Real-Time
Physical Simulation
& Rendering

Right Hand

t Input Video
PhysTwin
Simulation
Applications in Robotics
Figure 1. PhysTwin takes sparse videos (three camera views) of deformable objects under interaction as input and reconstructs a simulatable
digital twin with complete geometry, high-fidelity appearance, and accurate physical parameters. This enables multiple applications, such as
real-time interactive simulation using keyboards and robotic teleoperation devices, as well as model-based robot planning.

1. Introduction

Abstract

The construction of interactive digital twins is essential for
modeling the world and simulating future states, with applications in virtual reality, augmented reality, and robotic
manipulation. A physically realistic digital twin (PhysTwin) should accurately capture the geometry, appearance,
and physical properties of an object, allowing simulations
that closely match observations in the real world. However,
constructing such a representation from sparse observations
remains a significant challenge.
The creation of digital twins for deformable objects has
long been a challenging topic in the vision community.
While dynamic 3D methods (e.g., dynamic NeRFs [2, 5, 8,
13, 14, 17, 27, 29–31, 39–41, 43, 55, 56, 58, 61], dynamic
3D Gaussians [10, 20, 24, 33, 34, 59, 65, 66, 68]) capture observed motion, appearance, and geometry from videos, they
omit the underlying physics and are thus unsuitable for simulating outcomes in unseen interactions. While recent neuralbased models [4, 11, 28, 32, 36, 42, 49, 51, 52, 60, 64, 69]
learn intuitive physics models from videos, they require large
amounts of data and remain limited to specific objects or
motions, whereas physics-driven approaches [9, 12, 27, 44,
63, 71, 72] often rely on pre-scanned shapes or dense observations to mitigate ill-posedness. Additionally, it requires
dense viewpoint coverage and supports only limited motion

Creating a physical digital twin of a real-world object has
immense potential in robotics, content creation, and XR.
In this paper, we present PhysTwin, a novel framework
that uses sparse videos of dynamic objects under interaction to produce a photo- and physically realistic, realtime interactive virtual replica. Our approach centers on
two key components: (1) a physics-informed representation that combines spring-mass models for realistic physical simulation, generative shape models for geometry, and
Gaussian splats for rendering; and (2) a novel multi-stage,
optimization-based inverse modeling framework that reconstructs complete geometry, infers dense physical properties, and replicates realistic appearance from videos. Our
method integrates an inverse physics framework with visual perception cues, enabling high-fidelity reconstruction
even from partial, occluded, and limited viewpoints. PhysTwin supports modeling various deformable objects, including ropes, stuffed animals, cloth, and delivery packages.
Experiments show that PhysTwin outperforms competing
methods in reconstruction, rendering, future prediction, and
simulation under novel interactions. We further demonstrate its applications in interactive real-time simulation
and model-based robotic motion planning. Project Page:
https://jianghanxiao.github.io/phystwin-web/

7219

