This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedWSQ: Efficient Federated Learning with Weight Standardization and
Distribution-Aware Non-Uniform Quantization
Seung-Wook Kim* 1 , Seongyeol Kim* 1 , Jiah Kim* 1 , Seowon Ji† 2 , and Se-Ho Lee† 3
1
Department of Intelligent Robot Engineering, Pukyong National University
2
3
CSE, Konkuk University
CS&AI, Jeonbuk National University
Abstract

30, 46]: 1) data heterogeneity, where clients possess nonindependent and identically distributed (non-i.i.d.) data; 2)
partial client participation, where only a subset of clients
contributes to a global model update during each training
round due to communication constraints; 3) communication bottlenecks, where limited communication bandwidth
and high transmission costs hinder efficient model aggregation. These challenges worsen local gradient divergence,
slow down the global model convergence, and ultimately
degrade FL performance in real-world applications.
To address these limitations, we propose FedWSQ, an
advanced FL framework that combines weight standardization (WS) with our proposed distribution-aware nonuniform quantization (DANUQ) to improve both learning
stability and communication efficiency. WS is a plug-andplay technique that standardizes the weight vectors of convolutional or linear layers to stabilize the learning process
of a neural network [35]. In FedWSQ, WS plays a crucial role in mitigating client drift by filtering out gradient
components that contribute to overfitting during local training. This leads to improved generalization across heterogeneous clients and significantly enhances FL performance.
Although WS accelerates global convergence, the communication cost per round remains a major bottleneck. To address this, FedWSQ integrates WS with DANUQ, a novel
quantization strategy that leverages a standard normal distribution prior to minimize quantization errors, reducing
communication overhead while preserving model performance. Even under ultra-low-bit quantization, the proposed
FedWSQ achieves superior performance, consistently outperforming state-of-the-art (SOTA) FL methods across various datasets and FL settings.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
• We propose an effective application of WS in FL, enhancing model convergence and stability under data heterogeneity and limited client participation. By implicitly performing a gradient filtering process, WS mitigates client
drift while also providing a regularization effect that stabilizes training and improves generalization.
• We introduce DANUQ, a novel quantization method that

Federated learning (FL) often suffers from performance
degradation due to key challenges such as data heterogeneity and communication constraints. To address
these limitations, we present a novel FL framework called
FedWSQ, which integrates weight standardization (WS)
and the proposed distribution-aware non-uniform quantization (DANUQ). WS enhances FL performance by filtering out biased components in local updates during training, thereby improving the robustness of the model against
data heterogeneity and unstable client participation. In addition, DANUQ minimizes quantization errors by leveraging the statistical properties of local model updates. As a
result, FedWSQ significantly reduces communication overhead while maintaining superior model accuracy. Extensive experiments on FL benchmark datasets demonstrate
that FedWSQ consistently outperforms existing FL methods
across various challenging FL settings, including extreme
data heterogeneity and ultra-low-bit communication scenarios. The source code is available at our project page1 .

1. Introduction
In large-scale machine learning, centralized approaches often raise privacy concerns because sensitive data from edge
devices must be collected on a central server for model
training. Federated learning (FL) [31] enables distributed
devices to collaboratively train a shared global model without sharing raw data. A fundamental FL method, FedAvg,
was proposed by McMahan et al. [31]. In this approach,
each client trains its model using the local data, and then
the server collects and averages these local updates to form
a unified global model.
Several studies on FL have verified its practical effectiveness [4, 28, 41, 42, 44, 49, 50]. However, real-world
FL methods often face three key challenges [18, 19, 24,
* indicates equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

1 https://github.com/Seongyeol-kim/FedWSQ

4616

