This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IAP: Invisible Adversarial Patch Attack through Perceptibility-Aware
Localization and Perturbation Optimization
Subrat Kishore Dutta Xiao Zhang
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{subrat.dutta, xiao.zhang}@cispa.de

Abstract

a different but related line of work investigated adversarial
patch attacks [2, 21], which modify localized regions without magnitude restrictions. The general framework of this
approach facilitates adaptability to physical-world scenarios, increasing threats to security-critical machine learning
systems. Nevertheless, adversarial patches, though applicable in physical space, often attract suspicion due to their
highly visible, salient nature and inability to maintain homogeneity with the host image.
To overcome this, several techniques [9, 26, 40, 45] have
been proposed to generate adversarial patches that mimic
realistic images, ensuring their placement does not raise
suspicion. These approaches focus on maintaining context
homogeneity and high realism, which are crucial for achieving imperceptibility to human perception. Despite these advancements, the perturbations required to sustain high attack efficacy, particularly in targeted scenarios, often result
in large patches that are still visually noticeable. Defense
mechanisms [5, 10, 20, 27, 43, 51] have also been developed that leverage the contiguous high saliency of the patch
region, proving successful in detecting adversarial patches.
The strict constraints on patch size and the need to avoid
saliency make balancing stealth and targeted attack success
particularly difficult. Therefore, a natural question arises:

Despite modifying only a small localized input region, adversarial patches can drastically change the prediction of
computer vision models. However, prior methods either
cannot perform satisfactorily under targeted attack scenarios or fail to produce contextually coherent adversarial patches, causing them to be easily noticeable by human examiners and insufficiently stealthy against automatic
patch defenses. In this paper, we introduce IAP, a novel
attack framework that generates highly invisible adversarial patches based on perceptibility-aware localization
and perturbation optimization schemes. Specifically, IAP
first searches for a proper location to place the patch by
leveraging classwise localization and sensitivity maps, balancing the susceptibility of patch location to both victim
model prediction and human visual system, then employs
a perceptibility-regularized adversarial loss and a gradient update rule that prioritizes color constancy for optimizing invisible perturbations. Comprehensive experiments
across various image benchmarks and model architectures
demonstrate that IAP consistently achieves competitive attack success rates in targeted settings with significantly improved patch invisibility compared to existing baselines. In
addition to being highly imperceptible to humans, IAP is
shown to be stealthy enough to render several state-of-theart patch defenses ineffective.

Are targeted attack goals at all achievable with visually
imperceptible adversarial patches?
In this paper, we answer the above question affirmatively by
developing a general perceptibility-aware framework that
can generate invisible patches with strong attack capabilities. Below, we summarize the contributions of our work.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are highly susceptible to
inputs, often known as adversarial examples [12, 42],
crafted with small perturbations designed to fool the model.
Most existing attacks constrain perturbations using ℓp -norm
bounds to ensure imperceptibility [4, 12, 30, 31], where
any pixel of the entire input image is allowed to be modified to achieve the attack goal. Imposing an ℓp -norm constraint limits perturbation size, ensuring generated perturbations remain visually imperceptible to humans. In contrast,

Contributions. We propose IAP1 , a novel patch attack
framework based on a series of perceptibility-aware optimization schemes, which can realize targeted attack goals
with Invisible Adversarial Patches (see Fig. 1 for the overall pipeline). Most prior work overlooked human visual
sensitivity in patch placement and perturbation, a key factor in our design’s success. Specifically, IAP first locates a

14766

1 The code is available at https://github.com/subratkishoredutta/IAP.

