This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

χ: Symmetry Understanding of 3D Shapes via Chirality Disentanglement
Weikang Wang∗

Tobias Weißberg∗
Nafie El Amrani
University of Bonn & Lamarr Institute

Chirality Features
Source

Florian Bernard

Shape Matching Results
Target
Diff3F

Ours

Figure 1. Left: Our chirality features can disentangle the left and right parts of 3D shapes. By leveraging the generalisation abilities of
foundation image models, our method remains effective even on partial shapes. Right: Our chirality features resolve left-right ambiguities
in 3D shape matching by augmenting state-of-the-art vertex features like Diff3F [16] with structural information.

iments across diverse datasets. Results from downstream
tasks including left-right disentanglement, shape matching, and part segmentation demonstrate their effectiveness and practical utility. Project page: https://wei-kangwang.github.io/chirality/

Abstract
Chirality information (i.e. information that allows distinguishing left from right) is ubiquitous for various data
modes in computer vision, including images, videos, point
clouds, and meshes. While chirality has been extensively
studied in the image domain, its exploration in shape analysis (such as point clouds and meshes) remains underdeveloped. Although many shape vertex descriptors have
shown appealing properties (e.g. robustness to rigid-body
transformations), they are often not able to disambiguate
between left and right symmetric parts. Considering the
ubiquity of chirality information in different shape analysis problems and the lack of chirality-aware features within
current shape descriptors, developing a chirality feature
extractor becomes necessary and urgent. Based on the
recent Diff3F framework [16], we propose an unsupervised chirality feature extraction pipeline to decorate shape
vertices with chirality-aware information, extracted from
2D foundation models. We evaluated the extracted chirality features through quantitative and qualitative exper-

1. Introduction

∗ Authors contributed equally.

Symmetry and chirality are two sides of the same coin:
Symmetry highlights the similarities between two parts,
whereas chirality focuses on the differences between them.
As a broadly applicable and intuitive assumption for many
objects in the physical world, symmetry has been extensively studied in various computer vision domains for a long
time, including 3D reconstruction [57, 58], pose estimation
[10, 37, 43, 68], and generative models [1, 60]. However,
chirality, despite its close relationship to symmetry, remains
less explored and has just re-attracted researchers’ attention
in recent years [32, 34, 52, 62, 70].
In the field of shape analysis, symmetry and chirality
also play an important role in many problems, including
matching [11, 33, 64, 67], deformation [69], symmetry
plane detection [44], etc. For many shape analysis prob-

28292

