This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perceiving and Acting in First-Person:
A Dataset and Benchmark for Egocentric Human-Object-Human Interactions
Liang Xu1,2,3
Yiyi Zhang4

Chengqun Yang1 Zili Lin1,2,3 Fei Xu1 Yifan Liu1 Congsheng Xu1
Jie Qin5 Xingdong Sheng6 Yunhui Liu6 Xin Jin2,3 Yichao Yan1*
Wenjun Zeng2,3 Xiaokang Yang1

1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
3
Ningbo Key Laboratory of Spatial Intelligence and Digital Derivative, Ningbo, China
4
MoE Key Lab of AI, School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 6 Lenovo
https://liangxuy.github.io/InterVLA/

Figure 1. InterVLA features a large-scale human-object-human interaction dataset in a vision-language-action scheme, where an assistant
provides services to an instructor based on egocentric perception and verbal commands. This comprehensive dataset comprises 3.9K
sequences, totaling 11.4 hours and 1.2M frames of multimodal interaction data, including egocentric and exocentric RGB videos, language
commands and high-precision human/object motions, promoting the development of general-purpose intelligent AI assistants.

Abstract
Learning action models from real-world human-centric interaction datasets is important towards building generalpurpose intelligent assistants with efficiency. However, most
existing datasets only offer specialist interaction category
and ignore that AI assistants perceive and act based on
first-person acquisition. We urge that both the generalist
interaction knowledge and egocentric modality are indispensable. In this paper, we embed the manual-assisted task
into a vision-language-action framework, where the assistant provides services to the instructor following egocentric
vision and commands. With our hybrid RGB-MoCap system, pairs of assistants and instructors engage with multi-

ple objects and the scene following GPT-generated scripts.
Under this setting, we accomplish InterVLA, the first largescale human-object-human interaction dataset with 11.4
hours and 1.2M frames of multimodal data, spanning 2
egocentric and 5 exocentric videos, accurate human/object
motions and verbal commands. Furthermore, we establish
novel benchmarks on egocentric human motion estimation,
interaction synthesis, and interaction prediction with comprehensive analysis. We believe that our InterVLA testbed
and the benchmarks will foster future works on building AI
agents in the physical world.

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding authors

Learning generalist interaction knowledge is indispensable
towards general-purpose intelligent agents to assist humans
in the physical world. To avoid expensive robot data col-

12535

