This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-View Slot Attention Using Paraphrased Texts for Face Anti-Spooﬁng
Jeongmin Yu1 *, Susang Kim1,2 *, Kisu Lee1 , Taekyoung Kwon1 , Won-Yong Shin1 , Ha Young Kim1†
1
Yonsei University 2 POSCO DX
{jeongminyu, healess, kisu0928, taekyoung, wy.shin, hayoung.kim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent face anti-spooﬁng (FAS) methods have shown remarkable cross-domain performance by employing visionlanguage models like CLIP. However, existing CLIP-based
FAS models do not fully exploit CLIP’s patch embedding
tokens, failing to detect critical spooﬁng clues. Moreover,
these models rely on a single text prompt per class (e.g.,
‘live’ or ‘fake’), which limits generalization. To address
these issues, we propose MVP-FAS, a novel framework incorporating two key modules: Multi-View Slot attention
(MVS) and Multi-Text Patch Alignment (MTPA). Both modules utilize multiple paraphrased texts to generate generalized features and reduce dependence on domain-speciﬁc
text. MVS extracts local detailed spatial features and global
context from patch embeddings by leveraging diverse texts
with multiple perspectives. MTPA aligns patches with multiple text representations to improve semantic robustness.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that MVP-FAS achieves
superior generalization performance, outperforming previous state-of-the-art methods on cross-domain datasets.
Code: https://github.com/Elune001/MVP-FAS.

1. Introduction
Face anti-spooﬁng (FAS), which distinguishes spoofed
faces from real ones, has become essential for enhancing
the security of facial recognition systems. Previous FAS
models [3, 4, 11, 26, 29, 30, 44, 61] have demonstrated
notable effectiveness against various attack types, such as
printed image [65], replay [9], and 3D mask attacks [17]
in intra-domain datasets. However, in real-world scenarios,
FAS models may encounter unseen attack types and data not
present during training [24, 47, 54]. Therefore, extracting
generalized features is crucial to enhancing FAS models’
ability to accurately detect spoofed faces across a broader
range of conditions [19, 22, 27, 32, 36, 68].
Recently, FAS methods [7, 14, 18, 20, 31, 36, 39, 49]
that leverage vision-language models (VLMs), such as
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison between CLS-based single prompt and
multi-view-based FAS methods. (a) illustrates the single prompt
FAS model using the CLIP CLS token, which captures global information but lacks ﬁne-grained local details. (b) represents our
multi-view-based FAS framework (MVP-FAS), providing local
details with global context for each view. The red and blue areas indicate where the model focuses on within each view.

CLIP [45], have demonstrated remarkable performance in
zero-shot learning and domain generalization across diverse
cross-domain attacks. The ﬁrst CLIP-based FAS model,
FLIP [49], primarily relies on the classiﬁcation token (CLS
token), which encodes global image information. Recent
CLIP-based models [18, 20, 36] have proposed methods
to utilize local spooﬁng clues. FGPL [20] captures local details through prompt learning and a convolutional
adapter applied to the CLIP image encoder. CFPL [36]
and S-CPTL [18] leverage spatial information by extracting style- or content-related features from patch embeddings and feeding them into the text encoder. However,
these methods [18, 20, 36] still do not directly utilize CLIP’s
patch embedding tokens, which contain rich local information within the image domain. Consequently, similar to
FLIP [49], these approaches struggle to capture ﬁne-grained
spooﬁng artifacts, such as abnormal textures and light reﬂections in small areas, due to the information loss when
projecting into the text embedding space for prompt generation. In addition, CLIP is trained to align the CLS token

21117

