This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diff2 I2P: Differentiable Image-to-Point Cloud Registration with Diffusion Prior
∗

∗

†

†

†

Juncheng Mu1,4 Chengwei Ren2, 3, 4 Weixiang Zhang3 Liang Pan4 Xiao-Ping Zhang2, 3 Yue Gao1
{1 School of Software, 2 Shenzhen Ubiquitous Data Enabling Key Lab, 3 SIGS}, Tsinghua University, 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{mujc21, rcw22, zhang-wx22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, paul007pl2020@gmail.com, xpzhang@ieee.org, gaoyue@tsinghua.edu.cn
∗

Equal contribution

†

Corresponding authors

Abstract
Query
Point

Learning cross-modal correspondences is essential for
image-to-point cloud (I2P) registration. Existing methods
achieve this mostly by utilizing metric learning to enforce
feature alignment across modalities, disregarding the inherent modality gap between image and point data. Consequently, this paradigm struggles to ensure accurate crossmodal correspondences. To this end, inspired by the crossmodal generation success of recent large diffusion models,
we propose Diff2 I2P, a fully Differentiable I2P registration
framework, leveraging a novel and effective Diffusion prior
for bridging the modality gap. Specifically, we propose a
Control-Side Score Distillation (CSD) technique to distill
knowledge from a depth-conditioned diffusion model to directly optimize the predicted transformation. However, the
gradients on the transformation fail to backpropagate onto
the cross-modal features due to the non-differentiability
of correspondence retrieval and PnP solver. To this end,
we further propose a Deformable Correspondence Tuning
(DCT) module to estimate the correspondences in a differentiable way, followed by the transformation estimation using a differentiable PnP solver. With these two designs, the
Diffusion model serves as a strong prior to guide the crossmodal feature learning of image and point cloud for forming
robust correspondences, which significantly improves the
registration. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
that Diff2 I2P consistently outperforms SoTA I2P registration methods, achieving over 7% improvement in registration recall on the 7-Scenes benchmark. Code will be available at https://github.com/mujc2021/Diff2I2P.

GT Key
Point

Without CSD

With CSD

Figure 1. Our proposed Control-Side Score Distillation (CSD)
effectively promotes the learning of cross-modal features by introducing a novel Diffusion prior to bridging the modality gap. To
illustrate this, we select a query point from the chair leg in the
point cloud, where the features are primarily geometry-dominated
and challenging for the image backbone to capture effectively. Its
ground-truth corresponding pixel is marked in the top right image.
The bottom row visualizes the comparison of cosine similarity between image and point cloud features with and without CSD. With
CSD, it correctly locates the pixel with the most similar image features while the one without it fails.

1. Introduction

ordinate system. Unlike single-modal registration, such as
image registration [22, 26, 42, 43, 48, 65] and point cloud
registration [1, 14, 18, 38, 59, 61], which have been extensively studied for decades, cross-modal registration encounters greater challenges due to limited overlap, severe noise,
modality misalignment, etc.
Most existing approaches [11, 19, 24, 25, 34, 40, 53] follow the technical roadmap of image or point cloud registration, i.e., matching and transformation. They first extract
a set of cross-modal correspondences, then the transformation estimation problem is solved as a Perspective-n-Point
(PnP) problem using PnP-RANSAC [12, 23]. Therefore,
retrieving an accurate putative correspondence set is essential for robust registration. Recent advances [11, 25, 53, 64]
have led to substantial progress in learning-based matching methods, which typically employ metric learning tech-

Cross-modal registration between images and point clouds
is a crucial task in computer vision with broad applications
in robotics, AR/VR, etc. Given an image and a point cloud
of the same scene, the goal is to estimate a rigid transformation that aligns the point cloud with the image’s camera co-

25777

