This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unveiling the Invisible: Reasoning Complex Occlusions Amodally with AURA
Zhixuan Li1 Hyunse Yoon2 Sanghoon Lee2 Weisi Lin1∗
1
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Korea
zhixuanli520@gmail.com, hsyoon97, slee@yonsei.ac.kr, wslin@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1. We introduce AURA, a multi-modal approach designed for reasoning the amodal segmentation mask including both visible and
occlusion regions based on the user’s question. AURA can deduce the implicit purpose underneath the question and respond with the
textual answer along with predicted amodal masks for various objects. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
Amodal segmentation aims to infer the complete shape of
occluded objects, even when the occluded region’s appearance is unavailable. However, current amodal segmentation
methods lack the capability to interact with users through
text input and struggle to understand or reason about implicit and complex purposes. While methods like LISA integrate multi-modal large language models (LLMs) with segmentation for reasoning tasks, they are limited to predicting
only visible object regions and face challenges in handling
complex occlusion scenarios. To address these limitations,
we propose a novel task named amodal reasoning segmentation, aiming to predict the complete amodal shape of occluded objects while providing answers with elaborations
based on user text input. We develop a generalizable dataset
generation pipeline and introduce a new dataset focusing

on daily life scenarios, encompassing diverse real-world
occlusions. Furthermore, we present AURA (Amodal Understanding and Reasoning Assistant), a novel model with
advanced global and spatial-level designs specifically tailored to handle complex occlusions. Extensive experiments
validate AURA’s effectiveness on the proposed dataset. The
code, model, and dataset are released in this page.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

With the development of the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) series methods [24, 25, 58], predicting the segmentation mask of visible regions has been largely solved.
Amodal segmentation aims to predict the entire shape of an
object, including both visible and occluded regions, which
is naturally challenging since visual cues for the occluded
regions are unavailable. Predicting the intact shape of occluded objects is crucial for various real-world applications,

21927

