This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiGarment: Cross-modal Harmony Based Diffusion Model for Flat Sketch to
Realistic Garment Image
Junyi Guo1† , Jingxuan Zhang1† , Fangyu Wu1∗ , Huanda Lu2
Qiufeng Wang1 , Wenmian Yang3 , Eng Gee Lim1 , Dongming Lu4
1

2

Xi’an Jiaotong Liverpool University
3

Beijing Normal University

4

NingboTech University

Zhejiang University

{junyi.guo23, jingxuan.zhang23}@student.xjtlu.edu.cn, fangyu.wu02@xjtlu.edu.cn

(a)

(c)
A Pink pants
made in woolen

(d)

(b)

A Brown shirt
made in leather
Flat Sketch

HiGarment (Ours)

IP-Adapter

DEADiff

Garment Product

Inputs

HiGarment (Ours)

IP-Adapter

DEADiff

Figure 1: Flat Sketch to Realistic Garment task generates a realistic sample garment from a flat sketch and text prompts, providing a
reference for factories to produce garment product. HiGarment captures the structure of garments and attributes (color and fabric) details.
Blue boxes represent target results, red boxes describe accurate results, while yellow boxes describe inaccurate results.

Abstract
Diffusion-based garment synthesis tasks primarily focus on
the design phase in the fashion domain, while the garment production process remains largely underexplored. To
bridge this gap, we introduce a new task: Flat Sketch to
Realistic Garment Image (FS2RG), which generates realistic garment images by integrating flat sketches and textual
guidance. FS2RG presents two key challenges: 1) fabric
characteristics are solely guided by textual prompts, providing insufficient visual supervision for diffusion-based models, which limits their ability to capture fine-grained fabric details; 2) flat sketches and textual guidance may provide conflicting information, requiring the model to selectively preserve or modify garment attributes while maintaining structural coherence. To tackle this task, we propose HiGarment, a novel framework that comprises two

core components: i) a multi-modal semantic enhancement
mechanism that enhances fabric representation across textual and visual modalities, and ii) a harmonized crossattention mechanism that dynamically balances information from flat sketches and text prompts, allowing controllable synthesis by generating either sketch-aligned (imagebiased) or text-guided (text-biased) outputs. Furthermore,
we collect Multi-modal Detailed Garment, the largest opensource dataset for garment generation. Experimental results and user studies demonstrate the effectiveness of HiGarment in garment synthesis. The code and dataset are
available at https://github.com/Maple498/HiGarment.

1. Introduction

† Equal contribution.

In garment production, a key step involves converting flat
sketches, a detailed two-dimensional design outlining garment details [28], into physical samples through multiple
stages, including fabric sourcing, pattern creation, and de-

* Corresponding author.

18542

