This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Hyperdimensional One Place Signature to Represent Them All:
Stackable Descriptors For Visual Place Recognition
Connor Malone
Somayeh Hussaini
Tobias Fischer
Michael Milford
QUT Centre for Robotics, Queensland University of Technology, Australia
{cj.malone, s.hussaini, tobias.fischer, michael.milford}@qut.edu.au

Abstract
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) enables coarse localization by comparing query images to a reference database of
geo-tagged images. Recent breakthroughs in deep learning
architectures and training regimes have led to methods with
improved robustness to factors like environment appearance
change, but with the downside that the required training
and/or matching compute scales with the number of distinct
environmental conditions encountered. Here, we propose
Hyperdimensional One Place Signatures (HOPS) to simultaneously improve the performance, compute and scalability
of these state-of-the-art approaches by fusing the descriptors from multiple reference sets captured under different
conditions. HOPS scales to any number of environmental
conditions by leveraging the Hyperdimensional Computing
framework. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that our approach is highly generalizable and consistently improves
recall performance across all evaluated VPR methods and
datasets by large margins. Arbitrarily fusing reference images without compute penalty enables numerous other useful
possibilities, three of which we demonstrate here: improved
performance with reduced dimensionality descriptors, stacking synthetic images, and coarse localization to an entire
traverse or environmental section.

Figure 1. Here, we demonstrate near unanimous improvements to
recall@1 by using our HOPS fused descriptors across multiple stateof-the-art base descriptors and query conditions. We show absolute
improvement over the best recall achieved by a single reference
set, using hyperdimensional computing to fuse descriptors from
multiple reference sets with no dimensionality increase.

as an image retrieval problem that provides coarse localization estimates, which are then refined in a hierarchical
process using feature matching approaches [50, 62, 63].
Most state-of-the-art (SOTA) VPR methods use deep
learning models to represent images as feature-based descriptors [3, 10, 31, 35, 43]. While significant progress towards VPR that is robust to lighting, weather, viewpoint
and other appearance changes has been made, most approaches adopt the general formulation of using a single
reference set (often captured in ‘ideal daytime’ conditions)
to perform place recognition. To further improve appearance invariance, recent deep learning methods have used
multi-condition training sets [2, 80], explicit consideration
of multiple instances of places captured under varying conditions to improve feature robustness [10, 43], and domain
adaptation [12, 28]. Further work has attempted to consolidate separate VPR matches across multiple reference
datasets [22, 49], or simply develop ever more robust feature
extractors [10, 35, 43, 44, 76].
In this work, we explore an alternative approach for im-

1. Introduction
Localization is a critical task in robotics [77, 85], autonomous vehicles [16, 38], and augmented reality [58, 65].
Long-term operation requires localization systems that are
robust to factors like lighting, weather and dynamic scene
changes –– all of which significantly impact a place’s appearance [72].
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is the task of identifying
previously visited places given a query image and a database
of geo-tagged reference images [23, 42, 47, 68, 88]. In applications such as loop closure in Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) [14, 21, 75], VPR is often formulated

9822

