This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Walking: A Large-Scale Image-Text Benchmark
for Text-based Person Anomaly Search

1

Shuyu Yang1 Yaxiong Wang2 * Li Zhu1 * Zhedong Zheng3 *
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Hefei University of Technology 3 University of Macau

{ysy653, wangyx15}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhuli@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, zhedongzheng@um.edu.mo
Query

Retrieval Results

“A woman in a blue
shirt, a white and
black skirt and a pair
of white and black
shoes.”

Query
"A woman in a black
swimsuit is falling into the
pool, her legs stretched
upwards and one hand
clutching her chest..."

Hard Negative
True Match Sample

Scene

Normal Action

lawn

running

“A child is running
on a lush green
lawn, wearing…”

park

playing soccer

“A young girl is
playing soccer on
a grass field…”

Normal Action

Normal Action

Anomaly Action

wedding
“… a bride in…
wedding dress...
holding hands…“

Gallery
Text-based Person Search

Gallery

dancing

Anomaly Action
lying
“A child is lying in
a muddy puddle,
wearing a blue...”

being hit
“A young child is
hit by a red ball on
a grassy field...”

falling down
“… bride, wearing
a white lace…
kneeling…”

Training Set (Synthetic)
Text-based Person Anomaly Search

Figure 1. Comparison of our proposed task, i.e., Text-based Person Anomaly Search (right) vs. Traditional Text-Based Person
Search (left). Traditional text-based person search primarily focuses on the appearance of individuals and often overlooks action information, if any. In contrast, given the appearance and action description, text-based person anomaly search aims to locate the pedestrian of
interest engaged in either normal or abnormal actions from a large pool of candidates. Text-based person anomaly search emphasizes the
identification of pedestrian abnormal behaviors, aligning closely with real-world emergency and safety requirements.

Abstract
Text-based person search aims to retrieve specific individuals across camera networks using natural language descriptions. However, current benchmarks often exhibit biases towards common actions like walking or standing,
neglecting the critical need for identifying abnormal behaviors in real-world scenarios. To meet such demands,
we propose a new task, text-based person anomaly search,
locating pedestrians engaged in both routine or anomalous activities via text. To enable the training and evaluation of this new task, we construct a large-scale imagetext Pedestrian Anomaly Behavior (PAB) benchmark, featuring a broad spectrum of actions, e.g., running, performing, playing soccer, and the corresponding anomalies, e.g.,
lying, being hit, and falling of the same identity. The training set of PAB comprises 1, 013, 605 synthesized image-text
pairs of both normalities and anomalies, while the test set
includes 1, 978 real-world image-text pairs. To validate
the potential of PAB, we introduce a cross-modal pose-

aware framework, which integrates human pose patterns
with identity-based hard negative pair sampling. Extensive
experiments on the proposed benchmark show that synthetic
training data facilitates the fine-grained behavior retrieval,
and the proposed pose-aware method arrives at 84.93% recall@1 accuracy, surpassing other competitive methods.

* Corresponding author. The dataset, model, and code are available at
https://github.com/Shuyu-XJTU/CMP.

11720

1. Introduction
Text-based person search [25, 67] focuses on retrieving
specific individuals from large-scale image databases using natural language descriptions. This capability is particularly valuable for user-interactive applications in smart
cities, security systems, and personalized services, where
image queries are often unavailable or impractical to obtain.
However, current benchmarks for text-based person search
suffer from significant limitations in behavioral diversity,
primarily due to their bias towards common pedestrian actions. Existing datasets, including CUHK-PEDES [25],
ICFG-PEDES [11], and RSTReid [71], predominantly feature routine activities such as walking and standing, failing
to represent the full spectrum of real-world behaviors ade-

