This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MV-Adapter: Multi-View Consistent Image Generation Made Easy
Zehuan Huang1 Yuan-Chen Guo2† Haoran Wang3
Ran Yi3 Lizhuang Ma3 Yan-Pei Cao2
Lu Sheng1
1

Beihang University

2

VAST

3

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Project page: https://huanngzh.github.io/MV-Adapter-Page/
(realistic)
macro shot, parrot,
colorful, dark shot,
realistic …

(cartoon)
1 boy, kurosaki
ichigo, bleach,
black hakama,
bankai…

(chalk sketch)
an elderly woman
with a serene
expression…

(SDXL-Lightning)
mecha vampire
girl chibi

(ControlNet
Scribble)
Sonic the Hedgehog

(ControlNet Tile)
A character
wearing blue and
pink outfit…

Adaptability
Camera-guided Text-to-Multiview Generation

Camera-guided Image-to-Multiview Generation

Versatility

The warrior
Aragorn from Lord
of the Rings

Geometry-guided Text-to-Multiview Generation

Geometry-guided Image-to-Multiview Generation

A muscular
cartoon cat
wearing blue jeans
and a brown belt…
Input

Input

Generated Multi-view Images

Generated Multi-view Images

Figure 1. MV-Adapter is a versatile adapter that turns existing pre-trained text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models to multi-view image
generators. Row 1,2,3: results by integrating MV-Adapter with personalized T2I models, few-step T2I models, and ControlNets [68],
demonstrating its adaptability. Row 4,5: results under various control signals, including view-guided or geometry-guided generation with
text or image inputs, showcasing its versatility.

Abstract
Existing multi-view image generation methods often make
invasive modifications to pre-trained text-to-image (T2I)

models and require full fine-tuning, leading to high computational costs and degradation in image quality due to
scarce high-quality 3D data. This paper introduces MVAdapter, an efficient and versatile adapter that enhances
T2I models and their derivatives without altering the original network structure or feature space. To efficiently model

† Project lead;

corresponding author

16377

