This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal Overlapping Prediction: A Self-supervised Pre-training Method for
LiDAR Moving Object Segmentation
Ziliang Miao1 Runjian Chen1 * Yixi Cai2 Buwei He2
Wenquan Zhao3 Wenqi Shao4 Bo Zhang4 Fu Zhang1†
1

3

The University of Hong Kong 2 KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Southern University of Science and Technology 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{miaozl, rjchen}@connect.hku.hk

zhaowq2021@sustech.edu.cn

{yixica, buwei}@kth.se

{shaowenqi,zhangbo}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract

fuzhang@hku.hk

Moving object segmentation (MOS) on LiDAR point clouds
is crucial for autonomous systems such as self-driving
vehicles.
While previous supervised approaches rely
on costly manual annotations, LiDAR sequences naturally capture temporal motion cues that can be leveraged
for self-supervised learning. In this paper, we propose
Temporal Overlapping Prediction (TOP), a self-supervised
pre-training method designed to alleviate this annotation
burden. TOP learns powerful spatiotemporal representations by predicting the occupancy states of temporal overlapping points that are commonly observed in current and
adjacent scans. To further ground these representations in
the current scene’s geometry, we introduce an auxiliary pretraining objective of reconstructing the occupancy of the
current scan. Extensive experiments on the nuScenes and
SemanticKITTI datasets validate our method’s effectiveness. TOP consistently outperforms existing supervised and
self-supervised pre-training baselines across both pointlevel Intersection-over-Union (IoU) and object-level Recall
metrics. Notably, it achieves a relative improvement of up to
28.77% over a training-from-scratch baseline and demonstrates strong transferability across LiDAR setups. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.com/
ZiliangMiao/TOP.

thereby enabling better planning of collision-free trajectories in dynamic scenes. However, per-point manual labeling of moving objects [3, 6, 9] is both costly and laborintensive. Meanwhile, self-supervised pre-training has
achieved significant success in natural language processing [5, 13, 19, 30, 40], computer vision [14, 17, 18, 41, 51],
and 3D vision [39, 56, 59, 60], enabling the learning of
transferable embeddings from unlabeled raw data. This motivates us to pre-train a backbone using raw LiDAR data
in a self-supervised manner and then fine-tune it for MOS,
where labeled data is limited and expensive.
The MOS task heavily relies on temporal information
to discern the motion of objects relative to their surroundings. In the literature involving temporal information of LiDAR data, an intuitive approach is to utilize LiDAR observation forecasting as a self-supervised pre-training method
for MOS. The forecasting task includes point cloud forecasting [23, 32, 53, 54, 61] and occupancy forecasting [1],
which focus on predicting future scans or occupancy maps
based on past and current LiDAR scans and poses. However, utilizing forecasting as a pre-training method for MOS
presents certain limitations: (1) The forecasting task is more
complex and advanced than MOS. Forecasting a static object mainly requires geometric information to reconstruct
the unseen parts of the object from a novel sensor view. For
moving objects, beyond geometry, it is essential to extract
temporal features such as the object’s kinematics and interactions between objects and their surroundings. Hence,
relying on forecasting as a pre-training step for MOS could
be unnecessarily complex. (2) Existing methods [1, 23] inevitably learn a “flow” when using raw future observations
as supervision. This complex “flow” information represents
the relationship between the embeddings of past observations and future observations. Current approaches either
implicitly learn this flow through simple feature broadcasting [23] or explicitly predict it [1], lacking direct supervi-

1. Introduction
Moving Object Segmentation (MOS) on LiDAR data aims
to segment moving points from the entire LiDAR scan, providing autonomous systems [9, 33, 34, 50, 55] with important clues for localization and dynamic obstacle avoidance,
* Project lead.
† Corresponding author.

26653

