This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learn2Synth: Learning Optimal Data Synthesis Using Hypergradients
for Brain Image Segmentation
Xiaoling Hu1,† , Xiangrui Zeng1 , Oula Puonti1,2 ,
Juan Eugenio Iglesias1,3,4 , Bruce Fischl1,‡ , Yaël Balbastre1,5,‡
1

2

Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School
Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Copenhagen University Hospital
3
Centre for Medical Image Computing, University College London
4
Computer Science and AI Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
5
Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London

1. Introduction

Abstract

In medical imaging, the availability of high-quality reference data (high-resolution and artifact-free images, expert
annotations, fair representation of populations) is a major limiting factor, compared to other computer vision domains [68]. This can be explained by the cost of data acquisition, noise and artifacts inherent to medical images, as
well as the time and expertise required to label dense threedimensional images. This limitation has hampered the development of modality-agnostic tools and led to a web of
highly specific models trained on small datasets, whose performance degrades greatly in the presence of slight domain
shifts [37, 47, 67], making out-of-site generalizability one
of the most difficult and pervasive problems in biomedical machine learning [8]. This behavior, specific to supervised training on small datasets – peak on-domain performance with a rapid decay as data shifts away from the training domain – has long hindered the adoption of learningbased methods by the academic and clinical community.
In contrast, supervised shallow models and unsupervised
Bayesian approaches reach moderate but consistent performances across the board [3, 57].

Domain randomization through synthesis is a powerful
strategy to train networks that are unbiased with respect
to the domain of the input images. Randomization allows
networks to see a virtually infinite range of intensities and
artifacts during training, thereby minimizing overfitting to
appearance and maximizing generalization to unseen data.
Although powerful, this approach relies on the accurate
tuning of a large set of hyperparameters that govern the
probabilistic distribution of the synthesized images. Instead of manually tuning these parameters, we introduce
Learn2Synth, a novel procedure in which synthesis parameters are learned using a small set of real labeled data. Unlike methods that impose constraints to align synthetic data
with real data (e.g., contrastive or adversarial techniques),
which risk misaligning the image and its label map, we tune
an augmentation engine such that a segmentation network
trained on synthetic data has optimal accuracy when applied to real data. This approach allows the training procedure to benefit from real labeled examples, without ever
using these real examples to train the segmentation network,
which avoids biasing the network towards the properties of
the training set. Specifically, we develop parametric and
nonparametric strategies to enhance synthetic images in a
way that improves the performance of the segmentation network. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this learning
strategy on synthetic and real-world brain scans. Code is
available at: https://github.com/HuXiaoling/
Learn2Synth.

† Email: Xiaoling Hu (xihu3@mgh.harvard.edu); ‡ Co-senior authors

In a data-limited regime, randomized augmentation remains crucial and provides performance boosts in most contexts [58, 63, 70]. The use of proper augmentation – along
with methodical architecture and hyperparameter tuning –
has been shown to be one of the main predictors of accuracy on an array of medical image segmentation challenges [2, 34]. The introduction of domain randomization [5, 64, 65, 78], in which the concept of augmentation is pushed even further by randomly sampling entire
images, has been a paradigm shift in this regard. In its
version most commonly used in biomedical imaging, do-

20368

