This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AVT RUST B ENCH: Assessing and Enhancing Reliability and Robustness in
Audio-Visual LLMs
Sanjoy Chowdhury∗1
Sayan Nag∗2
Subhrajyoti Dasgupta3
4
4†
Yaoting Wang
Mohamed Elhoseiny
Ruohan Gao1†
Dinesh Manocha1†
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 University of Toronto
3
Mila and Université de Montréal 4 KAUST
{sanjoyc, rhgao, dmanocha}@umd.edu

sayan.nag@mail.utoronto.ca

subhrajyoti.dasgupta@umontreal.ca

m https://schowdhury671.github.io/avtrustbench_project/

Figure 1. Introducing AVT RUST B ENCH and CAVPref. We present AVT RUST B ENCH, a new benchmark comprising three challenging
yet unexplored axes, i.e., Adversarial Attack , Compositional Reasoning , and Modality Dependency , and evaluate SOTA Audio-Visual
LLMs (AVLLMs) on this benchmark. We observe that these models demonstrate poor performances under these settings. To alleviate these
limitations, we propose a novel AVLLM-agnostic preference optimization strategy CAVPref, which substantially improves the reliability
and robustness of these models over existing solutions such as DPO. : VideoLLaMA-2 model.

Abstract

(AVT RUST B ENCH), comprising 600K samples spanning
over 9 meticulously crafted tasks, evaluating the capabilities
of AVLLMs across three distinct dimensions: Adversarial
Attack, Compositional Reasoning, and Modality-specific Dependency. Using our benchmark, we extensively evaluate 16
state-of-the-art AVLLMs. The findings reveal that the majority of existing models fall significantly short of achieving
human-like comprehension, offering valuable insights for
future research directions. To alleviate the limitations in the
existing approaches, we further propose a robust, modelagnostic calibrated audio-visual preference optimizationbased training strategy CAVPref, obtaining a gain up to

With the rapid advancement of Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs), several diagnostic benchmarks
have recently been developed to assess these models’ multimodal reasoning proficiency. However, these benchmarks
are restricted to assessing primarily the visual aspect and
do not examine the holistic audio-visual (AV) understanding.
Moreover, currently, there are no benchmarks that investigate the capabilities of AVLLMs to calibrate their responses
when presented with perturbed inputs. To this end, we introduce Audio-Visual Trustworthiness assessment Benchmark
∗ Equal contribution. † Equal advising.

1590

