This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OrderChain: Towards General Instruct-Tuning for Stimulating
the Ordinal Understanding Ability of MLLM
Jinhong Wang1,2,3∗

Shuo Tong2∗ Jian Liu3 Dongqi Tang3 Weiqiang Wang3
Hongxia Xu2 Danny Z. Chen4 Jintai Chen5† Jian Wu2†

Wentong Li1

1

2

College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University
Transvascular Implantation Devices Research Institute and Liangzhu Laboratory
3
4
5
Ant Group
University of Notre Dame
HKUST (Guangzhou)
∗

Contribute equally † Corresponding Authors

Abstract

MLLM-based Methods

Traditional Deep Learning Methods
23 (yeas old)

Despite the remarkable progress of multimodal large language models (MLLMs), they continue to face challenges
in achieving competitive performance on ordinal regression (OR; a.k.a. ordinal classification). To address this
issue, this paper presents OrderChain, a novel and general prompting paradigm that improves the ordinal understanding ability of MLLMs by specificity and
commonality modeling. Specifically, our OrderChain
consists of a set of task-aware prompts to facilitate the
specificity modeling of diverse OR tasks and a new range
optimization Chain-of-Thought (RO-CoT), which learns a
commonality way of thinking about OR tasks by uniformly
decomposing them into multiple small-range optimization
subtasks. Further, we propose a category recursive division (CRD) method to generate instruction candidate category prompts to support RO-CoT automatic optimization.
Comprehensive experiments show that LLaVA model with
our OrderChain improves baseline LLaVA significantly on
diverse OR datasets, e.g., from 47.5% to 93.2% accuracy on the Adience dataset for age estimation, and from
30.0% to 85.7% accuracy on the Diabetic Retinopathy
dataset. Notably, LLaVA with our OrderChain also remarkably outperforms state-of-the-art methods by 27% on accuracy and 0.24 on MAE on the Adience dataset. To our
best knowledge, our OrderChain is the first work that augments MLLMs for OR tasks, and the effectiveness is witnessed across a spectrum of OR datasets. Project Page:
https://order-chain.github.io/.

Age
Estimation

Model A

Aesthetics
Assessment

Model B

23 (yeas old)
Age
Estimation

2 (flawed)

4 (Beautiful)
Aesthetics
Assessment

1 (Stage)
Cancer
Staging

Model C

Unified MLLM

2 (Stage )

Cancer
Staging

Figure 1. Comparing traditional ordinal regression (OR) methods
and modern MLLM methods. Traditional OR methods perform
well but need to train separate models for different tasks. MLLMs
can be unified for diverse tasks but struggle in performance.

searchers have been enhancing these models by incorporating visual understanding capabilities and led to emergence
of multimodal large language models (MLLMs), such as
LLaVA [34] and GPT-4V [40] and Qwen-VL [3, 4], exhibiting capabilities comparable to human intelligence in visual
understanding tasks [53, 55]. Despite these advances, the
potential of MLLMs on order understanding for ordinal regression tasks is not yet well explored.
Ordinal regression (OR) refers to classifying object instances into ordinal categories, and is crucial for applications in various areas like facial age estimation [26, 38, 47],
image aesthetics assessment [23, 24, 42], medical disease
grading [17, 36] and so on. The category labels of these
tasks all follow a natural order. Unlike general classification
tasks, ordinal understanding is a crucial issue for the representation learning of OR tasks. Mainstream methods in the
past, including order distribution learning [29, 39], instance
comparison [47], and CLIP-based [13, 30, 51], all revolve
around this point. Although these methods are effective, it
is still challenging to train a unified model for all OR tasks
due to different specificities of diverse tasks (e.g., in terms
of the number and range of categories). Therefore, separate
models are still needed for different tasks (see Fig. 1).

1. Introduction
With the success of Large language models (LLMs), e.g.,
GPT3 [6], LLaMA [49], Gemini [48], and Qwen [3], re-

3477

