This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-Driven Multi-Label Zero-Shot Learning with Semantic Granularity
Shouwen Wang1,2 , Qian Wan3 , Junbin Gao4 , Zhigang Zeng1,2∗
1
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education
3
Medical University of Vienna 4 National University of Singapore
wangshouwen533@gmail.com, w252086746@gmail.com, gao.junbin.cn@gmail.com, zgzeng@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

Modality Interaction

Cosine Similarity

Cosine Similarity

Trainable
Frozen

Recent methods learn class-unified prompt contexts by image data to adapt CLIP to zero-shot multi-label image classification, which achieves impressive performance. However, simply tuning prompts is insufficient to deal with novel
classes across different semantic granularity levels. This
limitation arises due to the sparse semantic detail in prompt
class names and the hierarchical granularity competition
among class names caused by CLIP’s contrastive loss. We
propose a language-driven zero-shot multi-label learning
framework to bridge associations among classes across
multiple granularity levels through class name reconstruction. To achieve this, we first leverage a language model to
generate structured text descriptions for each class, which
explicitly capture (1) visual attributes, (2) hierarchical relationships, and (3) co-occurrence scenes. With the enriched descriptions, we then learn class names by extracting
and aligning semantic relationships and features from them
in the CLIP’s shared image-text embedding space. Furthermore, we consider that similar text descriptions among
different classes may introduce ambiguities. We mitigate
these ambiguities by imposing a pair-based loss on learnable class names to enhance their distinctiveness. During
inference, we aggregate semantic predictions from multiple image snippets to reinforce the identification of classes
across different granularity levels. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our method surpasses state-of-theart methods in multi-label zero-shot learning and effectively
handles novel classes across different granularity levels.

Optimization

Image
Encoder

Word
Embedding

Image
Encoder

Optimization

Text
Encoder

Image
Encoder

Text
Encoder

Text
Encoder

GloVe
Image

Class Name

(a)

Image

Context

(b)

Class Name

Image

Context

Text
Class Name Description

(c)

Figure 1. Comparison of classic multi-label zero-shot learning
frameworks and our language-driven method. (a) represents the
traditional separate alignment, while (b) and (c) illustrate the current joint alignment. (a) and (b) require annotated image data for
training, whereas our method relies solely on text descriptions.

reliance on annotation data, multi-label zero-shot learning
(ML-ZSL) is proposed to learn the transfer mechanism from
seen classes to unseen (novel) classes.
Most ML-ZSL studies achieve transferability by aligning
visual and textual spaces. Pioneer works [3, 17, 21, 29, 45]
utilize separate images and text features for alignment
(Fig. 1(a)), with word embeddings of both seen and unseen
classes generated by a pre-trained language-based model,
e.g., GloVe[32]. These methods depend solely on image
data of seen classes to fine-tune the image encoder for aligning the separate textual space, significantly limiting transferability. Large-scale vision-language pre-trained models,
e.g., CLIP [33], are trained by image-text pairs, which has
shown impressive transferability. Recent ML-ZSL studies [15, 16, 37] utilize CLIP’s joint image-text alignment
(Fig. 1(b)) to learn class-unified prompt contexts, improving
cross-category generalizability, even on large-scale datasets
such as NUS-WIDE [11] and Open Images [18].
Indeed, classes in large-scale multi-label datasets exhibit varying levels of semantic granularity, since the websourced images in these datasets are freely annotated by
users with their own interests. For any given image, one
user might focus on fine-grained classes (e.g., “Golden Re-

1. Introduction
Many Multi-label classification (MLC) works [8, 10, 20,
38, 40, 41, 43, 46] have achieved remarkable classification performance, but their model training requires a large
number of images with high-quality annotations. To reduce
∗ Corresponding author.

1968

