This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiMTok: Learning Hierarchical Mask Tokens for Image
Segmentation with Large Multimodal Model
Tao Wang→1 , Changxu Cheng→†1 , Lingfeng Wang→2 , Senda Chen→3 , Wuyue Zhao1
1
Uni-Ubi 2 Zhejiang University 3 Tongji University
{wangtaomarvel,ccx0127,sendachen586}@gmail.com, yayafengzi@zju.edu.cn, zhaohongyi@uni-ubi.com

4
Segment <ref>the dog
wearing orange glasses
</ref>, then also output
the box.

8
16
Hierarchical Mask De-tokenizer

Sure, the mask
appears at

...

...

32

...

, and here is the box
<box>[[328,...]]</box>

Large Multimodal Model

Figure 1. The Large Multimodal Model integrated with HiMTok can progressively generate masks from coarse to fine, enhancing visual
grounding capabilities. In the figure, mask tokens of varying lengths (4, 8, 16, and 32) represent different levels of granularity.

Abstract
The remarkable performance of large multimodal models (LMMs) has attracted significant interest from the image segmentation community. To align with the nexttoken-prediction paradigm, current LMM-driven segmentation methods either use object boundary points to represent
masks or introduce special segmentation tokens, whose hidden states are decoded by a segmentation model requiring
the original image as input. However, these approaches often suffer from inadequate mask representation and complex architectures, limiting the potential of LMMs. In this
work, we propose the Hierarchical Mask Tokenizer (HiMTok), which represents segmentation masks with up to 32
tokens and eliminates the need for the original image during mask de-tokenization. HiMTok allows for compact and
coarse-to-fine mask representations, aligning well with the
LLM next-token-prediction paradigm and facilitating the
direct acquisition of segmentation capabilities. We develop
a 3-stage training recipe for progressive learning of segmentation and visual capabilities, featuring a hierarchical
mask loss for effective coarse-to-fine learning. Additionally,
we enable bidirectional information flow, allowing conversion between bounding boxes and mask tokens to fully

leverage multi-task training potential. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-theart performance across various segmentation tasks,while
also enhancing visual grounding and maintaining overall
visual understanding. The codes are available at https:
//github.com/yayafengzi/LMM-HiMTok.

1. Introduction

→ Equal contributions.

With the rapid development of large multimodal models
(LMMs), visual capabilities are advancing toward more
generalized forms [1, 13, 16, 35, 36, 62, 69]. Image segmentation, a fundamental task in computer vision, has recently improved in terms of generalization and instructionfollowing ability through integration with LMMs [27, 49,
76, 78]. Since large language models (LLMs) were originally designed to generate only text tokens, developing an
appropriate representation for image segmentation is both
critical and challenging.
There are several paradigms for LLM-based image segmentation. Some works represent a segmentation mask
as a sequence of boundary points, which can be learned
by a sequence-to-sequence framework [7, 44, 58, 83, 84],
as shown in Fig. 2 (a). However, using a limited number of polygon vertices can impede accuracy, particularly in representing masks of complex shapes or multi-

† Corresponding author.

23267

