This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Imbalance in Balance: Online Concept Balancing in Generation Models
Method

Yukai Shi1,2

teaser

Jiarong Ou2
Rui Chen2
Haotian Yang2
Jiahao Wang2
Xin Tao2†
Pengfei Wan2
Di Zhang2
Kun Gai2
1
2
Tsinghua University
Kuaishou Technology
(b) "Feathers and fur intermingling on a beaver's sleek body."

(c) "A boy is drinking coffee and an old man is playing toys."

(d) "A ball is on a square table and a cube is on a round table."

Attribute
leakage

Missing
object

(a) "A cat sitting between twins sharing a secret and giggling."

"A man eating spaghetti with tweezers." (spaghetti-fork)

(f)

"A pair of shoes is running on the road." (shoe-foot)

Concept
coupling

(e)

SD3

DALL·E3

Baseline

SD3

Ours

DALL·E3

Baseline

Ours

Figure 1. Our method achieves better concept composition ability with much smaller dataset (31M). Existing models face missing object, attribute leakage, and concept entanglement problem. Specifically, Figure(a)(b) miss the expected concepts (twins, feather).
Figure(c)(d) incorrectly match the attribute of the subjects. Figure(e)(f) exists unnecessary concepts (fork, legs).

Abstract
In visual generation tasks, the responses and combinations of complex concepts often lack stability and are errorprone, which remains an under-explored area. In this paper, we attempt to explore the causal factors for poor concept responses through elaborately designed experiments.
We also design a concept-wise equalization loss function
(IMBA loss) to address this issue. Our proposed method
is online, eliminating the need for offline dataset processing, and requires minimal code changes. In our newly proposed complex concept benchmark Inert-CompBench and
two other public test sets, our method significantly enhances
the concept response capability of baseline models and
yields highly competitive results with only a few codes.

1. Introduction
In recent years, visual generative models have witnessed remarkable progress, attributed to the improvements of gen† Corresponding author.

eration paradigms (e.g. diffusion models [28, 47], autoregressive models [23, 25, 48, 49, 56]), the proposal of new
network architectures (e.g. DiT [6, 12, 37], etc.), and the release of large-scale dataset (e.g. [8, 45, 51], etc.). Driven by
the concerted efforts of academia, industry, and the community, these models have reached a high level of sophistication. They are now capable of generating strikingly realistic
images ([2, 12, 33, 38, 43, 44]), videos ([3, 17, 22, 30, 32]),
and 3D models ([26, 54, 57]), and have been extensively
adopted in creative endeavors and content generation scenarios. Remarkably, the most attractive aspect of generative
models is their proficiency in deciphering and recombining
real-world concepts. This enables them to conjure up objects and scenes that do not even exist in the physical world.
This distinctive capability significantly expands the creative
boundaries for content producers, unlocking novel opportunities for innovation.
However, in real-world applications, generative models
often struggle to consistently generate outputs that closely
match user expectations, especially in the realm of con-

17432

