This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

2.5 Years in Class: A Multimodal Textbook for Vision-Language Pretraining
Wenqi Zhang1,2 *
Hang Zhang3,1
Xin Li2, †
Jiashuo Sun2
Yongliang Shen1
Weiming Lu1, †
Deli Zhao2
Yueting Zhuang1
Lidong Bing2
1

Zhejiang University

2

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
zhangwenqi@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

3

Alibaba Group

11, 17, 21, 25, 32–34, 45, 46, 50, 59, 60]. These advancements can be primarily attributed to the swift improvements
of large language models (LLMs) and the community’s ongoing creation of diverse, high-quality multimodal training
corpora [7, 9, 10, 19, 20, 43], collectively driving VLMs forward. A multimodal corpus typically consists of numerous
image-text pairs to align images with textual descriptions.
Pretraining on such paired datasets allows LLMs to be efficiently adapted into VLMs, with the ability to perceive and
interpret visual information.
Beyond image-text pair data, previous researchers have
also introduced image-text interleaved corpus as a more natural and flexible multimodal corpus [5, 23, 26, 37, 61].
These corpora, consisting of sequences of text paragraphs
interspersed with images, are typically crawled from webpage and document, such as Common Crawl. Pretraining on a combination of interleaved corpus and image-pair
datasets enables VLMs to handle interwoven multi-modal
inputs, while also unlocking advanced capabilities such as
in-context learning [29] and multi-image comparison [20].
Despite their benefits to multi-modal pre-training, existing interleaved datasets still suffer from the following issues
(shown in Fig. 1): (1) Loose text-image relation: The associations between images and text in a webpage are often
loose and may even include irrelevant images, e.g., logos
or advertisements. (2) Lack of logical coherence in image
sequences: most webpages contain relatively few images,
and more importantly, the logical relations between images
are often vague, making it difficult to learn complex visual
reasoning. (3) Low knowledge density: crawled webpages
inevitably include content such as news, entertainment, and
advertisement recommendations, with little involvement of
fundamental knowledge. These issues may severely affect
the learning effectiveness of interleaved corpora. Therefore,
exploring how to extract high-quality, textbook-level interleaved datasets from vast internet data is quite necessary.
On the other hand, the internet contains a vast array of
instructional videos [16, 38, 41, 57], e.g., online mathematics courses on YouTube, where people often turn to acquire

Compared to image-text pair data, interleaved corpora enable Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to understand the
world more naturally like humans. However, such existing datasets are crawled from webpage, facing challenges
like low knowledge density, loose image-text relations, and
poor logical coherence between images. On the other hand,
the internet hosts vast instructional videos (e.g., online geometry courses) that are widely used by humans to learn
foundational subjects, yet these valuable resources remain
underexplored in VLM training. In this paper, we introduce a high-quality multimodal textbook corpus with richer
foundational knowledge for VLM pretraining. It collects
over 2.5 years of instructional videos, totaling 22,000 class
hours. We first use an LLM-proposed taxonomy to systematically gather instructional videos. Then we progressively
extract and refine visual (keyframes), audio (ASR), and textual knowledge (OCR) from the videos, and organize as
an image-text interleaved corpus based on temporal order.
Compared to its counterparts, our video-centric textbook
offers more coherent context, richer knowledge, and better
image-text alignment. Experiments demonstrate its superb
pretraining performance, particularly in knowledge- and
reasoning-intensive tasks like ScienceQA and MathVista.
Moreover, VLMs pre-trained on our textbook exhibit outstanding interleaved context awareness, leveraging visual
and textual cues in few-shot context for task solving. Code
and dataset are available on https://multimodalinterleaved-textbook.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have demonstrated impressive development recently, delivering exceptional performance across a variety of visual tasks, including image
captioning, dialogue, and visual question answering [4, 6,
* Work is done during internship at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding author.

4647

