This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diagnosing Pretrained Models for Out-of-distribution Detection
Haipeng Xiong
Kai Xu
Angela Yao
National University of Singapore, Singapore
haipeng,kxu,ayao@comp.nus.edu.sg

90

Average OOD AUROC

Abstract
This work questions a common assumption of OOD detection, that models with higher in-distribution (ID) accuracy
tend to have better OOD performance. Recent findings show
this assumption doesn’t always hold. A direct observation
is that the later version of torchvision models improves ID
accuracy but suffers from a significant drop in OOD performance. We systematically diagnose torchvision training
recipes and explain this effect by analyzing the maximal
logits of ID and OOD samples. We then propose post-hoc
and training-time solutions to mitigate the OOD decrease
by fixing problematic augmentations in torchvision recipes.
Both solutions enhance OOD detection and maintain strong
ID performance.

85

ResNet50-v1

RegNet-v1
Swin-T-v2
ViT-B-16-v2
RegNet-v2
ResNet50-v2

80
v1
v2
AugDelete

75
70

74

76

78

80

ID Accuracy

82

84

86

Figure 1. OOD and ID performance comparison between
torchvision v1, v2 and AugDelete (ours) models on ImageNet1K. AUROC is averaged among near-OOD and far-OOD datasets.
Despite better ID accuracy, v2 models deliver worse OOD performance than v1 models. AugDelete can improve the OOD performance of v2 models while maintaining strong ID accuracy.

worse OOD performance than v1 models, despite better ID
accuracy (see Fig. 1). Similar trends hold across a wide
range of convolutional and transformer network architectures, including ResNet, MobileNet, ResNetXt, WideResNet,
RegNet, SWIN-T, and ViT (See Fig. 1, Appendix 8.9).
To understand this unusual phenomenon, we systematically diagnose torchvision models and find that labelrelated augmentation strategies - label smoothing [34] and
mixup [44] are mainly responsible for the poor OOD performance of torchvision models. In contrast, other training augmentations in torchvision models have little
effect on OOD detection. We further analyze the impact
of different augmentations on the logit space and find that
only label smoothing and mixup significantly reduce the
maximal logit values. The reduction of the maximal logit is
more pronounced for in-distribution (ID) samples than outof-distribution (OOD) samples, thereby diminishing their
separability. In turn, logit-based and hybrid methods that
rely on the logit values for OOD separation, such as the maximal logit score (MLS) [15] or nearest neighbor guidance
score (NNGuide) [29], are compromised.
Our findings are in line with previous observations, albeit
on a different task of failure detection in ID setups [41, 48],
and the impact of mixup on OOD detection [30]. However, our findings are more comprehensive, as we uncover a

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection identifies input samples that differ from the in-distribution (ID) training data.
Detecting such samples avoids overconfident or incorrect
predictions on data outside the training scope. It is important for sensitive domains such as healthcare, autonomous
driving, and security. Previous works [25, 38] have shown
that a model’s ID and OOD detection performance are correlated - the higher the ID classification accuracy (on CIFAR,
ImageNet, etc.), the better it is at distinguishing OOD versus ID samples. It is assumed that a stronger separation of
ID classes will lead to a natural separation of OOD from
ID classes. Improvements may come from the learning
rate schedule or model ensemble, though data augmentation
is the most effective [25]. RandAugment [3], Style Augment [8], and AugMix [13] are all effective for improving
both ID and OOD performance. These strategies use a combination of techniques, such as image rotation, translation,
or color transformation.
Torchvision is one of the most widely used model
libraries in OOD detection [45]. Curiously, some observations of torchvision models challenge the conventional understanding of correlation between ID and OOD performance. Specifically, torchvision v2 models have

1836

