This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learnable Logit Adjustment for Imbalanced Semi-Supervised Learning under
Class Distribution Mismatch
Hyuck Lee
Krafton
Seoul, Republic of Korea

Taemin Park
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea

Heeyoung Kim
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea

dlgur0921@krafton.com

ptm1001@kaist.ac.kr

heeyoungkim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

in class-imbalanced (fully supervised) learning (CIL). The
use of LA in CISSL has been shown to improve classification performance, especially when labeled and unlabeled
sets share the same class distribution.
However, in practice, the class distribution of the unlabeled set is often unknown (e.g., STL-10 [9]), and it may
mismatch that of the labeled set. In such cases, the use of
LA may lead to inappropriate logit adjustments and even
degrade performance, because the unknown class distribution of the unlabeled set cannot be incorporated into the
adjustment process. Fig. 1 (a), (b), and (c) illustrate the
confusion matrices of class predictions for the CIFAR-10
[33] test set using ReMixMatch [3], ReMixMatch+SAW
[35], and ReMixMatch+SAW+LA, respectively, where the
first is a naive SSL algorithm while the last two are CISSL
algorithms. These algorithms were trained on a classimbalanced version of CIFAR-10, where the class distributions of the labeled and unlabeled sets significantly differ. The value at position (i, j) represents the proportion of
the ith class samples classified as the jth class. Comparing
Fig. 1 (a), (b), and (c), it is clear that SAW significantly reduces the misclassification of minority class samples as majority classes, while the use of LA significantly increases the
misclassification of majority class samples as Class 9. This
is because LA debiases the classifier excessively by failing
to account for the class distribution of the unlabeled set.
We propose a CISSL algorithm called learnable logit adjustment (LLA). In contrast to the original LA, which adjusts logits based on fixed values of the label frequencies,
LLA adaptively adjusts them by learning the appropriate
degree of adjustment using both the labeled and unlabeled
sets. This allows LLA to incorporate the class distributions
of both sets into the adjustment process. Specifically, LLA
introduces an adjustment parameter for each class, which
represents the degree of logit adjustment needed for that
class. To learn the optimal adjustment parameters, LLA iteratively performs the following steps. LLA first adjusts the
logits calculated for both labeled and unlabeled samples according to the degree of adjustment specified by the current

In class-imbalanced learning (CIL), post-hoc logit adjustment (LA) effectively mitigates class imbalance by adjusting biased logits according to label frequencies. Given
the success of LA in CIL, recent class-imbalanced semisupervised learning (CISSL) algorithms incorporated LA,
leading to improved performance when labeled and unlabeled datasets share the same class distribution. However,
a common real-world scenario involves the unknown class
distribution of the unlabeled set, which may mismatch that
of the labeled set. In this case, LA may result in an inappropriate degree of logit adjustments, potentially degrading
classification performance due to its inability to incorporate the unknown class distribution of the unlabeled set. To
address this problem, we propose a novel CISSL algorithm
named learnable logit adjustment (LLA). Unlike the original LA, LLA learns the appropriate degree of logit adjustment by minimizing the class-averaged loss computed for
both the labeled and unlabeled sets. Based on the learned
degree, LLA refines the biased pseudo-labels of base semisupervised learning algorithms and adjusts the biased class
predictions on the test set by adjusting the logits. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that LLA
achieves state-of-the-art performance in CISSL.

1. Introduction
Classifiers trained on class-imbalanced datasets are known
to exhibit bias toward majority classes, which have a larger
number of samples [48, 64]. When semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms are trained on class-imbalanced sets,
this issue becomes more severe because the biased pseudolabels generated by the biased classifier are used for their
training [28, 40, 50]. To mitigate classifier bias, recent
class-imbalanced semi-supervised learning (CISSL) algorithms [35, 36, 50, 66] often use post-hoc logit adjustment
(LA) [47], which serves to adjust biased logits based on label frequencies. This builds upon the effectiveness of LA

2664

