This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Video Thinking Test: A Holistic Benchmark for Advanced Video
Reasoning and Understanding
Yuanhan Zhang*1 Yunice Chew*2 Yuhao Dong1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{yuanhan002, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Correctness - Complex Visual Narratives

Aria Leo2 Bo Hu2 Ziwei Liu1B
2
Independent Researcher

yunicechew1119@gmail.com

Robustness - Natural Adversarial Questions

🤔 Primary Q
😈 Rephrased Q

“Hyper-realistic cakes VS real items identification challenge” Video
Uniform sampled w/ 80 frames

What is the tissue box truly?

😈 Wrongly-led Q
Visual Complexity
— Illusion

🤔 Is the tissue box real 🤖
or cake?

It is a real box.

❌

😈 Correctly-led Q
Yes, a cake.

*Robustness Track

What is the tissue box truly?

✅

A. Cake, B. Real box, C. Plastic, D. Paper.

Correctness (1/1) 👍

💁
84
%

37
%

✅

😈 Multi-Choice Q

The tissue box is a cake, as shown when the
person bites it, and reveals the insides to be
made of cake.

*Primary Q
Correctness
Track

27%

Is the tissue box a cake?

Primary Q

✅

Yes, a real box. ❌

Is the tissue box real?

Narrative Complexity
— World Knowledge

🤖

Human-level
Intelligence

B. Real box.

❌

Robustness (2/5) 👎

22%

💁
64
%

36
%

Figure 1. Overview of the Video Thinking Test. Video-TT introduces two challenges: (1) ensuring correctness in understanding complex
visual stories; (2) maintaining robustness against natural adversarial conditions.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Human intelligence requires correctness and robustness,
with the former being foundational for the latter. In video
understanding, correctness ensures the accurate interpretation of visual content, and robustness maintains consistent performance in challenging conditions. Despite advances in video large language models (video LLMs), existing benchmarks inadequately reflect the gap between these
models and human intelligence in maintaining correctness
and robustness in video interpretation. We introduce the
Video Thinking Test (Video-TT), to assess if video LLMs
can interpret real-world videos as effectively as humans.
Video-TT reflects genuine gaps in understanding complex
visual narratives, and evaluates robustness against natural
adversarial questions. Video-TT comprises 1,000 YouTube
Shorts videos, each with one open-ended question and four
adversarial questions that probe visual and narrative complexity. Our evaluation shows a significant gap between
video LLMs and human performance.

Human intelligence fundamentally depends on two key aspects: correctness and robustness, with correctness being a
necessary condition for robustness [13, 45]. Correctness ensures that a system’s outputs align with the expected standards or truths. In video understanding, this translates to
making accurate judgments about the visual content. Building on this foundation, robustness is essential for ensuring that these interpretations remain reliable and consistent under various conditions, including ambiguity and conflicting information. These attributes are vital for providing dependable insights and managing complex situations.
The development of video large language models (video
LLMs) [4, 17, 19, 32, 44, 48, 49] have brought their capabilities closer to human intelligence. Developing benchmarks
that accurately highlight current shortcomings is crucial for
further improving video LLMs’ performance.

*Equal Contribution.
Project page: https : / / zhangyuanhan - ai . github . io /
video-tt/

However, current benchmarks fail to accurately reflect
the differences between video LLMs and human intelligence. Regarding correctness, existing benchmarks [2, 6,
7, 11, 15, 35, 50] do not clearly distinguish between errors
caused by insufficient frame sampling and errors caused by

20626

