This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-MOOD: Lifting 2D to 3D for Monocular Open-Set Object Detection
Yung-Hsu Yang1
Yuqian Fu3
1

ETH Zürich

2

Luigi Piccinelli1

Mattia Segu1

Marc Pollefeys1,4

Tsinghua University

3

Siyuan Li1

Hermann Blum1,5

INSAIT

Previous Methods

Abstract

3D-MOOD (Ours)

Monocular 3D object detection is valuable for various
applications such as robotics and AR/VR. Existing methods are confined to closed-set settings, where the training
and testing sets consist of the same scenes and/or object
categories. However, real-world applications often introduce new environments and novel object categories, posing a challenge to these methods. In this paper, we address monocular 3D object detection in an open-set setting
and introduce the first end-to-end 3D Monocular Openset Object Detector (3D-MOOD). We propose to lift the
open-set 2D detection into 3D space through our designed
3D bounding box head, enabling end-to-end joint training for both 2D and 3D tasks to yield better overall performance. We condition the object queries with geometry prior and overcome the generalization for 3D estimation across diverse scenes. To further improve performance, we design the canonical image space for more
efficient cross-dataset training. We evaluate 3D-MOOD
on both closed-set settings (Omni3D) and open-set settings (Omni3D → Argoverse 2, ScanNet), and achieve new
state-of-the-art results. Code and models are available at
royyang0714.github.io/3D-MOOD.

4

Microsoft

Rui Huang1,2

Zuria Bauer1
5

University of Bonn

pillow pillow lamp
bed

picture
pillow pillow lamp mirror
bed

cabinet

Closed-Set Monocular 3DOD

horse

horse

horse
horse
horse
horse horse

Open-Set Monocular 3DOD

Figure 1. Open-set Monocular 3D Object Detection. Unlike
previous methods focusing on achieving good results in the closedset setting, we aim to resolve the open-set monocular 3D object
detection problem. This challenge requires the model to classify
arbitrary objects while precisely localizing them in unseen scenes.

from specialized models to more unified frameworks. However, as shown in Fig. 1, most existing methods, including
the unified models, operate under an ideal assumption: the
training set and testing set share identical scenes and object
categories. This limits their generalizability in real-world
applications for not being able to detect novel objects in
unseen domains. This challenge motivates us to explore
monocular open-set 3D object detection, further pushing
the boundaries of existing 3DOD methods.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D object detection (3DOD) aims to recognize
and localize objects in 3D space from a single 2D image
by estimating their 3D positions, dimensions, and orientations. Unlike stereo or LiDAR-based methods, monocular
3DOD relies solely on visual cues, making it significantly
more challenging yet cost-effective for robotics and AR/VR
applications [10, 16, 35, 51, 62].
While many methods [22, 28, 43, 47, 49, 53, 60] focus on
improving 3DOD performance in specific domains, Cube
R-CNN [4] and Uni-MODE [23] build unified models on
the cross-dataset benchmark Omni3D [4], which consolidates six diverse 3D detection datasets [1, 2, 5, 14, 42, 46].
These advancements have driven the evolution of 3DOD

The first step towards the open-set monocular 3DOD is
identifying the fundamental obstacles underlying this task.
Our key observations are as follows: 1) Cross-modality
learning is crucial to breaking the limitation of closed vocabulary for novel class classification [40]. However, 3D
data lacks rich visual-language pairs, making it significantly
more challenging to learn modality alignment and achieve
satisfactory open-set results. 2) Robust depth estimation
is essential for monocular 3DOD to generalize well across
different scenes compared to LiDAR-based methods [54].
However, monocular depth estimation particularly in novel
scenes, is inherently challenging for existing methods.

7429

