This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GestureHYDRA: Semantic Co-speech Gesture Synthesis
via Hybrid Modality Diffusion Transformer and Cascaded-Synchronized
Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Quanwei Yang1∗ Luying Huang2∗ Kaisiyuan Wang2† Jiazhi Guan2 Shengyi He2 Fengguo Li2
Hang Zhou2 Lingyun Yu1 Yingying Li2 Haocheng Feng2 Hongtao Xie1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Baidu Inc.
∗

Audio
Original
Transcript

†

Equal contribution.

… 朋友们轻轻点击一下屏幕的 左上角 …

left-top

Corresponding authors.

Don’t

… 千万不要 错过今晚的福利啊，下次再有就是明年了 …

Semantic
Gesture
Repository

gesture
injection

…

segment
replacement

Figure 1. We propose GestureHYDRA, a co-speech gesture generation system based on a hybrid-modality diffusion transformer and a
cascaded-synchronized Retrieval-Augmented Generation to enable flexible and reliable human gesture synthesis.

Abstract
While increasing attention has been paid to co-speech gesture synthesis, most previous works neglect to investigate
hand gestures with explicit and essential semantics. In
this paper, we study co-speech gesture generation with an
emphasis on specific hand gesture activation, which can
deliver more instructional information than common body
movements. To achieve this, we first build a high-quality
dataset of 3D human body movements including a set of semantically explicit hand gestures that are commonly used
by live streamers. Then we present a hybrid-modality gesture generation system GestureHYDRA built upon a hybridmodality diffusion transformer architecture with novelly designed motion-style injective transformer layers, which enables advanced gesture modeling ability and versatile gesture operations. To guarantee these specific hand gestures can be activated, we introduce a cascaded retrieval-

12615

augmented generation strategy built upon a semantic gesture repository annotated for each subject and an adaptive
audio-gesture synchronization mechanism, which substantially improves semantic gesture activation and production
efficiency. Quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that our proposed approach achieves superior performance over all the counterparts. The project page can be
found https://mumuwei.github.io/GestureHYDRA/.

1. Introduction
Co-speech gesture synthesis aims to produce gestures synchronized with speech audio, which enables a variety of applications in filmmaking, game design, robotics, and digital
human creation [11, 12, 16, 45, 46]. Considerable enthusiasm [27, 47, 48] is devoted to exploring the elusive relationship between speech audio and holistic body movements at

