This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Adaptive Unfolded Network via Spatial Morphology Stripping and
Spectral Filtration for Pan-sharpening
Hebaixu Wang Jiayi Ma†
School of Electronic Information, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
Zhongguancun Academy, Beijing 100094, China
{wanghebaixu,jyma2010}@gmail.com

Abstract

3VHXGR
*7

In the ﬁeld of pan-sharpening, existing deep methods are
hindered in deepening cross-modal complementarity in the
intermediate feature, and lack effective strategies to harness
the network entirety for optimal solutions, exhibiting limited feasibility and interpretability due to their black-box
designs. Besides, validating pan-sharpening performance
in high-level semantic tasks is intractable for the absence
of datasets. To tackle these issues, we propose a deep adaptive unfolded network via spatial morphology stripping and
spectral ﬁltration for pan-sharpening, which is conceptualized as a linear inverse problem regularized by spatial and
spectral priors. Speciﬁcally, we incorporate phase-oriented
constraints into the spatial prior to facilitate the extraction
of modal-invariant spatial morphology by intrinsic decomposition and leverage a physics-driven spectral ﬁltration attention mechanism aligned with the spectral prior to mine
the inherent spectral correlation. After transparently unfolding the model into a multi-stage network, an adaptive
stage-exiting mechanism is designed to capitalize on fusion
diversity by aggregating optimal image patches across candidate stages. To systematically complete the assessment,
we construct the ﬁrst panoptic segmentation dataset as a
semantic-level benchmark for pan-sharpening performance
validation. Extensive experiments are conducted to verify
the merits of our method with state-of-the-arts. Code is
available at https://github.com/Baixuzx7/DAPNet.

3DWFK6SOLW

† Corresponding author: Jiayi Ma.

E

3KDVHRULHQWHG6SDWLDO0RUSKRORJ\6WULSSLQJ&RQVWUDLQV



3VHXGR
*7

F
IRUZDUGSURFHVV

VXSHUYLVHGFRQVWUDLQV

K\SRWKHWLFDOFRQVWUDLQV

DGDSWLYHVWDJHH[LWLQJ

EODFNER[EORFNV

LQWHUSUHWDEOHEORFNV

LOOSRVHGIHDWXUHV

LQWHUSUHWDEOHIHDWXUHV

Figure 1. Overview of existing pan-sharpening paradigms: (a) Supervised learning, (b) unsupervised learning, and (c) ours.
06VSHFWUDOUHVSRQVH 06VSDWLDOPRUSKRORJ\ 3$1VSDWLDOPRUSKRORJ\ 3$1VSHFWUDOUHVSRQVH

LQWHUSUHWDEOHIHDWXUH

Satellite systems are constrained from simultaneously capturing high-resolution (HR) multi-spectral (MS) images due
to hardware limitations. In this context, the acquired data
typically encompass low-resolution (LR) MS images and
paired HR panchromatic (PAN) images. The former offers rich spectral attributes across multiple bands but with

‫ۼۯ۾‬Ȁ‫܁ۻ‬

D

LOOSRVHGIHDWXUH

1. Introduction

‫ۼۯ۾‬Ȁ‫܁ۻ‬

Figure 2. Examples of the internal feature of the PAN and MS images. Upper tiers are unconstrained. Lower tiers are constrained.

low spatial resolution, while the latter possesses high spatial resolution, albeit with limited spectral richness. Consequently, their inherent complementarity provides a feasible
foundation for pan-sharpening [38], which super-resolves
LRMS images with paired HRPAN images as texture-rich
guidance. Given the excellent properties of HRMS images,
the pan-sharpening technology holds signiﬁcant importance
across diverse domains [45, 53, 64].
So far, pan-sharpening has achieved remarkable progress
owing to the powerful nonlinear capabilities of deep learning compared to the conventional methods [9, 37, 57, 60].

10730

