This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagicMotion: Controllable Video Generation with Dense-to-Sparse
Trajectory Guidance
Quanhao Li1,2∗

Zhen Xing1,2∗
1

Rui Wang1,2

Hui Zhang1,2

Qi Dai3

Zuxuan Wu1,2†

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Research Asia

https://quanhaol.github.io/magicmotion-site/

Stage1 - Mask

Stage2 - Box

Stage3 – Sparse Box

Figure 1. Example videos generated by MagicMotion. MagicMotion consists of three stages, each supporting a different level of control
from dense to sparse: mask, box, and sparse box. Given an input image and any form of trajectory, MagicMotion can generate high-quality
videos, animating objects in the image to move along the user-specified path.

Abstract
Recent advances in video generation have led to remarkable improvements in visual quality and temporal coherence. Upon this, trajectory-controllable video generation has emerged to enable precise object motion control
through explicitly defined spatial paths. However, existing methods struggle with complex object movements and
multi-object motion control, resulting in imprecise trajectory adherence, poor object consistency, and compromised
∗ equal contributions. † Corresponding author.

visual quality. Furthermore, these methods only support
trajectory control in a single format, limiting their applicability in diverse scenarios. Additionally, there is no publicly available dataset or benchmark specifically tailored
for trajectory-controllable video generation, hindering robust training and systematic evaluation. To address these
challenges, we introduce MagicMotion, a novel image-tovideo generation framework that enables trajectory control
through three levels of conditions from dense to sparse:
masks, bounding boxes, and sparse boxes. Given an input image and trajectories, MagicMotion seamlessly animates objects along defined trajectories while maintaining object consistency and visual quality. Furthermore,

12112

