This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Robustness of Person Search against Corruptions
Woojung Son

Yoonki Cho

Guoyuan An

Chanmi Lee

Sung-Eui Yoon

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
woojung.son.official@gmail.com, {yoonki, anguoyuan, chanmi99, sungeui}@kaist.ac.kr

Ideal

Abstract
Person search aims to simultaneously detect and re-identify
a query person within an entire scene. While existing
studies have made significant progress in achieving superior performance on clean datasets, the challenge of robustness under various corruptions remains largely unexplored. However, the lack of proper testing environments
for corrupted conditions persists as a challenge, since extensive collection of new person images attempting to cover
numerous corruption scenarios inevitably introduces privacy concerns. In this context, we establish an evaluation framework for analyzing corruption robustness using
existing publicly available data, and introduce two new
benchmarks: CUHK-SYSU-C and PRW-C. Based on this
framework incorporating 18 corruptions with 5 severity levels each, we conduct an extensive robustness evaluation
of popular person search methods. Moreover, we explore
a straightforward solution that naturally arises: integrating corruption-robust detection and re-identification models. Our experiments reveal that existing person search
models remain highly vulnerable to corruption, and this issue is not resolved by the simple integration approach. To
analyze the underlying reasons, we further investigate the
vulnerability of the detection and representation stages to
corruption and explore its impact on both foreground and
background areas. Based on these analyses, we propose a
foreground-aware augmentation and corresponding robust
proposal regularizer to enhance the robustness of person
search models. Supported by our comprehensive robustness analysis and evaluation framework our benchmarks
provide, our proposed technique substantially improves the
robustness of existing person search models.

Corruption Scenarios

Snow

Fog

Clean

Jpeg

100
mAP (%)

80
60

-54.5

-52.6

-52.2

-58.7

-46.7

-50.3

Dark

Ideal
Corruption Scenarios
-51.6

-50.1

40
20
0

OIMNet

NAE

SeqNet OIMNet++

COAT

PSTR

SAT

OADG
+CIL

Figure 1. Examples of corruptions in proposed benchmark and
evaluation of person search models under ideal and corruption
scenarios. The substantial performance deterioration illustrates
the vulnerability to corruption and highlights the necessity for robust solutions.

1. Introduction

criminative capabilities of deep neural networks (DNNs).
Since person search requires both pedestrian detection and
person re-identification simultaneously, earlier studies have
adopted a two-step framework [3, 13, 27, 51], where independent detection and re-identification models are applied
sequentially. More recent models have adopted a one-step
approach [1, 28, 36, 58], which processes the entire scene
in a single pass and leverages joint end-to-end multi-task
learning, leading to significant improvements.
Despite these advancements, DNNs exhibit significant
vulnerability to environmental variations and data degradations, often resulting in substantial performance deterioration [2, 11, 31, 46, 59]. This vulnerability underscores
the necessity for models to maintain robustness under challenging conditions; however, most prior person search studies [1, 4, 12, 22, 28, 36, 53, 58] have assumed ideal, clean
data conditions. It remains largely unexplored whether
the achievements in this field can be sustained under corrupted environments as well. One direct approach to fill
this knowledge gap would be collecting data at various corruption scenarios from actual real environments to analyze
model robustness. However, given the sensitive nature of
person search involving person data, extensive collection
of person images attempting to cover numerous corruption
scenarios would inevitably raise privacy concerns. For instance, DukeMTMC [45] was discontinued in 2019 due to

Person search is a task that involves detecting individuals in
complex scenes and subsequently re-identifying the same
individuals from a gallery of scene images. Significant advancements in this task have been made through the dis-

23408

