This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Embodied Gap in Vision-and-Language Navigation: A Holistic
Study of Physical and Visual Disparities
Liuyi Wang1,2 *, Xinyuan Xia2,3 *, Hui Zhao2 , Hanqing Wang2†, Tai Wang2 , Yilun Chen2 , Chengju Liu1,4 ,
Qijun Chen1,4†, Jiangmiao Pang2
1
Tongji University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
4
State Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems

Abstract
2020

Recent Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) advancements are promising, but their idealized assumptions about
robot movement and control fail to reflect physically embodied deployment challenges. To bridge this gap, we introduce VLN-PE, a physically realistic VLN platform supporting humanoid, quadruped, and wheeled robots. For the
first time, we systematically evaluate several ego-centric
VLN methods in physical robotic settings across different technical pipelines, including classification models for
single-step discrete action prediction, a diffusion model for
dense waypoint prediction, and a train-free, map-based
large language model (LLM) integrated with path planning. Our results reveal significant performance degradation due to limited robot observation space, environmental lighting variations, and physical challenges like
collisions and falls. This also exposes locomotion constraints for legged robots in complex environments. VLNPE is highly extensible, allowing seamless integration of
new scenes beyond MP3D, thereby enabling more comprehensive VLN evaluation. Despite the weak generalization of current models in physical deployment, VLN-PE
provides a new pathway for improving cross-embodiment’s
overall adaptability. We hope our findings and tools inspire the community to rethink VLN limitations and advance
robust, practical VLN models. The code is available at
https://crystalsixone.github.io/vln pe.github.io.

2025

2018
VLN: Oracle-based
navigation on a
predefined topology
with perfect localization.

No Robots

VLN-CE: Continuous
navigation using lowlevel oracle actions
with pseudo robots.

VLN-PE: Physically
realistic navigation
with robot-controlled
locomotion.

Pseudo Cylinder Robots Physically Realistic Robots

Natural Language Instruction: Turn left, go past the red table, then
turn left into the dining room. Once you reach the sofa, turn left and move
towards the dining table. Wait at the dining table.

Figure 1. The evolution of vision-and-language navigation (VLN)
task. As the techniques and algorithms develop, the settings become more and more practical and challenging.

navigation by jumping between predefined graph nodes.
Later, VLN-CE [25] introduced continuous navigation using Habitat [46] (Fig. 1). A variety of advanced methods
[1, 36, 56, 64] have highlighted the increasing potential of
VLN models in advancing the future of embodied AI.
However, a major gap remains between simulation-based
models and their physical deployment, especially when applied to diverse robot types, such as wheeled, humanoid,
and quadruped robots. Most current VLN-related benchmarks [13, 26, 41, 47, 52] are designed for ideal wheeled
or point-based agents, ignoring the physical embodiment
of the robots themselves. Moreover, the testing conditions in current VLN platforms are overly idealized, often neglecting critical physical issues like viewpoint shifts,
falling, deadlocks, and motion errors. Meanwhile, the
rapid advancement of locomotion algorithms, particularly
reinforcement learning (RL) methods for humanoid and

1. Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) [2] has emerged
as a critical task in embodied AI, where agents are required to follow natural language instructions to navigate complex environments. Initially, VLN relied on the
MP3D simulator [2], which only supported oracle-based
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

9455

