This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoLLaMB: Long Streaming Video Understanding
with Recurrent Memory Bridges
Yiqi Song 1,2∗
Cihang Xie 3
Yang Liu 4
Zilong Zheng 1†
Yuxuan Wang 1 *
1
NLCo Lab, State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
2
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California
4
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
flagwyx@gmail.com, yiqis@bit.edu.cn, zlzheng@bigai.ai

https://github.com/bigai-nlco/VideoLLaMB

Abstract
Recent advancements in large-scale video-language models
have shown significant potential for real-time planning
and detailed interactions. However, their high computational demands and the scarcity of annotated datasets
limit their practicality for academic researchers. In this
work, we introduce VideoLLaMB, a novel and efficient
framework for long video understanding that leverages
recurrent memory bridges and temporal memory tokens to
enable seamless encoding of entire video sequences with
preserved semantic continuity. Central to our approach is
a SceneTiling algorithm that segments videos into coherent
semantic units, facilitating robust understanding across
tasks without requiring additional training. VideoLLaMB
achieves state-of-the-art performance, surpassing existing
models by 4.2 points on four VideoQA benchmarks and
by 2.06 points on egocentric planning tasks. Notably,
it maintains strong performance under extreme video
length scaling (up to 8×) and excels at fine-grained frame
retrieval on our proposed Needle in a Video Haystack
(NIAVH) benchmark. With linear GPU memory scaling,
VideoLLaMB processes up to 320 frames using a single
Nvidia A100 GPU, despite being trained on only 16
frames—offering an unprecedented balance of accuracy,
scalability, and cost-effectiveness. This makes it highly
accessible and practical for the academic community.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large-scale video language models,
exemplified by GPT-4o and Project Astra have captivated
* Equal contributions
† Correspondence to Zilong Zheng ⟨zlzheng@bigai.ai⟩.

global attention due to their potential for sophisticated interaction with real-world environments [23, 81]. These models are particularly noteworthy for their capacity to comprehend streaming video [65], which can be conceptualized as video with an unlimited context length. This capability necessitates both the observation of the current state
and the ability to leverage long-term memory. Despite their
promise, the training of such large-scale video-language
(VidL) foundational models remains impractical for academic researchers. This impracticality arises from the substantial computational resources required by the complex,
high-dimensional nature of long streaming video data, in
addition to the scarcity of well-annotated, publicly available
video-language datasets. These factors present significant
challenges to scaling video-language models to the extent
observed with large language models (LLMs).
To circumvent these challenges, the community has witnessed a growing interest in developing computationally efficient multimodal large language models (MLLMs). Traditional methods resort to video compression strategies, such
as sampling [34, 76], aggregation [70], semantic consolidation [54], and resampling [20, 39], in order to temporally
reduce the length of the video. Yet, these methods often lead
to the loss of critical visual cues, undermining the model’s
ability to capture essential cues. Other approaches [47, 61]
segment videos into shorter clips to mitigate the computational load of processing long videos. However,
segmentation can disrupt the semantic flow of content,
complicating the encoding process and potentially impacting the general understanding of the video narrative. Lastly,
prevalent video understanding benchmarks, primarily based
on linguistic question-answering pairs, exhibit static [26]
and/or language biases [50, 82]. These biases favor models
that rely more on static imagery or textual elements, re-

24170

