This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FREE-Merging: Fourier Transform for Efficient Model Merging
Shenghe Zheng
Harbin Institute of Technology

Hongzhi Wang*
Harbin Institute of Technology

shenghez.zheng@gmail.com

wangzh@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

are often not fully covered by a single existing model and
are typically a union of several models [23, 52]. However,
running separate models for each subtask increases storage
and inference costs, especially with large models. Model
merging attempts to combine existing models to build a
model capable of addressing all target tasks [21, 33, 48].
This method reduces training costs, data privacy issues in
multi-task learning (MTL) [20, 56] and deployment costs,
garnering widespread attention.

With the rapid growth of deep learning, there is an increasing availability of open-source models for various
tasks. However, single fine-tuned models often fall short
of meeting the diverse needs of users. Model merging has
thus emerged as an efficient method to integrate the capabilities of existing models into a unified model. Nevertheless, existing model merging methods face challenging trade-offs between performance and deployment costs,
primarily due to task interference. For the first time, we
reveal that task interference is evident in the frequency
domain of model parameters, yet current efforts only focus on spatial domain solutions, which are largely ineffective in addressing frequency domain interference. To
mitigate the impact of frequency domain interference, we
propose FR-Merging, an innovative method that effectively
filters harmful frequency domain interference on the backbone with minimal computational overhead. Since performance loss is inevitable with cost-free methods, we propose a lightweight task-specific expert module that dynamically compensates for information loss during merging.
This proposed framework, FREE-Merging (FR-Merging
with experts), strikes a balanced trade-off between training cost, inference latency, storage requirements, and performance. We demonstrate the effectiveness of both FRMerging and FREE-Merging on multiple tasks across CV,
NLP, and Multi-Modal domains and show that they can be
flexibly adapted to specific needs. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/Zhengsh123/FREE-Merging.

While model merging aims to reduce training costs, it
often suffers from performance loss due to task interference [20]. To mitigate this issue, existing methods develop
along three directions. The first direction computes merging coefficients based on weights or data [23, 33]. The second uses the parameter differences before and after finetuning (i.e. task vectors) for merging [21, 48, 52, 58]. The
third method introduces independent knowledge for each
task [20, 29]. While the third way balances performance
and costs, it still faces two critical limitations. First, it neglects backbone optimization during merging, resulting in
subpar performance. Second, it requires high computation
and storage, making it impractical for edge deployment.
We argue that an effective model merging method requires addressing both of the above issues. First, since the
backbone constitutes the majority of parameters and thus
determines performance, an efficient backbone merging
method is essential to reduce performance loss. Then, given
the no free lunch theorem, cost-free merging cannot avoid
task interference. Therefore, introducing task-specific experts is necessary. However, they must remain lightweight
to avoid storage and inference overhead. Thus, we propose
FREE-Merging, a two-stage method that ensures an efficient backbone and lightweight experts as shown in Fig 1.

1. Introduction

For backbone merging, the key lies in eliminating task
interference [51]. We identify a compelling phenomenon
in which task interference is evident in the frequency domain of model parameters. And we present in Sec. 4 that
frequency-domain interference is strongly correlated with
performance. Notably, existing methods, which focus only
on spatial-domain operations, fail to address frequencydomain interference, leading to suboptimal outcomes. Ex-

In the current era of deep learning, the pretrain-finetune
paradigm is a standard procedure [9, 37, 40]. However, edge
applications often lack powerful computing resources and
data, favoring ready-to-use models for specific scenarios.
The recent growth of open-source platforms like HuggingFace [43] has made this feasible. Yet, practical demands
* Corresponding Author

3863

