This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Reciprocal Learning of Language-based Human Motion
Understanding and Generation
Chen Liang,

Zhicheng Shi,

Wenguan Wang,

Yi Yang*

State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/leonnnop/DRL

Abstract

problems with a long-standing research history in literature. Language-based human motion understanding aims to
translate 3D human motions into natural language descriptions or instructions, notably employed for guiding robots
or virtual game avatars [1–3]. Conversely, language-based
human motion generation focuses on synthesizing desired
human motions given the textual guidance. Recent research
endeavors have delved deeply into these tasks, centering
on sophisticated model architectures [1, 6, 10–14, 16] and
training strategies [7, 15]. More recently, a new trend has
emerged in scaling up model sizes and capabilities [8, 9],
echoing the breakthroughs seen in large foundation models [17–19] to drive further progress in this domain.
While significant advancements have been made in both
tasks, two major barriers hinder further progress in the field:
❶ Despite technological strides, both tasks heavily depend
on vast amounts of paired motion-language data for model
training. Recent progress indicates a growing trend of utilizing more data to train larger models with increased parameters. However, collection of such data is prohibitively
expensive and labor-intensive, potentially limiting related
research and applications. Besides, ❷ existing studies commonly treat the two tasks as separate problems (Fig. 1 (a)),
disregarding the significant interdependence between them.
While some initial efforts have aimed to connect the tasks
using methods such as one-way alignment [20] (Fig. 1 (b))
or in a unified model design [8, 9] (Fig. 1 (c)), these approaches still tackle the two tasks in parallel, with the motion understanding often being viewed as merely a supplementary component to enhance the learning of motion generation. The strong reciprocity between these two tasks remains largely underexplored in current literature.
To respond, in this work, we propose Dual Reciprocal
Learning (DRL) for language-based human motion understanding and generation, denoted as T2M (Text-to-Motion)
and M2T (Motion-to-Text). DRL establishes a symmetric
learning framework where both tasks collaboratively evolve
in a closed-loop, bootstrapping manner, effectively capitalizing on their reciprocal relationship, cf ., Fig. 1 (d). Specif-

Language-based human motion understanding focuses on
describing human motions using natural language descriptions. Conversely, human motion generation aims to generate human motions from textual inputs. Despite significant progress in both fields, further advancements are hindered by two primary challenges: i) Both tasks rely heavily
on vast amounts of paired motion-language data for model
training. However, human labeling is costly, making it increasingly unsustainable as model scales increase. ii) Existing models often learn the two tasks in parallel. The
strong reciprocity between them has not been fully explored.
In response, this work proposes Dual Reciprocal Learning (DRL) for language-based human motion understanding and generation. DRL establishes a symmetric learning framework where both tasks collaboratively evolve in
a closed-loop, bootstrapping manner, effectively leveraging
the reciprocity between them. In DRL, the tasks serve as
evaluators for each other, enabling the generation of informative feedback signals even with easily acquired unpaired,
unidirectional motion or language data. Furthermore, to
mitigate dataset-specific bias in existing evaluations, we
propose a generalized protocol that extends evaluation to
a general-domain cross-modal feature space. Experimental results on standard benchmarks demonstrate that DRL
achieves remarkable performance boosts over representative baselines in both tasks across evaluation protocols.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a surge of interest in the convergence of human motion and language modeling, driven
by the diverse demands of fields such as robotics [1], game
development [2], virtual reality [3, 4], film production [5].
Within this domain, language-based human motion understanding [1, 6–9] and generation [8–16] stand out as pivotal
* Corresponding author: Yi Yang.

6252

