This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What’s in a Latent? Leveraging Diffusion Latent Space for Domain
Generalization
Xavier Thomas1
Deepti Ghadiyaram12 *
1
Boston University 2 Runway

Abstract
Domain Generalization aims to develop models that can
generalize to novel and unseen data distributions. In this
work, we study how model architectures and pre-training
objectives impact feature richness and propose a method to
effectively leverage them for domain generalization. Specifically, given a pre-trained feature space, we first discover
latent domain structures, referred to as pseudo-domains,
that capture domain-specific variations in an unsupervised manner. Next, we augment existing classifiers with
these complementary pseudo-domain representations making them more amenable to diverse unseen test domains.
We analyze how different pre-training feature spaces differ
in the domain-specific variances they capture. Our empirical studies reveal that features from diffusion models excel
at separating domains in the absence of explicit domain labels and capture nuanced domain-specific information. On
5 datasets, we show that our very simple framework improves generalization to unseen domains by a maximum test
accuracy improvement of over 4% compared to the standard baseline Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM). Crucially, our method outperforms most algorithms that access
domain labels during training. Code is available at: link.

Figure 1. t-SNE visualization of the latent space from different pretraining objectives: CLIP [55], DiT [51], MAE [22], ResNet-50 [20] on
the domain generalization benchmark VLCS [17]. VLCS is curated from 4
different datasets, thus dataset-specific biases like spatial composition and
object size variations serve as different domains. Note how the diffusion
features separate domains effectively, suggesting that latent domain structures can be captured without explicit supervision. Best viewed in color.

dous progress, what exactly is captured in the underlying
latent landscape remains an open question. This question
becomes more challenging in diffusion models mainly due
to their iterative global denoising objective.
This work aims to understand the feature landscape
learnt from different pre-training models and objectives in
the context of domain generalization. Robust generalization
to unseen domains has been a long-standing goal in machine
learning research [6, 46], particularly in scenarios where
collecting domain-specific data is infeasible or expensive.
In such cases, models must learn to generalize without relying on explicit domain labels even during training [38]. It
has been established that most sophisticated models struggle when the test data distribution differs from that of training data [57, 63, 65] even in subtle ways, e.g., same visual
scene but captured using different cameras, same patient but
different brand imaging devices, same object but captured
in different color schemes and so on.
We posit that the first step to make fundamental progress

1. Introduction
It is now a common practice to use models pre-trained
on billion-scale data [20, 22, 44, 49, 51, 55, 58] as defacto backbones for diverse downstream tasks [41, 67].
In order to make these large-scale models “foundational,”
and offer rich feature representations, a variety of powerful pre-training strategies have been designed. Some of
these objectives aim to eliminate the need for clean labeled
data [8, 9, 13, 21, 78], some reap the benefits from rich text
representations by aligning them with corresponding visual
signals [30, 55], while others force models to build a more
meaningful understanding of scenes by learning to predict
large hidden regions of images [22]. Despite such tremen* Corresponding author (dghadiya@bu.edu).

2183

