This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blind Video Super-Resolution based on Implicit Kernels
Qiang Zhu1 , Yuxuan Jiang2 , Shuyuan Zhu1 ,* Fan Zhang2 , David Bull2 , Bing Zeng1
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 2 University of Bristol
{zhuqiang@std.,eezsy@,eezeng@}uestc.edu.cn,{yuxuan.jiang,fan.zhang,dave.bull}@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Blind video super-resolution (BVSR) is a low-level vision
task which aims to generate high-resolution videos from
low-resolution counterparts in unknown degradation scenarios. Existing approaches typically predict blur kernels
that are spatially invariant in each video frame or even
the entire video. These methods do not consider potential spatio-temporal varying degradations in videos, resulting in suboptimal BVSR performance. In this context, we
propose a novel BVSR model based on Implicit Kernels,
BVSR-IK, which constructs a multi-scale kernel dictionary
parameterized by implicit neural representations. It also
employs a newly designed recurrent Transformer to predict the coefficient weights for accurate filtering in both
frame correction and feature alignment. Experimental results have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed
BVSR-IK, when compared with four state-of-the-art BVSR
models on three commonly used datasets, with BVSR-IK
outperforming the second best approach, FMA-Net, by up to
0.59 dB in PSNR. Source code will be available at https:
//github.com/QZ1-boy/BVSR-IK.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison between existing BVSR methods [2, 40, 54,
60] and our BVSR-IK method. (a) Previous methods predict a single kernel and utilize it to perform super-resolution in an Aggregation manner. (b) BVSR-IK (ours) generates an INR-based multiscale kernel dictionary and applies it in a Correction-Alignment
manner for BVSR.

Aiming to generate a high-resolution (HR) video from its
low-resolution (LR) version, video super-resolution (VSR)
has been widely applied in many scenarios, including video
streaming [1, 20, 28], surveillance [12, 59], and remote
sensing [36, 53]. It is noted that, in some practical cases, LR
videos are potentially contaminated by unknown degradations, which makes the task even more challenging. On the
contrary, existing generic VSR methods [4, 5, 56, 67, 69,
70] are typically based on known blur kernels [4, 5] (e.g.,
Gaussian blur kernel) without specifically modeling them
during the restoration process. As a result, these VSR methods are not able to effectively capture the intrinsic characteristics of degraded videos [11] in those challenging cases,
leading to suboptimal VSR performance.
* Corresponding author

To address this issue, different blind VSR (BVSR) methods [2, 18, 26, 40, 49, 54, 61] have been proposed, which are
designed to predict specific blur kernels or extract degradations in each inference case. Although these BVSR methods
can offer promising super-resolution performance in unknown degradation scenarios, they are also associated with
various limitations: (i) these approaches typically assume
blur kernels are spatially invariant within each video frame
or the whole video, while such an assumption is not applicable in many real cases where blur kernels are spatially variant due to motion and/or focus blurs; (ii) the temporal alignment modules within many BVSR methods [40, 54, 61] assume that video frames share the same degradations [40, 54]
- this ignores the temporal inconsistency of degradations

10971

