This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Shell Texture Splatting: More Details and Fewer Primitives
Xin Zhang1

Anpei Chen2 Jincheng Xiong1 Pinxuan Dai1 Yujun Shen3 Weiwei Xu1 *
1
Zhejiang University 2 Westlake University 3 Ant Group
https://zhangxin-cg.github.io/nest-splatting/

Abstract
Gaussian splatting techniques have shown promising results
in novel view synthesis, achieving high fidelity and efficiency.
However, their high reconstruction quality comes at the cost
of requiring a large number of primitives. We identify this
issue as stemming from the entanglement of geometry and
appearance in Gaussian Splatting. To address this, we introduce a neural shell texture, a global representation that
encodes texture information around the surface. We use
Gaussian primitives as both a geometric representation and
texture field samplers, efficiently splatting texture features
into image space. Our evaluation demonstrates that this disentanglement enables high parameter efficiency, fine texture
detail reconstruction, and easy textured mesh extraction, all
while using significantly fewer primitives.

1. Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) generates images from new
camera angles that are plausibly consistent with a set of
conditioning images, allowing broad applications in virtual
reality, robotics, and digital content creation. Among the
most influential advancements in this domain is Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [34], which represents 3D scenes using
a neural network for photorealistic novel view generation.
Despite its success, NeRF suffers from computational inefficiency, motivating the search for faster alternatives. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [26] has emerged
as a compelling solution, offering real-time, high-quality
rendering by leveraging efficient Gaussian primitives. This
breakthrough has sparked significant interest in extending
3DGS to dynamic scenes, geometry, anti-aliasing techniques,
and generative 3D modeling, pushing the boundaries of NVS
toward practical deployment.
Specifically, 3DGS represents complex scenes using a set
of 3D Gaussian primitives, which are efficiently rendered
onto the screen via splatting-based rasterization. Each Gaussian is defined by attributes such as position, size, orienta* Corresponding author

2DGS

GsTex

Ours

SuperGS

Figure 1. Our method achieves enhanced details in rendering by
replacing the splat-constant, view-dependent color in Gaussian
Splatting with a global shell texture.

tion, opacity, and color, all of which are stored independently
and optimized using a multi-view photometric loss to accurately reconstruct scene appearance. A promising follow-up,
2DGS [21], replaces the 3D Gaussian representation with
2D oriented planar Gaussian surfels and introduces a backward ray tracing technique for ray-splat intersection and
rasterization, leading to more precise geometry modeling.
However, the high rendering quality and accurate surface reconstruction of these methods come at the cost of
requiring a large number of Gaussian primitives. This is
due to the inherent coupling of geometry and appearance
in their primitive representation, which requires significant
densification in regions with complex textures or detailed geometry. In practice, the frequency of surface textures is often
much higher than that of geometry. Therefore, prior GS-like
methods suffer from underparameterization for texture and
overparameterization for geometry.
To resolve these issues, we propose to disentangle geometry and appearance in a novel way: the high-frequency texture is represented and shared across different positions using
a global neural shell texture, while geometry can be modeled
with 2D surfels for efficiency. The texture and geometry
are then separately represented, and they are connected and
rendered to images using the ray-splat intersections. This
is different from previous works [9, 39, 41, 52] that employ
spatially varying textures for each Gaussian primitive. These
methods still associate textures to 3D points and fail to significantly reduce the number of primitives while maintaining

25229

