This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HUMOTO: A 4D Dataset of Mocap Human Object Interactions
Jiaxin Lu1,2 ,* Chun-Hao Paul Huang2 , Uttaran Bhattacharya2 , Qixing Huang1 , Yi Zhou2
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Adobe Research
lujiaxin@utexas.edu, {chunhaoh, ubhattac, yizho}@adobe.com, huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Detailed and
accurate hands
with multiple
objects.

Objects measured
and modeled
precisely from
artists.
short script: The subject lifts the floor
lamp with right hand and moves the
floor lamp with right hand to right side.
Finally, the subject places the floor lamp
with right hand on the ground.
long script: The subject stands at the
back of the floor lamp then it looks
down at the floor lamp. The subject
grasps the floor lamp with right hand.
The subject moves the floor lamp with
right hand to right side. The subject
gently puts the floor lamp with right
hand on the ground and finally rotate its
body to straight

Different abstract
levels of human
text annotation.

Figure 1. Overview of the HUMOTO dataset. The dataset contains mocap 4D human-object interaction animations with multiple objects.
The unique features of the dataset include its detailed, accurate interaction modeling, specifically the detailed hand pose. The objects are
precisely modeled by artists. We additionally provide different abstract levels of text annotation for the interactions.

research domains with practical applications in animation,
robotics, and embodied AI systems. Project Page: https:
//jiaxin-lu.github.io/humoto/.

Abstract
We present Human Motions with Objects (HUMOTO), a
high-fidelity dataset of human-object interactions for motion generation, computer vision, and robotics applications.
Featuring 735 sequences (7,875 seconds at 30 fps), HUMOTO captures interactions with 63 precisely modeled objects and 72 articulated parts. Our innovations include
a scene-driven LLM scripting pipeline creating complete,
purposeful tasks with natural progression, and a mocapand-camera recording setup to effectively handle occlusions. Spanning diverse activities from cooking to outdoor
picnics, HUMOTO preserves both physical accuracy and
logical task flow. Professional artists rigorously clean and
verify each sequence, minimizing foot sliding and object
penetrations. We also provide benchmarks compared to
other datasets. HUMOTO’s comprehensive full-body motion and simultaneous multi-object interactions address key
data-capturing challenges and provide opportunities to advance realistic human-object interaction modeling across

1. Introduction

∗ The work was mainly conducted at Adobe Research.

4D Human-Object Interaction (HOI) data are crucial for
understanding human behaviors in our three-dimensional
world and for numerous applications in computer vision [41, 49, 50, 69, 75, 76, 79], robotics [4, 12, 46, 48,
52, 62], computer graphics [25, 32, 56], and generative
AI [2, 26, 40, 71]. These applications range from HOI
detection and reconstruction to motion generation, robotic
learning through demonstration, and even image/video generation. All of these fields rely on 4D HOI data to capture
human and object poses, ground-truth geometries, dynamics, forces, and multi-view observations [70, 72]. However,
the lack of realistic 4D data hampers progress, particularly
in scenarios involving multiple objects and detailed manipulations [16, 35]. As both generative and discriminative models advance [10, 40, 49, 51, 67], the need for high-quality
HOI data has become increasingly critical.
Acquiring high-quality 4D HOI data is expensive due to

10886

