This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DNF-Intrinsic: Deterministic Noise-Free Diffusion for Indoor Inverse Rendering
Qing Zhang1,3*

Rongjia Zheng1
1

Sun Yat-Sen University, China

2

Wei-Shi Zheng1,3

Bytedance Inc, USA

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China

PSNR

3

Chengjiang Long2

Input

Metallic

Albedo

Roughness

Normal

Depth

Runtime (seconds) on single RTX 4090

Figure 1. Performance of our method on indoor inverse rendering. By fine-tuning a pre-trained diffusion model on InteriorVerse [63],
a synthetic indoor scene dataset, we achieve state-of-the-art indoor inverse rendering that can robustly recover albedo, metallic, roughness,
normal, and depth from a single RGB indoor image. Taking albedo estimation as an example, as shown on the right, our method not
only obtains significantly better results (21.05 in PSNR with a single step) than existing methods, e.g., InverseIndoor [33], IndoorIR [63],
IntrinsicAnything [13], IntrinsicDiff [28], and RGBX [59], but also enjoys the fastest inference speed (0.1 seconds) and fewest trainable
parameters (18.87M). Note, the PSNR and runtime performance on the right are evaluated on the test set of the InteriorVerse dataset.

Abstract

https://github.com/OnlyZZZZ/DNF-Intrinsic.

Recent methods have shown that pre-trained diffusion models can be fine-tuned to enable generative inverse rendering by learning image-conditioned noise-to-intrinsic mapping. Despite their remarkable progress, they struggle to robustly produce high-quality results as the noise-to-intrinsic
paradigm essentially utilizes noisy images with deteriorated
structure and appearance for intrinsic prediction, while it
is common knowledge that structure and appearance information in an image are crucial for inverse rendering.
To address this issue, we present DNF-Intrinsic, a robust
yet efficient inverse rendering approach fine-tuned from a
pre-trained diffusion model, where we propose to take the
source image rather than Gaussian noise as input to directly
predict deterministic intrinsic properties via flow matching.
Moreover, we design a generative renderer to constrain that
the predicted intrinsic properties are physically faithful to
the source image. Experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets show that our method clearly outperforms
existing state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available at

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Inverse rendering has long been a fundamental task in computer vision and graphics since originated by Barrow and
Tenenbaum [5]. It aims to reverse the rendering process
by estimating the scene material (e.g., albedo, metallic, and
roughness), geometry (e.g., normal and depth), and lighting
from a single image. This task was widely studied as acquiring these intrinsic properties allows a wide range of applications including AR/VR [38], segmentation and tracking [6, 45], relighting and material editing [58], as well as
robotics and autonomous driving [12].
Currently, inverse rendering remains a challenging open
problem due to the following reasons. First, the problem is
highly ill-posed, especially when only a single image with
complex appearance effects (e.g., inter-reflection and cast
shadows) is given. Second, there is a lack of large-scale
real-world datasets with ground-truth intrinsic properties in
this field, which makes it difficult to achieve inverse rendering of real-world scenes in a data-driven manner.

10342

