This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How To Make Your Cell Tracker Say “I dunno!”
Richard D. Paul1,2 Johannes Seiffarth1,3 David Rügamer2,4 Katharina Nöh1 Hanno Scharr1
1
Forschungszentrum Jülich 2 LMU Munich 3 RWTH Aachen University
4
Munich Center for Machine Learning
{r.paul,j.seiffarth,h.scharr,k.noeh}@fz-juelich.de

Abstract

david.ruegamer@stat.uni-muenchen.de

t0

Cell tracking is a key computational task in live-cell microscopy, but fully automated analysis of high-throughput
imaging requires reliable and, thus, uncertainty-aware data
analysis tools, as the amount of data recorded within a single experiment exceeds what humans are able to overlook.
We here propose and benchmark various methods to reason about and quantify uncertainty in linear assignmentbased cell tracking algorithms. Our methods take inspiration from statistics and machine learning, leveraging two
perspectives on the cell tracking problem explored throughout this work: Considering it as a Bayesian inference problem and as a classification problem. Our methods admit a
framework-like character in that they equip any frame-toframe tracking method with uncertainty quantification. We
demonstrate this by applying it to various existing tracking
algorithms including the recently presented Transformerbased trackers. We demonstrate empirically that our methods yield useful and well-calibrated tracking uncertainties.

t1

t2

A1 :

or
t0

t1

t2

A2 :

Figure 1. Example of ambiguity in two different assignment solutions A1 and A2 caused by the similar appearance of cells and
missing frames. Assignments are color-coded, i.e. cells in frame
t2 with the same color as those in t0 are considered daughters of
the latter. Standard tracking methods yield point estimates, i.e.
they will choose either solution, but not report any uncertainty
caused by the ambiguity in choosing the correct mother for the
cell marked by the red arrow.

1. Introduction

Commonly, a data analysis pipeline for LCM data consists of a two-step procedure referred to as the Trackingby-Detection (TbD) paradigm [10, 12, 22, 32, 33]. Cells
first get detected and segmented using a deep learning
model [7, 21, 31, 33, 36, 40] before being tracked across
a sequence of images. Up until recently, tracking was
most often solved using hand-crafted heuristics like nearest
neighbor associations or linear assignments on overlap- or
distance-based cost matrices. More recent methods replace
such hand-crafted cost functions by ones learned from data
[1, 12], having shown great generalization performance.
The strong reliance on computational tools demands for
high reliability and trustworthiness, which is improved by
uncertainty-aware analyses aiming to reliably estimate the
confidence in their own predictions. While over-confidence
in deep neural networks encountering distribution shifts is
a commonly known issue in the deep learning community

Uncertainty-aware cell tracking is a key requirement for
fully automated data analysis of high throughput live-cell
microscopy (LCM) data, where images often contain hundreds or thousands of almost indistinguishably looking,
moving, growing and dividing cells and where temporal
resolution of the time-lapses is limited by biological and
technical considerations such as phototoxicity [38] or camera movement speed in multi-colony setups [34]. LSCM
enables researchers to analyze cellular behavior beyond
the population level, revealing dynamics, development and
multi-species interactions [4, 5, 8]. The recent advances
in computer vision, mainly driven by the success of deep
learning and ever-improving computational resources, form
a substantial pillar of modern LCM analyses, as the amount
of data collected in a single experiment exceeds what humans are able to overlook [17, 34, 44].

6914

