This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Subject Mind Decoding from Inaccurate Representations
Yangyang Xu1 ,* Bangzhen Liu2,5 , Wenqi Shao3 , Yong Du4 ,* Shengfeng He5 , Tingting Zhu1
1

(a) BrainDiffuser

2
3
The University of Oxford
South China University of Technology
Shanghai AI Lab
4
5
Ocean University of China
Singapore Management University

(b) MindEye1

(c) MindBridge

(d) MindEye2

(e) Neuropictor (f) Direct Decoding

(g) Ours

(h) Stimulus

Figure 1. We propose a framework for faithful cross-subject mind decoding. Unlike prior approaches that struggle with cross-subject
generalization and accumulate errors in representation prediction, our method ensures more accurate and high-fidelity image reconstruction
from fMRI signals.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Decoding stimulus images from fMRI signals has advanced with pre-trained generative models. However, existing methods struggle with cross-subject mappings due to
cognitive variability and subject-specific differences. This
challenge arises from sequential errors, where unidirectional
mappings generate partially inaccurate representations that,
when fed into diffusion models, accumulate errors and degrade reconstruction fidelity. To address this, we propose
the Bidirectional Autoencoder Intertwining framework for
accurate decoded representation prediction. Our approach
unifies multiple subjects through a Subject Bias Modulation
Module while leveraging bidirectional mapping to better capture data distributions for precise representation prediction.
To further enhance fidelity when decoding representations
into stimulus images, we introduce a Semantic Refinement
Module to improve semantic representations and a Visual
Coherence Module to mitigate the effects of inaccurate visual
representations. Integrated with ControlNet and Stable Diffusion, our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches
on benchmark datasets in both qualitative and quantitative
evaluations. Moreover, our framework exhibits strong adaptability to new subjects with minimal training samples.

* Corresponding authors: Yangyang Xu (xuyangyang@hit.edu.cn) and
Yong Du (csyongdu@ouc.edu.cn).

The human visual cortex processes sensory stimuli and encodes them into brain signals, playing a fundamental role
in shaping perceptual experience [11, 13, 37]. Decoding
these brain signals back into the original stimuli has become
a significant focus in neuroscience and computer science,
presenting a challenging inverse problem with potential applications in brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) and cognitive
science [7]. The functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI), which captures changes in blood oxygenation, is
widely used in BCIs for mind decoding due to its ability to
reflect dynamic brain activity patterns [5, 21, 25, 35, 40].
Early methods for decoding fMRI data map voxel signals
to the feature space of pre-trained Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to classify object categories [9]. However,
these methods were limited in reconstructing complex visual stimuli. To improve the realism of reconstructions,
researchers introduced Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [3, 14, 47–49, 53] and diffusion models [33, 45, 46]
for mind decoding, where fMRI data is typically mapped
to image representations within generative models to guide
image synthesis.
Despite these advances, current approaches are limited
by individual cognitive variability and often rely on subjectspecific models that require separate training for each individual [36, 42]. Such subject-specific models generally lack
generalizability across individuals, reducing their scalability and applicability. Recently, cross-subject mind decod-

15066

