This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-Tailed Classification with Multi-Granularity Semantics
Yuting Liu

Liu YangB

Yu Wang

Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{liuyuting, yangliuyl, wang.yu}@tju.edu.cn

Parent-child

Abstract

Similar categories

Real-world data often exhibit long-tailed distributions,
which degrade data quality and pose challenges for deep
learning. To address this issue, knowledge transfer from
head classes to tail classes has been shown to effectively
mitigate feature sparsity. However, existing methods often
overlook class differences, leading to suboptimal knowledge transfer. While the class space exhibits a label hierarchy, similarity relationships beyond hierarchically related categories remain underexplored. Considering the
human ability to process visual perception problems in a
multi-granularity manner guided by semantics, this paper presents a novel semantic knowledge-driven contrastive
learning method. Inspired by the implicit knowledge embedded in large language models, the proposed LLM-based
label semantic generation method overcomes the limitations
of the label hierarchy. Additionally, a semantic knowledge
graph is constructed based on the extended label information to guide representation learning. This enables the
model to dynamically identify relevant classes for learning and facilitates multi-granularity knowledge transfer between similar categories. Experiments on long-tail benchmark datasets, including CIFAR-10-LT, CIFAR-100-LT, and
ImageNet-LT, demonstrate that the proposed method significantly improves the accuracy of tail classes and enhances
overall performance without compromising the accuracy of
head classes.

Figure 1. An example label hierarchy of CIFAR-100-LT. The
coarse-grained class “Non-insect invertebrates” is the parent class
of “Crab”. Meanwhile, “Turtle” and “Snail” do not belong to the
same subtree, but they all share semantic similarities.

classes), while other classes have only a limited number
(i.e. tail classes). The long-tailed distribution of data often
leads to deep learning models being dominated by the performance of head classes, while the learning of tail classes
remains severely underdeveloped. As a result, data imbalance presents novel challenges in training deep models capable of making accurate and reliable decisions between
different classes. To address the issue of unbalanced data,
various methods have been explored, mainly focusing on
re-sampling the training data [12, 31] and re-weighting the
loss of different classes [8, 15] to allocate more attention to
minority class samples.
However, compared to earlier approaches, research on
knowledge transfer for long-tailed recognition remains relatively limited. The core objective of knowledge transfer
is to transfer the knowledge learned from the substantial
data of the head classes to the tail classes. Existing methods
may fail to account for class differences, leading to ineffective knowledge transfer. For instance, in the case where the
head class is “dog” and the tail class is “airplane”, transferring knowledge from the head class to the tail class would
be ineffective.
When addressing visual perception challenges, humans
employ a hierarchical framework to associate each object with concepts of varying granularity, thereby enabling
learning and reasoning based on multi-granularity semantic structures. In fact, the class space inherently contains
multi-granularity relationships, where similar fine-grained

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning [18, 33] has achieved remarkable progress in computer vision tasks [27, 45, 49].
These tasks typically require large amounts of data and
a balanced distribution across classes, and this heavy reliance on data limits the development of deep learning.
However, real-world datasets are often imbalanced, with a
few classes containing an abundance of samples (i.e. head
B Corresponding author.

4285

