This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoProg3D: Compositional Visual Reasoning for
City-Scale 3D Language Fields
Shunsuke Yasuki1 Taiki Miyanishi2,3
Koya Sakamoto2 Daichi Azuma2
1

Rikkyo University

2

Nakamasa Inoue4 Shuhei Kurita5,4
Masato Taki1 Yutaka Matsuo2

The University of Tokyo 3 ATR 4 Institute of Science Tokyo
5
National Institute of Informatics

Project Page:

https://snskysk.github.io/GeoProg3D/

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed compositional geographic reasoning task. This task enables natural language interaction with city-scale
3D scenes, supporting diverse geographic reasoning scenarios. Given a natural language query, our GeoProg3D decomposes the task into
modular steps, executes structured visual programs using geographic APIs, and integrates results for interpretable and accurate reasoning.

Abstract

Field (GCLF) that leverages a memory-efficient hierarchical 3D model to handle large-scale data, integrated with
geographic information for efficiently filtering vast urban
spaces using directional cues, distance measurements, elevation data, and landmark references; and (ii) Geographical Vision APIs (GV-APIs), specialized geographic vision
tools such as area segmentation and object detection. Our
framework employs large language models (LLMs) as reasoning engines to dynamically combine GV-APIs and operate GCLF, effectively supporting diverse geographic vision tasks. To assess performance in city-scale reasoning, we introduce GeoEval3D, a comprehensive benchmark

The advancement of 3D language fields has enabled intuitive interactions with 3D scenes via natural language.
However, existing approaches are typically limited to smallscale environments, lacking the scalability and compositional reasoning capabilities necessary for large, complex
urban settings. To overcome these limitations, we propose
GeoProg3D, a visual programming framework that enables
natural language-driven interactions with city-scale highfidelity 3D scenes. GeoProg3D consists of two key components: (i) a Geography-aware City-scale 3D Language

9737

