This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sequential keypoint density estimator:
an overlooked baseline of skeleton-based video anomaly detection
Anja Delić, Matej Grcić, Siniša Šegvić
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing
Zagreb, Croatia
name.surname@fer.hr

SeeKer

Abstract

μ

Detecting anomalous human behaviour is an important
visual task in safety-critical applications such as healthcare monitoring, workplace safety, or public surveillance.
In these contexts, abnormalities are often reflected with unusual human poses. Thus, we propose SeeKer, a method for
detecting anomalies in sequences of human skeletons. Our
method formulates the skeleton sequence density through
autoregressive factorization at the keypoint level. The
corresponding conditional distributions represent probable
keypoint locations given prior skeletal motion. We formulate the joint distribution of the considered skeleton as
causal prediction of conditional Gaussians across its constituent keypoints. A skeleton is flagged as anomalous if
its keypoint locations surprise our model (i.e. receive a low
density). In practice, our anomaly score is a weighted sum
of per-keypoint log-conditionals, where the weights account
for the confidence of the underlying keypoint detector. Despite its conceptual simplicity, SeeKer surpasses all previous methods on the UBnormal and MSAD-HR datasets
while delivering competitive performance on the ShanghaiTech dataset.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection in videos is a safety-critical computer
vision task that focuses on identifying events that deviate
from regular patterns within observed video sequences [30,
43]. This task is particularly relevant for applications such
as public institution monitoring, workplace safety, or crowd
surveillance [34, 48], where abnormal frames may indicate
emergencies such as strokes, accidents or acts of violence
[3]. Designing more accurate human-related anomaly detectors may improve the security of shared spaces and contribute to overall public safety.
Capturing normality in raw RGB video sequences
is challenging due to high resolution, complex back-

Σ

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

Figure 1. Given preceding skeleton keypoints (colored dots),
SeeKer estimates the multivariate normal distribution of probable
locations for the subsequent keypoint. Observing keypoints at improbable locations indicates anomalous behaviour (e.g. fainting).

grounds, and spatio-temporal correlations between consecutive frames [34]. Consequently, previous anomaly detection approaches turn to feature representations extracted
with deep models [2, 55] and optical flow predictions [36]
as well as to combinations of multiple modalities [42]. Although these approaches achieve varying degrees of success, video anomaly detection remains an open challenge.
In the context of human-related anomalies, promising approaches rely solely on skeletal representations of human
poses [16, 23]. These are particularly relevant as problematic human behaviour can often be associated with irregular
body positions [3]. Moreover, skeleton sequences provide
a low-dimensional and anonymous representation that reduces susceptibility to biases such as variations in clothing,
body shape, or ethnicity and ensures that anomaly detection
is based solely on motion dynamics. Previous approaches
to skeleton-based anomaly detection [17, 39, 55] consider
skeletons as graphs and train graph-oriented models [56]
to maximize the likelihood of the skeleton sequence [23].
However, such monolithic approaches ignore the causality
in skeleton sequences inherent in the temporal domain and
overlook the compositional nature of skeletons. Moreover,
anomaly scores of these approaches cannot account for the
uncertainty of skeleton keypoint detectors.

11579

