This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoluMe – Authentic 3D Video Calls from Live Gaussian Splat Prediction
Martin de La Gorce
Givi Meishvili

Charlie Hewitt
Tibor Takács
Robert Gerdisch
Zafiirah Hosenie
Marek Kowalski
Thomas J. Cashman
Antonio Criminisi
Microsoft, Cambridge, UK

Input frame

3D reconstruction rendered from -40, -20, 0, +20, and +40 degrees

Input frame

3D reconstruction rendered from -40, -20, 0, +20, and +40 degrees

Figure 1. Given a streaming monocular video of a person, our method reconstructs each frame as a realistic 3D Gaussian splat of the moment
captured by that frame. Avatar systems build a model of the person’s appearance in the past, and may not fully adapt to how a person
looks in the present. Our method builds a realistic representation in real time and without enrolment. We use the term authenticity for the
property that the input frame is faithfully represented, shown in this figure by the match between the input frame and the reconstruction
when rendered to the original camera’s viewpoint. Our method faithfully represents eye glasses, headwear and diverse head and facial hair.

Abstract
Virtual 3D meetings offer the potential to enhance copresence, increase engagement and thus improve effectiveness of remote meetings compared to standard 2D video
calls. However, representing people in 3D meetings remains
a challenge; existing solutions achieve high quality by using complex hardware, making use of fixed appearance via
enrolment, or by inverting a pre-trained generative model.
These approaches lead to constraints that are unwelcome
and ill-fitting for videoconferencing applications.
We present the first method to predict 3D Gaussian reconstructions in real time from a single 2D webcam feed,
where the 3D representation is not only live and realistic,
but also authentic to the input video. By conditioning the
3D representation on each video frame independently, our
reconstruction faithfully recreates the input video from the
captured viewpoint (a property we call authenticity), while
generalizing realistically to novel viewpoints. Additionally,
we introduce a stability loss to obtain reconstructions that
are temporally stable on video sequences.
We show that our method delivers state-of-the-art accuracy in visual quality and stability metrics compared to
existing methods, and demonstrate our approach in live one-

to-one 3D meetings using only a standard 2D camera and
display. This demonstrates that our approach can allow
anyone to communicate volumetrically, via a method for 3D
videoconferencing that is not only highly accessible, but also
realistic and authentic.

1. Introduction
Online video meetings have transformed the ability for people to communicate and collaborate while physically remote,
but standard 2D video meetings create challenges with fatigue [24], make it difficult to infer where attention is directed [28], and have limited effectiveness [22]. Recent
evidence suggests that virtual 3D meetings offer the potential to enhance copresence, increase engagement, and thus
improve communication effectiveness [13, 28, 34]. However, representing people in 3D meetings, with accuracy and
realism in both appearance and movement, and on consumer
devices, is an unsolved challenge.
Existing solutions achieve high quality either with complicated hardware, such as multiple input cameras, dedicated
sensors and powerful processors, e.g., Project Starline [13].
Alternatively, photoreal avatars [26] use a latent represen-

13783

