This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionDiff: Training-free Zero-shot Interactive Motion Editing
via Flow-assisted Multi-view Diffusion
Yikun Ma
Sun Yat-sen University

Yiqing Li
Sun Yat-sen University

Jiawei Wu
Sun Yat-sen University

mayk25@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

liyq265@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

wujw97@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Zhi Jin *
Sun Yat-sen University

luox@pcl.ac.cn

jinzh26@mail.sysu.edu.cn

2XWSXW

,QSXW

Xing Luo
Peng Cheng Laboratory

E 6FDOLQJ

D 7UDQVODWLRQ

F 5RWDWLRQ

G 6WUHWFKLQJ

Figure 1. We propose MotionDiff, a training-free zero-shot ﬂow-assisted diffusion method, which performs complex multi-view motion
editing for static scenes. Users can interactively select the object to be edited and add the motion priors of interest. Then, MotionDiff
achieves corresponding multi-view motions, e.g., translation, scaling, rotation, and stretching with satisfactory consistency.

Abstract
1

Generative models have made remarkable advancements
and are capable of producing high-quality content. However, performing controllable editing with generative models remains challenging, due to their inherent uncertainty
in outputs. This challenge is particularly pronounced in
motion editing, which involves the processing of spatial information. While some physics-based generative methods
have attempted to implement motion editing, they typically
operate on single-view images with simple motions, such as
translation and dragging. These methods struggle to handle complex motions, such as, rotation and stretching, and
ensure multi-view consistency, often necessitating resourceintensive retraining. To address these challenges, we propose MotionDiff, a training-free zero-shot diffusion method
that leverages optical ﬂow for complex motion editing
among multi-view images. Speciﬁcally, given a static scene,
users can interactively select objects of interest to add motion priors. The proposed Point Kinematic Model (PKM)
1 * Corresponding author

then estimates corresponding multi-view optical ﬂows during the Multi-view Flow Estimation Stage (MFES). Subsequently, these optical ﬂows are utilized to generate multiview motion results through decoupled motion representation in the Multi-view Motion Diffusion Stage (MMDS).
Extensive experiments demonstrate that MotionDiff outperforms other physics-based generative motion editing methods in achieving high-quality multi-view consistent motion
results. Notably, MotionDiff does not require retraining,
enabling users to conveniently adapt it for various downstream tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/MrMa-yikun/MotionDiff.

1. Introduction
Generative models, including Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13] and Diffusion models [30, 50], possess
the capability to produce high-quality content. Nevertheless, generating controllable results and executing precise
pixel-level editing with these models remain challenge.
Recently, several image editing studies [6, 9, 25] have

14475

