This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoMVSNet: Monocular Priors Guided Multi-View Stereo Network
Jianfei Jiang, Qiankun Liu,* Haochen Yu, Hongyuan Liu, Liyong Wang, Jiansheng Chen, Huimin Ma*
University of Science and Technology Beijing, China
{jiangjf,haochen.yu,hongyuanliu,wangly}@xs.ustb.edu.cn, {liuqk3,jschen,mhmpub}@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning-based Multi-View Stereo (MVS) methods aim to
predict depth maps for a sequence of calibrated images to
recover dense point clouds. However, existing MVS methods often struggle with challenging regions, such as textureless regions and reflective surfaces, where feature matching
fails. In contrast, monocular depth estimation inherently
does not require feature matching, allowing it to achieve
robust relative depth estimation in these regions. To bridge
this gap, we propose MonoMVSNet, a novel monocular feature and depth guided MVS network that integrates powerful priors from a monocular foundation model into multiview geometry. Firstly, the monocular feature of the reference view is integrated into source view features by the
attention mechanism with a newly designed cross-view position encoding. Then, the monocular depth of the reference
view is aligned to dynamically update the depth candidates
for edge regions during the sampling procedure. Finally,
a relative consistency loss is further designed based on the
monocular depth to supervise the depth prediction. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MonoMVSNet achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the DTU and Tanks-andTemples datasets, ranking first on the Tanks-and-Temples
Intermediate and Advanced benchmarks. The source code
is available at https://github.com/JianfeiJ/MonoMVSNet.

1. Introduction

Reference Image

Ground Truth

Depth Anything V2

MVSFormer

MVSFormer++

MonoMVSNet (Ours)

Figure 1. Row 1: (a) Comparison with SOTA methods in terms
of overall error and GPU memory consumption at a resolution of
832×1152 with 5-view images on the DTU [1] test set, where
lower is better; (b) Comparison with SOTA methods on the
Tanks-and-Temples [16] benchmark, where higher is better. Row
2-3: Qualitative depth comparison with Depth Anything V2 [40],
MVSFormer [2], and MVSFormer++ [3] on scan13 from DTU test
set. Our method produces more accurate metric depth in edge (red
bounding box) and textureless (orange bounding box) regions.

Multi-View Stereo (MVS) is a fundamental task in computer vision that aims to reconstruct dense 3D geometry [19, 45, 51] from a set of calibrated images. While traditional MVS methods [8, 34, 36, 46–48] have made significant progress, they remain limited by handcrafted feature
representations. The rapid advancement of deep learning in
recent years has driven the development of learning-based
MVS [9, 12, 13, 41, 42], which leverage the powerful representation capabilities of deep neural networks, leading to
substantial performance gains over traditional approaches.
* Corresponding author

MVS can essentially be understood as a one-to-many
feature matching problem [7]. However, feature matching is
often challenged by difficult regions, such as texture-less areas, reflective surfaces, and depth discontinuity edges, leading to suboptimal reconstruction results, as shown in Fig. 1.
To mitigate this issue, recent MVS methods have focused
on enhancing feature extraction, as improved features enable more effective feature matching. The conventional approach for feature extraction involves using a Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) [14] to extract multi-scale features, facilitating the construction of multi-level cost volumes for

27806

