This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Membership Inference Attacks with False Discovery Rate Control
Chenxu Zhao

Wei Qian
Aobo Chen
Mengdi Huai
Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University

{cxzhao, wqi, aobochen, mdhuai}@iastate.edu

Abstract

sociated with a certain disease, they can infer that the owner
of the record has that disease with high probability. A recent
report [64] published by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) specifically highlights that an MIA
revealing that an individual was included in the dataset used
to train the target model is a confidentiality violation.
On the other hand, beyond traditional privacy attacks,
MIAs have diverse applications and play a crucial role in
fields such as machine unlearning [17, 65] and lifelong
learning [71]. For example, in the context of machine unlearning, MIA methods are used to evaluate the effectiveness of unlearning methods and help verify that specific
samples have been successfully unlearned, thus respecting
individuals’ rights to have their data removed. Note that machine unlearning refers to the process of selectively removing the influence of specific samples from trained models
[11, 15, 29, 53, 72, 83]. Additionally, in lifelong learning,
where a model aims to learn continuously from new data
over time while retaining previously acquired knowledge,
MIAs can be used to gauge the degree of memorization for
certain data. This allows us to assess how well the model
retains specific information and preserves prior knowledge.
Currently, various MIA methods have been proposed.
Based on the differentiation principles, existing MIA methods can be generally divided into: classifier-based, metricbased, likelihood ratio-based, and quantile regressionbased. Specifically, classifier-based MIAs [16, 34, 61] usually train a binary membership classifier indicator to distinguish the behavior of training members from that of nontraining members. Metric-based MIAs [20, 23, 41] involve
defining a specific metric on model outputs to distinguish
training members from non-members. Likelihood ratiobased MIAs [12, 78] utilize parametric techniques to model
the loss distributions of models that have been trained or
not trained on the target test example. Quantile regressionbased MIAs [10] utilize quantile regression on non-member
distributions without training surrogate models.
Despite the significance and popularity of MIAs, existing MIA methods cannot provide guarantees on the false
discovery rate (FDR), which is defined as the expected

Recent studies have shown that deep learning models are
vulnerable to membership inference attacks (MIAs), which
aim to infer whether a data record was used to train a target model or not. To analyze and study these vulnerabilities,
various MIA methods have been proposed. Despite the significance and popularity of MIAs, existing works on MIAs
are limited in providing guarantees on the false discovery
rate (FDR), which refers to the expected proportion of false
discoveries among the identified positive discoveries. However, it is very challenging to ensure the false discovery rate
guarantees, because the underlying distribution is usually
unknown, and the estimated non-member probabilities often exhibit interdependence. To tackle the above challenges,
in this paper, we design a novel membership inference attack method, which can provide the guarantees on the false
discovery rate. Additionally, we show that our method can
also provide the marginal probability guarantee on labeling true non-member data as member data. Notably, our
method can work as a wrapper that can be seamlessly integrated with existing MIA methods in a post-hoc manner,
while also providing the FDR control. We perform the theoretical analysis for our method. Extensive experiments in
various settings (e.g., the black-box setting and the lifelong
learning setting) are also conducted to verify the desirable
performance of our method.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successfully
adopted in various computer vision tasks [18, 22, 25, 32, 40,
42, 68, 84, 85]. Due to the high sample complexity of such
models, they require large amounts of training data. However, recent research highlights privacy risks and vulnerabilities of DNNs to membership inference attacks (MIAs)
[37]. MIAs on DNNs aim to infer whether a specific data
record was used to train a target model or not, thus posing
severe privacy risks to individuals. For instance, if attackers
infer that a clinical record has been used to train a model as-

1216

