This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lay2Story: Extending Diffusion Transformers for Layout-Togglable Story
Generation
Ao Ma*,† , Jiasong Feng* , Ke Cao* , Jing Wang* , Yun Wang, Quanwei Zhang, Zhanjie Zhang‡
JD.com, Inc., Beijing, China
maao.8@jd.com, zhangzhanj@126.com
(frame 2) hands on his face
in a forest background.

(frame 3) spits out a
rainbow in front of a forest.

(frame 4) wearing a cap with
a blue sky in the background.

(frame 5) gives a thumbs-up
under a pink-tinged blue sky.

(frame 6) stands with hands
on hips against a forest.

(pink cloud, frightened
expression)

(exaggerated look)

(irregularly shaped yellow
hat, white short-sleeve shirt)

(white cap, nervous
expression)

(smirk, thumbs up)

(yellow hat, white shortsleeve shirt, purple gloves)

Lay2Story

FLUX.1-dev IP-Adapter

1Prompt1Story

(frame 1) stands on a pink
cloud under a rainbow.

Identity Prompt: A cartoon-style shark. Frame Prompt: Blue description at the top. Subject Captions: Green description at the bottom. Subject Positions: Red box in the image.

Figure 1. Comparison with SOTA methods. Lay2Story offers finer subject control in a 6-frame story with subject captions (green
description) and positions (red box), unlike the contrast method, which uses only identity and frame prompts. It outperforms 1Prompt1Story
and FLUX.1-dev IP-Adapter in image consistency, generating images at 720 × 1280 resolution, while others use 1024 × 1024.

Abstract
Storytelling tasks involving generating consistent subjects have gained significant attention recently. However,
existing methods, whether training-free or training-based,
continue to face challenges in maintaining subject consistency due to the lack of fine-grained guidance and interframe interaction. Additionally, the scarcity of high-quality
data in this field makes it difficult to precisely control storytelling tasks, including the subject’s position, appearance, clothing, expression, and posture, thereby hindering further advancements. In this paper, we demonstrate
that layout conditions, such as the subject’s position and

detailed attributes, effectively facilitate fine-grained interactions between frames. This not only strengthens the
consistency of the generated frame sequence but also allows for precise control over the subject’s position, appearance, and other key details. Building on this, we introduce an advanced storytelling task: Layout-Toggable Storytelling, which enables precise subject control by incorporating layout conditions. To address the lack of high-quality
datasets with layout annotations for this task, we develop
Lay2Story-1M, which contains over 1 million 720p and
higher-resolution images, processed from approximately
11,300 hours of cartoon videos. Building on Lay2Story1M, we create Lay2Story-Bench, a benchmark with 3,000
prompts designed to evaluate the performance of different
methods on this task. Furthermore, we propose Lay2Story,
a robust framework based on the Diffusion Transformers

* Equal contribution.
† Project leader.
‡ Corresponding author.

16102

