This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLM-enhanced Action-aware Multi-modal Prompt Tuning for Image-Text
Matching
Mengxiao Tian1,2,3 , Xinxiao Wu1,2 , Shuo Yang2 ∗
1 Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2 Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
3 Beijing Research Center of Intelligent Equipment for Agriculture, China

Abstract

Query image

Driven by large-scale contrastive vision-language pretrained models such as CLIP, recent advancements in the
image-text matching task have achieved remarkable success in representation learning. Due to image-level visuallanguage alignment, CLIP falls short in understanding finegrained details such as object attributes and spatial relationships between objects. Recent efforts have attempted to
compel CLIP to acquire structured visual representations by
introducing prompt learning to achieve object-level alignment. While achieving promising results, they still lack the
capability to perceive actions, which are crucial for describing the states or relationships between objects. Therefore,
we propose to endow CLIP with fine-grained action-level
understanding by introducing an LLM-enhanced actionaware multi-modal prompt-tuning method, incorporating
the action-related external knowledge generated by large
language models (LLMs). Specifically, we design an action triplet prompt and an action state prompt to exploit
compositional semantic knowledge and state-related causal
knowledge implicitly stored in LLMs. Subsequently, we
propose an adaptive interaction module to aggregate attentive visual features conditioned on action-aware prompted
knowledge for establishing discriminative and action-aware
visual representations, which further improves the performance. Comprehensive experimental results on two benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
Codes are at https://github.com/MengxiaoTian/LAMP.

1. Introduction
Image-text matching has gained much attention in recent
years, aiming to match images with the most relevant texts
∗ Corresponding author

Top-1 sentence (0.291) :
Man running wearing a
blue shirt with a number
taped to it.
GT sentence (0.286):
A child wearing a blue
shirt is jumping in the air.

Query sentence:
A man in a red shirt si@ng in the grass as a ball ﬂies past

Top-1 image: 0.345

(a) Image-to-Text Matching

GT image: 0.329

(b) Text-to-Image Matching

Figure 1. Failure cases of image-text matching (image-to-text and
text-to-image) using CLIP on the COCO test set. Similarity scores
are shown in orange, and correct matches are marked in ✓
⃝ and
mismatches in ✗
⃝. (a) CLIP incorrectly retrieves the top-1 text for
a given image query; (b) CLIP incorrectly retrieves the top-1 image
for a given text query.

and vice versa. This is a fundamental task in vision and language research, involving multimodal reasoning and alignment of visual and textual concepts at different levels, such
as cross-modal retrieval [11, 30], natural language visual
reasoning [3, 14], and visual question answering [13, 33].
Recently, large-scale pre-trained models such as CLIP [32]
have shown superior generalization and transferability on
various downstream tasks [12, 41, 54], making CLIP one
of the most widely used pre-trained models for image-text
matching.
However, a large number of studies have demonstrated
that discarding fine-grained visual information results in
subpar performance on downstream tasks involving localization [53], counting [29], and understanding relationships
between objects or object attributes [15, 54]. Recent studies [17, 25, 40] focus on object-level understanding by introducing learnable prompts that describe more details of
image regions, i.e., objects or object attributes, enabling
CLIP to learn fine-grained representations, thereby enhancing fine-grained understanding. Despite the impressive performance, whether CLIP can effectively perceive actions
(i.e., states or relationships between objects) in the image-

20748

