This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Two Losses, One Goal: Balancing Conflict Gradients for
Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation
Rui Sun1 * Huayu Mai2,3∗† Wangkai Li2,3 Yujia Chen2,3 Yuan Wang3
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
National Key Laboratory of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
3
University of Science and Technology of China
{issunrui, mai556, lwklwk, yujia chen, wy2016}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation has attracted considerable attention as it alleviates the need for extensive
pixel-level annotations. However, existing methods often
overlook the potential optimization conflict between supervised and unsupervised learning objectives, leading to suboptimal performance. In this paper, we identify this underexplored issue and propose a novel Pareto Optimization
Strategy (POS) to tackle it. POS aims to find a descent
gradient direction that benefits both learning objectives,
thereby facilitating model training. By dynamically assigning weights to the gradients at each iteration based on the
model’s learning status, POS effectively reconciles the intrinsic tension between the two objectives. Furthermore,
we analyze POS from the perspective of gradient descent
in random batch sampling and propose the Magnitude Enhancement Operation (MEO) to further unleash its potential by considering both direction and magnitude during
gradient integration. Extensive experiments on challenging benchmarks demonstrate that integrating POS into existing semi-supervised segmentation methods yields consistent improvements across different data splits and architectures (CNN, Transformer), showcasing its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims to predict a specific
semantic class for each pixel, has achieved remarkable
success due to recent advances in deep neural networks
in computer vision [8, 16]. It has widespread applications [9, 25, 30, 36, 44, 45, 47, 54], such as visual understanding [13, 55] and autonomous driving [2]. However, its data-driven nature makes it labor-intensive and
time-consuming to gather the massive pixel-level annota* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

tions required for training data. To alleviate this data-hunger
issue, considerable research has turned attention to semisupervised semantic segmentation. The challenge lies in effectively leveraging limited labeled data in conjunction with
a large amount of unlabeled data to improve the model’s
generalization performance for robust segmentation.
Recently, the teacher-student network scheme has dominated this field due to its simplicity yet competitive performance. In this scheme, the student network is guided
by two separate sources of supervision signals: (1) the
ground truth for labeled data (yielding supervised loss),
and (2) the pseudo labels generated by the teacher network
for unlabeled data (forming unsupervised learning objective). Specifically, the unsupervised loss is constructed in
the form of consistency regularization, that is, the teacher
network generates pseudo labels with weak augmentation
perturbations to instruct the counterparts from the student
network under the presence of strong augmentation perturbations, following the smoothness assumption [7].
However, behind the promising performance, we reveal
a risk that is ignored by previous methods: the optimization direction of student network parameters is governed by
both supervised and unsupervised learning objectives. This
means that the student network is expected to simultaneously minimize both learning objectives, but usually, there
may not exist a set of parameters that can satisfy this goal.
In other words, supervised and unsupervised objectives may
conflict during the optimization process. Taking the widelyused Pascal dataset [13] under 366 partition protocols as an
example, Figure 1 (a) illustrates the negative cosine similarity between gradients derived from supervised and unsupervised losses, indicating that indeed existing undesirable conflicts in optimization direction during training. Previous methods [39, 46, 60] tend to resort to heuristically
assigning equal and fixed gradient weights, which are disconnected from the learning status, to instill the student
network (supervised and unsupervised losses are summed

20357

