This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Closed-Loop Transfer for Weakly-supervised Affordance Grounding
Zhengxuan Wei∗

Ge Zheng

Sibei Yang†

Lie on

Jiajin Tang∗

LOCATE

WSMA

Ours

GT

Cross-View-AG+

LOCATE

WSMA
Results

Ours

GT

Ride

Cross-View-AG+

Exocentrics

Egocentric

Figure 1. Visualization samples for lie on and ride affordances on egocentric images, comparing state-of-the-art methods with ours.

Abstract

fords riding. Affordance grounding [7, 10, 11, 32, 34] further refines this by not only predicting the actions an object can afford but also pinpointing the specific regions that
enable those actions, e.g., a bicycle’s handlebars for pushing and both its handlebars and seat for riding (see Fig 1).
In contrast to most vision perception systems that primarily focus on how objects appear, such as instance and part
segmentation, affordance grounding emphasizes how objects function. This is essential for embodied intelligent
agents to actively interact with and use objects in the real
world [1, 12, 16, 41, 43], while also facilitating downstream
tasks such as object manipulation [3, 17] and human-object
interaction [5, 15].
Humans can infer precise affordance grounding on objects across diverse actions and environments, even performing unfamiliar interactions with novel objects, simply
by observing others interact with them. To mimic this learning process, we follow a practical weakly-supervised affordance grounding setting [24, 26, 28, 33], learning object affordances from human-object interaction images or videos
without using any pixel-level affordance annotations. As
shown in Fig 1, given exocentric human-object interaction
images and object images with corresponding interaction
labels (e.g., lie on) during training, the goal in inference is
to ground the affordances of each interaction label on the
target egocentric object image.
Two essential yet challenging cores of affordance
grounding are (1) extracting affordance knowledge from
exocentric interactions and (2) transferring it to egocentric
localization. On one hand, to extract affordance knowl-

Humans can perform previously unexperienced interactions with novel objects simply by observing others engage with them. Weakly-supervised affordance grounding mimics this process by learning to locate object regions that enable actions on egocentric images, using exocentric interaction images with image-level annotations.
However, extracting affordance knowledge solely from exocentric images and transferring it one-way to egocentric
images limits the applicability of previous works in complex interaction scenarios. Instead, this study introduces
LoopTrans, a novel closed-loop framework that not only
transfers knowledge from exocentric to egocentric but also
transfers back to enhance exocentric knowledge extraction.
Within LoopTrans, several innovative mechanisms are introduced, including unified cross-modal localization and
denoising knowledge distillation, to bridge domain gaps between object-centered egocentric and interaction-centered
exocentric images while enhancing knowledge transfer. Experiments show that LoopTrans achieves consistent improvements across all metrics on image and video benchmarks, even handling challenging scenarios where object
interaction regions are fully occluded by the human body.
All models and codes will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
The term “affordance,” first introduced by J.Gibson [14], is
later formalized in computer vision and robotics to typically
describe the “action possibilities” offered by objects [2, 10,
31, 35, 48], such as a knife affords cutting or a bicycle af-

9530

