This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GlassWizard: Harvesting Diffusion Priors for Glass Surface Detection
Wenxue Li1∗

Tian Ye1∗ Xinyu Xiong2 Jinbin Bai3 Feilong Tang4 Wenxuan Song1
Zhaohu Xing1 Lie Ju4 Guanbin Li2 Lei Zhu1,5B
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Sun Yat-sen University 3 National University of Singapore 4 Monash University
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Glass Surface Detection (GSD) is a critical task in computer vision, enabling precise interactions with transparent
surfaces and enhancing both safety and object recognition
accuracy. However, current research still faces challenges
in both recognition performance and generalization capability. Thanks to the recent advanced diffusion-based generative models, GSD task can benefit from rich prior knowledge encapsulated in pre-trained Stable Diffusion (SD)
model. Thus, in this paper, we present GlassWizard, aiming
to harvest priors in diffusion-based model to achieve accurate and generalized GSD. Firstly, we delve into the text
embedding space in SD to build an text-based context prior,
thereby enhancing the understanding of implicit attribute of
glass and achieving fine-grained predictions. Secondly, we
train an end-to-end diffusion model with a one-step formulation pipeline, yielding effective optimization and fast inference. In addition, to facilitate our adapted framework
scalable to other multi-modal GSD tasks (such as RGBD/RGB-T GSD), we present a modality-customized adaptation, that can achieve rapid adaptation to multi-modal GSD
tasks. Our experimental results demonstrate that our proposed framework achieves cutting-edge performance across
diverse datasets, and it also shows strong generalization
ability. Additionally, it excels in multi-modal GSD tasks,
confirming its scalability across different modalities.

RGB Image

Segmentation maps

Abstract

Multi-modal

Modality-Customized Adaptation

...
RGB-T

RGB-D

Figure 1. Our proposed GlassWizard harvests priors from
diffusion-based model to achieve accurate and generalized Glass
Surface Detection (GSD). It is also scalable to multi-modal data
with Modality-Customized Adaptation.

information [8, 27], contextual features [54], and visual
blurriness cues [29]. However, constructing an effective,
unified model for glass detection remains an open challenge. Existing models often rely on small training datasets
and have limited feature capacity, which restricts their ability to generalize across diverse real-world conditions.

1. Introduction

Fortunately, with the construction of massive highquality training datasets and well-designed large-scale
model architectures, many computer vision tasks, such as
image segmentation [17, 41] and image generation [32],
have taken a leap forward in generalization and zero-shot
capabilities in recent years. A prominent example of such
models is the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [17], which
demonstrates excellent zero-shot performance on many
downstream segmentation tasks. Nevertheless, studies have
shown that the standard SAM performs poorly on glass detection [7]. A key reason for this is that unlike explicit semantic classes (e.g., person or car) that can be distinguished
independently of context, accurately recognizing glass surfaces is highly context-dependent. To incorporate richer
contextual semantics, some approaches introduce additional

Glass Surface Detection (GSD) [20, 25, 50, 51] is crucial
for various applications, including robotics, autonomous
driving, and augmented reality, where precise identification
greatly enhances safety and interactivity in complex environments. Recent efforts have proposed many ingenious
strategies for glass detection, such as exploring boundary
*Equal contribution.
B Lei Zhu is the corresponding author of this work.

17848

