This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Test-Time Composition of Multiple LoRA Models for Image
Generation
Tuna Han Salih Meral1, * Enis Simsar2, * Federico Tombari3,4
1

Virginia Tech

2

ETH Zürich

3

TUM

4

Pinar Yanardag1
Google

https://clora-diffusion.github.io

Figure 1. CLoRA is a training-free method that works on test-time, and uses contrastive learning to compose multiple concept and style
LoRAs simultaneously. Using pre-trained LoRA models, such as L1 for a person, and L2 for a specific type of flower, the goal is to
create an image that accurately represents both concepts described by their respective LoRAs. Directly combining these LoRA models to
compose the image often leads to poor outcomes (see LoRA Merge). This failure primarily arises because the attention mechanism fails
to create coherent attention maps for subjects and their corresponding attributes. CLoRA revises the attention maps in test-time to clearly
separate the attentions associated with distinct concept LoRAs.

Abstract
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) has emerged as a powerful and popular technique for personalization, enabling efficient adaptation of pre-trained image generation models for
specific tasks without comprehensive retraining. While employing individual pre-trained LoRA models excels at representing single concepts, such as those representing a specific dog or a cat, utilizing multiple LoRA models to capture a variety of concepts in a single image still poses a
significant challenge. Existing methods often fall short, primarily because the attention mechanisms within different
LoRA models overlap, leading to scenarios where one concept may be completely ignored (e.g., omitting the dog) or
where concepts are incorrectly combined (e.g., producing
an image of two cats instead of one cat and one dog). We
introduce CLoRA, a training-free approach that addresses

these limitations by updating the attention maps of multiple LoRA models at test-time, and leveraging the attention
maps to create semantic masks for fusing latent representations. This enables the generation of composite images
that accurately reflect the characteristics of each LoRA.
Our comprehensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations
demonstrate that CLoRA significantly outperforms existing
methods in multi-concept image generation using LoRAs.

1. Introduction

* Joint first-authors.

Diffusion text-to-image models [20] have revolutionized the
generation of images from textual prompts, as evidenced by
significant developments in models such as Stable Diffusion [44], Imagen [48], and DALL-E 2 [43]. Their applications extend beyond image creation, including tasks like image editing [2, 3, 10, 18], inpainting [35], and object detection [6]. As generative models gaining popularity, personal-

18090

