This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Multimodal Learning via Disentangled Gradient Learning
Shicai Wei1,2
Chunbo Luo1 *
Yang Luo1
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
National and Local Joint Engineering Research Center for Cloud Operating System
shicaiwei@std.uestc.edu.cn, {c.luo, luoyang}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal learning often encounters the under-optimized
problem and may have worse performance than unimodal
learning. Existing methods attribute this problem to the imbalanced learning between modalities and rebalance them
through gradient modulation. However, they fail to explain
why the dominant modality in multimodal models also underperforms that in unimodal learning. In this work, we
reveal the optimization conflict between the modality encoder and modality fusion module in multimodal models.
Specifically, we prove that the cross-modal fusion in multimodal models decreases the gradient passed back to each
modality encoder compared with unimodal models. Consequently, the performance of each modality in the multimodal model is inferior to that in the unimodal model.
To this end, we propose a disentangled gradient learning (DGL) framework to decouple the optimization of the
modality encoder and modality fusion module in the multimodal model. DGL truncates the gradient back-propagated
from the multimodal loss to the modality encoder and replaces it with the gradient from unimodal loss. Besides,
DGL removes the gradient back-propagated from the unimodal loss to the modality fusion module. This helps eliminate the gradient interference between the modality encoder
and modality fusion module while ensuring their respective
optimization processes. Finally, extensive experiments on
multiple types of modalities, tasks, and frameworks with
dense cross-modal interaction demonstrate the effectiveness
and versatility of the proposed DGL. Code is available at
https://github.com/shicaiwei123/ICCV2025-GDL

1. Introduction
With the growing availability of affordable sensors, multimodal learning, which harnesses data from various sources,
has received significant interest in machine learning. It
is evident in various domains, including classification
tasks [11, 18, 30], object detection [15, 26, 41], and segmentation tasks [4, 13, 23]. Existing research on multimodal

learning mainly focuses on developing fusion techniques,
such as tensor-based fusion [12, 37], and attention-based fusion [7, 40]. However, the simple combination of multiple
modalities may not always yield satisfactory performance.
Recent studies [8, 21] observe that the multimodal models could be inferior to the unimodal models in some situations. These studies attribute the decline in performance
to imbalanced learning between modalities, in which the
dominant modality that has better performance will suppress the optimization of the weaker modality, leading to
inadequate feature learning in the weaker modality. To address this issue, techniques such as teacher aid [8], gradient modulation [9, 17, 21, 36], and alternating optimization [14, 32, 33, 39] have been introduced to alleviate
the imbalanced training and have shown promising results.
However, these methods primarily focus on improving the
weaker modality while overlooking the optimization of the
dominant modality, which also exhibits sub-optimal performance compared to unimodal learning. As shown in Fig. 1,
the audio branch that has better performance in the multimodal model (see Fig. 1 (a)) also underperforms its unimodal baseline (see Fig. 1 (b)).
To this end, this paper focuses on the question of what
makes the dominant modality under-optimized in multimodal learning. Here, we reveal that each modality in the
multimodal model, even the highest-performing one, learns
less effectively than in unimodal models due to optimization conflicts with the fusion module. Specifically, compared with the unimodal model, we prove that the modality fusion module in multimodal models will suppress the
gradient back-propagated to the modality encoder. Moreover, the suppression degree will increase with the optimization progress. As shown in Fig. 1(c), the gradient backpropagated to the audio encoder from the multimodal loss
is smaller than that from the unimodal loss. And this gap
becomes larger in the middle of the training. Consequently,
the performance of each modality in the multimodal model
is inferior to that in the unimodal model.
To tackle this issue, we introduce the disentangled gradient learning (DGL) strategy. Specifically, DGL first trun-

22879

