This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G-DexGrasp: Generalizable Dexterous Grasping Synthesis Via Part-Aware Prior
Retrieval and Prior-Assisted Generation
Juntao Jian1,2⋆ ,

Xiuping Liu2⋆ ,

Zixuan Chen2⋆ ,

1

4

Ruizhen Hu1

Dalian University of Technology
Shenyang University of Technology

Abstract

Could you please hold this
object and pour me some water?

Recent advances in dexterous grasping synthesis have
demonstrated significant progress in producing reasonable
and plausible grasps for many task purposes. But it remains challenging to generalize to unseen object categories
and diverse task instructions. In this paper, we propose GDexGrasp, a retrieval-augmented generation approach that
can produce high-quality dexterous hand configurations for
unseen object categories and language-based task instructions. The key is to retrieve generalizable grasping priors,
including the fine-grained contact part and the affordancerelated distribution of relevant grasping instances, for the
following synthesis pipeline. Specifically, the fine-grained
contact part and affordance act as generalizable guidance
to infer reasonable grasping configurations for unseen objects with a generative model, while the relevant grasping
distribution plays as regularization to guarantee the plausibility of synthesized grasps during the subsequent refinement optimization. Our comparison experiments validate
the effectiveness of our key designs for generalization and
demonstrate the remarkable performance against the existing approaches. Project page: https://g-dexgrasp.
github.io/

1. Introduction
Dexterous grasping synthesis [8, 13, 16, 22, 32, 34, 39–
41, 48] aims to generate reasonable and plausible solutions for the dexterous hands of robots in grasping and
manipulating objects. A variety of works have proposed
analysis-based [6, 27, 40] or learning-based approaches
[5, 7, 11, 19, 24, 41] to synthesize dexterous hand grasps.
† Corresponding Authors: manyili@sdu.edu.cn, jianliu2006@gmail.com

Jian Liu4† ,

2

Shenzhen University
3
Shandong University

⋆ Equal contribution

Manyi Li3† ,

G-DexGrasp

Generalizable Dexterous Grasping Synthesis

Grip the badminton
racket firmly for better
play.

Open the door of this
cabinet.

Hold the bucket now.

Could you carefully use
the coffee machine at
the bar?

I'd appreciate it if you
held the bell pepper
gently in your hand.

Please ensure a secure
hold by enclosing the
can in your hand.

Could you kindly pick
up the lamp?

Hold the tetra-pak
securely.

Please hold the bowl
for better support.

Please hold the globe by Hold the lamp securely
its base to keep it from at the base for stability.
tipping over.

Keep the wine glass
stable by holding it at
the base.

Could you please adjust
the operating mode of
the coffee machine?

Could you please twist
off the kettle lid?

Please rotate the switch
Could you turn the
gently.
toaster knob to the right,
please?

Figure 1. Given the diverse language-based task instructions and
target objects of unseen categories, G-DexGrasp can synthesize
high-quality dexterous grasps that can stably hold the object and
are semantically aligned with the specified instruction.

However, they often focus on producing stable and diverse
grasping solutions, but ignore the functionality goal of the
grasps, i.e. whether the synthesized grasps can facilitate the
following manipulation tasks with all kinds of objects.
To deal with various task intents and target objects, the

11447

