This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PixTalk: Controlling Photorealistic Image Processing and Editing with Language
Marcos V. Conde, Zihao Lu, Radu Timofte
Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Würzburg, Germany
https://github.com/mv-lab/AISP

ISP sRGB

This image is too dark,
please increase the
exposure.

The enitre image looks
flat, I want an image with
higher contrast.

The image looks too dark
and cold, make it a bit
warmer and brighter.

Can you make my photo
look like in winter?

Figure 1. Given an image and text prompts for how to edit the image, our multi-task image processing model edits the image considering
the human instructions. PixTalk, covers over 40 transformations that can be commonly found in photography software (e.g. Adobe Lightroom), and it generalizes of-the-shelf on real-world photographs from diverse cameras and sensors.

Abstract
Text-guided image generation and editing is emerging as a
fundamental problem in computer vision. However, most
approaches lack control, and the generated results are far
from professional photography quality standards. In this
work, we propose the first approach that introduces language and explicit control into the image processing and
editing pipeline. PixTalk is a vision-language multi-task image processing model, guided using text instructions. Our
method is able to perform over 40 transformations –the
most popular techniques in photography–, delivering results as professional photography editing software. Our
model can process 12MP images on consumer GPUs in
real-time (under 1 second). As part of this effort, we propose a novel dataset and benchmark for new research on
multi-modal image processing and editing.

49, 57]. These improvements are often in post-processing
rather than capture [5, 46, 54], which might include color
enhancement, white balance correction, denoising and other
computational photography techniques [14]. Indeed, smartphones compensate for the physical limitations by using
more complex Image Signal Processors (ISPs) that include
deep models for image enhancement. Such neural models
run in dedicated on-device GPUs and NPUs [24].
Despite the advancements in computational methods,
the inherent hardware advantages of DSLM (Digital Single
Lens Mirrorless) cameras make them superior in capturing
realistic images that are closer to the human perception.
The camera ISP typically “offers” a single output i.e.
the models are deterministic, offering a single input-output
stop. For this reason, photographers often rely on thirdparty software for advanced editing and enhance further the
images (e.g. Adobe Lightroom). The control over the image processing and editing process is key to obtain optimal
results, and a positive user experience.

1. Introduction
Image signal processing and computational photography
have witnessed remarkable advancements due to the integration of deep learning techniques [1, 12, 17, 25, 38,

19269

Contributions We propose an efficient text-guided model
for realistic image editing and photo-finishing. Our method,
PixTalk, is a multi-task image processing model, able to

