This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIPSym: Delving into Symmetry Detection with CLIP
Tinghan Yang
Purdue University

Md Ashiqur Rahman
Purdue University

Raymond A. Yeh
Purdue University

yang1683@purdue.edu

rahman79@purdue.edu

rayyeh@purdue.edu

Abstract
Symmetry is one of the most fundamental geometric cues
in computer vision, and detecting it has been an ongoing
challenge. With the recent advances in vision-language models, i.e., CLIP, we investigate whether a pre-trained CLIP
model can aid symmetry detection by leveraging the additional symmetry cues found in the natural image descriptions. We propose CLIPSym, which leverages CLIP’s image and language encoders and a rotation-equivariant decoder based on a hybrid of Transformer and G-Convolution
to detect rotation and reflection symmetries. To fully utilize CLIP’s language encoder, we have developed a novel
prompting technique called Semantic-Aware Prompt Grouping (SAPG), which aggregates a diverse set of frequent
object-based prompts to better integrate the semantic cues
for symmetry detection. Empirically, we show that CLIPSym
outperforms the current state-of-the-art on three standard
symmetry detection datasets (DENDI, SDRW, and LDRS).
Finally, we conduct detailed ablations verifying the benefits
of CLIP’s pre-training, the proposed equivariant decoder,
and the SAPG technique.

promising results. PMCNet [50] proposed a method that
relies on specially designed convolutional techniques rather
than principled equivariant architectures, limiting its ability
to consistently detect symmetry patterns across different orientations. Although EquiSym [51] addresses this limitation
by leveraging group-equivariant convolutional networks, due
to the limited availability of large-scale annotated symmetry
datasets, the full potential of the learning based approach
remains underexplored.
On the other hand, recent advances in pre-trained visionlanguage foundation models [20, 37, 40, 73], have shown
remarkable generalization capabilities by leveraging largescale datasets and joint training on visual and textual information. Image captions often contain words or phrases
that carry the symmetry information of the object in the
image. For example, in the case of internet-scale LAION400M dataset [48], around 10% of the image captions contain words that convey shape/symmetry-related cues such
as ‘rectangle,’ ‘circle,’ ‘oval’, etc. (see Appendix A2.1 for
detailed statistics). This observation suggests that visionlanguage models trained on such extensive image-text pairs
are likely to contain useful symmetry cues in their learned
text/image representations. A natural question arises:
How to leverage pre-trained vision-language models for symmetry detection?

1. Introduction
Symmetry plays an important role in human perception and
understanding of the world [6, 8, 13, 30, 45, 58]. In computer
vision, symmetry is one of the most fundamental geometric
cues, providing essential information for tasks such as object
recognition [35, 57], scene understanding [10, 64], image
matching [16], and editing [33]. Detecting symmetry, however, has been a long-standing question in computer vision
due to the variations and complexities present in real-world
scenarios [19, 31, 42, 49, 56, 66].
Earlier works relied on keypoint matching techniques [1,
3, 36, 52, 53], which involved comparing local descriptors of
keypoints and their transformed counterparts. Although effective to some extent, these methods struggled with complex
symmetry patterns or in the presence of noise. More recently,
deep learning-based approaches [12, 50, 51] were proposed
to detect reflection and rotation symmetries and have shown

In this paper, we present CLIPSym, a novel framework
that leverages the pre-trained CLIP model for the detection
of reflection and rotation symmetries in images. Our approach is motivated by the hypothesis that being trained on
a large-scale vision-language dataset, the visual representations learned by CLIP contain knowledge that can benefit symmetry detection. The proposed CLIPSym contains
CLIP’s image and text encoders and introduces a decoder
with guarantees on rotation equivariance. Given an input
image, CLIPSym outputs a symmetry heatmap, where each
pixel represents the probability of being a reflection axis
or the rotation center. To fully leverage the potential of
CLIP’s language encoder, we propose a novel SemanticAware Prompt Grouping (SAPG) method, which aggregates
multiple text prompts to enhance the model’s understanding
of symmetries.

21003

