This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Met2 Net: A Decoupled Two-Stage Spatio-Temporal Forecasting Model for
Complex Meteorological Systems
Shaohan Li1,2∗ Hao Yang1∗ Min Chen1,2,3† Xiaolin Qin2,3†
1
Chengdu University of Information Technology
2
Chengdu Institute of Computer Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Spatial

4

Difference Value

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

(a)

Data distributions.

1.2

2

(b)

TCC_S T2M_S TCC_T T2M_T
First-order difference.
TAU_Single
TAU_Multi
Two-Stage
Ours

MAE

0.18

0.8

Temporal

0

0.20

TAU_Single
TAU_Multi
Two-Stage
Ours

1.0

Spatial

2

4

TCC_S T2M_S TCC_T T2M_T

0.16
0.14

0.6
1.0

1.2

1.4

(c)

T2M variable.

RMSE

1.6

0.22

1.8

(d)

0.24

RMSE

0.26

TCC variable.

Figure 1. (a) Spatiotemporal distributions of the meteorological
variables TCC and T2M highlight their heterogeneity. (b) Firstorder differences illustrate variations in trends and rates. (c) and
(d) show that incorporating multiple variables did not enhance and
even degraded TAU’s performance, while the two-stage training
scheme also produced suboptimal results.

data. Recently, advancements in artificial intelligence have
driven the rapid development of spatiotemporal prediction
models, significantly improving weather forecasting accuracy [16, 17, 31, 32, 50, 51]. The success of these methods is attributed not only to their focusing on temporal nonstationarity but also to their incorporation of spatial dependency to capture more complex weather patterns.
However, variables such as temperature, humidity, wind
speed, and precipitation interact with each other, forming
a complex climate system [1, 5, 7, 8, 12]. The prevailing
methods aim to analyze a single variable, fail to capture
these dynamic relationships, thus leading to prediction errors. Therefore, integrating multiple meteorological variables enables the model to better understand weather patterns, identify potential extreme weather events, and provide more reliable warnings and decision support in re-

1. Introduction
Global climate change and the increasing frequency of
extreme weather events make accurate weather prediction crucial [10]. While traditional statistical and physical models are effective in some areas, they often struggle
with complex nonlinear relationships and high-dimensional
* Equal contribution.

Temporal

1.00

MAE

The increasing frequency of extreme weather events due
to global climate change urges accurate weather prediction. Recently, great advances have been made by the
end-to-end methods, thanks to deep learning techniques,
but they face limitations of representation inconsistency in
multivariable integration and struggle to effectively capture the dependency between variables, which is required
in complex weather systems. Treating different variables
as distinct modalities and applying a two-stage training
approach from multimodal models can partially alleviate
this issue, but due to the inconformity in training tasks
between the two stages, the results are often suboptimal.
To address these challenges, we propose an implicit twostage training method, configuring separate encoders and
decoders for each variable. In detailed, in the first stage,
the Translator is frozen while the Encoders and Decoders
learn a shared latent space, in the second stage, the Encoders and Decoders are frozen, and the Translator captures inter-variable interactions for prediction. Besides, by
introducing a self-attention mechanism for multivariable fusion in the latent space, the performance achieves further
improvements. Empirically, extensive experiments show the
state-of-the-art performance of our method. Specifically,
it reduces the MSE for near-surface air temperature and
relative humidity predictions by 28.82% and 23.39%, respectively. The source code is available at https://
github.com/ShremG/Met2Net.

Normalized Value

Abstract

† Corresonding authors.

5458

