This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency-Guided Posterior Sampling for Diffusion-Based Image Restoration
Darshan Thaker
University of Pennsylvania

Abhishek Goyal
University of Pennsylvania

René Vidal
University of Pennsylvania

dbthaker@seas.upenn.edu

abhi2358@seas.upenn.edu

vidalr@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Image restoration aims to recover high-quality images from
degraded observations. When the degradation process is
known, the recovery problem can be formulated as an inverse problem, and in a Bayesian context, the goal is to sample a clean reconstruction given the degraded observation.
Recently, modern pretrained diffusion models have been
used for image restoration by modifying their sampling procedure to account for the degradation process. However,
these methods often rely on certain approximations that can
lead to significant errors and compromised sample quality.
In this paper, we propose a simple modification to existing
diffusion-based restoration methods that exploits the frequency structure of the reverse diffusion process. Specifically, our approach, denoted as Frequency Guided Posterior Sampling (FGPS), introduces a time-varying lowpass filter in the frequency domain of the measurements,
progressively incorporating higher frequencies during the
restoration process. We provide the first rigorous analysis of the approximation error of FGPS for linear inverse
problems under distributional assumptions on the space of
natural images, demonstrating cases where previous works
can fail dramatically. On real-world data, we develop an
adaptive curriculum for our method’s frequency schedule
based on the underlying data distribution. FGPS significantly improves performance on challenging image restoration tasks including motion deblurring and image dehazing. The source code is available at https://github.
com/darshanthaker/FGPS.

In the above, A : Rn ! Rm denotes the forward operator, which we assume to be known, and z 2 Rm is additive Gaussian noise. In most applications, recovering x0
is difficult because the forward operator is a many-to-one
mapping. To address this challenge, researchers incorporate prior knowledge about x0 , including sparsity [5, 16],
low-rank structure [4, 6], total variation [32], or deep generative priors [3, 29]. One way of enforcing this knowledge
is by solving a regularized optimization problem where the
objective is to find an x0 that maximizes the likelihood under the chosen prior model while satisfying the constraint
y = A(x0 ). Another approach is to follow the Bayesian
viewpoint where instead of recovering an exact x0 , we sample from p(x | y) where Equation (1) is the model for
p(y | x0 ) [38]. The advantage of this interpretation is that
we can draw multiple plausible samples. In image restoration tasks, the diversity of samples can help the user pick a
visually appealing reconstruction.

1. Introduction

Recently, diffusion models [20, 36] have shown tremendous success in modeling complex probability distributions,
allowing one to generate diverse and visually coherent samples in image, video, and audio tasks [14, 21, 25]. During
training, diffusion models learn to reverse a gradual noising process that transforms data x0 to pure noise xT over T
steps, where xt denotes an intermediate step of the reverse
diffusion process. At test time, they generate samples by
iteratively denoising random noise, progressively refining it
into coherent data. Naturally, these models can also be used
to develop samplers for p(x | y) in inverse problem settings. However, while one can train a problem-specific diffusion model to sample directly from p(x | y) [33], this requires training new diffusion models for every inverse problem, limiting the practical use of such approaches.

Image restoration is a fundamental problem in computer vision whose goal is to recover high-quality images from degraded observations. Many image restoration problems can
be cast as inverse problems, where the task is to recover
an underlying signal x0 2 Rn from noisy measurements
y 2 Rm that are obtained from x0 via
y = A(x0 ) + z.

(1)

A popular approach which does not require training a
new diffusion model for p(x | y) is to modify the sampling process of a pretrained unconditional diffusion model
so that it produces samples that are consistent with the
given measurement y [9, 24, 35, 37, 41]. These methods
are based on decomposing the conditional score function
rxt log p(xt | y) as rxt log p(xt ) + rxt log p(y | xt )
using the Bayes rule. While the first term is learned by a

12873

