This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teeth Reconstruction and Performance Capture Using a Phone Camera
Weixi Zheng1
1

Jingwang Ling1

Zhibo Wang2

School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University

…

Quan Wang2
2

Feng Xu1

SenseTime Research

…
…

…

…

…

Input monocular video

Teeth reconstruction

Performance capture

Figure 1. Given a monocular video, our method performs personalized dental geometry reconstruction and teeth-inclusive facial performance capture.

Abstract

augmented reality, human telepresence, and beyond. Recent advancements have improved the quality of face modeling and performance capture, paving the way for broader
adoption in facial avatars. However, faces contain components with largely varying geometry, appearance, and motion patterns. To further enhance quality and enable more
ﬁne-grained controllability, many recent works have focused on modeling the speciﬁc facial components, such as
hair [66, 67], eyes [36, 45], mustache [7] and neck [62],
rather than taking them as a whole.

We present the ﬁrst method for personalized dental shape
reconstruction and teeth-inclusive facial performance capture using only a single phone camera. Our approach
democratizes high-quality facial avatars through a noninvasive, low-cost setup by addressing the ill-posed monocular capture problem with an analysis-by-synthesis approach. We introduce a representation adaptation technique that maintains both mesh and SDF representations of
teeth, enabling efﬁcient differentiable rendering while preventing teeth-lip interpenetration. To overcome alignment
challenges with similar-appearing dental components, we
leverage foundation models for semantic teeth segmentation
and design specialized optimization objectives. Our method
addresses the challenging occlusions of teeth during facial
performance through optimization strategies that leverage
facial structural priors, while our semantic mask rendering
loss with optimal transport-based matching ensures convergence despite signiﬁcant variations in initial positioning.

Among these facial components, teeth have received relatively less attention, but they play a critical role in face
avatars. Teeth are ﬁxed to the skull and jaw and move accordingly, which can help regularize jaw motions. Teeth
inﬂuence airﬂow during pronunciation and thus inﬂuence
various visemes, so the teeth movement impacts the quality of speech animations and is a key feature for lipreading [38, 40]. Teeth exhibit signiﬁcant individual variation
in shape, number, and alignment, making them an essential
feature for identity representation [4, 17, 52, 56]. Furthermore, teeth serve as rigid obstacles to constrain the motion
of lips, affecting the ﬁnal lip movements. Despite their importance, existing shape reconstruction methods [21] predominantly focus on facial skin regions, often omitting teeth
in their results, leading to an uncanny valley effect. While a
recent neural rendering approach [26] models a complete

1. Introduction
3D modeling and performance capture of real human faces
is an essential step toward immersing ourselves in the digital world and has signiﬁcant applications in virtual and

9998

