This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal Segment Anything Model for Camouflaged Scene Segmentation
Guangyu Ren1 * Hengyan Liu1 * Michalis Lazarou2 Tania Stathaki2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, China
2
Imperial College London, United Kingdom
{guangyu.ren, hengyan.liu}@xjtlu.edu.cn, {michalis.lazarou14, t.stathaki}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Camouflaged scenes, where objects blend seamlessly into
their environments, pose significant challenges to both human observers and computer vision systems. To address this,
we propose a novel framework that leverages off-the-shelf
foundation models to generate multi-modal prompts for the
Segment Anything Model (SAM), thus eliminating the need
for manual prompts and significantly improving overall performance on this downstream task. At first, we generate an
image caption using the BLIP model and obtain its text embedding through the use of a text encoder. We then generate
a visual embedding through the vision encoder of the BLIP
model and use both as inputs to SAM to provide additional
semantic information about the image. Finally, we propose a
couple of architectural novelties, a) we effectively integrate
the multi-modal information in SAM through a multi-level
adapter and b) we replace the dense embedding of SAM
with the image embedding of its image encoder. Our method
achieves new state-of-the-art performance in 11 out of 12
metrics in three benchmark datasets for camouflaged detection. Additionally, our method can be successfully adapted to
other tasks such as medical image segmentation performing
on par or even outperforming the state-of-the-art methods.
Our code is available in https://github.com/icqialanqian/Vision-Language-SAM .

（a）

（b）

（c）

（d）

Figure 1. Visualization of segmentation results generated by SAM
under different bounding-box prompts. (a) Original image and
corresponding ground truth mask. (b) Segmentation result with a
bounding-box prompt placed in the background, failing to capture
the object. (c) Segmentation result with a properly placed boundingbox prompt, closely matching the ground truth. (d) Segmentation
result with a bounding-box prompt slightly larger than in (c), resulting in over-segmentation and mask leakage into the background.
This figure highlights the sensitivity of SAM to bounding-box
prompt placement and size.

1. Introduction

of the barely detectable differences between the object and
its surroundings, causing traditional segmentation methods
to either overlook or misclassify the target objects.
Despite the remarkable performance of deep learningbased methods in various computer vision tasks, they still
struggle with Camouflaged Object Detection (COD). A key
reason for this underperformance is the limited size of available datasets. Without high-quality datasets, models struggle
to learn expressive feature representations, which are essential for accurately distinguishing camouflaged objects from
their surroundings. Obtaining more data can be a way to address this issue, nevertheless this can be labor-intensive since
it requires humans to annotate correctly numerous images.
Another approach is to leverage large foundation models like the Segment Anything Model (SAM) that have
demonstrated adaptability for downstream tasks using sparse
prompts (e.g., text, bounding boxes) and dense prompts (e.g.,
masks) for segmentation. However, even SAM that has
been trained on the huge dataset SA-1B struggles with COD
for many reasons. One reason is COD is highly complex
since background and foreground look very similar. Another
problem is a fundamental limitation of SAM, that relies on

Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) focuses on identifying objects that are visually blended into their surroundings,
often sharing similar colors and patterns, which makes them
challenging to detect. COD has garnered significant attention
in the field of computer vision due to its potential implications and extensive applications in areas such as surveillance
systems [15], wildlife monitoring [44], tracking [25, 36]
and low-altitude economy (LAE) [9]. However, this task
remains a significant challenge for computer vision because
* Equal contribution.

19882

