This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal-aware Query Routing for Real-time Video Instance Segmentation

1

Zesen Cheng1,3

Kehan Li4

Yian Zhao1,3

Hang Zhang4

Chang Liu5

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
3

4

2

Jie Chen1,2,3

Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China

Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China

5

Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

cyanlaser@stu.pku.edu.cn

jiechen2019@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Image
Encoder

With the rise of applications such as embodied intelligence,
developing high real-time online video instance segmentation (VIS) has become increasingly important. However,
through time proﬁling of the components in advanced online VIS architecture (i.e., transformer-based architecture),
we ﬁnd that the transformer decoder signiﬁcantly hampers
the inference speed. Further analysis of the similarities between the outputs from adjacent frames at each transformer
decoder layer reveals signiﬁcant redundant computations
within the transformer decoder. To address this issue, we
introduce Temporal-Aware query Routing (TAR) mechanism. We embed it before each transformer decoder layer.
By fusing the optimal queries from the previous frame, the
queries output by the preceding decoder layer, and their
differential information, TAR predicts a binary classiﬁcation score and then uses an argmax operation to determine
whether the current layer should be skipped. Experimental
results demonstrate that integrating TAR into the baselines
achieves signiﬁcant efﬁciency gains (24.7 → 34.6 FPS for
MinVIS, 22.4 → 32.8 FPS for DVIS++) while also improving performance (e.g., on YoutubeVIS 2019, 47.4 → 48.4
AP for MinVIS, 55.5 → 55.7 AP for DVIS++). Furthermore, our analysis of the TAR mechanism shows that the
number of skipped layers increases as the differences between adjacent video frames decrease, which suggests that
our method effectively utilizes inter-frame differences to reduce redundant computations in the transformer decoder.

1. Introduction
Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) [45] is an advanced
computer vision technology that aims to provide precise
segmentation masks for each object instance in a video and
to associate the same object across frames. This technology is widely utilized in ﬁelds such as medical surgery, emCorresponding Author

Transformer
Decoder

Frame ‫ ݐ‬െ ͳ

Tracker

Queries
Image
Encoder

Transformer
Decoder

Results ‫ ݐ‬െ ͳ

Tracker

Frame ‫ݐ‬

Results ‫ݐ‬
17% + 28%

Image Encoder (Backbone + FPN)

52%
Transformer Decoder

3%
Tracker

Figure 1. Time proﬁling of components in the advanced online
VIS method MinVIS shows: Image Encoder (Backbone + FPN)
45% (17%+28%), Transformer Decoder 52%, Tracker 3%. This
distribution identiﬁes the transformer decoder as the key computational bottleneck, whose optimization can greatly boost efﬁciency.

bodied intelligence, and human-computer interaction. For
instance, in the context of embodied intelligence, VIS can
precisely locate various objects in real time within a scene,
allowing agents to achieve better environmental understanding and perform corresponding actions based on the accurate positions of those objects. As these applications are
further adopted, fast and accurate low-latency object localization becomes increasingly crucial to ensure the system’s
safety and responsiveness while improving user experience.
In general, VIS has three paradigms: ofﬂine, semionline/near-online, and online. Ofﬂine VIS [11, 17] methods require complete video data for segmentation, which
clearly does not meet the demands for real-time response.
Semi-online/near-online VIS methods [18, 31] focus on
clip-level object segmentation and tracking. However, they
fail to satisfy the stringent real-time requirements of streaming scenarios due to signiﬁcant delays in segment acquisition. For example, in a 10 FPS video stream, obtaining 5
frames takes 0.5 seconds, resulting in a minimum reaction
time of 0.5 seconds for semi-online methods operating at
this granularity, which is unacceptable for real-time appli-

22467

